- [H.A.S.C. No. 115-32] ASSESSING PROGRESS AND IDENTIFYING FUTURE OPPORTUNITIES IN DEFENSE REFORM

[House Hearing, 115 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

[H.A.S.C. No. 115-32]

ASSESSING PROGRESS AND IDENTIFYING

FUTURE OPPORTUNITIES IN DEFENSE REFORM

__________

COMMITTEE ON ARMED SERVICES

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FIFTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

HEARING HELD

APRIL 4, 2017

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

25-148                         WASHINGTON : 2017
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800;
DC area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104 Mail: Stop IDCC,
Washington, DC 20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON ARMED SERVICES
One Hundred Fifteenth Congress

WILLIAM M. ``MAC'' THORNBERRY, Texas, Chairman

WALTER B. JONES, North Carolina      ADAM SMITH, Washington
JOE WILSON, South Carolina           ROBERT A. BRADY, Pennsylvania
FRANK A. LoBIONDO, New Jersey        SUSAN A. DAVIS, California
ROB BISHOP, Utah                     JAMES R. LANGEVIN, Rhode Island
MICHAEL R. TURNER, Ohio              RICK LARSEN, Washington
MIKE ROGERS, Alabama                 JIM COOPER, Tennessee
TRENT FRANKS, Arizona                MADELEINE Z. BORDALLO, Guam
BILL SHUSTER, Pennsylvania           JOE COURTNEY, Connecticut
K. MICHAEL CONAWAY, Texas            NIKI TSONGAS, Massachusetts
DOUG LAMBORN, Colorado               JOHN GARAMENDI, California
ROBERT J. WITTMAN, Virginia          JACKIE SPEIER, California
DUNCAN HUNTER, California            MARC A. VEASEY, Texas
MIKE COFFMAN, Colorado               TULSI GABBARD, Hawaii
VICKY HARTZLER, Missouri             BETO O'ROURKE, Texas
AUSTIN SCOTT, Georgia                DONALD NORCROSS, New Jersey
MO BROOKS, Alabama                   RUBEN GALLEGO, Arizona
PAUL COOK, California                SETH MOULTON, Massachusetts
JIM BRIDENSTINE, Oklahoma            COLLEEN HANABUSA, Hawaii
BRAD R. WENSTRUP, Ohio               CAROL SHEA-PORTER, New Hampshire
BRADLEY BYRNE, Alabama               JACKY ROSEN, Nevada
SAM GRAVES, Missouri                 A. DONALD McEACHIN, Virginia
ELISE M. STEFANIK, New York          SALUD O. CARBAJAL, California
MARTHA McSALLY, Arizona              ANTHONY G. BROWN, Maryland
STEPHEN KNIGHT, California           STEPHANIE N. MURPHY, Florida
STEVE RUSSELL, Oklahoma              RO KHANNA, California
SCOTT DesJARLAIS, Tennessee          TOM O'HALLERAN, Arizona
RALPH LEE ABRAHAM, Louisiana         THOMAS R. SUOZZI, New York
TRENT KELLY, Mississippi             (Vacancy)
MIKE GALLAGHER, Wisconsin
MATT GAETZ, Florida
DON BACON, Nebraska
JIM BANKS, Indiana
LIZ CHENEY, Wyoming

Robert L. Simmons II, Staff Director
Ann McDonough-Hughes, Professional Staff Member
Douglas Bush, Professional Staff Member
Britton Burkett, Clerk

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page

STATEMENTS PRESENTED BY MEMBERS OF CONGRESS

Langevin, Hon. James R., a Representative from Rhode Island,
Committee on Armed Services....................................     2
Thornberry, Hon. William M. ``Mac,'' a Representative from Texas,
Chairman, Committee on Armed Services..........................     1

WITNESSES

Flournoy, Michele, Chief Executive Officer and Co-Founder, Center
for a New American Security, Former Under Secretary of Defense
(Policy).......................................................     5
Hamre, Dr. John J., Chief Executive Officer and President, Center
for Strategic and International Studies, Former Deputy
Secretary of Defense...........................................     3
Zakheim, Dr. Dov S., Senior Adviser, Center for Strategic and
International Studies, Former Under Secretary of Defense
(Comptroller)..................................................     8

APPENDIX

Prepared Statements:

Flournoy, Michele............................................    60
Hamre, Dr. John J............................................    51
Smith, Hon. Adam, a Representative from Washington, Ranking
Member, Committee on Armed Services........................    49
Zakheim, Dr. Dov S...........................................    74

Documents Submitted for the Record:

[There were no Documents submitted.]

Witness Responses to Questions Asked During the Hearing:

[There were no Questions submitted during the hearing.]

Questions Submitted by Members Post Hearing:

Mr. Langevin.................................................    91

ASSESSING PROGRESS AND IDENTIFYING FUTURE OPPORTUNITIES IN DEFENSE
REFORM

----------

House of Representatives,
Committee on Armed Services,
Washington, DC, Tuesday, April 4, 2017.
The committee met, pursuant to call, at 10:01 a.m., in room
2118, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. William M. ``Mac''
Thornberry (chairman of the committee) presiding.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. WILLIAM M. ``MAC'' THORNBERRY, A
REPRESENTATIVE FROM TEXAS, CHAIRMAN, COMMITTEE ON ARMED
SERVICES

The Chairman. Committee will come to order.
This week the committee will hold two hearings that focus
on the two major pillars of our agenda. Tomorrow we will hear
from the service chiefs on repairing and rebuilding our
military. Today, however, we will concentrate on the other
pillar, which is defense reform.
We have done a lot of reform over the past 2 years. That
includes acquisition reform, a new military retirement system,
major changes in military health care, commissary reform, a
rewrite of the Uniform Code of Military Justice, as well as
significant organizational reform.
While a lot has been done, however, a lot more needs to be
done. The world around us is simply moving too fast for us to
sit still and assume that the organizations and processes of
the past will suffice for today and especially for tomorrow.
Yes, we all have an obligation to see that taxpayer dollars
are spent as efficiently and as effectively as possible,
especially in fulfilling the first job of the Federal
Government, which is to defend the country. But we all know
from the news and from our intelligence briefings that we face
a wide, diverse array of threats, and those threats change day
by day as adversaries develop systems designed to deny us any
military advantage. We must be prepared for each of these
threats.
We also know that the pace of technological change is
accelerating and that more and more innovation takes place in
the private sector.
All of these trends stress our existing organizations and
processes. We will not be able to defend the country with
outdated technology or sluggish bureaucracy.
Much of the responsibility for making needed reforms rests
with us, with Congress. We cannot do everything in a single
bill or even in 3 years, but we must be willing to move
aggressively to make the reforms needed in this volatile,
dangerous world.
There are no individuals who can provide wiser, more
considered guidance than the three witnesses we have today,
each of whom has held high office in the Department of Defense,
each of whom has testified many times before this committee,
and each of whom has devoted their careers to helping provide
for the national security of the United States. I appreciate
each of them being with us today.
Before turning to those witnesses, let me yield to the
distinguished acting ranking member, the gentleman from Rhode
Island, Mr. Langevin.

STATEMENT OF HON. JAMES R. LANGEVIN, A REPRESENTATIVE FROM
RHODE ISLAND, COMMITTEE ON ARMED SERVICES

Mr. Langevin. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I want to welcome our witnesses here today, and proud to be
able to speak on behalf of Ranking Member Smith this morning.
And I will be submitting his statement for the record after I
read it.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Smith can be found in the
Appendix on page 49.]
Mr. Langevin. But thank you, again, to our witnesses.
So thank you, Mr. Chairman, for holding today's hearing on
this topic of critical importance.
And again, I also want to say a thank you to our witnesses
for sharing their opinions on past and future defense reform
opportunities. I know you all have a wealth of knowledge, and I
appreciate you sharing this with the committee.
I look forward to hearing the views on what the Department
of Defense should or should not address in the future as it
relates to acquisition policy, organizational structure, and
military personnel reform efforts. The fiscal year 2016 and
fiscal year 2017 National Defense Authorization Acts included
significant changes to the acquisition division of the Office
of the Secretary of Defense.
First, decision-making authority for large acquisition
programs moved from the Under Secretary of Defense for
Acquisition, Technology, and Logistics to the service
secretaries; and second, that the same under secretary position
was split into two under secretary positions. This shift has
created an unknown dynamic for the Department of Defense and
private sector companies who produce goods and provide services
for DOD.
So here we are in 2017 working on next year's NDAA
[National Defense Authorization Act] and key acquisition
positions are yet to be filled, and it is too early to tell if
this reform--these reforms will prove to be successful.
In my view, before we make additional acquisition reforms
we should see if last year's changes are effective because,
frankly, it seems as if current changes may be overwhelming the
system. The Department of Defense can only absorb so much new
acquisition reform legislation.
However, one area where DOD does not need congressional
support is in helping it to right-size its infrastructure by
authorizing a new round of base realignment and closure [BRAC].
DOD has been asking Congress to authorize a new BRAC round each
year for the past 5 years, and they estimate a new BRAC can
help save $2 billion a year. At a time of constrained resources
we cannot afford to waste $2 billion a year holding onto
infrastructure that is in excess to the military's requirement.
While some may question the force structure levels or raise
concerns with the 2005 round, I believe Congress can and should
work with DOD to address these issues and authorize a new round
of BRAC this year.
I am also interested in where the Department and the
services will go with personnel reforms. The fiscal year 2016
NDAA reformed the military retirement system to provide 83
percent of the force a strong, portable retirement plan that
they can take with them when they complete their service
obligation but do not reach a 20-year retirement.
It is time that the personnel system complements the
retirement system with more flexibility and ability to target
certain skill sets when needed. The services have been
discussing for years the need for a more flexible personnel
system but have done little with the existing authorities they
have to make any meaningful changes.
People join the military and depart the military for a
variety of reasons, and the system cannot be one-size-fits-all.
I understand due to the nature of the missions and
organizations there have--there are requirements and standards
that need to be maintained. I am interested in exploring
concrete options that create flexibility to attract the
qualified individuals it needs to fit the requirements and, as
those requirements change, retaining the quality the military
needs to maintain high standards.
With that, I thank the ranking member for letting me read
his statement on his behalf, and I yield back to the chairman.
The Chairman. I thank the gentleman.
Let me again welcome each of our witnesses: Dr. John Hamre,
chief executive officer and president for the Center for
Strategic and International Studies [CSIS]; Michele Flournoy,
chief executive officer and co-founder, Center for a New
American Security; and Dr. Dov Zakheim, senior advisor for the
CSIS.
As I mentioned, each of them have held high position in the
Department of Defense and we are grateful for y'all being here.
Without objection, your full written statement will be made
part of the record. But at this point we would be pleased to
hear any oral comments you would like to make.
Dr. Hamre.

STATEMENT OF DR. JOHN J. HAMRE, CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER AND
PRESIDENT, CENTER FOR STRATEGIC AND INTERNATIONAL STUDIES,
FORMER DEPUTY SECRETARY OF DEFENSE

Dr. Hamre. Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member Smith, it is a real
privilege to be invited back and I want to say thank you to you
not just for inviting us but for this committee taking so
seriously this important work of defense reorganization reform.
You know, this is not the kind of thing that most committees
are doing these days. I am so proud that you are, and thank you
for that.
I was on the staff of the Senate Armed Services Committee
when the----
The Chairman. Excuse me, Dr. Hamre. Would you get that
microphone right up to your mouth----
Dr. Hamre. I am sorry. I apologize.
The Chairman. Thank you. Thank you.
Dr. Hamre. I was on the staff of the Senate Armed Services
Committee when we passed Goldwater-Nichols and then the Packard
Commission reforms. We worked on that very hard, but we made a
real--some serious mistakes with the Packard Commission reform,
and I would--it was--we didn't understand it at the time but
we--when we took the chief of staff of the services out of the
chain of command for acquisition, that was a mistake.
You fixed that 2 years ago, and I am very grateful for
that.
We made a mistake by decapitating the ecosystem for
innovation in the Department when we created the under
secretary for acquisition, made it the third most important
position in the building, and we diminished the role of the
defense research and engineering. That was a mistake at the
time.
You fixed that last year, but--and I am--I haven't--I know
that you are working on legislation this year. I haven't seen
what you are proposing, so I am really--what I really am here
to talk about is what happened last year.
You did the right thing by elevating the research and
engineering function, but unfortunately, in the conference I
think you undermined the impact of this when you created the
second under secretary for acquisition.
The purpose of your goal last year--and we had
conversations with the committee--was to make the innovation
secretary the third most important position in the building,
and that was the right thing to do. You did that.
But by introducing a second under secretary who takes care
of acquisition, that is where the money is. You know, I was the
comptroller, you know, so I know what it is like in the
building. The guy that controls the money has got more clout.
So your desire to elevate in prominence the innovation
ecosystem in the Department so that we become more dynamic in
addressing new technology and new threats was, unfortunately,
undermined when you created this second under secretary. And I
would ask you to go back and take a look at that.
You did the right thing by delaying implementation 1 year,
so you have a chance to really get this right. We need to
recruit the biggest person we possibly can to come into that
job.
We have to recruit a very prominent person. They are not
going to come in if the job looks like it is undermined by the
structure of the rest of the senior leadership.
So I would plead with you to take another look at that. I
would be happy to come up and talk at any time.
The other thing I would wish to talk to you about is you
put in--in the Authorization Act last year you created the
chief management officer. As written now, it isn't--it doesn't
really do anything new. It carves out all the functions that
are currently with the deputy secretary as the chief management
officer into that new position as an under secretary.
I think there is a great promise in what you are looking
at, but I think we need to make clear the way it is written in
last year's bill it is a staff function. What I think we need
in the Department is a line manager over the defense agencies.
We do not have a line manager over the defense agencies. We
have line manager for the Army, for the Air Force, for the Navy
and Marine Corps; we don't for the defense agencies.
I would ask you to consider looking at making that chief
management officer position, which you created, not a staff
function but a line function. Give it responsibility to manage,
oversee, hire, fire, promote, you know, to make capital
investments, et cetera, for this very important function, to
oversee the defense agencies. It is about $130 billion, so
there is a lot of work to be done here, but you are not going
to get management out of the job the way you wrote it last
year.
So I apologize for being blunt here, but I--you absolutely
are on the right track. I think some minor adjustments you will
carry this across the line.
And, of course, I would be very flattered to work with you
on anything this year. I haven't seen your draft bill, but I
look forward to working with you and the committee, sir.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Hamre can be found in the
Appendix on page 51.]
The Chairman. Thank you, sir.
Ms. Flournoy.

STATEMENT OF MICHELE FLOURNOY, CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER AND CO-
FOUNDER, CENTER FOR A NEW AMERICAN SECURITY, FORMER UNDER
SECRETARY OF DEFENSE (POLICY)

Ms. Flournoy. Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member Smith, and
distinguished members of the committee, truly an honor to be
here to testify before you on such a critical topic as defense
reform.
You know, it is hard to remember a time when the need for
defense reform was more acute, given the incredible challenges
that our military is likely to face in the future. We have a
military that is more capable than ever before, but also it is
a military that is on an unsustainable cost curve.
And so fundamental reforms are needed to actually free up
resources that can be reinvested in the critical concepts and
capabilities and operations that will need--that will enable us
to really maintain our technological edge in the future in a
far more challenging security environment. So now is the time
to continue with a plan for robust reform that ensures that we
get the most possible out of every taxpayer dollar invested.
And I, too, want to applaud the work that this committee
has done in leading the charge on defense reform, particularly
in the acquisition area. But what I wanted to do this morning
is suggest four new areas that you may want to go deeper in
this legislative cycle and in the future.
The first is right-sizing DOD headquarters and, in
particular, transforming the defense agencies. If you look
today at the Office of the Secretary of Defense, the Joint
Staff, the combatant command headquarters, and the defense
agencies, they total about 240,000 people, excluding
contractors. That is about 20 percent of the defense budget.
The substantial growth in DOD headquarters is not just a
matter of inefficiency but also one of effectiveness. You know,
in the private sector bloated headquarter staffs have been
documented to slow decision making, push too many decisions too
far up in the organization, incentivize risk-averse behavior,
undermine organizational performance, and compromise agility;
and I think the same can be true in government.
Perhaps the greatest opportunity for potential savings lies
with the largest defense agencies, which account for about $134
billion of the DOD budget. So highest priority in my mind
should be given to those large agencies that operate most like
civilian businesses, including DLA, the Defense Logistics
Agency; DISA, the Defense Information Systems Agency; DHA, the
Defense Health Agency; and DFAS, which is the [Defense] Finance
and Accounting Service.
And what I would encourage you to do is to require the
Secretary of Defense to undertake a comprehensive management
assessment of these agencies, looking at where best business
practices, new technologies, and automation might actually
improve performance and reduce cost, and create savings that
could be reinvested in higher-priority areas.
Beyond this focus on defense agencies, I think it would
also be a good thing for Congress to provide the Secretary with
the flexibility and breathing room to assess across the DOD
headquarters areas of potential overlap and look for
opportunities to restructure, consolidate, reassign personnel,
eliminate unnecessary offices and functions. Just hearing
John's proposal for giving the CMO [chief management officer]
line responsibility over the agencies, I think that is very
much worthy of consideration.
Second key area I would love for you to grapple with is
BRAC. The Department desperately needs a BRAC round. The
estimate is that 22 percent of current infrastructure is excess
to military need. The service chiefs have repeatedly testified
that that infrastructure overhang is taking money away from
readiness and from modernization and critical future
warfighting capabilities.
Based on past experience, the Department is estimating that
at least $2 billion a year could be saved. And although
concerns about potential job loss are understandable, there are
also a number of studies of past closures that concluded that
most jobs are ultimately replaced and most affected communities
actually do recover quite well.
I think in a year where the Congress is also considering a
major infrastructure investment bill you could imagine
directing some of that investment to affected communities and
potentially easing their transition and mitigating some of the
job losses associated with BRAC.
So bottom line is every dollar we spend on unneeded
infrastructure is a dollar that we are not using to support the
men and women who serve in harm's way, so I would encourage you
this year to act.
The third area is reshaping and reinvigorating the civilian
workforce. Today DOD employs about 770,000 civilian employees,
plus a comparable number of civilian contractors. Multiple
efforts have been made to streamline the system with mixed
success.
I think you have an opportunity this year to provide the
Secretary with a package of authorities to help reinvigorate
the civilian workforce. I would encourage you--I list them in
my testimony; I will just briefly touch on some of them here.
But requiring the Secretary to develop a comprehensive
human capital strategy for how we recruit, develop, retain, and
shape the civilian workforce, including in that assessing the
optimal mix between military, civilian, and contractor
workforces; secondly, to set realistic personnel cost reduction
targets over the FYDP [Future Years Defense Program]; to
actually further modify the VSIP [voluntary separation
incentive payments] authority to allow it to be targeted on
specific employees that are judged appropriate to leave
government service; to encourage the Secretary to use the
modified RIF [reduction in force] authority that you provided
last year but hasn't been used by the Department yet; to give
the Secretary flexibility to reallocate and reassign personnel
as he right-sizes and reshapes the organization; and really to
look at consolidating the personnel system.
Currently there are 66 different personnel systems that are
being used for the civilian workforce in the Department of
Defense today--66. Imagine trying to manage that.
Can we look at a consolidated approach under title 10 that
would really allow the Secretary to tailor one system to hire,
manage, develop, compensate, retain DOD's civilian workforce.
And there are a number of other ideas that I list there, as
well.
The fourth area is improving the quality of health care
while reducing costs. Today the military health care system--
costs have nearly doubled over the last decade, with the CBO
[Congressional Budget Office] estimating an additional $40
billion by 2030.
What is even more important in my mind is that survey data
suggests that the quality of care received by military
personnel and their dependents remains uneven and customer
satisfaction is below civilian benchmarks in key areas. So I
think this is an area where DOD and the Congress have an
opportunity to explore ways of both improving the quality of
care while also leveraging approaches like values-based health
care to reduce costs.
In my written testimony I actually draw from an excellent
report that Bob Hale, the former DOD comptroller, did for CNAS
[Center for a New American Security] on reforming defense, and
particularly he highlights five areas for health care reform
that I think are worthy of looking at: wartime readiness,
value-based reimbursement, utilization of services,
productivity, and availability of choice.
Let me just conclude by saying that I really do think we
have a tremendous opportunity with this Secretary and this
Congress to move forward on these issues. I think now is the
time to provide the Secretary of Defense with the authorities
and flexibility he needs to actually get better performance and
free up resources for reinvestment in higher-priority areas.
But that said, defense reform, as you all know, is not a
panacea. It is my hope that this Congress will also consider
how to establish a more predictable and more robust levels of
defense spending over the next 5 to 10 years without gutting
diplomacy and development accounts that are also critical to
our national security.
I believe that reaching a comprehensive budget deal that
includes all of the obvious elements--from tax reform, to
entitlement reform, to smart investment in the drivers of our
economic vitality and growth--is not only an economic
imperative; it has become a national security imperative.
Lastly, I hope that through the dialogue that this
committee is fostering, the Congress and the executive branch
will be able to partner more closely together and make some of
the hard choices and undertake the reforms necessary to ensure
that we truly keep faith with the men and women who serve in
the best fighting force in the world. As I think you would all
agree, they deserve nothing less.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Flournoy can be found in the
Appendix on page 60.]
The Chairman. Thank you.
Dr. Zakheim.

STATEMENT OF DR. DOV S. ZAKHEIM, SENIOR ADVISER, CENTER FOR
STRATEGIC AND INTERNATIONAL STUDIES, FORMER UNDER SECRETARY OF
DEFENSE (COMPTROLLER)

Dr. Zakheim. Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member Smith, Mr.
Langevin, and the committee, like my colleagues here, I have
been in front of this committee several times and it is a real
privilege to be here again and to testify yet again on defense
reform.
The last 2 years in particular this committee has literally
led the charge on implementing--first legislating and then
helping to, in effect, implement reforms that were sorely
needed in the Department. But, as my colleagues have pointed
out and everyone here recognizes, there is still a way to go.
I want to focus on some of the topics that have already
been mentioned. The list is very long.
Let me begin first with civilian personnel. I have a
slightly different take than some of my colleagues have on what
to do about the fact that civilian personnel has grown. It is
36 percent right now of--excuse me, of all personnel in DOD.
Civilian personnel added 77,000 people over the last 15 years,
an 11.5 percent jump. Military end strength, as we know, has
gone down over that period by 8 percent.
And civilian pay has gone up 31 percent. Most of that has
gone to the General Schedule, the white-collar folks. Wage
Board folks, the blue-collar folks, have barely gotten an
increase at all, and I think that is worth noting.
It is not at all clear that all these increases have
actually provided DOD with more efficiencies. If it had, we
wouldn't be talking about it today.
And one of the serious issues involving efficiency is the
degree to which civil servants offload too much work to
contractors, and particularly to what are called
euphemistically ``staff augmentees.'' We have got a problem
with that because it creates a sort of unhealthy symbiosis
where civilian workers essentially give contractors work that
they probably could and should do themselves.
And I had that when I was comptroller. I saw reports that
were meant to go to the Congress that were poorly written.
Turned out they weren't written by the civil servants; they
were barely reviewed by the civil servants.
They were written by contractors. And when I said this just
wasn't the right thing to send up to the Hill the answer was,
``Okay. We will send it back to the contractor.'' There is
something fundamentally wrong with that.
Another serious problem is the education of our civil
servants. You can get a degree at the age of 25 and not take
another course again for 40 years. That just doesn't work with
Moore's law--particularly with the acquisition corps, but for
human resource management, as well.
I think my colleagues are absolutely right: We need to
focus on human resource management. If we don't train people,
how are they going to know how to manage?
We really need to ensure that we--anybody who wants to get
particularly into the Senior Executive Service should spend a
year at a top-notch university either doing business school-
type work or going to a top technology school so that they
really become educated consumers and educated managers. Without
that you are going to find people flailing around, as they do
today.
It doesn't help. And the military system, whatever you
think about the need to improve professional military
education, at least they have it. And you cannot become a flag
or a general officer without going to the National War College
or one of the service war colleges or the equivalent.
We need that for our civilians, as well. It is not fair to
them.
And last year's NDAA had some relationships established
between the Defense Acquisition University and outside
organizations, whether it is think tanks, universities,
whatever. But the Defense Acquisition University is
fundamentally a training institution, and if you go online and
you look at the offerings you will see so many of them are
distance learning. Well, distance learning has its points, but
it is not really going to educate people in the way that face-
to-face, yearlong education will do.
As long as the course offerings are primarily for learning
how to do something for training rather than education, you are
not going to get what you need out of the DAU. The DAU has its
place, but it is not the be-all and end-all.
I would also argue that because the civilian personnel
levels are just so high, we need to look at something like the
REDUCE [Rebalance for an Effective Defense Uniformed and
Civilian Employees] Act. Unless you literally specify cuts--and
it can--and obviously the Department will allocate those cuts,
but unless you specify something along the lines of the REDUCE
Act, you are never going to get the civilian force levels down.
And if you want to spend more money on the military force
levels, you want to spend more money on procurement and
acquisition, you have got to do something with the size of the
civilian workforce. There are no two ways around it.
And as for dealing with the staff augmentees, I would
recommend that nobody who leaves the Department as a civilian
or a military person can go back to the Department as a
contractor for 5 years.
In other words, you can't flip your badge and come back on
Monday doing the same work you did on Friday. It just doesn't
work out. It adds to the overload in terms of numbers of
civilians, and obviously if people have to stay out for 5 years
they are going to find other jobs and you won't have this
phenomenon of people literally doing the same job, just getting
paid more and wearing a different badge.
I would also like to briefly talk about the reorganization
of OSD [Office of the Secretary of Defense]. I don't feel as
strongly as my colleague, John Hamre, does about the split of
the two--of the under secretary into two under secretaries, but
one thing: We really need to make sure that their staffs don't
grow so that, again, you are increasing headquarters instead of
reducing them, as Michele would like to see and I think we all
would like to see.
If you don't limit what they can add to themselves--one
idea that I have had for many years is have the principal
deputy double as the assistant secretary in some--some
assistant secretary simply so that you don't have duplication
of staffs. You don't need to have a principal deputy who has a
staff of his or her own in addition to the under secretary, in
addition to an assistant--to the number of assistant
secretaries.
And, by the way, I would recommend the committee look again
at how many assistant secretaries the Defense Department really
needs. In my testimony I indicate some areas where some changes
could be made there and reductions could be made.
And finally, regarding the CMO, I totally agree with John.
The CMO ought to be, in effect, the under secretary--not with
that term, but, in effect, the under secretary for the Fourth
Estate.
Have them focus--the CMO focus on that area. We are talking
about Fortune 500 companies that are managed by people who
would not be CEOs [chief executive officers] of Fortune 500
companies.
So we need to get somebody good in there; we need to get
somebody with business experience in there. And that CMO should
focus on that.
Right now the mandate is so broad that what is going to
happen is there will be inefficient focus on any one area, plus
lots and lots of turf wars. There is nobody who focuses only on
the defense agencies and field activities.
That is because the under secretaries who have them in
their org charts simply are focused primarily on other things.
When I was comptroller, I suspect when John was comptroller,
yes we had DFAS, and yes we had DCAA [Defense Contract Audit
Agency] under us, but that was not our primary task. Our
primary task was to focus on the budget.
So I would strongly recommend, as I think John does, that
the CMO focus on that Fourth Estate.
And finally, on acquisition reform, because I know my time
is running out, I would simply say this: I know that there has
been some skepticism about DIUx [Defense Innovation Unit
Experimental] and about, to some extent, the Third Offset.
Frankly, I think the Third Offset is necessary; it is--it only
shouldn't be a replacement for force level increases, which to
some extent was the implication that many people took away from
when the Third Offset was first introduced.
As for DIUx, it seems to me that they have overhauled their
personnel, they are clearly focused on innovation, but if you
want them to succeed you have got to do some other things. In
particular, the Defense Department needs to default not to FAR
[Federal Acquisition Regulation] part 15, which is the classic
way of contracting, but either to FAR part 12 or some other
system where, in effect, you are buying directly from the
contractor, who doesn't have to be part of the defense base.
If you do that you are going to totally overhaul the
culture of the Department, which right now thinks profits is
some kind of sin, which essentially wants to go through many
hurdles and hoops before anything gets done, and that is where
we get our delays, that is where we get our cost overruns, and
that is where we get frustration on the part of your committee
and Congress generally, and the consumers of defense, who are
the taxpayers.
Mr. Chairman, thank you very much for allowing me to repeat
many of the things I have said before, but you are--the
committee is doing a wonderful job, and just keep it up.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Zakheim can be found in the
Appendix on page 74.]
The Chairman. Sometimes we need to hear it more than once,
so that is okay.
I want to go back and examine some of the specifics y'all
have talked about at the end if other members don't ask about
them, but let me just start with a couple big-picture
questions.
Seems to me when it comes to defense reform there are two
major justifications. One is efficiency, squeeze more money out
so it can be used for other purpose; the other is agility, so
you can keep up with changing threats, changing technology,
adaptive enemies, and so forth.
Do each of you agree that the efficiency part--if you--if
everything were perfect and you could squeeze out all the
inefficiency possible, do you believe that is enough money to
rebuild the military, to repair the damage that CRs [continuing
resolutions] and sequestration have created over the past
number of years?
Dr. Hamre. Do you mean the budget as--the slim budget that
was proposed?
The Chairman. No. What members ask me is they will see a
headline and says, ``Oh, greater efficiencies could save this
much money.'' And the question is, can you reform your way to
health if you are just looking at the dollars?
Dr. Hamre. Yes. My personal view is that you are going to
need additional resources. You cannot find enough savings
inside the Department to compensate for the readiness issues we
have now, the force structure issues we have now. I think you
are going to need more money, personally.
Now, that isn't to say you shouldn't dig in on getting rid
of the inefficiencies, but I think you are--we just need more
money because the Department is stretched.
The Chairman. Yes. That is what I am trying to understand.
Ms. Flournoy. I would agree that you can't--defense reform
alone will be--not be enough to generate the investment we need
in future capabilities to deal with a more daunting security
environment.
By the same token, I don't think we can afford to simply
put more money into the defense budget without defense reform,
both from an efficiency perspective but also from the very
important point you made about agility, that this is also about
improving the organizational performance of the Department, not
just reducing cost.
The Chairman. Dr. Zakheim.
Dr. Zakheim. I would agree, as well. I would use a business
metaphor, if you will: If you cut your operating costs all the
way down and you don't increase your revenues you are out of
business.
And in a sense, this is the same thing. I mean, you can
push efficiencies only so far, but if you don't increase your
top line you are going to be out of business.
And agility, I think, is equally if not more important
because the fact of the matter is we do rely primarily on our
edge in high technology, and if we are not agile enough we are
going to lose that edge because so much of that technology is
no longer DARPA's [Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency's]
province or DOD's province. It is out there. And so agility is
absolutely critical.
We need both. And I think the direction the committee has
taken I think does allow the Department to achieve both if the
Department is willing to cooperate.
The Chairman. Well, and let me just pick up on that for my
second question. On the agility side, I think you heard earlier
the statement that we need to just give it a rest, let the
reforms we have already instituted have a chance to get--
because they are--is a cost to churn, to change, and I think we
ought to be, you know, cognizant of that.
But I guess what I would--and, again, a big-picture sense
from y'all is as you see the threats evolving, do you believe
we should kind of back off and let what we have already done
give a chance to set in, or do you think we need to continue to
move, maybe even more aggressively, at the kinds of reforms
that each of you have laid out? Just, again, this kind of
bigger picture: Is the churn worth it, given what is happening
in the world?
Dr. Zakheim. Well, Mr. Chairman, I would say move as
aggressively as you can, and the reason I say that is twofold.
First, churn doesn't necessarily lead to bad things.
Secondly, if you essentially call a timeout what you are going
to do is allow the bureaucrats in the Department to figure out
a way to get around everything you have done.
That has happened in the past. I have seen it when I was in
the Weinberger Defense Department; I saw it in the Rumsfeld
Defense Department; I saw it when Mr. Rumsfeld tried to do
things and the bureaucracy figured out how to get around him,
much less you all.
No. It is critical that you keep on pushing.
The Chairman. Okay.
Ms. Flournoy.
Ms. Flournoy. I would agree with that. I do think that a
lot of the change is focused in the acquisition area, and I
think the Department probably needs some period of
consolidation of actually, maybe with some of the tweaks that
John Hamre described, but to have--needs some time to actually
be able to implement and fully, you know, comply with what you
have already asked them to do in the acquisition domain.
Beyond that, I think it is--now is a time where you have an
opportunity to move much more aggressively now in other areas,
which are equally important to bringing both agility and
efficiency.
The Chairman. Dr. Hamre.
Dr. Hamre. Mr. Chairman, I would argue that I think you
should move actively, aggressively on reform because the
American public is questioning the value we are getting out of
what we put into the Defense Department. That was the real
challenge of that study that was done by the Defense Business
Board last year.
It came at a time when people were saying, ``Do we need to
give DOD more money or don't we need to give them more money?''
I happen to think we do, but I also think the American public
is questioning whether they ought to.
I think you have to push on reform in order to convince
them that you are being a good steward of these resources.
The Chairman. Okay. Thank you all. That is very helpful.
Mr. Langevin.
Mr. Langevin. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Again, I want to
thank our witnesses for your insightful testimony here today.
So modernization approaches in our major programs have
traditionally taken years to execute. For example, Increment
3.1 on the F-22 began development in 2006 and the first upgrade
wasn't delivered to the fleet until 2012. While this strategy
has worked in the past, the commoditization of advanced
computing power has rendered it unsustainable, especially when
you look at Moore's law, I mean, squaring--technology is
squaring every 18 months.
So our adversaries are now accomplishing multiple upgrades
during our weapon systems development and acquisition timeline.
How do we transform the military-industrial policy complex to
restore our advantage in the timeline it takes to field new
technologies?
Ms. Flournoy. I think it is one of the principal challenges
we face. And, you know, I think one of the things--there are
certain platforms that are going to take very long lead times
to create, but I think we want to--one of the things we want to
do is have more modularity in the designs of those platforms so
that you can plug and play new information technologies, new
electronic warfare systems, new, you know, modular components.
Because it is those capabilities that are developing much
more rapidly and those areas where we want to be able to change
out capabilities on a platform that may have to last 20, 30
years. But that is key.
The other key part is being able to approach the
acquisition of commercial technologies and their integration
with a much more responsive, agile, quick-turn set of
authorities. One of the things that, you know, this committee
has done is pushed some of those other authorities, those new
authorities to the Department.
I think what is now lacking is the change of culture and
behavior that Mr. Zakheim highlighted as needed in the
acquisition workforce. We need to actually educate, train a
cadre who really knows how to use those new authorities, who
has more of an innovation mindset, who is most comfortable
acquiring commercial technologies and bringing them in. And
that is a very different skill set and mindset than what you
need to manage a major traditional defense acquisition program
over a 20-year timescale.
Dr. Zakheim. And the only thing I would add to what Michele
Flournoy just said is it is necessary if you are going to
change the culture to have the bureaucracy default to buying
commercial as opposed to default to the system that we now
have. The Defense Business Board, which I am on, and the task
force that I also was on, recommended, as I mentioned, focusing
on the portion of the FAR part 12 that essentially deals with
commercial off-the-shelf procurement as opposed to the classic
system.
You can do that. You can do other things. What really is
important is ensuring that the default mechanism for buying the
modularity that Michele talked about is commercial. As long as
that is not the default mechanism, A, you are not going to
change the culture; and B, you are going to have the same
problems you just spoke about, Mr. Langevin.
Dr. Hamre. May I just briefly add that I--you are right to
highlight that when we build platforms we--gosh, it takes a
long time to do it. But we also have examples where we have
done things quickly and we have done them effectively. We put
Hellfire on Predator. I mean, that was just done in months.
I mean, we are able to do things very quickly and we should
be studying why do we have places where we do it well, and then
why do we get bogged down in other things? And a lot of it
revolves around the commitment of the leadership and how
closely the leadership is supervising the bureaucracy. You
know, if a boss wants to pull something through the system, it
works, you know?
So I think we need to probably go back and take a look.
This is why you did the right thing when you put the chairman
of the chiefs of staff back in the chain of command. That is
how we are going to get more--it is making people more
accountable and giving them more flexibility and say, ``We are
not satisfied with 12-year-long development programs.''
You are right to highlight it. Let's look at the examples
where we have been successful, too.
Dr. Zakheim. If I could jump in a second time, you know, we
have a rapid acquisition system now that was created to get
around our acquisition system. So that is where you ought to
start looking.
And I think what you will find is that the rapid system
simply eliminates a lot of the checkoffs and reviews and
passing of paper that otherwise would take place. But that is
where you should look. When a department creates a system to
get around its own system, you ought to scratch your head and
say, ``Why?''
Mr. Langevin. Thank you for those answers, and still on the
topic of acquiring advanced technologies more quickly and allow
them to be adapted more quickly, so technological advantage and
the innovation that drives it have been key foundations of
strength for our armed services. Our technology sector, from
major corporations to small businesses, are crucial to
invigorating research, yet they have limited access to and
participation in our defense industry.
While the Defense Innovation Unit Experimental, or DIUx, is
an excellent initiative to change this paradigm, the contracts
awarded through this mechanism accounted for less than 0.01 of
a percent of DOD's research and procurement budgets in fiscal
year 2016. So how do we reform our acquisition cycle to promote
participation and access for both giants of Silicon Valley and
the entrepreneurial small businesses that fuel our American
tech industry?
Ms. Flournoy. And I think the primary task and opportunity
of the new under secretary--I like to call it the under
secretary of innovation, but it is the research, development,
engineering under secretary--is to take that soda straw that is
coming through places like DIUx or DARPA, and so forth, and to
make it a superhighway, to really perfect the Department's
leveraging of these other authorities to access commercial
technologies, to have it be commonplace to be prototyping a
number of systems, and then choose which ones you are going to
bring all the way into full acquisition.
To be putting--incentivizing real experimentation and
concept development that goes along with how we are going to
better--how we are going to allow these new technologies to
actually transform how we fight.
And again, that is going to take a different organizational
culture, a different set of incentives and rewards, a different
kind of training for the civilian and military workforces that
actually have that task.
So I think that is--you have done the organizational
change, but if--to make that effective you really have to get
into how are you going to create the incentives, the career
paths, the training to make that new organization behave
fundamentally differently than the traditional acquisition
corps.
Dr. Zakheim. I would add a couple of other things.
First, DIUx essentially develops prototypes. Then it goes
into the system. Once it goes into the system you have got all
the problems that the system has and that we have talked about.
So again, that is another reason for accelerating reform
rather than sitting back and waiting, because otherwise you
just shot DIUx in the foot. It won't be able to do anything.
Another area related to that is you can MIL-SPEC [military
standard] everything to death and if you start MIL-SPECing what
DIUx has prototyped you are going to have a problem again. And
I have spoken to the head of DIUx about it and he acknowledged
that that was a serious issue because they don't MIL-SPEC. That
is the whole idea of what DIUx is doing. So you have gotta take
a close look at that.
Third area is just keep the DIUx leadership there. If
somebody comes in from industry and is there 18 months, that is
not really very, very good. You are not going to get anything
out of an innovation like DIUx unless you have got somebody
there for 3 years who figures out how the system works, how to
get around the roadblocks, and so on.
You heard about the training from Michele. I won't repeat
that again.
But one other thing: DIUx now has leaders who are
reservists--many of them. And our whole Reserve system doesn't
really account enough for the people who are in the high-tech
area in their civilian lives and then come in and they will be
sent to clean the bilge or something. And I am not kidding.
So DIUx provides a vehicle for bringing in Reserves who are
doing really well in the high-tech area--for example, down in
Austin. The guy who is down in Austin who is running that
Austin office is a Reserve who reports directly to the CEO of
Apple. That is what you want.
Dr. Hamre. May I humbly offer a suggestion?
The President has nominated Mr. Patrick Shanahan to be the
next Deputy Secretary of Defense. Pat has a long and very
storied career as a very effective program manager in one of
our aerospace companies. You don't have a formal role with
confirmation, but you should have him come up to talk to you,
either in a formal hearing or in an informal hearing, and ask
him--say, ``We are going to be measuring you by how well you
accelerate the efficiency of this system, and I want you to
come back to us in 3 months with each of the chiefs of staff of
the military departments to say how are we going to do it.''
This is about leadership, and I think you have a golden
opportunity because we have got a new leader who has a lot of
experience in managing in industry. I think it is a great
opportunity for you to take advantage of that.
Mr. Langevin. Very good. Great suggestions. I thank you all
for your answers and your insights, and although I have other
questions and I like this idea of not being on the clock, I am
going to be respectful of other members' time.
And I will yield back and perhaps submit these for the
record. Thank you. I yield back.
The Chairman. Mr. Wilson is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Wilson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you each for
being here today and your service to our country.
Dr. Zakheim, in your own experience as Under Secretary of
Defense, what was one defense reform that stands out as being
particularly effective, and what lessons should be learned and
taken from that reform to inform ongoing and future reform
efforts?
Dr. Zakheim. That is a tough question. Remember, I was
there at the----
Mr. Wilson. We need some good news. I would like to hear
it.
Dr. Zakheim. I was there at the beginning of the 2000s.
One reform that clearly did make a difference, I thought,
was the ability of DARPA essentially to go directly to the
comptroller and get money. And I will give you a concrete
example of that.
Ron Sega at the time was director of DARPA. We had gone
into Afghanistan; we knew a lot of the bad guys were hiding in
caves.
He comes to me and he says--this is November of 2001--he
comes to me and he says, ``If you give me X amount of millions
of dollars I have got this weapon called a thermobaric weapon
that will smoke all these people out of caves, and I will have
it in the field for you by March.''
Gave him the money. That was that. It was in the field by
March and it smoked a lot of people out.
So there are ways, and I think my colleagues have pointed
it out. There are ways to cut through this red tape. That was
one example.
Mr. Wilson. Well, as a grateful dad of a son who served as
an engineer in Afghanistan, thank you for what you did.
Ms. Flournoy, if you recommend a shift to new issues, what
criteria should the committee use to determine issues of focus
for future defense reform efforts?
Ms. Flournoy. I guess I would encourage you to sort of plot
them on two axes: One is sort of bang for the buck, biggest
return on the effort; and second would be political--the
heaviness of the political lift, and to focus first and
foremost on the things that are most impactful in terms of both
improving that organizational performance and agility on one
hand, and potentially reducing cost on the other, and that are
also in the politically feasible square. That is where I would
start.
You know, I think one of the things--the dynamics that has
taken hold sometimes is, you know, the Department of Defense
will propose and Congress will say, ``Well, we don't really
like that agenda,'' and we go back and forth trading.
I would love to see the executive branch and the Congress
sit down and say, ``Let's create a target for how much money we
want to be able to move from--you know, to save and move into
reinvestment,'' and let you all really determine or have the
lead in determining of all the target-rich environment of all
the possible reforms, what are the ones that you think make
sense and that you think politically we can get a consensus on
to move forward on.
And, I mean, because the truth is there are many more
opportunities than we can possibly handle in 1 year, and I
think the key is keeping momentum going. And so, you know, that
is--I would say bang for the buck and political feasibility.
Mr. Wilson. And very constructive. Thank you very much.
And, Dr. Hamre, under the leadership of Chairman Mac
Thornberry of this committee our reform efforts have largely
been focused in the past few years successfully on acquisition,
military personnel, and structural reforms at the Department.
In your opinion, should the committee continue to--its focus on
primary reform efforts in these areas in order to capitalize on
progress that has been made to date, or shift to new issues? If
you recommend shifting to new issues, what issues do you
recommend?
Dr. Hamre. Sir, I do think--first of all, you are going to
have to monitor the reforms--efforts that you have put in place
because the reforms of last year are unsettled. And you did the
right thing by giving a year implementation period, but that
means you are going to have to be on top of it for this year to
make sure that they follow through.
I do think you should look at additional things. And I have
my own set of pet-rock issues.
For example--and I know this is something your staff is
working at--the question of materiality for audit standards in
the Department. There is no materiality standard for the
auditors.
So they chase 10 cents; they chase parking tickets; they
chase, you know, who had the blue cheese dressing. You know, I
mean, it is crazy without having a materiality standard. We are
wasting a lot of money and we are bottling up the defense
industry because we can't close out our--close our contracts.
I mean, these are very mechanical, very arcane, but stuff
like that is really important. It drives a lot.
I personally think we need to bring back A-76, where we
conducted objective competitions between public and private
sector over contracting out activities. Half of the time the
government wins. But the government redesigned the way it did
the business and it saved money every time.
I think there are a lot of things like that that we could
be doing that--and I hope you tackle these. These are not the
big, glamorous, exciting things, but they drive a lot of money
in this department, and I would be grateful. I am happy to come
up at any time and talk with you about some of them.
There is no purple property book for the Department of
Defense. Every bit of property is owned by one of the military
services.
There is no central management. We are the biggest renter
of real estate for the Federal Government, outside of the
General Services Administration, but it is all decentralized.
We get no value for scale in our system.
There are so many things we could do like this that would--
but we have to change the way we do our business.
Mr. Wilson. Well, supporting an audit, thank you for what
you are suggesting. Thank you.
The Chairman. Mr. Suozzi.
Mr. Suozzi. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I am new to this, but I am a former mayor and a county
executive of a large county with a $2.8 billion budget, and it
was a 50-year-old government that kind of--just kind of grew
over time. There was no central listing of the properties that
were owned; there were multiple different IT [information
technology] technologies in all the different departments.
So when I hear you talk about 66 different--what did you
say--HR [human resource] personnel systems, and when you talk
about no, you know, no centralization of management--and I just
visited Guantanamo yesterday and, you know, it is a sprawling
facility with a new building here and another one over there,
and it is very typical to what I saw in my experience.
Now, I always felt it was, you know, the executive branch
who really is the one that has to get their hands around this.
They are the ones who have to drive the ball here and, you
know, the legislative body can sometimes be more of a hindrance
by trying to pass an additional law like, you know, no
standards for the audits, for example. So, you know, I don't
really care who had the blue cheese dressing; I want to know
about the big things that are going on.
So I have a couple different questions.
Number one is, you suggested before, Ms. Flournoy, that
if--we should target a number as to how much we would like to
try and target in savings that should be used for reinvestment.
So the first question is, what do you think that number should
be? You know, just to--you know, I am not going to hold you to
it, but it is just an order of magnitude type of number that we
should be targeting for savings and then reinvestment.
Second question is when I look at the overall budget of the
Department of Defense, personnel is $138 billion; operation and
maintenance is $250 billion; and procurement is $112 billion.
So operation and maintenance is bigger than either personnel or
procurement, and that is--and I don't hear anybody talking
about operation and maintenance that much, so it seems like
there is a lot of--that could be a target-rich environment. And
what do you think about that basic observation, just looking at
the numbers?
And that is where I will--I will leave it there for now.
So I am just going to ask all of you, what is your target
number that we should be looking for for--set a goal for,
``This is what we want to get as savings to reinvest back into
the military.''
And second is: What about operation and maintenance?
Dr. Zakheim. Well, the Defense Business Board, as you may
know, came up with a study--it has been referenced before--a
couple years ago which pointed out a host of different
efficiencies and argued that over 5 years you could save $125
billion. That is a lot of----
Mr. Suozzi. That would be $25 billion a year.
Dr. Zakheim. $25 billion a year. I personally think that
that number is on the high side, and they actually had high,
low, and middle. But it just does seem to me that somewhere
between $15 billion and $20 billion is not out of the question.
That is number one.
On the----
Mr. Suozzi. Just $25 billion is, you know, less than 5
percent of the budget.
Dr. Zakheim. That is correct.
On the operations and maintenance [O&M], you are absolutely
right. One of the issues that has been ongoing for years is
real cost growth in operations and support. And part of the
problem for--with that is that when you buy a new system the
focus is always on the upfront costs and not on how much it is
going to cost you out there. In fact, very often the people who
produce the system say, ``Well, you are going to save a ton of
money in the future,'' but if you start discounting you
discover you are not saving all that much. In fact, you are
going to wind up spending a lot more than you thought.
And so you need to have somebody very senior who is
responsible for the O&M side when they get into discussions
about procurement. I remember at the--at meetings of the
acquisition board the person who worried about sustainment and
operations was not as senior as just about everybody else
around the table. Well, you know what happens when that is the
case.
I think high-level focus on O&M will get to the goal that
you are laying out.
Ms. Flournoy. I don't have a magic number in mind, but I do
believe that the sort of order of magnitude that the Defense
Business Board study talked about is probably correct over
time. The challenge is you are going to require--it is going to
require some upfront investment so your initial savings will be
smaller and it will grow over time.
For example, base realignment and closure. There is
actually--it costs money up front to close bases and then you
get the savings over time. But it is documented that in most
cases you do get the savings.
Similarly, for things like IT transformation and automation
you are going to have--DOD is going to have to invest to move
to the cloud or to a secure cloud and to start treating
software as a service rather than some--you know, building
proprietary systems. That is going to require upfront
investment, but over time potential for dramatic savings.
So I think you want to think about it as ramping up over
time.
The other key thing is the incentives, and this I watched
Secretary Gates struggle with this on the efficiencies mission
effort the--that he undertook. The first time he went out and
sat down with all the services and the components he said,
``Okay, we are going to aim for''--you know, 10--I can't
remember what the number was--``X billion dollars of
efficiencies. Next meeting come back with your suggestions.''
Everybody came back the next meeting--really hard to find
anything. Just, you know, really couldn't do it.
So he said, ``Well, how about if I told you you could keep
half of what you find?''
Oh. So next time people came back--unbelievable ideas.
Wonderful, creative ideas because each of the components knew
that they could now keep half those savings and reinvest in
their priority areas.
So I think the incentive structure is very--as important as
setting the target level.
Mr. Suozzi. Thank you.
Dr. Hamre. Just to build on what Secretary Flournoy has
said, it is about incentives. And, you know, both Dr. Zakheim
and I were comptrollers. You know, the patron saint of all
comptrollers is Judas Iscariot, you know?
So nobody is ever going to come and give you money. And so
it sets up this very bad dynamic, you know, within the
Department.
But there is one very important dimension: If any dollar
that a military department--any one of the service chiefs--
saves in the out-years of the FYDP, they get 100 percent of
that. It is only when it comes into the budget year when we arm
wrestle with them and take some from them and give them a
little bit back and all that.
Everything they save in the FYDP, the out-years, is
something they get to pocket and they can reinvest inside their
own service.
The most important review that the Department does is the
program review, which is run by CAPE [Cost Assessment and
Program Evaluation]. We have kind of let that fall apart,
honestly. If we were to get back to the--where the program
review becomes more prominent in how we manage the Department
and the service chiefs know if they make hard choices now, in 2
and 3 years they get 100 percent of that money.
Mr. Suozzi. Yes.
Dr. Hamre. So we can get the incentives right, but we don't
have it right now.
Mr. Suozzi. Okay. Thank you very much. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman. I am very interested in this topic if there is
anything that we can do further. Thank you.
The Chairman. Great.
Mrs. Hartzler.
Mrs. Hartzler. Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Great
testimony, great suggestions, and appreciate my colleague's
comments there.
I wanted to hone in on the--Dr. Zakheim, the Defense
Business Board at--the report that you put out that you just
referenced. And as you know, that kind of caused a big stir
when that came out, $125 billion, and that is $25 billion a
year.
You know, current and former Department leaders and others
have expressed concerns that some of the savings came from
private sector initiatives that may not be achievable in the
public sector. So in your opinion, what are the differences
between accomplishing successful reform in the public sector
versus the private sector?
Dr. Zakheim. Well, let me start with unions. We have in the
Defense Department unions that bitterly oppose any civilian
personnel reform, where you could save a bunch of money. You
could save probably initially anywhere between $5 billion and
$8 billion a year just through human resource management.
Well, Mr. Rumsfeld tried it and it blew up in his face,
thanks to the unions.
Now, the law, the Civil Service Reform Act of 1979,
actually has a provision where the President could exempt
Defense Department employees from being unionized. Already CIA
[Central Intelligence Agency] employees, military employees,
others are, indeed, exempt.
Now, once you exempt them then you can start pursuing those
sorts of reforms, and that is one key area. In fact, that is
probably the richest area for immediate reform because that is
money that you spend immediately each year.
There obviously are differences beyond that between the
commercial sector and the government sector. But nevertheless,
if you actually look at the report it does scale: $125 billion
is kind of mid-level; there is less than that and more than
that, as well, as options.
But the key is, what kind of efficiency--what percent
efficiencies could you realize? And if you took half the
percent of what goes on in the commercial sector, you would
still save $60 billion over 5 years.
So it does seem to me that the argument, ``Well, you know,
we are different,'' and you throw your hands up in the air--it
has got some validity, but not total validity.
Mrs. Hartzler. Yes. Very good.
Ms. Flournoy. One thought--data access and transparency.
There is no entity in the world that has more data than the
Department of Defense, but we keep it locked up in little
stovepipes that individual components own.
And so if you are looking at real property, for example,
right now the Department is trying to do a cost accounting
exercise where they just are trying to understand how are we
actually spending money on different properties. And if you do
that--if you unlock that data and you apply analytics across
it, the problem children pop out and you see, well, in one case
you are paying five times more for electricity in the same
region than another facility down the road. Why is that? Or,
you know, maintenance, or whatever the issue is.
So I think there is a huge--there is--it is very powerful
if we could figure out a way to unlock and access and analyze
the data that the Department already has in stovepipes to get
at some of these efficiencies.
Mrs. Hartzler. That is very good. Dr. Hamre, do you have
anything you wanted to add to that?
Dr. Hamre. Well, if I may, just, you know, we really have
two different kinds of budgets in the Department of Defense. We
have got budgets we manage from the top down. That is
procurement, MILCON [military construction], military
personnel. And then there are budgets that are bottom up. That
is O&M, and we do not manage that in any detail.
The way we handle it is we deal out--we give cash at
various levels to people. We give them a little bit less than
they ask for and we see how loud they scream.
That is really how we manage O&M. I mean, we do not manage
O&M in an effective way. And everybody knows they are
sandbagging dollars at lower levels because they know they are
going to get cut.
So we really do have to find a different way we get at how
we analyze and understand the O&M budget. And the O&M budget
now is doing a lot of procurement. It is not just operations
anymore. We are buying a lot of procurement through the O&M
budget.
So you are on to something very big here, and I--but I--you
are going to have to drill down to say, ``If we were to change
the way we budget and manage the execution of O&M, how would we
do that?''
Mrs. Hartzler. Very good. Thank you very much. I yield
back.
The Chairman. Mrs. Davis.
Mrs. Davis. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And I really
appreciate your having this hearing. It tells me how serious
you are about this topic, and I know it has been going on for
some time.
One of the questions that really is looming out there right
now--and you have talked so much about the people who are in
important places, leadership, but I am wondering right now, we
have a Federal hiring freeze. We are also having a great deal
of difficulty getting people into appointed positions,
nominations, and even the confirmations.
How is that affecting all of this?
Ms. Flournoy. I think it is creating a very challenging
environment. I think the hiring freeze in particular is sort
of, you know, using a meat ax when you need a scalpel, and many
administrations across, you know, political--of all different
stripes have used this.
It is a very blunt instrument because what it does is it
cuts off your talent pipeline and so it prohibits you from
hiring the best talent coming in, the next generation, even in
the most high-priority areas. And so you basically create a
personnel bathtub that will follow you through over time, you
know, as the--as your talent pool progresses.
I was on the CIA advisory board and we watched this bathtub
that was created--I think it was in the Carter years--follow
all the way through the workforce, where still in very senior
grades today you have a paucity of the right kind of expertise
and personnel because of that hiring freeze decades ago.
And so I think it is--there are better ways to manage that
personnel infrastructure.
The other thing is as you are right-sizing, reshaping the
workforce and making cuts, it is very important to also be
investing in the workforce and the talent that you want to keep
so that you are continuing professional development, you are
continuing to groom and promote the high-performers, and so
forth, because if you don't do that you will actually break the
workforce in the process of reshaping it.
Which is why that human capital strategy piece up front is
so important to pull all of the different pieces together.
Mrs. Davis. So I am wondering, then, and certainly for this
committee, you have had a lot of suggestions about how to try
and get at some of these issues. Some of them are cultural;
others are just--I think people just haven't tackled those
issues.
What is the best way of going about that? I know on
personnel over the last few years some changes were made. There
were commissions that looked at some of those issues. Sometimes
it feels as if there is going to--that only creates a delay in
getting things done.
But if we had, you know, this year, looking at what is it
specifically that could be done to get at that--you mentioned
one of the positions that I think hasn't--someone who hasn't
even taken that position yet trying to get to--what would you
do on a lot of these? Do we need a----
Ms. Flournoy. I think it starts----
Mrs. Davis [continuing]. A task force here or----
Ms. Flournoy. Well, I think it--I think the--what this
committee could do is ask the Secretary of Defense to create a
human capital strategy for the civilian workforce of the
Department and then he would task each of his line managers to
do component strategies.
I harp on this because, you know, if I were going to ask
that--answer that previous question about what was the most
successful, powerful reform you witnessed when you were in
government, it was implementing a human capital strategy in my
own organization as we were having to downsize, because I knew
that if you didn't complement the downsizing with investment
and keeping the best talent and incentivizing the participation
and the morale and, you know, people buying into--even though
it was going to be a smaller organization, a still vigorous
organization.
To me that is the key. You have got to have a strategy of
where you are trying to go that isn't just about cuts, but also
reinvesting in what you are going to keep.
And so that is where I would start, and I would encourage
the Secretary to report to you on that and to hold all of his
direct reports accountable for helping him develop that
Department-wide.
Mrs. Davis. Dr. Zakheim.
Dr. Zakheim. Yes. I would focus on two things.
First, we have all talked about training and education, and
I do believe that no one should enter the Senior Executive
Service and be a top manager without getting the kind of
education the same way the military does: a year where you are
really learning about either technology or human resource
management.
The other one is if you are going to formulate any kind of
requirement for a human resource management plan, like Michele
just talked about, be careful not to create the kind of
loopholes that DOD always blows right through. And I will give
you an example. The 2013 NDAA called for an efficiencies plan,
but it allowed DOD to identify exemptions of--from the total
workforce. Out of 776,000 people 538,000 were exempted.
If that is going to be the situation, you are not going to
get anywhere.
So I would strongly urge, if you follow Michele's advice,
make it as tight as possible.
Mrs. Davis. Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. Mr. Byrne.
Mr. Byrne. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Ms. Flournoy, you brought up a topic that has been sort of
a hot topic around here and some of us have been skeptics about
it. I am going to go back to it with you. That is BRAC.
We have had discussions about BRAC ever since I have been
on the committee 3\1/2\ years now, and some of us have tried to
look into past BRACs to determine if those BRACs actually
resulted in savings--real, substantial savings. And we couldn't
find any evidence that, in fact, there were those sorts of
demonstrable savings that would make the BRAC effort worth it.
So I would like for you to disabuse me of my skepticism.
Tell me where I am wrong and other members of the committee are
wrong.
Will BRAC--based upon past experience, will it really bring
savings to us?
Ms. Flournoy. I am not an expert on this topic, but I
have--I believe the GAO [Government Accountability Office] has
done a number of reports that--and the way--my understanding of
their conclusions was that the early rounds of BRAC actually
did result in recurring savings over time in the single-digit
billions. And I could get the exact figure for you but, you
know, I am sure your staff can get to that report or I can
provide it.
The BRAC round that sort of poisoned the well was the last
one because it really was a realignment and consolidation BRAC;
it really wasn't a closure BRAC, by and large. And so it really
didn't save a lot of money, and the way in which the process
worked I think left a lot of--a sour taste in the mouths of
many people who participated.
So I think there are certainly lessons to be learned in how
to go about this to ensure that it is worth the pain associated
with doing it, but I do think the early rounds of BRAC
demonstrate that real savings can be had over time. And given
the extent of the overhang--when you have got service chiefs
saying, ``I have 20 to 25 percent more infrastructure than I
need and it is taking money away from readiness and investment
in future capability for the people we are sending into harm's
way,'' I think we have to wrestle with this.
Mr. Byrne. Would either one of you gentlemen want to
respond to that?
Dr. Hamre. If I may, sir, the secret is that BRAC was the
biggest MILCON program in history. We built stuff all over in
the gaining bases and gave them modern new facilities. So you
really have to look at this--at BRAC--as having made possible
the real plant modernization for major elements of the
departments.
I was just down in Huntsville last week. My gosh, the
fabulous facilities down in Huntsville--it was all made
possible by BRAC.
So the reason that you don't see big savings is because,
frankly, we spent it along the way to modernize. We would have
had to have done something with modernization anyway.
I would look at this in a slightly different way: How do we
find a way to internally finance the modernization of our
forces--especially real property? I think we should look at
BRAC in a slightly different way than just, ``Are we going to
rack up big savings that we can show to the American
taxpayer?''
Mr. Byrne. Well, but that is the way it has typically been
sold to us--you know, to save money. And when we look----
Dr. Hamre. Yes, sir. I understand.
Mr. Byrne. And so I am not saying that it is not
appropriate to look at what you are saying we should look at,
but the way we are being approached with it is, ``Hey, we need
to save this money.'' We just are skeptics about that part of
it.
Maybe it is something worth doing beyond the fact that it
saves money. Maybe it achieves some other things for us. But it
seems to me we haven't had a good enough case made by the
services that a BRAC would actually save money.
I mean, do you all have--Dr. Zakheim, did you have
something you want to add to that?
Dr. Zakheim. Well, I tend to agree with John Hamre on this.
If you look at BRAC the way we have been talking about other
efficiencies, where the idea is--you know, there are two ways
to benefit from efficiencies.
One is to save the money and give it back to OMB [Office of
Management and Budget]. I wouldn't want to do that. I tried to
avoid it when I was comptroller.
The other way is to take the money, I think as Michele
pointed out, and said, ``Yes, we are going to put it back into
service priorities.''
If you approach BRAC that way--we are going to take the
money and put it back into service priorities--you are in a
completely different place. But I totally agree with you that
if the case is made on the basis of savings, the case is weak.
Ms. Flournoy. I think that is why you have the service
chiefs pushing for this so strongly, because they want that
money to reinvest elsewhere, whether it is in readiness or,
even more so, in future capabilities that they know they are
going to need to deal with more challenging adversaries.
Mr. Byrne. Well, I appreciate that.
Mr. Chairman, I would just say I would hope that if we
could get that information from the service chiefs, what is it
that you would do with this money that you think you are going
to save, and how is it you think that that is going to make
your operation more efficient and more effective? That would be
helpful to me to be able to take a closer look at the BRACs and
see if they really make sense.
And I yield back.
The Chairman. Thank the gentleman.
I would just mention, we asked the services a couple years
ago to give us some data to support the idea that they have 20
percent excess infrastructure. What we got back basically was
the 2004 estimate and nothing really updated since then.
So I think the attitude a lot of us have is we want to work
with you to save money, but we are going to have to have
something more than something that goes back more than a decade
before the last round of BRAC upon which to base a decision.
I appreciate the gentleman raising the issue.
Mr. Brown.
Mr. Brown. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
My question pertains to changes in acquisition.
I know that, Dr. Hamre, you identified some specific things
that perhaps we should consider undoing from previous years.
But I also know that, Ms. Flournoy, in your submitted
testimony--and I missed some of your responses to questions as
I had to step out; I apologize--you advocate for a pause,
perhaps a yearlong pause in further acquisition reform to allow
the Department of Defense to realize and measure the impact of
changes made in the last few NDAAs. I wanted you to elaborate
on that.
And let me throw out all my questions so this way each of
you can respond, perhaps.
Dr. Zakheim, you had mentioned the workforce training for
acquisition. I know in October of 2002 the Army stood up the
Acquisition Corps to identify, recruit, retain, develop that
civilian and military workforce. Is that working? Is it a good
model? Should it go service-wide, Department-wide?
Thank you.
Ms. Flournoy. Let me clarify. I don't mean a full stop
pause. What I was trying to say is last year's authorization
bill gave the Secretary and the Department a lot of guidance on
how to change the acquisition system, and particular the--how
the Department--the organizational structure: you know,
dividing the under secretary into two, creating new authority
staff procedures, et cetera.
Just having lived through many organizational changes in
the Department, I think that I would say that the focus, as Dr.
Hamre said, this year should be on really working very, very
closely with the Department to make sure those changes are
perhaps tweaked and refined a little bit as needed, but also
fully implemented as intended before you sort of take your eye
off that ball and go on to the next round, particularly of any
further organizational changes.
So it is not really a pause, but I think you have put a lot
on the plate in terms of acquisition reform, and I think it
is--I would say it is a good time to switch to some other areas
while really monitoring closely the implementation of what you
have already asked the Department to do in that regard.
Dr. Zakheim. Well, I differ somewhat with my colleague and
friend, Michele Flournoy. I personally believe that you have
got to go full-bore, because if you give the bureaucracy time
to figure out what you have asked for, they will also figure
out a way to get around what you asked for. Happens over and
over again. You have got to keep pushing, in my view.
On your question about training, remember when the Army
brought this in they had had a string of disasters--of
acquisition disasters. They have done better, although find me
a good new light helicopter. They are still working on that.
But again, the focus was on training, and there has to be
training. But there also needs to be a focus on education. You
don't keep up with Moore's law through a training course at DAU
[Defense Acquisition University]. You just don't.
A year at MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology] might
do it, though. And so you need both.
And it should be, obviously, defense-wide because even if a
service has a pretty efficient way of getting its systems
through its own process. Look at Stackley at the Navy, who is
really a terrific assistant secretary and has worked, I think,
for both Democrats and Republicans. They don't want to let him
go.
But what happens when whatever has passed through him now
hits OSD? You run into a roadblock again.
So any reform that you think about implementing needs to be
DOD-wide, in my view.
Mr. Brown. Just a follow-up: And Maryland has gained a lot
in BRAC 2005 on a per capita basis, big plus-ups there. I am
hearing sort of conflicting views from the services that I
speak with, different service personnel, leadership, as to
Navy, Army, and Air Force, who is in for BRAC, who is not, and
what is the--can you just characterize, perhaps, it by service,
where they are?
Ms. Flournoy. I do not have the fidelity to give you an
accurate answer. I am sorry.
The Chairman. Mr. Wittman.
Mr. Wittman. Thank you, Mr. Chair. I would like to thank
our witnesses for joining us today.
Ms. Flournoy, I would like to begin with this: You know, we
hear today about all the strategic challenges we have--our
adversaries, whether it is terrorism and the groups associated
with that, China, Russia, North Korea, Iran. And since World
War II every administration has gone through the process of
acquisition reform.
But I argue today for the United States, with where we are,
that our adversary, our challenge that is as strategically
important as the other adversaries we talk about all the time,
are time and resources, of which we have excess of neither.
Give me your perspective on how do we get an acquisition
process that treats the adversaries of time and resources at
the same level as it treats our adversaries of extremist
groups, of Russia, of China, or Iran, and North Korea.
Ms. Flournoy. It is a great question, and I think is the--
what should be the driver behind really building out not this--
not just this new under secretary but a whole end-to-end system
of how you go from--you know, how you really create a pipeline
for rapid acquisition and rapid access to commercial
technologies and integration of those technologies.
Because I share your view--and I think this is a common
assumption--that, you know, what we do in the next decade will
determine whether we keep our military technological edge. It
is under challenge in many domains: cyber, space, maritime,
electronic--I mean, you can go down a list. If we stand still
and rest on our laurels we will not have the edge in 10 years'
time.
In many of these areas it is not going to be the new
acquisition platform bill that is going to yield fruit in 20
years; it is going to be how rapidly can we upgrade and modify
and improve what we have?
And so the efforts of DIUx; the efforts of the Strategic
Capabilities Office that is currently tucked--you know, that is
housed in DARPA but an independent organization; the efforts of
DARPA--these are--and how quickly we can prototype and get
those into the field, that is what is going to determine
whether we can prevail in the future.
So I think you--we can't have a great enough sense of
urgency here. And I think building out the bypass system is the
most immediate goal, and then I would love to keep reforming
the main system.
But the urgency is building out the bypass and making it a
superhighway instead of a one-lane dirt road.
Mr. Wittman. Dr. Zakheim, let me ask you, in addition to
this question, let me ask you to expand, because where I see
the United States today in relation to our adversaries is this:
When our adversaries look to start a new system, whether it is
a combat system, whether it is a new class of ships or
aircraft, they start with a blank piece of paper and they go
through and they put their ideas on there and they go, ``Okay,
we are going to do this; we are going to do that,'' and they
problem-solve and get to decision making quickly through that
realm.
When we start here in the United States we have a sheet of
paper that is filled with ``noes.'' No, you can't do this. No,
you can't do that. No, you can't do this. So we look for
portholes through that whole sheet of paper with noes.
How do we pull out our eraser and take those noes off the
page so we can start with the blank sheet of paper, which is
where our adversaries start? And they add to that blank sheet
of paper by stealing some things, too, so they can bypass us
even more quickly.
Give me your perspective on how we get there.
Dr. Zakheim. Well, again, I think the key is to open the
door as wide as possible to commercial acquisition. If you buy
into the notion that the big weapon systems are essentially
platforms for things you put in them, then the question
becomes, ``How do I get the things that I want to put in them
as quickly as possible and as advanced as possible?''
Look, if you go out to Silicon Valley, they are ahead of
time. You go to the Defense Department, we are behind time.
And so that is the key. How wide can you force that door
open? And unless there is legislation to force it open, it
ain't going to open because the culture of the Department is
anti-profit, anti-commercialization, lots and lots of inboxes
and outboxes, and you know all the rest.
By the way, I heard something really interesting, which
shows even the bad guys steal from each other. Russians came to
China and discovered that the Chinese had stolen their plans
for the latest airplane and they discovered it was exactly the
same. So if they are stealing from each other you can imagine
how much they are stealing from us.
We have to focus on that, as well. And we are doing a lot
in that regard, but unless we go after the things that
everybody else wants to steal, then we are not going to make
that 10-year gap that Michele talked about.
Mr. Wittman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Dr. Hamre. Would you permit me to--you didn't ask me the
question, but may I just offer something?
Mr. Wittman. Please. Please, yes.
Dr. Hamre. And, you know, I go back to when I was nominated
to be the comptroller, Senator John Glenn asked me to come up,
sit in on a hearing he was holding in Government Affairs
Committee about how bad the finance and accounting system was
in the Department of Defense. That had a searing impact on me,
and I probably spent 20 percent of my time when I was the
comptroller trying to go after that problem.
I would suggest--again, I mentioned--you were out at--
because you had another obligation, but I would recommend you
bring in the new Deputy Secretary of Defense--he is an
acquisition professional; he has been working inside industry--
and you tell him you want him to give you a plan in 6 months on
how he is going to streamline the system. It isn't going to
give you all the answers, but I promise you he is going to
spend a third of his time working on that problem, and it is
about leadership. That is what the real key is.
I apologize for interrupting.
Mr. Wittman. No problem. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield
back.
The Chairman. That is great.
Ms. Hanabusa.
Ms. Hanabusa. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. It is nice to see
Ms. Flournoy again.
I have a question, and I am following up with Congressman
Wittman's ideas. I am a fan of DARPA. I think DARPA is amazing.
It has been explained to me once like, he said, ``Imagine
about 100 or so geniuses just doing whatever they do and just
one like a travel agent, making sure that they are staying in
their right places.'' And as we all know, when Prime Minister
Abe was looking at trying to reform the Japanese military the
one thing he wanted that we had was like a DARPA because it
just worked so well.
Having said that, however--and this is in line with what
Michele Flournoy was saying, as well as you, Dr. Zakheim--it is
this idea of the reality is we can have this thing about silos
and what we need to do, but the reality is we are here every 2
years, you know? The President is there every 4. It takes him a
while to maybe pick whoever is going to be in the respective
positions. And therefore the concepts of what we should do to
modify how we do things can come and go very quickly.
So how do you anticipate--like if--it seems to me like
getting rid of the silos is a great idea, something that should
have been done a long time ago but hasn't. But then the
question becomes, okay, it seems like some other kind of
bureaucracy is going to have to take over to do away with the
silos and, like Ms. Flournoy was saying with BRAC, there is
going to be an expense that may make it seem inefficient before
you have the benefit.
So as you all sit there, tell me, given the political
reality of how Congress and how administration operates, how do
we--how are we going to be able to accomplish this if you have
a totally changed philosophy in 2 years or 4 years? And what I
really want to make sure of is that we don't do things to
entities like DARPA, that works.
And those are my concerns. I agree, we need to do
something. But how do you do it in the political reality of
which we deal with?
Dr. Zakheim. Let me take a stab at that.
I am a Republican. My two colleagues are Democrats. We are
pretty much in agreement on a lot of this, and this is a very
bipartisan committee.
The point is when it comes to efficiencies in defense
reform it is not a political issue in the sense that many other
things are. So that is already an advantage in your favor.
The second thing is, this is one of the reasons why I would
argue push for reforms as quickly as you can precisely because
it is a 2-year turnover. And also, once the legislation is
there the Department always adapts if you don't give them the
flexibility to wiggle out of it. So that is the second thing.
The third thing is Congress can--and I think John Hamre
alluded to this several times--Congress can call the leadership
of the Department in and say, ``Okay, what have you done? What
have you accomplished?'' Because what you want is consistency.
I wouldn't get rid of the DIUx just because Ash Carter
brought it in. That is ridiculous.
And what I have seen over the years is you get new
secretaries, new under secretaries, they come in, and they
reinvent the wheel. They have a 100-day plan and they basically
say, ``The guy before me was an idiot,'' which, if you think
about it, means that everybody was an idiot because the new guy
said that about the old guy.
You have got to get away from that. The way you get away
from that is Congress keeps pushing and saying, ``We have
legislated X. Demonstrate how you have effectively made X to
work.'' That you can do, and you can do it over time.
Ms. Hanabusa. And as Ms. Flournoy answers, but, you know,
everyone knows this, Ms. Flournoy. You have talked about it for
years and years. But we don't do it.
So, go ahead.
Ms. Flournoy. And I think one of the challenges is we too
often focus, in my view, on moving the organizational boxes
without changing the underlying incentives that drive behavior.
And I will give you a great example that John Hamre gets lots
of credit for because he worked on it when he was up on the
Hill of legislating a change of incentive that we are still
feeling the effects of today: Goldwater-Nichols.
It used to be that joint service was the death of a
military career. You are out of sight, out of mind. Forget
promotion if you leave your service.
Once you passed Goldwater-Nichols and you said, ``You may
not become a general or a flag officer unless you, A, get joint
education, and B, you have joint experience,'' it completely
flipped the incentive and now all of the hard-chargers are
looking for that joint experience and looking for that joint
education and how am I going to do--be that so I can get the
stars on my shoulder?
It is very powerful, and over a generation or two that is
the bedrock of joint culture. It is all that time being
educated together, serving together.
So I think the thing we have to wrestle with is what is
the--what are the incentive changes that you all could
legislate that would create fundamentally different behavior in
the acquisition and innovation domain? To me that is going to
be more powerful and enduring than any tweaks we make to the
organizational chart.
Now you are going to ask me what that is.
[Laughter.]
Ms. Hanabusa. I am out of time.
Dr. Hamre. But do you mind if I may just----
Ms. Hanabusa. You have to ask the chair.
Dr. Hamre. There are five reasons why DARPA has been a huge
success.
First, the chairman serves a 5-year term--the director. And
so there is--it is a long enough period of time for you to be
accountable, and you want to show results. That is the first
thing.
Second thing is there is an astounding amount of financial
flexibility for DARPA. There are only four line items in
DARPA's account, and they can move money across any of them.
You know, Congress has tied the Department's hands. You
cannot move more than two--I think it is $4 million from one
line item to another in R&D [research and development] without
coming back for permission. DARPA has total flexibility to do
that. That is the second.
The third reason is almost all of their work is placed
entirely in the private sector. And they can do rapid
acquisition by going out to the private sector. They have
special authorities to do that. But they place it in the
private sector.
The fourth reason is program managers are not allowed to
stay more than 4 years, you know, so they don't build up
entrenched bureaucracies around themselves. It is a fairly
small, fairly lean organization, and they can only stay for 4
years.
And the last thing is they get Secretary of Defense
protection.
Now, you put those five factors together, that is what--why
we have success.
I would have to tell you--and I say this respectfully. We
are doing just the reverse with our legislation. We are
creating more overhead, more fracturing of it; we are putting
more restrictions on where you can put money and how you spend
it.
I mean, please step back to look at how you could take that
model and bring more flexibility to the Department, because
that is why DARPA works.
Ms. Hanabusa. Thank you, Mr. Chair, and I apologize I went
over.
The Chairman. No, we are a little more flexible today with
these witnesses.
General Bacon.
Mr. Bacon. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And as someone who served nearly 30 years in the Air Force
I tell you, your stellar reputations precede you, so thank you
for being here.
Two quick comments and then a couple of questions.
I was part of the rapid acquisition as an operator within
the Air Force, the Big Safari really works. One thing that
doesn't work is the manning of those weapon systems once we
produce them.
We typically only man them at 50 percent even though we
have done a good job fielding them, so I would hope--we have to
match the rapid acquisition with other things that the service
provides there, I think, for it to be effective.
I am thinking of the MC-12 as an example--50 percent manned
while we had it in the Air Force, and put a lot of risk into
the system. Just one example.
Secondly, I am very proud that this committee has worked on
reducing the size or the number of general officers and SESes
[Senior Executive Service], particularly in the Pentagon. It
has been my experience we have been overstaffed there.
Now for a couple questions.
Have we reduced the OSD staff at the same levels that we
have with the services? Because I think we need to. This is my
impression, but I would love to have your thoughts on that, and
whoever would like to answer.
Dr. Zakheim. They want me to go first----
Mr. Bacon. Put you up first.
Dr. Zakheim. My impression is that we have not. And in
fact, each time you add an assistant secretary or you have a
congressionally mandated deputy under secretary, somebody who
needs confirmation, you have created an excuse to hire more and
more staff.
In my written testimony you will see I give a few examples
of where, in fact, you can combine assistant secretaries so
that you can cut back on the staff. I think you should cut back
on principal deputies; I don't think you need them.
And finally, when we talk about splitting the Under
Secretary for AT&L [Acquisition, Technology, and Logistics],
make sure that the total number of OSD staff working for the
two is no greater than working for the one, which was too big
to begin with. If you look back at the growth of the AT&L
bureaucracy over the last 20 years, it skyrockets.
Mr. Bacon. Should the Armed Services Committees of both the
Senate and the House drive this, or does the Secretary of
Defense--should he take ownership of doing what you are saying?
Dr. Zakheim. I would say that this is something that
requires consultation with the Secretary, and if the Secretary
is forthcoming--and this particular Secretary is very
forthcoming about just about everything--I would say that it
may well be that the Secretary could handle it. The only
downside to that is what happens when a new Secretary comes in?
Mr. Bacon. All right.
Dr. Zakheim. That is my concern.
Mr. Bacon. Anyone else care to answer?
Ms. Flournoy. And I think the--I think you should put the
onus on, you know, on the Secretary of Defense to come back to
you with what is the optimal mix, where is the optimal
reallocation. And there may be areas where he needs to grow
capability and there may be areas where he can reduce the
capability, but giving him the flexibility to move--to, you
know, consolidate organizations, eliminate low-priority
functions, reassign staff--I mean, those kinds of authorities
and flexibilities are key to do that reshaping.
Because again, there may be some cutting but there is also
going to need to be some reinvestment----
Mr. Bacon. Right.
Ms. Flournoy [continuing]. In the human capital.
Mr. Bacon. Well, sure fits in with my perception that we
need to reduce the size of the OSD team.
Another question for you: Use it or lose it at the end of
the year. How do we reform that better, because we get a lot of
new desks, a lot of new paintings, a lot of new rugs, and it is
wasteful. End-of-year spending, use it or lose it--anybody--any
thoughts on that?
Dr. Hamre. You know, I was a comptroller and I remember we
had a process where we would move money from time zone to time
zone the last day to be able to spend it.
Mr. Bacon. I saw it too.
Dr. Hamre. Okay. So yes, we are--part of it is you have
done some of that. I don't know if the authority is still in
place, but funds that are not spent in the O&M account by the
end of the fiscal year, normally they lapse but they are
allowed to go into the Foreign Currency Fluctuation Fund. So it
provides an--you don't have the incentive just to spend it on
anything, you know, because you can put it into something that
you need.
I think that is how you ought to think about this. I think
you ought to find a way where you can take the, you know, the
funds that are otherwise close to expiring and give them an
opportunity to live in a different way for something that the
Department needs.
In this case, foreign currency fluctuation was a--it was a
big deal, you know, in the 1990s. I don't know if it is as much
a problem today as it was back then, but I think it is
something like that.
The other thing is, frankly, O&M is--it is managed on a
decentralized basis. You know, we don't really know how it is
being spent in the field.
And until we start developing different approaches--here
probably the committee should find out how big corporations
manage O&M. You know, they must have a different way of doing
it than we do in the government.
But like I just said, we don't know----
Mr. Bacon. They have profit.
Dr. Hamre. Yes. They have an incentive for it, so----
Mr. Bacon. Right. Thank you very much. I yield back,
Chairman.
Dr. Zakheim. Mr. Chairman, may I just add a couple things?
I agree with John. The way, by the way, that private
corporations do it is they are monitoring the funds on a daily
basis. And one thing that I tried to do, I brought in the E to
PPBE [Planning, Programming, Budgeting, and Execution] with
these, which is execution, and I wanted to have an execution
review every quarter, which is nothing compared to daily
reviews of where the monies are.
But if you have an execution review every quarter as
opposed to one midyear review then the comptroller is in a
better position, working with the Joint Staff in particular, to
move those monies around and minimize that last-minute spending
that you are talking about. Moving the monies into an account
that would allow them to be used for other purposes, well some
people are going to turn around and say it is a slush fund. So
you have got to be very careful about what accounts you are
talking about.
But it seems to me that the more visibility you have into
what are called bishop's funds--and it is actually a total
church hierarchy because the further down you go the monsignor
has got his money, and so on and so forth. The more
transparency you get--and we have all talked about that--the
more likely it is you are going to prevent what you are talking
about.
Mr. Bacon. Well, thank you again.
And I just submit, Mr. Chairman, that use-it-or-lose-it
reforms is something we should be looking at. I think it is an
embarrassment.
Thank you.
The Chairman. Well, as a matter of fact, I am hopeful that
if there is a supplemental that we enact that it can be spent
beyond September 30th, at least for that money for this year.
We have done it a few times before to extend beyond the fiscal
year, and it seems to me, getting at the problem you are
talking about, that it would make some sense.
Mr. Lamborn.
Mr. Lamborn. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you for having
this hearing. Thank you all for being here.
Research and development is critical, and that is part of
having the best weapons platforms and innovations for the
future. But sometimes research dollars are vulnerable because
in the beginning stages of researching new technologies, it is
not yet tied to a program.
So how can research dollars in these times of constrained
budgets be protected so that we still have the great
capabilities that our finest minds in the world are able to
come up with and stay ahead of any potential adversaries, but
those dollars might be taken for something else if we are not
careful?
Dr. Hamre. Well, this is a big problem because, you know,
we--when we were back in the days when we had R&D budgets that
were about half the size of the procurement budget, we couldn't
possibly turn the breakthroughs into weapons systems. We didn't
have enough procurement money.
You know, and so part of the reason that it was scaled
back, you know, the last couple years as a percentage was
because there just was not sufficient capacity to take
advantage of what we were inventing.
The whole fresh look at R&D would be very helpful. It is
one of the things that would be very good for this new Under
Secretary for Research and Engineering to do, I mean, because
the current DDR&E [Director of Defense Research and
Engineering] largely just looks after the 6.1 and 6.2 account,
you know, they don't have a capacity to look at the whole. And
I think that would be a good thing for you to ask the next
under secretary to do.
Corporations will have--I was with one for a time--I was on
the board of one for a time that had something called a
vitality index, which is: How much of our R&D that we spend
today shows up on the shelf as a product we sell within 5
years? And there was a--there were objective measures that they
had as a company to say, ``Where are we willing to spend money
because we want to see a return on it?''
Now, it is hard for us to do that in the Defense
Department, but we should have some kind of a mechanism where
we are looking at the R&D program and saying, ``Where does this
fit in?'' You know, ``Where does it fit in and what difference
will it make?''
You are hard-pressed to find that, so there is some real
management we need to bring to this problem.
Dr. Zakheim. All companies basically look at capital
expenditures, which includes R&D expenditures, and the CEO has
to report back to the board and say, ``Here is what I think is
going to come of this,'' precisely because they are bottom-line
operations.
One possibility that might help deal with the concern you
raise is if this new under secretary really is committed to
having a partnership with the commercial sector, with the non-
defense commercial sector, so that our bureaucrats--and again,
I mean, you want to talk about measures of merit and changing
culture, I have said in my testimony, don't let anybody become
a senior executive servant unless they have spent a year in--at
MIT, or Caltech, or what have you, if they want to be in the
Acquisition Corps because it is going to make a difference.
I have also suggested that there is a program called the
Secretary of Defense Corporate Fellows, where they send about
18 or 20 people to corporations. Triple that and then have an
equal number of civilians there so they know what it is like in
industry.
The more you cross-pollinate with industry, the more they
will think about, ``Yes, where do my R&D dollars lead to? What
will I really get?'' Because now they will be thinking in terms
of CAPEX [capital expenditure], if I can use the term that
everybody uses.
I think that might be a way to help out.
Mr. Lamborn. Michele, do you have any thoughts to add?
Ms. Flournoy. The one thing I would say is that if you are
going to move towards a system that puts more emphasis on
experimentation, innovation, prototyping, you know, your--you
have to have a slightly--you have to have a somewhat higher
tolerance for failure, that there are going to be certain
things that you prototype, they don't work out, but you learn
from the experience and that makes the next thing better.
So I actually think in the model that you are trying to
create with this new organization you want to have a higher
proportion of R&D spending relative to what we have had vis-a-
vis procurement, and that you don't want to have such an
emphasis on ultimate ROI [return on investment] that you miss
the learning curve that you get out of, you know, a very robust
experimentation and prototyping plan.
Mr. Lamborn. Mr. Chairman, could I ask a quick follow-up?
The Chairman. Sure.
Mr. Lamborn. Very quickly, Iron Dome in Israel--that was
done in 3 years, from pad of paper to operation, and I just
can't see that kind of result here in the U.S. And yet, there
are times we are going to need that kind of quick turnaround.
Ms. Flournoy. I think that is a great example of urgent
operational need. You had civilians in Israel being killed by
rockets from Gaza.
They went out and saw, what is possible today? What can we
put together that works? And they went out and procured it and
fielded it as fast as possible, with our help.
I think this gets to one of the things that I hope will be
on your plate is the whole military requirement-setting
process, that--obstacle to doing things quickly. We spend so
much time trying to get consensus and we over-specify the
requirements that, you know, we spend so much time--we spend
years on that up front--that we are already behind the curve
when we finally get to trying to actually acquire the thing.
So figuring out where do you need--really do need to have
the military specs, and where can you rely on commercial and
integration and adaptation kind of--I think that is a key
distinction that we need to work on.
Dr. Zakheim. Well, the Israeli system, by the way, is so
different from ours in another respect. They are totally
integrated, the commercial side and the ministry of defense, so
that when they go out and say, ``Yes, we need X,'' the
commercial folks are on it quickly.
We have this gap because for too many of our people in the
acquisition system the commercial side is the enemy. We have
got to break down that barrier.
Mr. Lamborn. Thank you all. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for
your indulgence. I yield back.
The Chairman. Mr. Veasey.
Mr. Veasey. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I know that people have varying opinions on how the
Congress should go about tackling these issues, and other than
legislation, I was wondering what do you think Congress can do
or refrain from doing that could improve the efficiency or
the--and the effectiveness of the acquisition process.
Dr. Hamre. Well, I would go back to what I mentioned about
DARPA. I think that DARPA is such a success because it has so
much flexibility but accountability.
The director is there for 5 years. That individual is
totally accountable for what comes out, that product, out of
their budget every year. They have a lot of flexibility in the
budget. They are not bound by the civil service system for
finding program managers.
You know, so it--what it--it is a very different model. It
is a model where it is more about leadership and trusting
leadership and less about arcane and very rigid rules.
And I think, honestly, we are on a path where we are
writing legislation so much just dictating how the Department
has to do things that we are undermining what I think is really
the key, which is hold them accountable, give them the
flexibility, and use the other power that you guys have, which
you don't use enough of, which is to bring them up and talk to
them.
You have no idea how frightening it is when they get a call
and say: I want to--the committee wants to hear--it is not
going to be a hearing; we are just going to have a private
meeting.
They are going to--that has enormous impact. But right now
most people think they just have to write big bills to have
impact with the Department.
You don't. There is so much more you could do by utilizing
this power that you have from this position.
So I would look--do less, create more accountability, think
about a model where you are trying to recruit the very best
people that want to come in and serve because they have a lot
of authority to get things done and you are trying to help them
do it.
Dr. Zakheim. You know, John Hamre was my predecessor,
actually, but one as comptroller. And I can say as comptroller,
as well, the congressional restrictions on moving money from
one account to another are just too tight. John mentioned the
director of DARPA doesn't have to worry about that to any
degree that just about anybody else does.
And when we are talking about a budget of approximately
$600 billion and then you are told we must go to four
committees to move $25 million from one account to another, I
mean, that is ridiculous. Certainly not how industry works.
Certainly not how any successful company would work.
So it seems to me that--I fully understand why Congress
wants to watch how monies move, but there is a long way between
$20 million or $25 million and a $600 billion budget. And it
seems to me raising those ceilings would be one way to create
the ability to be flexible and agile, and then if you combine
it with some of the other reforms that this committee is
pushing then you are going to start to see a real synergy.
Ms. Flournoy. I would just add that same flexibility in
moving and managing people is really, really key.
And then the last thing I would say is, you know, there
have been lots of reform attempts over the year, and when
something doesn't work, rather than removing it we just add
another layer. And so I think clearing away some of the layered
complexity of past reform and regulatory efforts that haven't
necessarily yielded the desired results but people still feel
accountable to go by, that can also add a lot of needed
flexibility.
Mr. Veasey. And so with all of that, what do you think is
the most appropriate mix and the most cost-effective mix that
the military should try to achieve as it relates to military,
civilian, and contractor personnel to accomplish its mission?
Ms. Flournoy. Again, I think that will be--the answer to
that question requires a comprehensive assessment that I don't
think has been done in a long time. But I think the general
assumption that I have heard this morning is, you know, there
is likely to be some reshaping of the civilian career workforce
while investing in that workforce's development and education
and training, and probably a reduction in the level of
contractors that we rely on to support those civilian
functions.
Dr. Zakheim. And we also have to look very closely at what
we want the military to do, as opposed to what someone else can
do. And that is important, as well.
So it is not just a matter of cutting this level or that
level of civilians, or cutting contractors; it is also a matter
of who is doing what. And so it really has to be a
comprehensive view.
Mr. Veasey. Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Dr. Hamre. And if I may add, it has to be a comprehensive
review where we have the honest price of each of the forms of
labor. We do not have a uniform way in which we put the full
cost of having a uniform or a civilian or a contractor side by
side to say, ``Which is the most cost-effective way to do this
job?''
So you could demand--again, this is a plea--you could
demand that the Congress give--or that the Department develop a
real objective cost assessment that you can see the difference
between military labor, civilian labor, contracted labor.
The Chairman. Ms. Flournoy, as y'all were talking about it
earlier I had in my mind that you were talking about, say, a
human capital plan for OSD. But you are really talking about
something broader than that when you start bringing in who does
what--what do contractors do, what do civilians do, what do
military people do.
Am I right, or--I am trying to think, okay, how do--what is
the--what--how do we write this? What is the charge here?
Ms. Flournoy. You know, ideally you would want a full
assessment Department-wide, but that is a pretty herculean
task. So I think where I would start is with the Secretary's
own staff, and to ask him to lay out for the functions of OSD
what is the right mix of military, civilian, and contractor,
and how does he need to reshape and re-educate, train, develop
his workforce to be as effective and efficient as possible.
But I think you could then look at other components beyond
OSD, and should, because, you know, from a resources
perspective the OSD is dwarfed by the staffs of the services,
the staffs of the defense agencies, and so forth.
But if you are looking for a way to pilot the approach and
get your arms around a piece of the puzzle and then learn from
that experience to then go after other pieces, it is not a bad
place to start.
Dr. Zakheim. I would agree with that, except I would expand
it to include the Joint Staff. There is a lot of overlap there.
There are some people who say we just ought to combine them
the way the Canadians and the Brits do. I am not sure that is
the right way to go. In fact, I am pretty sure it is not the
right way to go.
But still, there is an awful lot of overlap, and I think
looking at them together as a unit might be one way to deal
with this pilot project, as Michele puts it.
The other thing is I wouldn't allow this to stand in the
way of mandating reductions in the civilian workforce. The
civilian workforce is just too big, and I haven't seen any
efficiency out of it. There is no correlation between the
growth of the workforce and its efficiency. In fact, it is a
negative correlation.
The Chairman. Well, that really gets to the second part--or
the other question I wanted to ask.
There are some suggestions that we ought to give the
Secretary of Defense authority to reorganize, say, OSD however
he wanted to in 6 months' time. But is your view that we ought
to expect this human capital report before there is authority
to move the boxes around and have buyouts and so forth?
Ms. Flournoy. I think that ultimately you want the review,
first of all--you want form to fit function. You want the focus
to be first on, you know, what are the most--what are the
important functions that--where I need, you know, potentially
more investment? Where am I willing to take some risk and do
less?
And then you need to adapt, I think, the--add on the human
capital layer to fill out how are we going to actually staff
that.
So one of the things that I--when I had my little world of
Policy, which was by then 1,000 people--it, you know, had grown
a lot since I had first been in there in the Clinton
administration--we did them simultaneously. And one of the
things we asked is, ``If you had more--10 percent more to
invest, where would you invest it? If you had to cut 10
percent, where would you cut?''
And we did that at the--a very low level all the way
through the organization, and it gave you a pretty good sense
of where we were short and we really needed to plus-up, and
where people really thought, ``You know, I am doing this
because I am told I have to do it but I really don't think
there is much value here.''
And so we sort of did the two streams in a complementary
way, or overlapping way. I don't think they have to be strictly
sequenced.
Dr. Hamre. Sir, I am not--I just think you are going to
have to impose cuts and then tell them, ``Figure out what is
the most efficient way to do what you have got to do, and if
there are things that you don't need to do or you think are
low-value, tell us what that is.''
But, you know, I am close enough to a number of
corporations, when they have to do a downsizing they don't
start with a bottom-up review, you know, they start with a top-
down goal.
And I think Bill Perry used to say, you know, reform does
not--can't remember what he said now. Forgive me. You have to
make cuts first and commit yourself to those cuts before you
can figure out how you are going to get the best value out of
it.
I just honestly think you--I have been around it too much.
You are going to get very incremental, marginal suggestions if
you do it on a bottom-up basis.
Ms. Flournoy. I agree with that. I think you have to have a
target but then allow a combination of a functional review and
a human capital review, in terms of figuring out how you are
going to get there. But the target is key to incentivizing the
result.
Dr. Zakheim. And that is where I would come out, as well.
If you don't give them some clear directive as to how much they
should cut over what period of time, they just--they are not
going to do it.
First of all, they are going to try to wait you out. That
is number one.
Number two is they are going to try to--like I had
mentioned somewhat earlier, they will--if you give them any
sort of vehicle for exemption they will exempt as many people
as they could--500,000 out of 700,000, and that sort of thing.
So it has got to be tightly written, it has got to be
clearly directed, and then you give the Secretary--and, I would
argue, the Secretary together with the Chairman, because I
think it is important if you are focusing on OSD, OSD and the
Joint Staff I really think need to be looked at together--have
them both, give them the flexibility within that overall
number, and then have them come back and report to you. And not
a written report, because a written report is going to be
written by a contractor, but have them actually come and
testify in front of you.
Ms. Flournoy. But I think a cost-saving target, you know,
it gives them maximum flexibility of how to get there.
And this is where the other authorities come in--they are
so important, you know, as you gave last year, a RIF authority
that is not just about seniority but actually about
performance. VSIP authority you raised the level, which is
great, but still supervisors can't use that on an individual
basis to actually incentivize individuals who need to depart to
depart.
So, I mean, I think those accompanying authorities are
really, really important to turn the--you know, to really give
the flexibility required to reshape the organization in a
productive manner.
Dr. Zakheim. The only thing that worries me about
authorities, Mr. Chairman, is that bureaucrats will say,
``Okay, I have got the authority and I want to use it.'' And
what will then happen is the deadwood always stays, which is
why deadwood bureaucrats love hiring freezes, because who goes?
The junior people.
They don't come in. The ones who come in last, they are the
ones who go out. That is just not the way to get the Department
up to speed with all our enemies out there.
The Chairman. Okay.
If y'all will indulge me just a few moments more, Dr.
Hamre, I have got to go back to the beginning and this under
secretary business. I understand your point, that you dilute
the effectiveness of the one by having the second, and you
addressed this in your written testimony but I still need to
hear it again.
So if you have the Under Secretary for Research and
Development but then you give under him the acquisition
authority, how is that not recreating AT&L under a different
name?
Dr. Hamre. Yes, sir. I think the most important thing we
are trying to do is to change AT&L from a giant compliance
organization into an innovation organization.
You are not going to get that done unless you break it up,
and I think breaking it up means you take those mechanical
functions of acquisition--you know, procurement policy, FAR
review, you know, all that kind of stuff--you put that under an
assistant secretary. That is what the assistant secretary does.
The under secretary is responsible for all the big choices
that the Department is going to make that involves
acquisition--development and purchase of things. But you have
to make that job big enough so that you are going to recruit
somebody really big who will want that job because it really is
meaningful.
All of the acquisition--you took a big step 2 years ago
when you pushed a lot of the acquisition back to the services.
A very good thing to do.
So we need to get the bulk of the acquisition process back
to the services, get a smaller organization at the top that is
overseeing the process that the services implement, and then a
powerful person who makes big choices for the Department. And I
think having two under secretaries I think could confuse that.
It is really disassembling what we built up with the
Packard Commission and going back to having the services play
much more of a role and OSD play much more of an oversight role
with a creative person being a decider about big choices.
The Chairman. But the assistant secretary reports to the
under secretary----
Dr. Hamre. Yes, sir.
The Chairman [continuing]. So it is still within the one--
--
Dr. Hamre. It is still within that orbit. You have one
acquisition secretary but you are taking all of those
mechanical functions and you are taking them down a level and
you are pushing them out to the services.
The Chairman. Okay. Okay. Y'all have anything more on that?
Okay.
Mr. Langevin, you have questions?
Mr. Langevin. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
So one additional question that I had--and we had a
discussion just a minute ago about cost-cutting targets. Last
winter we learned of a report out of the DOD that stated that
$125 billion could be saved over the course of 5 years by
attending to waste within the Department. So this accounts for
about 4 percent of DOD outlays and is well within the types of
savings that companies also try to achieve through cost-cutting
practices.
And while I am disappointed this report was initially
buried within the Department, I think there are certainly
valuable lessons that can be learned from it.
How do you believe we can best meet these cost-saving
objectives, and how have you seen the Department implement some
of the more actionable efficiencies?
Dr. Zakheim. Well, the report came out of the Defense
Business Board, as you know, Mr. Langevin, and it wasn't really
buried at all. I mean, it was easily accessible on the web; it
was publicly briefed; we all talked about it; nobody was told
you couldn't talk about it. So I don't know where that whole
thing came from, quite frankly.
But to the substance of your concern, it does seem to me
that what that report essentially is saying is in the first
place your best start is with civilian personnel, and it seems
to me that that is one where the--their legislation, in terms
of levels of civilian personnel, might be very much worthwhile.
I believe that if you take their numbers from 2 years ago and
update the numbers to fiscal 2017 numbers you could save $5
billion to $8 billion. Not trivial. Not a lot, but not trivial.
Then they have five other categories, and in fact, the
Secretary of Defense listed those very same categories in his
memorandum on efficiency. And so again, picking up on what John
Hamre said, get them in here. Ask them, ``Okay, what have you
done on each of these categories?'' And to the extent that you
don't get a straight answer you start thinking about
legislation for it.
Ms. Flournoy. I would just add, I also think you need to
think about how the deputy secretary and the CMO--what kind of
capacity they will have to do this kind of management
transformation work. You know, your typical political appointee
is not going to necessarily have that kind of background and
experience, and so a senior official who wants to take a
transformation step is either--you know, either they have to go
hire a very expensive outside consultant or they decide, you
know, they just don't have the bandwidth to take something on.
One of the things that was included in the last
authorization bill was authorization for what is called a
delivery unit, which is actually taking a page from the U.K.
[United Kingdom], who basically brought, you know, 30, 40
people with deep experience transforming organizations coupled
with some real experienced folks from within the Department and
basically created an internal resource for the deputy and the
CMO to work with the line managers of the organization on
transformation plans and to really drive that change
internally.
But I do think you have to think about where is--where are
these two critical officials actually going to get the
capacity--the kind of change that you are talking about and to
really drive that.
Dr. Hamre. You know, I personally think you could save $115
billion, but very hard choices. Really tough choices we have to
make.
You know, the average--I think the average server in a
computer center in the Department runs at about 10 percent of
capacity, but we--because each of the services is buying their
own stuff. But that means you are going in and you are ripping
it out of a service. That is painful. It is hard to do that.
We do not take advantage of the pricing power we have as
the biggest renter of property in the United States because it
is fractured. It is all over the place. We don't have a central
place where we are good at that.
We spend money getting rid of things rather than making
money getting rid of things. You know, we have got 500 people
at the disposal center. We are paying for them to get rid of
stuff. We are not making any money off of it.
I mean, look, there are--but these are very hard things to
do. They involve people's jobs in very specific locations. You
know, it involves a lot of--freeing up a lot of restrictions
that have been put on the Department in recent years.
So can we do it? Yes. I think we can do it. They are very
painful.
Does that avoid us needing to increase money for the
Department because of the problems we have got now? No. I think
we need to--we are--we have got real readiness issues in the
Department. Real readiness issues.
We have got a lot of airplanes that are really old, you
know, that we need to replace. I mean, so I--we need to be
objective about it.
I strongly think we should try to save that--the $115
billion, $125 billion, whatever that is, especially because it
would give credibility to the Department when it asks for
additional resources.
Dr. Zakheim. One other area where--related to this is the
whole area of contract auditing, which is highly controversial
right now. But the fact of the matter is DCAA is billions of
dollars behind. That is hurting industry in another way, which
is they have to reserve money that they can't spend because
they don't know if they are going to have to give it to DCAA.
But leave that aside. The fact is if you get a good outside
auditor they will start to tell you where some of this money
that John Hamre just referred to is or isn't, and that gives
you the vehicle to start moving monies around, to being more
efficient, and, in fact, to reaching that $125 billion goal.
Mr. Langevin. Well, certainly I know that we are moving in
the direction of being able to audit the Department. I know we
are trying to get to that point, and certainly this is another
area where data analytics will come into play and help us to
get where we want to be.
So thank you all for your testimony. And with that I will
yield back.
The Chairman. Yes. I want to just emphasize on the Defense
Business Board issue not only did we not bury it, we cited it
in our committee report 2 months later. And the increase in
incentives to voluntarily leave the Department that we had in
last year's bill was one of the specific recommendations that
they made.
Now, the bigger dollar savings comes from the sort of
civilian personnel reform that we have been talking about,
which is part of the reason I have asked y'all several
questions about that. As Dr. Zakheim mentioned, there was an
effort that didn't go so well to do that a few years ago, but
yet, it is a significant area that needs our attention.
Y'all have been very helpful. I have got lots of notes, but
I also know where to find you to elicit more information and
more questions.
So thank you all for being here and for all that you assist
this committee with.
The hearing stands adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 12:15 p.m., the committee was adjourned.]

=======================================================================

A P P E N D I X

April 4, 2017

=======================================================================

PREPARED STATEMENTS SUBMITTED FOR THE RECORD

April 4, 2017

=======================================================================

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

=======================================================================

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MEMBERS POST HEARING

April 4, 2017

=======================================================================

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MR. LANGEVIN

Mr. Langevin. In the 1940s and 1950s, almost 40 combat aircraft
were competed and awarded, invigorating the industrial base in the
process. This period of development stands in stark contrast to the
last 25 years when only 4 new fighters or bombers were developed: the
B-2, the F-22, the F-35, and the B-21 last year. Today, if a company
does not prime or partner on a winning design, they risk being shut out
of the industry until the next competition a decade or more later. How
do we increase the number of competitions and reduce this feast or
famine cycle to increase the vitality of our defense industrial base?
Dr. Hamre. I recall this history, and it was astounding how many
different aircraft design efforts we were able to sustain during that
period. Part of the answer is greater resources. Back during this
period, defense spending was between 6-7% of GDP, and today it is less
than 3% GDP. We also have seen huge real cost increases in the price of
labor, both civilian and military, which reduces the amount we can
devote to research, development and acquisition. I mention these two
factors because I think this will hugely constrain our ability to solve
the problem you outlined. In fairness, during the last 15 years we have
launched major efforts to use unmanned air vehicles. But your point is
still valid.
I think the only practical way to do this with the constrained
budgets we currently have is through expanded emphasis on prototyping.
That will support the design teams, but would not necessarily support
the shop floors. It is hard to see how this can change until we
allocate more resources to aircraft procurement.
Mr. Langevin. In the 1940s and 1950s, almost 40 combat aircraft
were competed and awarded, invigorating the industrial base in the
process. This period of development stands in stark contrast to the
last 25 years when only 4 new fighters or bombers were developed: the
B-2, the F-22, the F-35, and the B-21 last year. Today, if a company
does not prime or partner on a winning design, they risk being shut out
of the industry until the next competition a decade or more later. How
do we increase the number of competitions and reduce this feast or
famine cycle to increase the vitality of our defense industrial base?
Ms. Flournoy. Increasing the number of competitions is indeed
critical to enhancing the vitality of our defense industrial base. It
is also essential to ensuring that our armed forces can fully leverage
rapidly evolving technological innovation to maintain their military
edge in the future. Working with Congress, the Department of Defense
can and should take several steps to increase the opportunities for
competition.
First, and perhaps most importantly, Congress must act to restore
predictability in defense budgeting so the military services can plan
and execute their programs over a multiyear period without constant
uncertainty and disruption. Nothing does more to undermine DOD's
ability to make smart investments in future defense capabilities than
not knowing whether and when defense authorization and appropriations
bills will be passed or how much defense spending will be approved over
the FYDP. Negotiating a budget deal that would permanently lift the BCA
caps, end the threat of sequestration, and return the system to regular
order should be a top national security priority. Restoring
predictability would enable the services to let contracts with greater
frequency and regularity while increasing industry's confidence in
having more bites at the apple.
Second, Congress should fully support DOD's efforts to enact
defense reforms that would enable the reallocation of resources to
priority investment accounts. The list of promising reforms is long and
includes, among others: authorizing another round of Base Realignment
and Closure (BRAC), streamlining DOD headquarters staffs and defense
agencies, leveraging information technologies and big data to transform
DOD's business practices, and adopting a value-based approach to health
care that would improve the quality of care while reducing costs. Every
dollar saved by improving the performance and efficiency of the DOD
enterprise is a dollar that could be reinvested in ensuring our troops
have the capabilities they will need in the future.
Third, DOD should adopt a new approach to acquisition that
incentivizes innovation and strengthens the vitality of the defense
industrial ecosystem. As described in greater detail in the recent CNAS
Report, Future Foundry: A New Strategic Approach to Military-
Technological Advantage, by Ben Fitzgerald, Alexandra Sander, and
Jacqueline Parziale, the Department should pursue an ``optionality
strategy'' to develop an expanded and more diverse portfolio of defense
capabilities and concepts. This approach would provide industry with
more opportunities to innovate and rapidly prototype and field new
technologies. It would generate more opportunities for companies, both
traditional defense firms and new entrants to the market, to compete
for a wide variety of contracts, stimulating a healthier industrial
base while generating greater technological advantage for the U.S.
military.
These steps are necessary not only to ensure the future health and
vitality of the U.S. defense industrial base but also to ensure that
the U.S. armed forces maintain their technological edge and, most
importantly, their ability to deter and prevail in a more complex and
challenging future security environment.
Mr. Langevin. In the 1940s and 1950s, almost 40 combat aircraft
were competed and awarded, invigorating the industrial base in the
process. This period of development stands in stark contrast to the
last 25 years when only 4 new fighters or bombers were developed: the
B-2, the F-22, the F-35, and the B-21 last year. Today, if a company
does not prime or partner on a winning design, they risk being shut out
of the industry until the next competition a decade or more later. How
do we increase the number of competitions and reduce this feast or
famine cycle to increase the vitality of our defense industrial base?
Dr. Zakheim. A number of factors enabled the United States to
produce a larger set of combat aircraft in the 1940s and 1950s. First,
aircraft were less complex, rendering it easier for more firms to enter
the market, or remain in it. Second, the complexity of modern aircraft
increases the financial and related scheduling penalties that accompany
engineering change proposals; one change will likely affect many other
aircraft components and even sub-systems. Greater costs limit aircraft
buys. Third, although the War and Navy Departments, and, succeeding
them, the Defense Department, imposed military specifications during
that era, there were far fewer such specifications than is the case
today. Meeting all specifications can drive up costs, again limiting
production. Fourth, the overwhelmingly bureaucratic nature of the
current acquisition process itself causes delays, and increased costs
that always accompany such delays. There are too many approval levels.
Fifth, while operational testing is critical, government development
testing should be minimized. Industry should be held accountable for
testing at the developmental level. Sixth, the huge backlog of DCAA
audits forces companies to reserve cash that might otherwise be spent
on new development, or serve as dividends. This too, inhibits companies
from participating in the defense sector. Finally, bureaucracy is also
a deterrent to new companies entering the defense industrial sector.
Excessive paperwork (apart from milspec); excessive oversight; limits
on profit; restrictions on retention of intellectual property; and a
different cost accounting method (government cost accounting standards
(CAS) as opposed to commercial Generally Accepted Accounting Principles
(GAAP), are among the leading factors inhibiting companies from working
with government. Therefore, in order to increase competition, and ramp
up production of new aircraft, the DOD must, to the extent it can,
reverse the foregoing factors.
1) While aircraft are not likely to become less complex, DOD can
minimize the frequency of engineering change proposals by requiring
that any proposal involving more than a month's effort be certified at
a flag, general officer, or SES level. 2) DOD should mandate an
immediate fifty per cent. reduction in military specifications. 3)
Approval levels should be reduced by twenty per cent. DOD-wide, to
include service and OSD approvals. 4) Development tests should be
reduced by at least twenty per cent. 5) Mandate than any DCAA audit
that has not been completed in twelve months shall be dropped entirely,
enabling companies to free funds currently held as reserves. 6) DOD,
working with OMB, should modify CAS so that it more nearly approximates
GAAP.

[all]
