- [H.A.S.C. No. 115-38] HEARING ON NATIONAL DEFENSE AUTHORIZATION ACT FOR FISCAL YEAR 2018 AND OVERSIGHT OF PREVIOUSLY AUTHORIZED PROGRAMS BEFORE THE COMMITTEE ON ARMED SERVICES HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES ONE HUNDRED FIFTEENTH CONGRESS FIRST SESSION

[House Hearing, 115 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

[H.A.S.C. No. 115-38]

HEARING

ON

NATIONAL DEFENSE AUTHORIZATION ACT

FOR FISCAL YEAR 2018

AND

OVERSIGHT OF PREVIOUSLY AUTHORIZED PROGRAMS

BEFORE THE

COMMITTEE ON ARMED SERVICES

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FIFTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

FULL COMMITTEE HEARING

ON

MEMBER DAY--NATIONAL DEFENSE

PRIORITIES FROM MEMBERS FOR THE

FISCAL YEAR 2018 NATIONAL DEFENSE AUTHORIZATION ACT

__________

HEARING HELD

APRIL 27, 2017

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

25-824                         WASHINGTON : 2017
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800;
DC area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104 Mail: Stop IDCC,
Washington, DC 20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON ARMED SERVICES
One Hundred Fifteenth Congress

WILLIAM M. ``MAC'' THORNBERRY, Texas, Chairman

WALTER B. JONES, North Carolina      ADAM SMITH, Washington
JOE WILSON, South Carolina           ROBERT A. BRADY, Pennsylvania
FRANK A. LoBIONDO, New Jersey        SUSAN A. DAVIS, California
ROB BISHOP, Utah                     JAMES R. LANGEVIN, Rhode Island
MICHAEL R. TURNER, Ohio              RICK LARSEN, Washington
MIKE ROGERS, Alabama                 JIM COOPER, Tennessee
TRENT FRANKS, Arizona                MADELEINE Z. BORDALLO, Guam
BILL SHUSTER, Pennsylvania           JOE COURTNEY, Connecticut
K. MICHAEL CONAWAY, Texas            NIKI TSONGAS, Massachusetts
DOUG LAMBORN, Colorado               JOHN GARAMENDI, California
ROBERT J. WITTMAN, Virginia          JACKIE SPEIER, California
DUNCAN HUNTER, California            MARC A. VEASEY, Texas
MIKE COFFMAN, Colorado               TULSI GABBARD, Hawaii
VICKY HARTZLER, Missouri             BETO O'ROURKE, Texas
AUSTIN SCOTT, Georgia                DONALD NORCROSS, New Jersey
MO BROOKS, Alabama                   RUBEN GALLEGO, Arizona
PAUL COOK, California                SETH MOULTON, Massachusetts
JIM BRIDENSTINE, Oklahoma            COLLEEN HANABUSA, Hawaii
BRAD R. WENSTRUP, Ohio               CAROL SHEA-PORTER, New Hampshire
BRADLEY BYRNE, Alabama               JACKY ROSEN, Nevada
SAM GRAVES, Missouri                 A. DONALD McEACHIN, Virginia
ELISE M. STEFANIK, New York          SALUD O. CARBAJAL, California
MARTHA McSALLY, Arizona              ANTHONY G. BROWN, Maryland
STEPHEN KNIGHT, California           STEPHANIE N. MURPHY, Florida
STEVE RUSSELL, Oklahoma              RO KHANNA, California
SCOTT DesJARLAIS, Tennessee          TOM O'HALLERAN, Arizona
RALPH LEE ABRAHAM, Louisiana         THOMAS R. SUOZZI, New York
TRENT KELLY, Mississippi             (Vacancy)
MIKE GALLAGHER, Wisconsin
MATT GAETZ, Florida
DON BACON, Nebraska
JIM BANKS, Indiana
LIZ CHENEY, Wyoming

Robert L. Simmons II, Staff Director
Ari Zimmerman, Professional Staff Member
William S. Johnson, Counsel
Britton Burkett, Clerk

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page

STATEMENTS PRESENTED BY MEMBERS OF CONGRESS

Smith, Hon. Adam, a Representative from Washington, Ranking
Member, Committee on Armed Services............................     1
Thornberry, Hon. William M. ``Mac,'' a Representative from Texas,
Chairman, Committee on Armed Services..........................     1

WITNESSES

Carter, Hon. John R., a Representative from Texas................     6
Chabot, Hon. Steve, a Representative from Ohio...................     2
Crawford, Hon. Eric A. ``Rick,'' a Representative from Arkansas..     9
Dunn, Hon. Neal P., a Representative from Florida................    11
Johnson, Hon. Mike, a Representative from Louisiana..............    13
Loebsack, Hon. David, a Representative from Iowa.................     7
Walz, Hon. Timothy J., a Representative from Minnesota...........     4

APPENDIX

Prepared Statements:

Carter, Hon. John R..........................................    28
Chabot, Hon. Steve...........................................    21
Crawford, Hon. Eric A. ``Rick''..............................    30
Dunn, Hon. Neal P............................................    32
Johnson, Hon. Mike...........................................    33
Loebsack, Hon. David.........................................    29
Walz, Hon. Timothy J.........................................    25

Documents Submitted for the Record:

Arrington, Hon. Jodey C., a Representative from Texas........    41
Barr, Hon. Andy, a Representative from Kentucky..............    43
Bustos, Hon. Cheri, a Representative from Illinois...........    45
DelBene, Hon. Suzan K., a Representative from Washington.....    47
Gottheimer, Hon. Josh, a Representative from New Jersey......    48
Lieu, Hon. Ted, a Representative from California.............    50
Panetta, Hon. Jimmy, a Representative from California........    52
Thompson, Hon. Mike, a Representative from California........    54
Velazquez, Hon. Nydia M., a Representative from New York.....    56
Young, Hon. Don, a Representative from Alaska................    62

Witness Responses to Questions Asked During the Hearing:

[There were no Questions submitted during the hearing.]

Questions Submitted by Members Post Hearing:

[There were no Questions submitted post hearing.]

MEMBER DAY--NATIONAL DEFENSE PRIORITIES FROM MEMBERS FOR THE FISCAL
YEAR 2018 NATIONAL DEFENSE AUTHORIZATION ACT

----------

House of Representatives,
Committee on Armed Services,
Washington, DC, Thursday, April 27, 2017.
The committee met, pursuant to call, at 10:03 a.m., in room
2118, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. William M. ``Mac''
Thornberry (chairman of the committee) presiding.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. WILLIAM M. ``MAC'' THORNBERRY, A
REPRESENTATIVE FROM TEXAS, CHAIRMAN, COMMITTEE ON ARMED
SERVICES

The Chairman. The committee will come to order.
The committee meets today to receive testimony and input
from our distinguished colleagues. And let me just say, we are
very grateful to the Members who will testify today, as well as
the Members who have submitted written testimony, for their
interest, for their input, advice and guidance, which always
assists our annual defense authorization bill.
Let me ask unanimous consent that the written testimony of
those members who are not able to appear in person be included
in the record. Without objection, so ordered.
[The documents referred to can be found in the Appendix
beginning on page 41.]
The Chairman. And before turning to our distinguished
witnesses, let me yield to the ranking member for any comments
he would like to make.

STATEMENT OF HON. ADAM SMITH, A REPRESENTATIVE FROM WASHINGTON,
RANKING MEMBER, COMMITTEE ON ARMED SERVICES

Mr. Smith. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate the
opportunity to have this hearing.
This is a very big bill that covers a lot of different
subjects, and just because you are not on the committee doesn't
mean it isn't important to you. So I think it is always
important to hear from other Members throughout the body. I
thank the chairman for his leadership in doing his best and our
best to include those thoughts and ideas as best we can in our
bill.
With that, I yield back. Thank you.
The Chairman. I thank the gentleman.
And first up we have the distinguished chair of the Small
Business Committee, the committee that has made a number of
contributions to our bill over the years. We appreciate the
working relationship we have had. The gentleman from Ohio is
recognized for any comments he would like to make.

STATEMENT OF HON. STEVE CHABOT, A REPRESENTATIVE FROM OHIO

Mr. Chabot. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman and Ranking
Member Smith. We appreciate the cooperation that we have had
with this committee for years.
I would note that our ranking member, who we have a very
good working relationship with, Nydia Velazquez of New York,
had hoped to be here but, unfortunately, she is tied up on the
floor right now, so won't be able to attend personally. But she
is here in spirit.
We thank you for the opportunity to share a few thoughts
about the fiscal year 2018 National Defense Authorization Act,
NDAA. Let me begin by thanking your committee, all the
committee members, for its longstanding collaboration with the
House Small Business Committee. The successful passage of
previous years' NDAAs were victories for our national security,
for our men and women in uniform, and for our small-business
industrial base, which is very critical and something obviously
our committee cares about a lot. I look forward to continuing
that relationship with this year's bill.
We recognize that this committee has been working with the
Department of Defense [DOD] to pursue acquisition reform. Our
Nation needs a robust small-business industrial base capable of
equipping our military efficiently and at a reasonable cost.
Improving defense procurement is vital to the health of our
economy and directly benefits our Armed Forces. Small defense
contractors have consistently proven that they are capable,
agile, and innovative, providing better quality products and
services to our military, often faster and cheaper than their
non-small competitors. When there are fewer offers,
competitiveness would decrease and choices would become more
limited and it would become more expensive.
Unfortunately, the declining number of companies competing
for Federal contracts threatens competition and harms
readiness. The Small Business Committee has held over a dozen
hearings examining these roadblocks. As Chairman Thornberry
frequently says, we need to focus on getting more defense for
the dollar. Small businesses are part of that solution.
To this end, nine members of the Small Business Committee
introduced bipartisan contracting and entrepreneurship bills
this year. It is truly impressive to see both parties working
towards a common goal.
I would like to take a moment and thank the ranking member
again for her dedication and support. As I mentioned, we work
in a very bipartisan manner. We have collected these
commonsense reforms into two bills, H.R. 1773, the Clarity for
America's Small Contractors Act of 2017, and H.R. 1774, the
Developing the Next Generation of Small Businesses Act. These
bipartisan provisions were marked up and approved unanimously
by the Small Business Committee last year. I provided more
detail in my written statement. I would like to share with you
how these two bills help small contractors.
First, they modernize the Small Business Act to ensure
clear and consistent language across Federal procurement
programs. It should be easy for the DOD contracting officers to
work with small businesses, not more difficult.
Second, they strengthen our government's small-business
advocates to promote competition and make sure the laws on the
books, including the NDAA, are followed.
Third, they increase transparency within our Federal
procurement system, allowing Congress to understand which
procurement programs are successful and which need a closer
look. This will also make it easier to catch fraud and abuse
within the programs.
Finally, H.R. 1774 reauthorizes the SBA's [Small Business
Administration's] entrepreneur development programs to further
the important work being done by your committee. This ensures
the SBA is effectively introducing the next generation of
entrepreneurs to Federal contracts. By strengthening our small
businesses, we are in turn strengthening our industrial base.
I respectfully ask the committee to incorporate these
provisions into this year's NDAA, and we look forward to
continuing to work with this committee, and we are happy to
answer any questions.
Mr. Chairman, I think I stopped right on time there, too.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Chabot can be found in the
Appendix on page 21.]
The Chairman. I appreciate it. And without objection, the
written testimony of all of our witnesses will be made part of
the record as well.
Are there any questions or comments for the chairman?
The gentleman from California.
Mr. Knight. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
First, I would like to thank Chairman Chabot and the
ranking member for all their hard work. I am honored to be a
member of both the House Armed Services Committee and the
Committee on Small Business, and I have seen firsthand how
important small businesses are to giving warfighters the tools
they need in a cost-effective manner.
Our small-business industrial base has a unique ability to
strengthen our contracting process by driving innovation and
competition in the marketplace. And just as the chairman said,
they are very agile so that they can move quickly in times of
need. Small businesses tend to be more nimble and can often
respond to market needs. A healthy small-business industrial
base benefits the taxpayer from increased competition,
innovation, and job creation.
I support the work being done by Chairman Chabot and
Ranking Member Velazquez to increase contracting opportunities
for small businesses and strengthen entrepreneurial development
programs that help eliminate barriers of entry and diversify
our industrial base.
Part of that diversification must also come from the people
who enter the industrial base in the first place and
subsequently make it thrive. That is why I offered H.R. 1680,
the Women's Business Centers [WBC] Improvement Act of 2017, for
which I have advocated for the inclusion of FY18 [fiscal year
2018] NDAA. This bill would make changes to the WBC program, a
Federal network of educational centers that provide resources
and counseling to female entrepreneurs.
Currently, the program requires clarification in the areas
of oversight and a clearer accreditation process, and this
legislation aims to address these problems and increase funding
for the program so it can expand and improve service quality.
I look forward to working with the chairman, ranking
member, and my colleagues on measures like this and others to
increases opportunities for our small-business community.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I yield back.
The Chairman. Any other questions or comments?
Mr. Chairman, thank you. We look forward to working with
you again this year as we have before on a bipartisan basis.
And we certainly appreciate those Members who are on both
committees that will take a particular interest in our work.
So thank you.
Mr. Chabot. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. Thank you.
Next, we turn to the distinguished ranking member on the
Veterans' Affairs Committee, a Member who used to be a member
of this committee, and I was a little sad to see him go, I have
to say. But I appreciate the distinguished gentleman from
Minnesota coming back today, and the gentleman is recognized.

STATEMENT OF HON. TIMOTHY J. WALZ, A REPRESENTATIVE FROM
MINNESOTA

Mr. Walz. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman, and to Ranking
Member Smith, and members of the committee. I, too, am saddened
that I am not on this committee, and I would like to extend a
thank you to you and your professional staff. There are no
stronger public servants, and their willingness to work with
everyone in the caucus, whether they are on this committee or
not, to strengthen our national defense is truly admirable.
I submit testimony today in my strong support of several
efforts within the fiscal year 2018 National Defense
Authorization Act. These efforts will serve better the lives of
our constituents, and also those serving in the Armed Forces.
It will also strengthen our national security as a whole.
Currently we find our military actively engaged in two
unconventional wars and preparing for the possibilities of a
third or even fourth simultaneous and potentially conventional
focused fight. The requirements we as a Nation continue to
place upon our military are ever increasing, which for the last
almost two decades has necessitated continuous call-up of the
Reserve Component. The contemporary National Guard and Reserve
Components have increasingly become operationally vital to the
conduct of ongoing operations and contingency plans.
To this end, I must insist upon the fair treatment of our
Reserve Components and the proper attention and planning for
their continued operational tempo. The Reserve Component
Benefits Parity Act, introduced by Representatives Palazzo,
Franks, Shea-Porter, and myself, is an important step towards
ensuring fairness for our Reserve Component troops who are
involuntarily mobilized to serve this Nation under Title 10
U.S. Code 12304b. Many Members of Congress have requested its
inclusion as a legislative proposal within this NDAA, and the
bill has garnered broad bipartisan support, with over 60
Members committing to cosponsor the measure.
This legislation supports previous Department of Defense
efforts to provide parity and benefits under section 12304b,
via amendments to title 5, 10, 37, and 38 of the Army
Transition Plan, dated November of 2016. It also identifies the
rectification of this issue as vitally important to Reserve
Component and the military as a whole. Inclusion of this
legislation will correct the health, education, leave, pay, and
retirement benefits applicable to Reserve Components service
members who do mobilize under 12304b.
Increases in readiness must also accompany the increased
operational tempo of the Reserve Component. To do so requires
more training days annually than have been required in the
past, for which this committee has thoughtfully provided
authorization and appropriate increases to funding, which I am
incredibly grateful for.
This fundamental shift towards an operational reserve
force, though resulting in enhanced readiness, comes at a cost
to this Nation's employers. Employers are decreasingly likely
to hire traditional National Guard and Reserve Component
members given their increased utilization over the last several
years, which is projected to continue indefinitely. I encourage
that the strategic implications of this shift be
comprehensively researched by DOD and communicated and worked
with our employers across this Nation.
And finally, during the 1990 and 1991 Persian Gulf war,
nearly 700,000 soldiers, sailors, airmen, and marines deployed
to Iraq and the surrounding area answering this Nation's call
to arms. Following the war, many veterans began to experience
multiple complex and persistent symptoms that have not to date
been explained by traditional medical diagnosis. Gulf war
illness has become that generation's Agent Orange. This illness
could possibly affect as many as 250,000 of these veterans.
It is imperative that DOD coordinate with the Veterans
Affairs Administration and the Gulf War Illness Research
Program Consortium, part of the congressionally directed
medical research program, to declassify specific information
necessary to enable the diagnosis and treatment of Gulf war
illness veterans. It has been over 26 years since the war
ended, and the necessary classified record should be reasonably
expected to be declassified in accordance with all applicable
laws and regulations.
I want to thank the committee again for the work you do.
Thank you for allowing me to testify in front of you. And thank
you for the care that you give to our Nation's veterans.
I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Walz can be found in the
Appendix on page 25.]
The Chairman. I appreciate it and appreciate certainly the
care and interest the gentlemen shows and works on for veterans
and for Guard and Reserve.
Any questions or comments for the gentleman?
Again, thank you for being with us.
Next, we turn to the distinguished gentleman from Texas,
member of the Defense Appropriation Subcommittee, as well as
various other hats he wears.
Judge Carter, we appreciate you being with us. You are
recognized.

STATEMENT OF HON. JOHN R. CARTER, A REPRESENTATIVE FROM TEXAS

Mr. Carter. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Chairman Thornberry,
Ranking Member Smith, thank you for allowing me to testify here
today on what I believe is a major problem facing the United
States Army.
I am the proud representative of Fort Hood, Texas, as well
the co-chairman of the Congressional Army Caucus. I work every
day to ensure the soldiers I represent and all our men and
women in uniform have the resources they need to do their job
as safely and as effectively as possible.
I believe the work of this committee is critical to the
well-being of our service members and their families. So thank
you both for what you do each and every day to serve those who
serve us.
Today, the revisionist powers are annexing territory,
challenging and probing the post-World War II political world
order, and using anti-access and area denial technology to
thwart our ability to project power. These nations have also
modernized their ground forces and the tactical overmatch that
the U.S. ground forces have enjoyed for decades is now gone. As
U.S. Army Vice Chief of Staff General Allyn recently stated, we
are ``out-ranged, outgunned, and outdated.''
On our present course, the U.S. Army will not be
sufficiently modernized to deter and defeat potential enemies.
The Army's current fleet of ground combat vehicles was
conceived in the 1970s and built in the 1980s. While multiple
upgrades of these vehicles have occurred, they were not
designed for the requirements of today's and tomorrow's wars.
In 8 years, the Army will make a decision whether or not to
keep the current 35-year-old Bradley Fighting Vehicle. They
would keep it for the next 50 to 70 years. The scheduled
upgrades for the Abrams tank will take 26 years to complete and
completely outfit for the entire Army, while not solving many
of the problems of being outgunned anyway. And for many
reasons, like having to fund current readiness requirements at
higher than expected levels, the Army has no program in place
to procure the next-generation ground combat vehicles.
The risk an overmatched Army presents to the joint force
fight is untenable. It is almost indefensible to us as Members
of Congress to sit idly by and not give our soldiers the
capabilities they will need to dominate the battlefield in
future wars.
I have introduced H. Res. 238 to support the U.S. Army and
encourage them to expedite their efforts to procure and field
the next generation of ground combat vehicles, as well as their
current modernization strategy. Our ground combat vehicles are
overmatched today, and the longer we wait, the longer our
soldiers cannot provide the adequate deterrence or win if
deterrence fails without high cost in blood and treasure, and
this is one of the most threatening national security
environments our Nation has ever faced.
As you begin your process of drafting the FY 2018 National
Defense Authorization Act, I respectfully request that the
committee include the report language contained within my
resolution in the National Defense Authorization Act.
Thank you both for your staunch support for our military
service members and their families. I look forward to
continuing to work with you on this important issue.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Carter can be found in the
Appendix on page 28.]
The Chairman. Well, I appreciate the gentleman highlighting
this issue for the Army. There is no question that we have
vehicles that are way past their design life and the Army is in
need of updates, as are other services. So certainly between
our two committees, I think we can certainly make progress. So
I appreciate the gentleman highlighting this.
Are there other questions or comments for the gentleman
from Texas?
We appreciate the gentleman being with us.
Mr. Carter. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. Thank you.
Next, we turn to another former member of this committee,
but are grateful that he has returned with us today. The
gentleman from Iowa, Mr. Loebsack, is recognized.

STATEMENT OF HON. DAVID LOEBSACK, A REPRESENTATIVE FROM IOWA

Mr. Loebsack. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And I want to thank
both you and Ranking Member Smith for allowing me this
opportunity to testify today. But before I get into the
particular topic here, I do want to thank both of you for your
leadership. I know that, having served on this committee for 8
years, I have every confidence that you folks know what it
takes to keep America safe. And on behalf of my two Marine
children in particular, I want to thank you for doing what you
can to provide for our troops in all of our services. So thank
you for your leadership, and you, Mr. Smith, as well.
Today, I am very happy to have the opportunity to discuss a
defense issue of importance, not just to my district in Iowa,
but to the warfighter, to the U.S. Army, indeed to the
taxpayer. The interests of all are well served by this
initiative. And what I am talking about is the Iowa Army
Ammunition Plant [IAAAP]. It is one of the Army's six
government-owned contractor-operated, the GOCO ammunition
plants around the country. Built in 1942, it is a vital part of
our munitions industrial base with the production of high-
velocity 40 millimeter grenades, C4 blocks, tank and artillery
rounds, and missile warheads. And I have visited this
particular plant on a number of occasions.
Today the IAAAP--that is a mouthful--employs over 650
skilled professionals and is located in my district near the
banks of the Mississippi River by Burlington, Iowa.
Historically, however, the IAAAP has not received sufficient
modernization funding to upgrade critical manufacturing
processes.
An example of this is one of the production lines, Line 3A,
which is the Nation's primary large caliber ammunition melt
pour facility. Line 3A is a large spread-out manufacturing
line, requiring manual touch labor and lacking the adaptability
needed for implementing new manufacturing technologies. Its
modernization is long overdue.
Modernization of this Army-owned line would yield more
precise process controls, automation, environmental controls,
and a greatly reduced footprint. My understanding is that the
proposed plan to modernize this line would reduce costs,
increase efficiencies, and pay for itself in less than 5 years.
It seems like a pretty good deal to me.
I hope the HASC [House Armed Services Committee] will find
merit in this initiative and will support the modernization of
Line 3A at IAAAP that will provide so many benefits to so many
stakeholders.
And I thank the chairman again and the ranking member for
your time and your consideration. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Loebsack can be found in the
Appendix on page 29.]
The Chairman. I appreciate the gentleman raising this
issue. It is certainly something we need to look into further,
and we will. And I appreciate the gentleman.
The gentlelady from Missouri.
Mrs. Hartzler. Yes, gentleman, I appreciate you raising
this issue because I have, just outside of my district, I am
very supportive of the Lake City Ammunition Facility. Same
thing, built in 1940s, and severely in need of modernization.
And so I did have an amendment in NDAA to add $20 million
more for our ammunition in this particular plant. We produce
all of the small caliber ammunition for the entire Army. It is
right there. And I see you do the large caliber.
But as I have looked into this issue, it is very clear all
of these plants need modernization and it is imperative that we
take these steps. So I appreciate you raising this issue there.
Maybe we can work together on this and try to ensure that we
get the modernization that is needed so that we are not
vulnerable.
Just FYI [for your information], 2 weeks ago there was an
accident at Lake City. I don't think I have had a chance to
share with the chairman about this. In the primer facility
there was an explosion and, sadly, we lost a man that had
worked there for over 30 years. So they are currently shut
down, which I have been in contact with the commander there,
and as well as Orbital ATK, that supervises that to make sure
that it won't impact our warfighters right now. They are going
through an inspection process and hope to get that back up and
running very shortly.
But it just shows the vulnerability. And I don't believe--
well, they are doing an inspection, we don't know yet the cause
of that tragedy. But it is imperative that these facilities
have the safety provisions and the modernization they need so
that we don't have any accidents or any potential stoppage of
production.
Mr. Loebsack. Thank you.
Mrs. Hartzler. Thank you for raising this awareness. I look
forward to working with you. And thank you very much, Mr.
Chairman.
Mr. Loebsack. Thank you.
The Chairman. As a matter of fact, I did know about that
accident; the staff had emailed me right away, because these
plants are so significant for the country's security. And like
Judge Carter was talking about with the Army vehicles, we have
deferred updating them all way too long. So I appreciate both
the gentlelady and the gentleman from Iowa and will work with
them on this.
Are there any other questions or comments on the gentleman
from Iowa? If not, we thank the gentleman for being here and
for raising the points.
Mr. Loebsack. Thank you so much.
The Chairman. Next, we turn to the distinguished gentleman
from Arkansas, who is, I believe, chairman of the EOD
[Explosive Ordnance Disposal] Caucus.
Mr. Crawford. Yes.
The Chairman. We always appreciate the gentleman and the
caucus' input on this vital part of our national defense
efforts. The gentleman is recognized.

STATEMENT OF HON. ERIC A. ``RICK'' CRAWFORD, A REPRESENTATIVE
FROM ARKANSAS

Mr. Crawford. Thank you, Chairman Thornberry and Ranking
Member Smith and distinguished members of the committee. Once
again, I am here to testify before the committee regarding
explosive ordnance disposal, or EOD, priorities for the 2018
NDAA.
The first priority for the caucus is to reengage last
year's EOD acquisition reform. Last year, Representative Davis
submitted an amendment that would have established a permanent
joint EOD research, development, and acquisition [RDA] program
under the supervision of the Under Secretary of Defense for
Acquisition, Technology, and Logistics, or AT&L. During
conference with the Senate, this reform measure was changed to
enable DOD to examine the current program and provide
recommendations.
The Department's findings were to leave the current program
as it is. This means DOD's oversight of the EOD technology and
training program is performed by the Under Secretary of Defense
for Policy, not the Under Secretary of Defense for AT&L. This
is troublesome because the oversight officer's position is
scheduled to be eliminated.
Additionally, the current system of acquisition causes the
services to coordinate on their equipment needs, but then they
each have to compete separately through the four service
requirement systems in order to field what is called joint
common equipment. This duplication of efforts results in
inefficiency and increased costs to the taxpayer.
More importantly, the current acquisition system has
completely failed to deliver critical equipment, such as X-
rays, robots, and electronic jammers to the field. Instead,
each service is buying commercial off-the-shelf items to meet
its needs. The Radiographic Imaging System for EOD program is
fielding systems that are not compatible with Windows 10
software, are routinely delivered with 50 percent of the
systems broken or unusable, and are so poorly thought-out that
the Joint EOD Technology Center issued a safety of use message
saying that using the system could under certain threats cause
injury to the user. The Army needs an additional $37.5 million
to purchase these commercial systems.
This failure to deliver essential equipment that meets the
requirements on schedule has created a reliance on various
commercial solutions that are not joint and will create a
logistics nightmare for the joint force commander when
deployed.
We on the caucus urge the committee to work with your
Senate colleagues to develop a real joint EOD RDA program under
the appropriate supervision of the Under Secretary of Defense
for AT&L with a funding line managed by the Defense Threat
Reduction Agency in order to ensure proper accounting and
funding of a small but critical capability and appropriate
budget justification documentation to ensure proper oversight.
The caucus also continues to be concerned with the capacity
of the Army's EOD program. Over the past fiscal year, roughly
one-third of the Army's EOD force has been cut. Current
military deployments to the Middle East have decreased in the
past years, but the threat of IEDs [improvised explosive
devices] is not going away at home or abroad. IEDs remain a
cheap, easy-to-assemble, and effective weapon that can have a
strategic effect. Many briefings talk about the elimination of
chemical or biological weapons, but virtually no mention is
made of the EOD men and women who are qualified to disable,
defuse, and dismantle these weapons.
While working with HASC staff we noticed very little EOD
capacity identified in specific operational plans. We are
concerned that the EOD capability is being overlooked in
various plans which will result in a lack of capacity when
needed. We recommend limiting the further reduction of the
Army's EOD forces to match that of other sustainment
capabilities.
The capacity cuts and lack of EOD planning is caused by a
lack of appropriate EOD senior leaders within the Army. Many of
the Army's higher headquarters, such as Corps and Army level,
have no EOD officer to conduct planning. Additionally, the lack
of an EOD general officer continues to hamstring the further
development of this important capability within the Army.
Therefore, the caucus urges HASC to consider establishing
an EOD branch within the Army sustainment community with a
brigadier general as the chief of that branch. We fully
understand the difficulty of creating a new general officer
position and recommend, as Congress did with other newly
created branches, giving the Army a limited exclusion to the
general officer cap for the purposes of manning a new branch.
Finally, the National Guard's Civil Support Teams are the
first line of defense for individual States in the instance of
a chemical, biological, radiological, or nuclear threat.
However, EOD technicians are a missing and much-needed element.
The caucus recommends a National Guard EOD program which will
authorize full-time national EOD positions, enabling the
National Guard to provide 24/7 EOD support to protect our
Nation. This will allow EOD techs transitioning out of the
Active Components, who currently have limited options, to
transition into the National Guard.
Apparently, my time has expired, so I will yield for any
questions that you might have.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Crawford can be found in the
Appendix on page 30.]
The Chairman. Well, I appreciate the gentleman raising
these points. And obviously your full written statement will be
made a part of the record.
The only thing I would mention to the gentlemen is we are
in the process of reorganizing the AT&L functions, and so we
will want to keep in communication with you on that point.
Mr. Crawford. Thank you.
The Chairman. But I understand the gentleman's point about
emphasis in the Army and having the appropriate attention on
this, because IEDs are not going away. There is no question
about that.
Mr. Crawford. Correct. Thank you.
The Chairman. And so we have to have that capability with
the proper priority.
Any other questions, comments to the gentleman from
Arkansas? If not, we appreciate again the gentleman being here
and his input into our process.
Next, we will turn to one of the newer Members of Congress.
We appreciate the gentleman from Florida being with us today.
We have already had unanimous consent that your full written
statements will be made part of the record. And we would be
pleased to hear any comments the gentleman from Florida would
like to make.
Mr. Dunn.

STATEMENT OF HON. NEAL P. DUNN, A REPRESENTATIVE FROM FLORIDA

Dr. Dunn. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member
Smith, and other distinguished members of the committee. It is
my honor to testify today.
I am here to express support for incorporating House Rule
1968, the Military Assets Protection Act, into the National
Defense Authorization Act for fiscal year 2018. I recently
introduced this legislation with Representative Hanabusa of
Hawaii, Representative Rosen, and also Generals Bergman and
Bacon, both high-hour military combat pilots.
The emerging threat of unmanned aircraft systems piloted by
our enemies was brought to my attention by military leaders at
Tyndall Air Force Base in Florida's Second Congressional
District, as well as by General Mike Holmes, the commander of
all Air Combat Command, and Lieutenant General Scott Williams,
the commander of the First Air Force, who is responsible for
protecting the airspace of all North America.
This committee has also received testimony regarding the
seriousness of this threat. On March 8 of this year, General
John Hyten, the commander of the U.S. Strategic Command, stated
his concern about ``unauthorized flights of unmanned aerial
systems over Navy and Air Force installations. These intrusions
represent a growing threat to the safety and security of
nuclear weapons and personnel.''
This is not a theoretical threat. Terrorist groups,
including the Islamic State, have increasingly used armed
drones against our allies overseas. As the tactics and
technology of weaponized drones are proven on battlefields
abroad, they will be exported to our shores for attacks and
espionage against U.S. military installations here at home. Our
Armed Forces face a new threat from drones and the law needs to
catch up.
As you may know, the Federal Aviation Administration [FAA]
recently regulated drone flights at 133 different military
facilities in the form of airspace restrictions. Although this
is a good first step, we cannot expect terrorists to follow the
FAA's notices to airmen. And importantly, military personnel
currently lack the authority and requisite shield against
liability to interdict drones that compromise the security of
our assets, installations, classified information, and
personnel.
For this reason, we drafted the Military Assets Protection
Act in consultation with the DOD and the Air Force Office of
the Judge Advocate General. In the National Defense
[Authorization] Act for 2017 this committee made critical
progress on this same issue. The Military Assets Protection Act
will further clarify and strengthen the Defense Department's
legal authority to interdict drones that threaten homeland
assets and installations.
I respectfully request that the committee consider House
Rule 1968 as it develops the National Defense Authorization Act
for fiscal year 2018, and I want to thank you all for your time
and for the opportunity to speak to you on this important
issue.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Dunn can be found in the
Appendix on page 32.]
The Chairman. Well, I appreciate the gentleman's work on
this. There is no question within the last year we have seen
enemies using armed drones against us, against our allies, as
the gentleman points out. And we have issues here at home. And
we need to have the laws keep up with the change in tactics and
technology, as the gentleman said. So I think that is exactly
right.
The gentleman from Louisiana.
Dr. Abraham. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Doc, I will just certainly agree with you. Even the FAA
doesn't know really what to do with all the drones. There are
more drones on the civilian side now than there are aircraft
flying. And certainly they can be militarized, weaponized, and
they are getting bigger, better, and faster. The optics are
impressive.
So good for you guys for highlighting this. I know the
chairman has highlighted it in a previous committee meeting.
But it is a threat that is going to become more and more
critical as time moves on quickly here. Thank you for your
input.
Dr. Dunn. Thank you, Dr. Abraham.
The Chairman. Great. Dr. Dunn, thank you for being with us,
and we will certainly take a look at your legislation and
continue to work together on this issue.
Dr. Dunn. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. Thank you.
Next, we turn to another distinguished gentleman from
Louisiana, Mr. Johnson, also a new Member of Congress. We are
grateful that you would be with us today. Your written
statement is part of the record, and you are recognized for any
comments you would like to make.

STATEMENT OF HON. MIKE JOHNSON, A REPRESENTATIVE FROM LOUISIANA

Mr. Johnson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman and Ranking Member
Smith and members of the committee, including my good friend
Dr. Abraham from the neighboring district. I really appreciate
the opportunity to provide input during this committee's
hearing today as we determine the fiscal year 2018 National
Defense Authorization Act. I am going to read fast because we
have some important information I would love to get into the
record today.
I have the honor of representing a congressional district
that is home to both Fort Polk and the Barksdale Air Force
Base, which are two, as you know, vital military installations
for our Nation and our national security interests around the
world. As I am sure you know, Fort Polk is home to the Army
Joint Readiness Training Center [JRTC] and Barksdale is home to
our Air Force Global Strike Command.
As is evident with the actions of North Korea, we know we
live in a highly uncertain and incredibly complex time, and it
further highlights the importance of our bases.
Due to today's time constraints I will try to focus
primarily on just three areas that I think are in essential
need of attention by the committee and the Congress: our U.S.
nuclear enterprise, our U.S. Army forces, and ensuring
appropriate missile defense needs are met for homeland defense
and U.S. strategic alliances.
Now, I am new to Washington, but one of the first things I
did was meet with the generals based in my district given the
importance of the roles they play in our daily global national
security and the training of our Army soldiers. From those
meetings and continued discussions over the past months
engaging with these men and women who are working to ensure our
Nation's security, I am even more convinced than ever that
America needs these robust strategic deterrent capabilities and
we have to continue to invest more in missile defense and
ensure our Army has the appropriate levels of funding and
readiness to adequately respond when called to fight.
The U.S. should not only invest more in missile defense,
given recent missile testing by North Korea and Iran, for our
own immediate national security needs, but we should also
continue to adequately invest in missile defense cooperation
with Israel.
Based on developing hostilities around the world, it is
clear we have to step up our level of investment into our U.S.
missile defenses, developing leading-edge conventional and non-
kinetic capabilities, modernizing our nuclear forces, a surety
in our command and control, effective intelligence collection
and support, and ensuring our Army force posture is adequately
maintained with the right balance of highly trained, well-
equipped soldiers to quickly respond when called into action.
Without adequate investment in these platforms and people,
America will struggle to provide the necessary levels of U.S.
national security at home and to assure the security of our
allies and partners around the world.
I would like to briefly speak to the nuclear weapons as
they continue to play an integral role in the strategies of
Russia, North Korea, Pakistan, India and China, as you know. In
fact, according to many reports and as evidenced from recent
aggressive actions, these countries are increasing their
reliance upon and modernizing their capabilities, whether it be
in their land, air, or sea-based forces. It is also very clear
Iran has not given up its nuclear ambitions.
Thankfully, despite ideological differences, Congress has
clearly expressed support for the long-term commitment we have
at Barksdale Air Force Base and for the majority of the nuclear
triad. The decision to elevate Global Strike Command to a four-
star command has already started to yield important rewards,
but there is still work to be done and budgets should fully
address specific needs to achieve U.S. advancements to upgrade
and maintain America's technological edge over our adversaries.
Critical areas of need include upgrading nuclear command
and control facilities; addressing the challenges of the B-52
re-engine, which are facing catastrophic engine failures; the
future of the B-21; and essential funding for what President
Trump's own March budget deemed, quote, ``critical
infrastructure maintenance,'' unquote, and warhead life
extension programs to sufficiently modernize the nuclear
security enterprise. As Secretary of Defense Mattis recently
stated, ``We must ensure a war that can never be won will never
be fought.''
As members of this committee, you are well aware of the
activity Global Strike Command oversees and its involvement in
a wide array of strategic deterrence, global strike, and direct
combat, including actions in Iraq, Syria, Yemen, and Nigeria.
The Bomber Command, 8th Air Force, in charge of our aging fleet
and Missile Command, and the 20th Air Force, in charge of the
U.S.'s intercontinental ballistic missiles, are critical to
deterrence and global strategy.
In our ground capabilities, in the event that maintaining a
capable and robust nuclear option doesn't suffice as a
deterrent from war, it is also imperative we have capable and
ready ground forces. Unfortunately, previous budget plans
forced the Army to shrink at an unrealistic pace to the lowest
levels in 50 years, as you know, and seriously threatened our
Nation's long-term ability to carry the fight forward. These
changes not only impacted the top line end strength numbers,
but also the Army's ability to accomplish their missions and
achieve necessary military readiness.
My district is the proud home of the Fort Polk Army Base
and it is important today to highlight how the Army has
continued to solidify Fort Polk's footprint as a multipurpose
military installation with state-of-the-art Joint Readiness
Training Center. The base contains units that provide
invaluable training for advise and assist roles and provide
soldiers with the training and flexibility necessary to carry
out the demands placed on them to secure victory.
The exercise scenarios learned there replicate many of the
unique situations and challenges the unit may face while
deployed, and because of this, Fort Polk is uniquely suited for
a number of upcoming Army plans, including planned expansion of
the Army advise and assist missions, as it is the only combat
training center in the Nation that also trains and deploys
combat units.
The Army recently completed its largest land purchase in an
effort to provide even more robust training capabilities for
brigade combat team rotations, an action that was warmly
embraced by the local community.
We have a number of issues that I can highlight, but I see
that I am far out of time. Mr. Chairman, I will submit the
written comments for the record. And I certainly appreciate the
opportunity to show our support for our men and women in
uniform. Thank you all for your critical work for the country.
And I yield back.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Johnson can be found in the
Appendix on page 33.]
The Chairman. Well, I appreciate the gentleman highlighting
three very important issues. This committee has certainly
focused on the nuclear deterrent, and missile defense, as you
mentioned, is critically important, and the Army needs I think
you have highlighted are very well taken.
Any comments or questions?
The gentleman from Louisiana.
Dr. Abraham. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I just want to say it is an honor for me to serve with the
gentleman from Louisiana. Also his knowledge base, his passion,
his tireless work effort, he is all over not only the district,
but his State, highlighting the Armed Forces capabilities and
certainly the deficiencies that he has mentioned with the B-52
engine.
And he is right, the JRTC at Fort Polk is not only prime,
but it is ready to take on that AAA [Advise and Assist]
battalion and brigade, so we would look forward to working with
that. In Belle Chasse we have certainly some issues down there
with some F-15 shortages that will occur shortly if we don't do
something about it.
So again, just a heartfelt thank you to Mike for his
unwavering support of the Armed Forces, not only in Louisiana,
but of the Nation.
Thanks, Mike.
Mr. Johnson. Thank you, sir.
The Chairman. Any other questions or comments?
I appreciate the gentleman taking time to be with us, as
well as your input. Obviously, the committee will take all the
input we have received today in written and oral form into
consideration and try to come up with the best defense
authorization bill we possibly can.
At this point, the hearing stands adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 10:45 a.m., the committee was adjourned.]

=======================================================================

A P P E N D I X

April 27, 2017

=======================================================================

PREPARED STATEMENTS SUBMITTED FOR THE RECORD

April 27, 2017

=======================================================================

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

=======================================================================

DOCUMENTS SUBMITTED FOR THE RECORD

April 27, 2017

=======================================================================

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
