- [H.A.S.C. No. 115-49] Ground Force Modernization Budget Request

[House Hearing, 115 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

[H.A.S.C. No. 115-49]

HEARING

ON

NATIONAL DEFENSE AUTHORIZATION ACT

FOR FISCAL YEAR 2018

AND

OVERSIGHT OF PREVIOUSLY AUTHORIZED PROGRAMS

BEFORE THE

COMMITTEE ON ARMED SERVICES

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FIFTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

SUBCOMMITTEE ON TACTICAL AIR AND LAND FORCES HEARING

ON

GROUND FORCE MODERNIZATION BUDGET REQUEST

__________

HEARING HELD
MAY 24, 2017

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
25-871 PDF                  WASHINGTON : 2018

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing Office,
http://bookstore.gpo.gov. For more information, contact the GPO Customer Contact Center,
U.S. Government Publishing Office. Phone 202-512-1800, or 866-512-1800 (toll-free).
E-mail,
[email protected]
.

SUBCOMMITTEE ON TACTICAL AIR AND LAND FORCES

MICHAEL R. TURNER, Ohio, Chairman

FRANK A. LoBIONDO, New Jersey        NIKI TSONGAS, Massachusetts
PAUL COOK, California, Vice Chair    JAMES R. LANGEVIN, Rhode Island
SAM GRAVES, Missouri                 JIM COOPER, Tennessee
MARTHA McSALLY, Arizona              MARC A. VEASEY, Texas
STEPHEN KNIGHT, California           RUBEN GALLEGO, Arizona
TRENT KELLY, Mississippi             JACKY ROSEN, Nevada
MATT GAETZ, Florida                  SALUD O. CARBAJAL, California
DON BACON, Nebraska                  ANTHONY G. BROWN, Maryland
JIM BANKS, Indiana                   TOM O'HALLERAN, Arizona
WALTER B. JONES, North Carolina      THOMAS R. SUOZZI, New York
ROB BISHOP, Utah                     (Vacancy)
ROBERT J. WITTMAN, Virginia
MO BROOKS, Alabama
Jesse Tolleson, Professional Staff Member
Doug Bush, Professional Staff Member
Neve Schadler, Clerk

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page

STATEMENTS PRESENTED BY MEMBERS OF CONGRESS

Tsongas, Hon. Niki, a Representative from Massachusetts, Ranking
Member, Subcommittee on Tactical Air and Land Forces...........     2
Turner, Hon. Michael R., a Representative from Ohio, Chairman,
Subcommittee on Tactical Air and Land Forces...................     1

WITNESSES

Murray, LTG John M., USA, Deputy Chief of Staff of the Army, G-8;
and LTG Paul A. Ostrowski, USA, Military Deputy to the
Assistant Secretary of the Army (Acquisition, Logistics and
Technology)....................................................     4
Thomas, LtGen Gary L., USMC, Deputy Commandant for Programs and
Resources; and BGen Joseph Shrader, USMC, Commanding General,
Marine Corps Systems Command...................................     5

APPENDIX

Prepared Statements:

Murray, LTG John M., joint with LTG Paul A. Ostrowski........    23
Thomas, LtGen Gary L., joint with BGen Joseph Shrader........    34
Turner, Hon. Michael R.......................................    21

Documents Submitted for the Record:

[There were no Documents submitted.]

Witness Responses to Questions Asked During the Hearing:

[There were no Questions submitted during the hearing.]

Questions Submitted by Members Post Hearing:

Mr. Banks....................................................    55
Mr. Bishop...................................................    56
Mr. Brown....................................................    54
Ms. Tsongas..................................................    53
Mr. Turner...................................................    53
Mr. Wittman..................................................    56

.
GROUND FORCE MODERNIZATION BUDGET REQUEST

----------

House of Representatives,
Committee on Armed Services,
Subcommittee on Tactical Air and Land Forces,
Washington, DC, Wednesday, May 24, 2017.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 3:36 p.m., in
room 2118, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Michael R.
Turner (chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. MICHAEL R. TURNER, A REPRESENTATIVE
FROM OHIO, CHAIRMAN, SUBCOMMITTEE ON TACTICAL AIR AND LAND
FORCES

Mr. Turner. The hearing will come to order. The
subcommittee meets today to review the Army and Marine Corps
ground force equipment modernization budget request for fiscal
year [FY] 2018. From our previous hearings held in March, we
are aware that the Army and Marine Corps continue to face
significant challenges in rebuilding full-spectrum readiness
from years of deferred modernization funding.
We are particularly interested in understanding how this
budget request will begin the process of reversing the trend in
deferred modernization funding. I would like to welcome our
guests representing the Army and Marine Corps: Lieutenant
General John M. Murray, Deputy Chief of Staff, G-8; Lieutenant
General Paul A. Ostrowski, Military Deputy to the Assistant
Secretary of the Army (Acquisition, Logistics and Technology);
Lieutenant General Gary L. Thomas, Deputy Commandant for
Programs and Resources; Brigadier General Joseph Shrader,
Commanding General, Marine Corps Systems Command. Thank you
each for your dedicated service and for being here today.
Today the subcommittee will review the broad portfolio of
ground force equipment modernization programs and their
associated acquisition strategies. We expect to gain a better
understanding of Army and Marine Corps modernization priorities
in fiscal year 2018 and beyond. As such, the witnesses have
been asked to identify their top five modernization
requirements and briefly summarize how the budget request
addresses them.
The subcommittee will be particularly interested in
learning of any unfunded requirements the Army and Marine Corps
may have for fiscal year 2018. Yesterday, the administration
released its budget request for the Department of Defense [DOD]
that amounts to a $603 billion top line. Since we just received
the request, we are still in the early stages of reviewing the
specifics of the budget request, which makes this hearing so
timely.
As I have stated at previous hearings, I support the
President's commitment to rebuilding the military. However, I
am concerned that the current budget request does not go far
enough. I support Chairman Thornberry's statement, ``The
administration's budget proposal for defense is not enough to
do what the President said he wants to do. In order to begin to
repair the damage that has been done to readiness, and to build
the capacity needed for today's dangerous world, we believe
that $640 billion is required for fiscal year 2018.''
A topline budget of $603 billion for defense in fiscal year
2018 really only represents 3 percent growth above President
Obama's projected budget request for fiscal year 2018 from last
year. To be fair enough, it does appear that the Army's
modernization request (procurement, RTD&E [research, testing,
development, and evaluation]), and the Marine Corps ground
equipment procurement request do provide for some improvement
over fiscal year 2017 projected levels. The problem is that due
to multiple years of underfunding and reduced budgets, these
relatively modest increases aren't enough to actually reverse
the damage that has been done.
For example, the request provides the funding necessary to
modernize about half of one [armored] brigade combat team,
meaning that the Army is on a path to fully modernize all of
their armored brigade teams by 2035, which is a problem.
Finally, I continue to have concerns that we are losing our
comparative advantage in ground combat overmatch against near-
peer and peer competitors. Legacy combat vehicle platforms in
some cases are nearing the 40-year mark in terms of service,
and I am concerned that these vehicles are reaching limitations
in terms of capability.
So I am particularly interested in understanding how this
budget request begins to address next generation combat vehicle
systems. And I would like to recognize my good friend, Niki
Tsongas.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Turner can be found in the
Appendix on page 21.]

STATEMENT OF HON. NIKI TSONGAS, A REPRESENTATIVE FROM
MASSACHUSETTS, RANKING MEMBER, SUBCOMMITTEE ON TACTICAL AIR AND
LAND FORCES

Ms. Tsongas. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and good afternoon.
I look forward to discussing the budget for both the Army
and Marine Corps with our witnesses here today, and I thank you
for being here. But first, I would like to address concerns I
have with the approach taken by the broader Federal budget
released just yesterday. The fiscal year 2018 President's
budget prioritizes defense spending at the expense of other
national priorities, like education, infrastructure, and
economic development.
Of particular relevance to our discussion here today, the
budget also makes deep cuts to the State Department and USAID
[United States Agency for International Development], to
international security assistance programs that provide defense
equipment and training to our partners abroad, and to the
Treasury's office responsible for combatting terrorist
financing, just to name a few. And these cuts are even more
pronounced over a 10-year period.
Increasing defense spending at the expense of these other
critical programs will not only make us less safe, but will
undermine important investments key to our national
competitiveness and our long-term security. With that in mind,
today's hearing is the first chance the subcommittee has to
review the Army and Marine Corps fiscal year 2018 budget
request. The delay in completing the budget does put pressure
on us to get as much information today as possible, given the
short time available before consideration of the 2018 NDAA
[National Defense Authorization Act] next month. And there are
a few points I would like to make.
First, the 2018 budget request for Army and Marine Corps
modernization accounts do appear to show modest growth in
comparison to the final 2017 figures for both services;
welcomed news given the services' modernization needs, but I
hope to hear today how you both plan on using the additional
funding to both expand current programs and set the stage for
the future by starting some new ones.
Research, development, test, and evaluation accounts seem
to have also grown at a modest level. I have been worried for
some time by the rapid decline in R&D [research and
development] funding, especially for the Army, which over the
past few years has reached troublesome lows. I hope to hear
more today about both new development programs and expanded
research in the science and technology, or S&T, accounts.
The second broad issue I wanted to touch on is the
importance of keeping a focus on improving personal protective
equipment, like body armor, helmets, and related materials.
Both services continue to make substantial investments and
field new equipment, which is encouraging. I think this is both
the smart thing to do, but also the right thing to do, given
the risks that members of our military take every day. The cost
of these programs in comparison to the billions needed for
tanks or helicopters is relatively small, but should be
protected and expanded.
A final point I wanted to make was about the importance of
competition. A series of laws, Executive orders, and subsequent
regulations make full and open competition the standard method
for acquisition of equipment by the military services. That was
done in the taxpayers' interest to ensure fairness, reduce
costs, increase transparency, and foster a healthy defense
industrial base.
However, we all know that the competition process usually
does take more time than doing a sole-source award. For me,
that tradeoff, a more time-consuming process, is worth it,
except in cases of true emergency combat needs or when optimal
products already exist in the commercial sector, situations
which have prompted the congressional defense committees to
craft needed workarounds.
So as both services make use of the exceptions to
competition that the law allows, I would caution that it be
done thoughtfully, carefully, and only in the case of true
urgency. The overarching goal should be to both achieve the
benefits of competition and to ensure that the flexibility
currently enjoyed by the military services is preserved. With
that in mind, I look forward to today's testimony, and I yield
back.
Mr. Turner. Thank you. I understand that General Murray
will provide the remarks on behalf of the Army and General
Thomas will provide remarks on behalf of the Marine Corps.
Before we begin, they have projected votes between 4:05 and
4:35. And then we are going to have an hour-long vote, and
after that it is going to be difficult to get members back. If
we give each of you 5 minutes, if you can shave off a minute or
two there, we are going to go to 3-minute rounds of questions,
and I am going to abbreviate mine. And I think we will get
through everybody if we get to a reasonable time for the votes.
So with that, gentlemen, please begin. General Murray.

STATEMENT OF LTG JOHN M. MURRAY, USA, DEPUTY CHIEF OF STAFF OF
THE ARMY, G-8; AND LTG PAUL A. OSTROWSKI, USA, MILITARY DEPUTY
TO THE ASSISTANT SECRETARY OF THE ARMY (ACQUISITION, LOGISTICS
AND TECHNOLOGY)

General Murray. And I will read fast, Mr. Chairman, so
thank you. Chairman Turner, Ranking Member Tsongas,
distinguished members of the Subcommittee on Tactical Air and
Land Forces, on behalf of our Acting Secretary, the Honorable
Robert Speer, and our Chief of Staff, General Mark Milley, we
look forward to discussing with you the fiscal year 2018
President's budget request for Army modernization.
The fiscal year 2018 modernization budget request of $26.8

billion represents a modest increase in modernization.
Additional funding sustains, but it does not significantly
advance our modernization efforts. Given today's fiscal
environment, our modernization strategy remains to focus our
limited modernization budget on the equipment that will have
the greatest impact against near-peer threats and can be in the
hands of our soldiers in the near future.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

General Murray submitted a correction of his hearing
statement, changing $27.3 billion to $26.8 billion.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
For the past 10 years, we have focused on the immediate,
providing the equipment necessary for our soldiers to fight in
Iraq and Afghanistan, along with incremental upgrades to our
existing combat platforms. That strategy, driven primarily by
constrained modernization resources, forced us to defer the
development of new combat capabilities. We have now reached a
point in time where we can no longer afford to do one or the
other: improve existing systems or develop new ones. We must
begin to do both.
We face critical capability and capacity gaps in areas like
air and missile defense, long-range precision fires, munitions,
the mobility protection and lethality of our brigade combat
teams, and active protection to name just a few. We must begin
to fill these gaps if we are to credibly deter, and if
necessary defeat a near-peer adversary. These are challenging
times. In the end, the security challenges of tomorrow will be
met with equipment we develop, modernize, and procure today.
Because adversaries will continue to invest in technology
to counter or evade U.S. strengths and exploit vulnerabilities,
resource insecurity and insufficient force modernization will
place the Army's ability to overmatch its opponents at risk. We
owe our future soldiers the equipment they will need to fight
and win on a very complex battlefield. We urge Congress to
provide fiscal stability, funding that is sufficient,
consistent, long-term, balanced, and predictable, so we can
maintain our current warfighting readiness while simultaneously
building a more modern and capable force for the future.
I would like to thank you and the entire committee for your
resolute support of the men and women of the United States
Army, Army civilians, and our families, and I thank you, and I
look forward to your questions.
[The joint prepared statement of General Murray and General
Ostrowski can be found in the Appendix on page 23.]
Mr. Turner. General Thomas.

STATEMENT OF LTGEN GARY L. THOMAS, USMC, DEPUTY COMMANDANT FOR
PROGRAMS AND RESOURCES; AND BGEN JOSEPH SHRADER, USMC,
COMMANDING GENERAL, MARINE CORPS SYSTEMS COMMAND

General Thomas. Chairman Turner, Ranking Member Tsongas,
and distinguished members of the subcommittee, thank you for
the opportunity to appear before you today. I am honored to
represent your Marines and testify on our fiscal year 2018
ground force modernization program.
Your Marines continue to be in high demand from all our
combatant commanders around the world. They are forward-
deployed, engaged on land and sea, and ready for crisis
response. As a result, we must constantly balance between
capability and capacity, between current operations and future
operations, between steady state and surge readiness, as well
as between low-end and high-end operations and training.
Our role as America's naval expeditionary force in
readiness informs how we man, train, and equip our force. It
also drives how we prioritize and allocate the resources we are
provided by Congress. While today's force is capable and our
forward-deployed forces are ready to fight, we have been
fiscally stretched to maintain readiness across the breadth of
the force. Our fiscal year 2018 budget request builds on the
additional funding received in the fiscal year 2017 omnibus
appropriation and begins the deliberate effort to fix readiness
for today and tomorrow.
Modernization is central to addressing near-term readiness
and foundational to building the Marine Corps of the 21st
century. It includes replacement of legacy systems with new
ones, such as the Amphibious Combat Vehicle [ACV], Joint Light
Tactical Vehicle, the Ground/Air Task Oriented Radar [G/ATOR],
the Common Aviation Command and Control System, and the CH-53K
King Stallion; five key modernization efforts supporting how we
are going to operate, fight in the future.
Modernization also includes changes to the structure of our
tables of equipment that we continue to incorporate lessons
learned from the battlefield into equipment sets that balance
affordability with the need for a networked, mobile, and lethal
expeditionary force. And it includes the insertion of
technology into current capabilities, including such efforts as
developing active protection systems, long-range precision
fires, and unmanned aircraft system capabilities.
The Marine Corps must begin to rebalance and modernize for
the future, creating a fifth-generation multi-domain force with
overmatch that can deter and, if necessary, defeat a highly
capable near-peer adversary. However, an unstable fiscal
environment creates inefficiencies, disrupts our planning, and
directly challenges our current and future readiness. With your
help, we can begin to overcome these challenges and ensure that
the Marine Corps is well postured for the 21st century.
Again, thank you for the opportunity to appear before you
today. I look forward to your questions.
[The joint prepared statement of General Thomas and General
Shrader can be found in the Appendix on page 34.]
Mr. Turner. Excellent. Thank you, gentlemen. Well, to get
us jump-started, I am going to ask three quick questions that I
believe you can both answer yes to, which will get us moving.
And so let's see if I am correct.
Obviously, we are concerned about the pace of
modernization. If additional funding were provided, could you
accelerate armored brigade combat team modernization? General
Murray.
General Murray. Absolutely.
Mr. Turner. General Thomas.
General Thomas. We could accelerate key modernization
programs, yes.
Mr. Turner. Great. Second yes question. In your
professional opinion, are changes to the current cluster
munitions policy required to address current Army requirements
and emerging threats? General Murray.
General Murray. I am not sure I completely understood the
question, Chairman.
Mr. Turner. We are very concerned about the policy
concerning cluster munitions, which is going to impact your
operations, your ability to utilize them. In your professional
opinion, does that current policy need to be changed to be able
to give you, as you look to requirements and emerging threats.
The second part of this--and I will just go ahead and tell
you--is would the loss of the ability to use cluster munitions
create an unacceptable capability gap for land component area
effects, particularly in major combat operations against near-
peer or near-peer-equipped opponents?
General Murray. The answer to the second one is absolutely.
It is a critical operational capability that goes away on 1
January 2019. The answer to the first one, Mr. Chairman, is I
think we have to at least look at it and consider it.
Mr. Turner. General Thomas.
General Thomas. We would advocate a change. The DPICM
[Dual-Purpose Improved Conventional Munition] capability is
very important to our force and to replace that capability is
going to take a lot more time and a lot more money.
Mr. Turner. Great, thank you. Ranking Member. And you
should have a clock on me.
Ms. Tsongas. Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I am
pleased that both services have ongoing efforts to improve the
fit and function of female personal protective equipment, as
the number of women serving in both the Army and Marine Corps
continues to increase, and it is something we talk about often
here.
But I am somewhat concerned that the two services are
headed in different directions. My understanding is that the
Marine Corps is making improvements aimed at making sure that
marines of all statures are equipped with appropriately fitted
plates. While that is important, appropriately sized plates are
but one component of a system aimed at making sure women have
equipment designed specifically to improve protection and range
of motion.
The female improved outer tactical vest is an important
example of how the Army is working to ensure that women have
body armor with the appropriate form, fit, and function. So my
concern is that the two services, while arguably trying to do
what they think is right, are diverging in their approaches
where there may be a great deal to be gained by a joint effort.
So, General Ostrowski and General Shrader, would you both
talk about what you are doing in this area within your services
and how it differs from the other service and why that is the
case? So, General Ostrowski.
General Ostrowski. Ma'am, thank you for the question. I
will tell you that I think you are very well aware that the
Army has not only sized body armor for our males, 11 different
sizes, but also for our females, 11 separate sizes with respect
to body armor.
In addition to the five torso and three side plates, in
terms of different sizes that we have had in the past, we have
added an additional three torso plates, as well as an
additional smaller side plate in order to address additional
concerns with respect to our female soldiers.
Our next-generation soldier protection system, which will
consist of about 121,000 systems for the folks, our soldiers
that are on the leading edge in terms of engaging with and
closing with the enemy in a close fight, will also include
sizing for women. This is important based on where we have gone
in terms of the Army and females' ability to serve within our
infantry and armor forces.
In addition, we will have eight total sizes for the soldier
protection system. This sizing is based on human factors
designed--that we have done in conjunction with the Marine
Corps; and the eight sizes, again, fit not only our male
soldiers, but are designed to fit our female soldiers based on
the addition of the new plates, as well as the scalable torso
protection system that we have.
Ms. Tsongas. We will go to General Shrader now, give you a
quick time to respond. Maybe if you need more time, put it in
the record later. Go ahead.
General Shrader. Yes, ma'am. So I think General Ostrowski
said it exactly what we are doing too--we are working with the
Army on our new plate carrier that we are getting ready to
field. As far as the plates are concerned, we are buying the
same plates as the Army. So, yes, ma'am, we are working with
the Army and moving forward.
Ms. Tsongas. Well, the Army has done some wonderful things,
so not only the outer tactical vests, but they have better
designed female protective undergarments, ballistic combat
shirts, and I would encourage the Marines to take a look at
that full suite of investments.
Mr. Turner. Mr. Cook.
Mr. Cook. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. First of all, I want to
thank the Marine Corps for inviting us to the parade a couple
of weeks ago. I have not dried out yet. And I have got cases of
immersion foot and jungle rot, which goes back 50 years ago to
when I was in Vietnam.
But anyway, a couple of systems which I am really impressed
on, the Trophy system that you are looking at that, thank God
that you are taking a look at that with the development of the
T90 and everything like that. The Marine Corps I know is
bringing on the new 81 Mike-Mike mortar, not new, but the
munitions. Can you just give a quick heads-up on that, what is
going on, on it?
General Thomas. Congressman, we are looking at the ACERM
[Advanced Capability Extended Range Mortar] round, which gives
you the extended range for the 81-millimeter mortar. That is in
technical demonstration right now, but we are paying close
attention to that.
Mr. Cook. Yeah, as that goes along, I would be really
interested in that. The other thing I wanted to address real
quick--and everyone is aware of the RAND study. We are worried
about long-range fires. The chairman talked about some of the
things on that.
We are concerned, at least I am, on HIMARS [High Mobility
Artillery Rocket System], whether we have enough ammunitions,
the systems that--you know, that unclassified portion of it, 60
hours to be in Tallinn or Riga, if you could just briefly,
anybody, how you looked at that, because I know it has got
everyone's attention and some of your systems addressing that,
because I think that is an important part of the budget, the
way it stands right now.
General Murray. Yes, sir. So, Congressman, fire structure
is part of the growth we will experience in 2018, with what we
were granted, in terms of the growth of the Active Component to
476 [thousand]. We thank you. It is just not the munitions. It
is also the HIMARS and MLRS [Multiple Launch Rocket System] to
shoot it, correct.
Mr. Cook. Yeah.
General Murray. And then we have a program going right now
called long-range precision fires. There is about $102 million
in the base to take two prototypes into demonstration in 2019.
In addition to that, we are also SLEPing, service life
extension program, on our ATACMS [Army Tactical Missile System]
missile to make sure we have got the inventory. And we are also
working to double the range of the GMLRS [Guided Multiple
Launch Rocket System] missile, as well.
Mr. Cook. Great. I am rushing real quick. By the way, I was
just out at Fort Irwin. They did a great cyber exercise. Some
of these kids, I mean, they are right out of Star Wars. They
are talking about some of the gear coming right off the shelf.
And very, very impressive.
The one thing that bothered me a little bit was the MICLIC
[Mine Clearing Line Charge], the mine going out with--this is
50 years ago we were doing the same thing with the C4, the det
cord [detonation cord] that goes out there. Of course, I am
looking for something much quicker and wondering if there is
anything in the works. And that is my last question. I yield
back after that.
General Murray. There is not anything in the works to
replace that currently, sir.
Mr. Cook. Okay, thank you.
Mr. Turner. Mr. Langevin.
Mr. Langevin. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I want to thank
our witnesses for your testimony. And thank you all for your
service to the country.
General Ostrowski, the Army's budget request shows $37
million for a leader-and-follow ground robotics effort that
would allow in theory unmanned cargo trucks to follow a single
truck driven by a soldier. Elsewhere in the budget request is a
larger $70.8 million effort that is spread across seven
different projects, including a squad multi-purpose transport,
which appears to be a small cargo-carrying robot, and the
common robotic system, which is a man packable, less than 25-
pound ground robot with various sensors, and a soldier-borne
sensor, which is a very small handheld UAV [unmanned aerial
vehicle].
Could you please give us some details on these efforts and
how they all fit together? And there is rapid progress in the
commercial world on ground robotics. What year will the Army
field its next generation of robots like the ones described in
the research and development request? For example, when would
the Army field a cargo or intelligence collection ground robot?
And then, finally, does the Army have any demonstrations
planned to open up this area to commercial robot companies?
General Ostrowski. Sir, the Army has got a multifaceted
approach to getting after ground robotics. And the Chief is
leading the charge. He is all about ensuring, as we all are,
that soldiers are not put into harm's way unnecessarily. The
first of those efforts is the S&T effort that you talked about,
Leader-Follower, which is in the S&T realm at the Army's TARDEC
[Tank Automotive Research, Development, and Engineering Center]
location now. The intent is to create the capability for a
leader vehicle truck that could be followed by other additional
carrying capability that will go from port to a base. Again,
not off-road, but along highways. This takes into account the
ability for us to use commercial technologies that have been
developed and to leverage those particular technologies.
With respect to the SMET [Squad Multipurpose Equipment
Transport] that you talked about, as well, the squad robotic
capability, ability to move 1,000 pounds worth of equipment,
our ability to do that is based on our acquisition strategy of
going through other transactional authority to get vendors to
come in to provide papers on how we can get after that
particular capability, take that down-select to about 10, have
them provide prototypes, and take those prototypes into test.
And following the test, we will down-select about four. And
between the period of 2019 to 2020, we will then place those
four standard types into the field for evaluations on behalf of
our soldiers that will lead to a decision by 2020 to make a
call as to whether to field or not to field that particular
capability.
Mr. Langevin. Okay.
Mr. Turner. Mr. Kelly.
Mr. Kelly. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. First, I am pleased to
see the Army's request to upgrade the Abrams tanks to the M1A2
SEPV3 [System Enhancement Package Version 3]. And I understand
the Army may attempt to accelerate additional upgrades for the
SEPV4 configuration. That being said, the Abrams tank is now
approaching 80 tons in gross vehicle weight. And what impact
does this weight have and are we getting the Mike-88s to make
sure that we can tow those things and also the things like the
new JAB [Joint Assault] Bridge that we have been talking about
since I was a young engineer lieutenant? You know, can our
bridges, our gap crossing capability support these new 80 tons
instead of 70?
General Murray. Yes, sir, so we have got several problems.
So you have mentioned two of them would be the heavy equipment
transport, or HETs. So right now, we have got work going on in
several different paths on the heavy equipment transports. We
have got a problem in Europe we have got to fix fairly quickly,
which is one avenue of approach we are taking, and then we are
also starting the development what we are calling the super HET
to account for the weight of the tank, which is actually combat
loaded about 78 tons. So you are correct, approaching 80.
With the bridges, we have got our engineers doing some work
right now that it really comes down to the strength of the pins
and the scissors as the weak point of that bridge. We can cross
it right now, but only at caution crossing, which is basically
walking speed. So we are working on the strength of the pins to
try to save the bridges we have got and then increase the pins
or increase the strength of the pins. And then you mentioned
the HERCULES [Heavy Equipment Recovery Combat Utility Lifting
Extraction System]. We also have an upgrade to the HERCULES in
works. RTD&E is funding in 2018 and then actually going to
development of allowing the HERCULES to do a single vehicle
recovery.
Mr. Kelly. And I just ask that you pay real close attention
to that. And we have got to have those upgrades in time to have
them on the battlefield. And it is not just those force
multipliers, but it is the things like our ISR [intelligence,
surveillance, and reconnaissance] capabilities, are we up to
range? It is the range on our artillery systems and our rocket
systems as compared to our near-peers. I mean, it is a total
force and you have got to bring every force multiplier. So I
just--I ask both the Marine Corps and the Army to make sure
that we get overmatch, because it is about rate of fire and
standoff. And if you have got those two things, you win; if you
don't, you lose. So please focus on that.
And then the other thing is, for both of you-all, on the
aviation standpoint, I know the Army and especially the Army
and the Marine Corps have our ITEP [Improved Turbine Engine
Program] engines to make sure that we have got the increased
capabilities for our rotor wing assets. Does that continue to
be a top priority for both the Army and the Marine Corps?
General Murray. It does, Congressman.
General Thomas. Congressman, for the Marine Corps
perspective, not necessarily the ITEP, but modernization,
particularly of our heavy lift capability, replacing the CH-53,
which is rapidly reaching the end of its service life, with the
CH-53K.
Mr. Kelly. And thank you, because that engine life and the
lift power creates both costs, but also life-saving and safety
issues. And with that, I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Turner. Thank you. Mr. Gallego.
Mr. Gallego. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. We kind of hit on
this earlier, but I would like to go in a little more in depth
regarding standoff ground fire capability. It is an area where
we may be deficient versus our competitors on the Russian side,
especially when it comes to anti-armor capability. What are the
Army and Marines doing to consider building the long-range
ground fires capability? Please include any anti-armor or
sensor fuse capabilities as part of that answer.
General Murray. When you say long-range, I assume you are
talking missile-delivered fires?
Mr. Gallego. Missile or artillery or----
General Murray. Okay. So, Congressman, we are working LRPF
[Long Range Precision Fires], as I mentioned before, targeting
about 499-kilometer range on that, which is current ATACMS is
350, limited only to 499 because of the INF [Intermediate-Range
Nuclear Forces] treaty, and we are working to double the
payload, so two per pod as opposed to one per pod, which is an
automatic way of doubling your force structure.
We are working right now with two foreign governments on
the potential of buying sensor fused munitions to put on both
the GMLRS and the ATACMS. And we are working with Dr. Roper and
the SCO [Strategic Capabilities Office], really, on some cannon
delivered munitions that would be an effective anti-armor
capability.
General Thomas. Congressman, the way that we are getting
after the long-range precision fire challenges, we are
increasing capacity. With the growth to 185K [185,000], we are
going to stand up an additional HIMARS battalion. In the FY
2018 request, we continue to purchase additional munitions, and
we work very closely on the innovations that the Army is
proceeding with that General Murray just described.
Mr. Gallego. In the meantime, what are the plans to
maintain and replace the capabilities affected by DOD's cluster
munitions policy in Europe and other key operational
environments around the world, or at least temporarily?
General Ostrowski. Congressman, the plan right now is to
service life extend our ATACMS missiles from a cluster munition
back to a unitary. We also have height-of-burst capability that
we have also proven on that particular missile system and just
recently tested to good effect. So that is the key thing there.
With respect to the 155 rounds, our DPICMs, the intent
there is to, again, use them if we can up until the point of
time where we can't, and then those will be discarded and
demilled. We are demilling 155s as we speak, as they have gone
beyond their shelf life, but the others still remain in our
inventory and are ready should the policy change or should we
need them prior to the deadline.
Mr. Gallego. Lieutenant General.
General Thomas. We continue to procure GMLRS alternative
warhead, as to mitigate the challenge that General Ostrowski
just described, but that is going to take a long time. We
wouldn't get our full requirement until the mid-2020s.
Mr. Gallego. Okay. Thank you. I yield back.
Mr. Turner. Mr. Bacon.
Mr. Bacon. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I thank all four of you
for being here. It is great to see my National War College
classmate there, General Thomas. I was hoping you could give me
your feedback on this perception. As I look out in our
acquisition and our modernization, I think that we are going to
produce future systems that have overmatch in the air domain,
the sea domain. I think I feel like I could say the same thing
in the space and cyber domains. But I worry about our land
domain.
When I look at the future weapons systems, I see that our
near-peers are producing stuff that are at parity or in some
cases exceed when it comes to range, rate of fire, and so
forth. So is my perception right? Should we be raising the bar
on what we are going to produce for our soldiers and marines in
the ground domain? Love to get your feedback.
General Murray. Yeah, I absolutely agree with you,
Congressman. And I am--as I said the last time--I am kind of a
parity type of guy, because it does depend on how you look at
the system. And Army is absolutely trying to do that. And I
said in my opening statement the last time and this time is
that we are now at the point where it is going to be hard to
upgrade our current combat systems to retain that parity and we
have got to start looking at what comes next.
The fundamental issue the Army has is when you look at our
modernization--we have to prepare--we have to make sure
soldiers tomorrow have the best equipment we can possibly
provide them, and we have also got to start looking to the
future. So you have two different efforts going on. You have
got upgrading the current equipment and you have got now I
think some RTD&E started, next generation combat vehicles
specifically, looking at future generation vehicle.
You know, I can do RTD&E. The problem comes in procurement.
I can't begin to buy a new vehicle until I finish upgrading the
last vehicle, and when you got extended upgrade timelines, it
becomes one ECP [engineering change proposal] or one upgrade
after another. So we have got to figure out how to shorten that
timeline so I can free up the resources to go after the
procurement of the next generation tank, air defense system,
infantry fighting vehicle. I mean, there's lots of needs across
the board.
General Thomas. Congressman, we would share the concerns
that you articulated. The Marine Corps, a little bit different
than the Army, we are a light general purpose force. So we look
at--much as the Army does, we look at the entire system
together, which is our overmatch comes by our ability to
maneuver and the fires that we can bring to bear. That is
cannon artillery. It is rockets. But it is also aviation. So
that will continue to be a focus.
I think much like the Army, we are focused on the
individual marine and soldier in terms of equipment, and my
sense is that we are gaining momentum in that particular area.
Our vehicles are, you know, just very old, and we have got good
programs in place that meets our mission needs. The issue that
we have is the good news is we are getting hot lines now. The
challenges that we face have to do with the speed at which we
are modernizing that fleet.
Mr. Bacon. I will just close my comments as I am finished
with my time here, we want to seek overmatch for our ground
domain. And if we don't have it, we are going to have to work
hard. So I would love to get your unfundeds [unfunded
requirements] and see how we can fight harder to give you that
overmatch, because parity isn't good enough for our soldiers
and marines. Thank you.
Mr. Turner. Mr. Carbajal.
Mr. Carbajal. Thank you, Mr. Chair. And thank you all for
being here today. Lieutenant General Murray, in your written
testimony, you stress the importance of prioritizing science
and technology efforts and gaining understanding of state-of-
the-art commercial and academic research in order to field the
most modern capabilities to the force in the 2030s. I am aware
that DOD and individual services have a number of research
partnerships with academic institutions and commercial entities
to share expertise and coordinate these efforts, research
efforts.
Academic institutions, like UC [University of California]
Santa Barbara and California Polytechnic State University San
Luis Obispo, currently participate in Army and Air Force
research partnerships through programs such as the University
Affiliated Research Center and the Education Partnership
Agreement program. These programs have helped build
partnerships between academic institutions, services, and
industry experts in an effort to engage in advanced research
ultimately providing our personnel with the best technologies
and capability.
Lieutenant Generals Murray and Ostrowski, what resources
can this committee further provide to help the Army take
advantage of the research and technology being done in the
commercial and academic sectors? And lastly, would expanding
these research partnership programs with academic institutions
and commercial sectors assist in identifying cutting-edge
research and technology?
General Murray. The answer to the first part of your
question, Congressman, is I think this committee and Congress
as a whole have made it very clear to us how important S&T
funding is. And that is why we have not, even in declining
budgets, reduced our S&T funding.
So right now, out of our modernization funds, the S&T
budget is about 10 percent of that, which is a significant
chunk of what I have for modernization. We recently just went
through the process where we reshuffled some S&T funding away
from near-term S&T back into basic research, which is really
what you are talking about, in terms of getting after
requirements that reach for technology for the 2030s and
beyond. And we have partnerships throughout this country. I can
think of--I was just down in Arizona State. We have a
partnership at Arizona State. We have partnerships all through
North Carolina. The ones in California are obviously very, very
important to us, given the tech base out there.
But I can't--and General Ostrowski may come up with
something--but we understand the importance of the S&T funding
for our future.
General Ostrowski. General Murray, I would agree
completely. And I want to thank all Members of Congress for the
additional $800 million that was placed in the 2017 budget with
respect to the S&T portfolio.
The use of academia, as well as commercial marketplace, is
absolutely essential in getting after leading-edge technologies
that are filling the gaps that we are encountering on a daily
basis. These are extremely important partnerships. There is no
intent whatsoever to cut them off. And the ability to expand
them is only a function of money.
Mr. Carbajal. Thank you very much. I yield back.
Mr. Turner. I want to thank our witnesses and our members
for the fact that we have had an incredibly efficient sprint of
a hearing. We are going to actually make the votes. We have
Wittman and Rosen next. And we have--Brown, I am sorry--and how
much time is left? There is 11:43 on the clock, so we have
plenty of time. Mr. Wittman.
Mr. Wittman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Gentlemen, thanks so
much for joining us today. Thanks for your service.
Lieutenant General Thomas, I want to go to you. For years,
between sequestration and BCA [Budget Control Act], we have had
our ability limited to really provide the necessary resources I
think in all levels for our men and women in the United States
Marine Corps. And I think this year's FY 2018 budget still
falls well short of where we need to be to make up for lost
ground from years past.
And I want to go to a particular line in this year's budget
that I would like to get your perspective on. The line in this
year's budget says this: It says this budget reflects hard
choices that the Marines made to protect readiness largely at
the cost of modernization and infrastructure sustainment.
I believe that budgets need to be driven by strategy, not
vice versa. And I am deeply concerned about there being a bill
payer for readiness, especially when we look at infrastructure
sustainment, modernization. That is like eating our seed corn.
To me, that is deeply troubling.
Tell me this. If you were to be given additional resources
this year, what would the priorities of the Marine Corps be to
pipeline those resources to areas such as modernization and
infrastructure sustainment?
General Thomas. Thank you, Congressman. You know, our
priorities are the Amphibious Combat Vehicle, Joint Light
Tactical Vehicle, the G/ATOR radar, and then aircraft such as
the CH-53K and MV-22, and there are others. We, again, as I
alluded to, we have got programs in place. You know, additional
funding would be used to accelerate those programs.
And to your point about sacrificing modernization for near-
term readiness, that is something that has been a challenge for
us over the past few years. We feel that this request improves
on that somewhat. We have increased our ground modernization
program by about 60 percent, up to $2.4 billion, significant
investment for us. But now it is just a matter about getting
out of the old metal as soon as we possibly can.
Mr. Wittman. Give your perspective, too. You talked a
little bit about ACV. This year's budget does put some
additional dollars into ACV for test vehicles and then 26 low-
rate production vehicles for ACV. Give me your perspective
about how the Marine Corps came to 26 vehicles as the initial
low-rate production number.
General Thomas. This coming year, in 2018, is where down-
select, you know, will occur. And so once that occurs, then we
anticipate our request to increase. We are actually--the
program is doing well. It is on a pretty tight timeline to make
the IOC [initial operating capability] of 2020. So it is fully
funded. We need to do down-select. And once we have done that,
we can't really accelerate IOC any earlier, but we can
accelerate FOC [full operating capability], which would be
funds starting next year.
Mr. Turner. Time is expired. Mr. Brown.
Mr. Wittman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Mr. Brown. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Both of my questions go
to the Army. I will ask both of them. You can answer it and
allocate the time accordingly. One, regarding the Mobile
Protected Firepower vehicle program, and the question is, you
have got the Bradley fighting vehicle. Why are we going to the
Mobile Protected Firepower [MPF] program? Is it mobility,
lethality, survivability?
Next question is on the CH-47. Army has a requirement for
14 more of those between the CH-47 and the MH-47 variant for
SOCOM [Special Operations Command]. You are only asking for
six. So that is--you know, a few less than your requirement.
What is the impact on the mission? And do you anticipate an
impact on your vendor in terms of their ability to keep pace
with what you will eventually need? Thank you.
General Murray. Thank you, Congressman. So on the MPF, it
is a completely different role than the Bradley plays. So it
is--MPF is, in fact, a light tank. And we are targeting
lethality between a 105- and a 120-millimeter cannon. And it is
really not to go up against other tanks, but it is to maintain
momentum of our light forces that we begin to field other
vehicles to our infantry brigade combat teams. So it is not an
infantry carrier. It is, in fact, a light tank that is, in
fact, about the same weight as a Bradley, but it carries a much
bigger punch and a little bit more frontal armor protection.
And then the CH-47, I will turn that over to General
Ostrowski.
General Ostrowski. Yes, sir. The multiyear that we had with
the Chinook ends in 2017. And we are, indeed, 14 short of our
authorized amount within the Army. The intent going forward is
to move to the Block II, CH-47F Block II, which provides
greater capability over the current Block I.
However, when we do that particular venue, we know that we
are going to be short in terms of the number of aircraft that
we are able to buy each year. For instance, in 2018, you said
yourself, sir, about six aircraft. Two of these are the 47F
Block Is and two of these are the variant for SOCOM. That does
not get better through 2020 to 2022; not until 2023 do we get
back up to the point where we are producing the amount of
aircraft from that facility that we have been in the past. So
it is concerning.
Again, it is a combination of a transition to a new
platform in terms of the capability. Again, same platform,
greater capability. And a combination of doing that and the
money that we have to invest in that particular upgrade to the
current platform that is putting us in this position.
We are constantly working with the vendor, as well as
partner nations in FMS [Foreign Military Sales] sales. This
particular year, in 2017, the reason that we were able to
execute the multiyear was because we had help from another
country that brought us up to the level to get to the multiyear
amount. So we will continue to push hard for that, because,
again, we are running out of the ability to help that vendor
just by our own buys alone.
Mr. Brown. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you.
Mr. Turner. Time is expired. Gentlemen, we are looking
forward to the unfunded requirements lists that are coming out.
And I would ask, as a continuing obligation for this hearing,
if when they are available, if you would each provide to us
your written perspectives on those, as we might be able to
evaluate them as we go forward. So assume it as a question that
has been asked to you here to get your thoughts and input
concerning the unfunded list and the unfunded requirements
list, and we will look forward to that if you could provide us
that as soon as possible, as those might become available.
Thank you.
[Whereupon, at 4:21 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]

=======================================================================

A P P E N D I X

May 24, 2017

=======================================================================

PREPARED STATEMENTS SUBMITTED FOR THE RECORD

May 24, 2017

=======================================================================

[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

=======================================================================

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MEMBERS POST HEARING

May 24, 2017

=======================================================================

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MR. TURNER

Mr. Turner. The Vice Chief of Staff of the Army in his testimony at
the February 7th full committee hearing indicated Air and Missile
Defense (AMD) as a top capability gap to address the urgent operational
needs of combatant commanders and mitigate current threats. How does
the FY18 budget request address this critical capability gap?
General Murray. The Army Fiscal Year 2018 (FY18) budget request
addresses the Air and Missile Defense (AMD) capability gap by
increasing procurement of critical systems and by beginning a Service
Life Extension Program (SLEP) for Stinger missiles. For instance, we
requested funding to begin procurement of AIM9X missiles (196), begin a
Service Life Extension Program for Stinger missiles (1,440), and
continue development of the Integrated Battlefield Control System,
Indirect Fire Protect Capability, and an improved Lower Tier AMD
Sensor. In support of developing a Maneuver-Short Range Air Defense or
M-SHORAD capability, the FY18 budget request supports advancing a near
term solution that considers the results of the recent tech demo event
and initiatives in support of the M-SHORAD Family of Systems Analysis
of Alternatives.
Mr. Turner. What are your major concerns with munitions? What are
you doing to address shortfalls?
General Murray. My major concerns with munitions include our
inability to support multiple theater requirements while also meeting
the training demand for munitions. For example, in Fiscal Year 2018
alone, the Army identified a $938 million shortfall in conventional
munitions which range from small arms (e.g., 9mm and 5.56mm) to crew
served weapons (e.g., .50 cal) to mortar and artillery munitions. I am
also concerned that our aging munitions industrial base cannot support
increased operational requirements in an efficient, cost effective
manner while ensuring the protection and safety of employees and the
environment. Finally, we lack sufficient capacity to produce the needed
quantity of precision and near precision munitions. To address these
shortfalls, the Army is making munitions a top priority and is moving
resources from lower priority programs to increase funding for
munitions. For instance, the FY18 budget request includes 6,000 Guided
Multiple Launch Rocket System missiles, an increase of almost 1,800
missiles over FY17's request. The FY18 request also includes 998
Hellfire missiles, an increase of 840 missiles over FY17. However,
fiscal constraints will not allow the Army to sustain the level of
investment required to meet demand for munitions across the Future
Years Defense Program. For example, we would need to invest over $600
million more per year to reach the maximum production rate for the
Patriot Advanced Capability Missile Segment Enhancement missile, a key
Combatant Commander required munition. The Army continues to look for
opportunities to close these gaps through reprioritization of funds,
increasing the efficiency of the munitions industrial base, and closely
monitoring expenditures of critical munitions.
______

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MS. TSONGAS
Ms. Tsongas. What technological advances have been made, including
in ensuring situational awareness and intelligence, surveillance, and
reconnaissance (ISR) capabilities, to mitigate operational risk and
enhance force protection for soldiers in small tactical units? How does
the Army envision using resources included in the FY18 budget request
and across the Future Years Defense Program (FYDP) to deploy these new
technologies in the field?
General Ostrowski. The Army has recently made several technological
advances to mature components and subsytems supporting small aerial and
ground ISR platforms which have the capability to mitigate operational
risk and enhance force protection for soldiers in small tactical units.
This research included developing payload standards, increasing image
resolutions, reducing audio signature, balancing power subsystems to
increase distance and duration capabilities, and developing software
algorithms which optimize performance. The Army will continue to
advance these technologies by researching platform agnostic components
and sub-system technologies which can be shared with multiple industry
partners. The advanced capabilities planned consist of research to
enable: (1) operations in GPS-denied environments, (2) environmental
sensing leading to collision avoidance, and (3) autonomy leading to
collaborative behaviors (i.e. swarming) and (4) man-machine interfaces
which will enable more autonomous operations, with limited operator
intervention. Longer term basic and applied research is focusing on
small unit sensor systems, sensor data analytics, communications,
mission command and positioning, and navigation and timing in Global
Positioning System (GPS) denied environments. These will be leveraged
to further advance these systems, examples include: (1) GPS alternative
technologies that provide state-of-the-art performance for soldier
position and navigation; (2) Acoustic, radio frequency (RF), and
electro-optic sensors and algorithms to detect and locate weapons fire
and unmanned aerial systems in complex, noisy environments; (3) Stand-
off sensors that provide non-line-of-sight situational awareness of
power-grid activities in real time; Related enabling science and
technology research which is being leveraged by these small aerial and
ground ISR platforms programs include converged hardware and software
architectures, cyber capabilities to the Corps and below, to include
small unit/squad, technologies for distributed, networked sensing; jam-
resistant soldier-borne antennas; adaptive protocols for resource-based
data acquisition and signal processing on sensor networks; automated
analytics for detection, tracking, and classification of adversaries;
and techniques to mitigate network and sensor effects from jamming,
spoofing, attrition, and non-cooperative emitters. The Army has
designated tactical situational awareness and mission command for small
units as a high priority research objective for FY18-24.
______

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MR. BROWN
Mr. Brown. The Army has embraced a non-developmental item (NDI)
approach to the procurement of networked communications modernization--
an approach that Congress has encouraged and fully supports. However,
the Army has made changes to its requirements for certain programs, and
has also chosen to reevaluate its needs, leading to delays in the
fielding of important, modernized communications items to the
warfighter. While Congress understands the importance of evaluating
needs, the delays in the procurement and fielding of important
communications items is concerning. First, the delay forces our
soldiers to continue to rely on outdated and potentially vulnerable
capabilities. Second, it discourages industry from investing more of
their own funds in additional capability when there is an unclear path
to an actual acquisition and return on said investment.
Given the ongoing studies the Army is conducting regarding its
network, is it safe to say that changes to the current strategy will be
made? When will the Army finalize and release any changes to this
strategy? Additionally, are you comfortable with stating that changes
in decisions to procurement strategies regarding tactical network
modernization will not lead further delay putting tactical radios into
soldiers' hands, or inhibit our tactical commutations readiness
capability?
General Murray and General Ostrowski. Given the ongoing studies
that the Army is conducting regarding the network, it is safe to say
that the Army's current network strategy and procurement approach will
adjust to appropriately address our operational needs and provide
opportunities for greater use of industry innovation. What will not
change is the Army's use of Non-Developmental network technologies and
the full and open competitive process to support our procurement
activities. Regarding adjustments in procurement strategies, as
previously noted, the Army intends to continue leveraging the NDI
approach with a full and open competitive process to support
procurement of our tactical network systems. However, the methodology
by which we assess/evaluate and determine the capabilities for our
overall network requirements will shift from `lowest price, technical
acceptable' toward a ``best value'' methodology. Changing to a best
value acquisition strategy will allow for greater opportunity to
maximize industry potential without binding ourselves to a rigid set of
parameters that limit flexibility and/or innovation that have proven to
result in program delays in the past. While no one can truly state for
certain that all delays will be averted, the adjustments to our network
strategy and a shift to a ``best value'' approach aim to reduce future
programmatic delays, ensure greater flexibility for the Army, improve
the use of industry innovation and provide our warfighter with the best
operational capability available.
Mr. Brown. The Navy and Army both have major robotics procurements
coming in the next 1-2 years; programs such as Man Transportable Robot
Systems Increment II (MTRS Inc II), Common Robotics Systems (I), and
Advanced Explosive Ordnance Disposal Robot System (AEODRS). What is the
strategy for integrating these capabilities into the field and into the
larger military context beyond how they are being used now?
Additionally, although the defense budget is going up overall, it's not
necessarily being allocated in a way that ensures that service men and
women are getting the newest, most capable technology in areas such as
robotics. For example, it is my understanding the Marines are looking
at purchasing robots initially developed in 2002 to meet their
Explosive Ordnance Disposal capabilities because of challenges in the
Advanced Explosive Ordnance Disposal Robot System Program. I would like
to hear from all the panelists on this question, but particularly from
BG Shrader.
General Murray and General Ostrowski. The Army's strategy for
robotic systems is to integrate new technologies into our organizations
to help ensure overmatch against increasingly capable enemies. Based
upon the expanding roles for robotic systems beyond EOD, the Army chose
to build upon the Navy's open source modular architecture and pursue
lighter weight, lower cost, common chassis solutions using modular
mission payloads to meet the needs of diverse organizations across the
Army. This common chassis strategy provides greater efficiency for
integrating these capabilities into the larger Army and reduced cost
through economies of scale by buying thousands of similar systems
rather than hundreds of multiple types of unique systems. The Army's
Interoperability Profile (IOP) standards enable the development and
selective upgrade of interchangeable modular mission payloads to
perform specific warfighter functions across multiple platforms. This
approach specifically enables the Army to focus more on its Robotic
investments where they have the greatest impact: Updating
interchangeable mission payloads with newer, increasingly capable
technology. For example, a MTRS Inc 2 may be configured with a suite of
EOD payloads or a suite of CBRN sensors. The Army IOP standards are
fully compatible with the Navy's AEODRS standards. The Army anticipates
the production of the MTRS Inc 2 in Fiscal Year 2019 and the Common
Robotic System-Individual (CRS-I) in Fiscal Year 2021. Additionally, to
ensure that Soldiers get the newest, most capable technology within
current fiscal constraints, the Army is collaborating with our industry
partners. The Defense Innovation Unit Experimental (DIUx) organization
has facilitated the Army's outreach to non-traditional industry
partners on the cutting edge of technology. This approach enables the
rapid delivery of prototype capabilities to the Warfighter using a buy-
try-decide methodology through newly expanded Other Transaction
Authority (OTA).
Mr. Brown. The Navy and Army both have major robotics procurements
coming in the next 1-2 years; programs such as Man Transportable Robot
Systems Increment II (MTRS Inc II), Common Robotics Systems (I), and
Advanced Explosive Ordnance Disposal Robot System (AEODRS). What is the
strategy for integrating these capabilities into the field and into the
larger military context beyond how they are being used now?
Additionally, although the defense budget is going up overall, it's not
necessarily being allocated in a way that ensures that service men and
women are getting the newest, most capable technology in areas such as
robotics. For example, it is my understanding the Marines are looking
at purchasing robots initially developed in 2002 to meet their
Explosive Ordnance Disposal capabilities because of challenges in the
Advanced Explosive Ordnance Disposal Robot System Program. I would like
to hear from all the panelists on this question, but particularly from
BG Shrader.
General Thomas and General Shrader. [The information referred to
was not available at the time of printing.]
______

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MR. BANKS
Mr. Banks. LTG Murray, the Army G8 validated an operational needs
statement (ONS) for a hydra rocket penetrating warhead for the field
guided rocket system back in October, but still requires action on
resourcing a material solution to the Apache helicopter war fighters.
The USAF and USMC validated similar ONS and are in qualification
programs to provide guided rockets with a penetrating warhead with
incendiary effects that is already in the DOD inventory and in
operational use by SOCOM. Is it not true that this capability is
specifically noted in the Vice Chief of Staff of the Army's (VCSA) 2016
approved munitions strategy? Considering the high cost of guided
missile systems such as Hellfire and considering that hydra rockets can
now be precisely guided to a target, what is the Army's plan to provide
this capability to the warfighter and take full advantage guided rocket
technology that will provide more flexibility to the operational user
to engage a broader spectrum of targets?
General Murray. Both the Chief of Staff of the Army (CSA) and the
Vice Chief of Staff of the Army (VCSA) continue to place special
emphasis on the development, procurement and positioning of critical
munitions requested by the Combatant Commanders. In the case of the
Operational Need Statement (ONS) for a penetrating warhead (M282) on an
Advanced Precision Kill Weapon System (APKWS) equipped Hydra rocket,
also known as a ``guided'' Hydra rocket, a request for the resources to
develop, qualify and field the weapon system was recently submitted as
priority numbers eleven and twelve on the CSA's Fiscal Year 2018 (FY18)
Unfunded Requirements list (reference numbers 0978 and 0976). The
resource requirements identified in the UFR take advantage of other
services' integration and qualification efforts where applicable. In
the meantime, the Army is procuring and fielding the APKWS guidance
sections with a widely used High Explosive (HE) warhead (M151) in
support of our Soldiers in current areas of operations. The Army plans
to continue procurement of 2,000 APKWS per year beginning in FY18
leveraging an existing Navy contract. A FY18 UFR (reference number
0978) has also been submitted to double the number of APKWS the Army
procures (from 2,081 to 4,000) that will take advantage of investments
in the production line that will increase capacity for all services.
For the Army, APKWS is qualified on the AH-64D/E Apache and is
currently constrained to operations in the U.S. Army Central Command
Area of Responsibility by an Urgent Materiel Release. Full Materiel
Release, allowing unconstrained use of the weapon system, is expected
in FY19.
______

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MR. BISHOP
Mr. Bishop. The Marine Corps has been evaluating Australian
technology through the Foreign Comparative Testing Program for Rifle
Accessory Control Units (RACUs) that would allow troops to manage their
electronic and battle management systems while keeping hands-on
situational awareness at all times. This technology, already used
abroad, if implemented within the U.S. military, would allow troops to
keep their hands on their weapon with heads-up and eyes on the target
all while being able to manage incoming and outgoing communications
with other systems. It is my understanding that the Marine Corps has
exercised its option under the existing testing and evaluation contract
to go to Phase 3 of testing, which includes additional communications
management capabilities. It is also my understanding that the Marine
Corps supports obtaining a significant number of RACU units so that
additional demonstration can take place at the Battalion level and to
investigate further this technology's use with systems such as drones,
re-supply robots, heads-up displays on night vision goggles, and the
like.
(1) Does the Marine Corps support additional advanced systems
testing and the production of the RACU units during Fiscal Year 2018
and beyond to support such testing; and (2) What is the Marine Corps
assessment to date of the benefits of this technology as a part of
troop modernization efforts?''
General Shrader. [The information referred to was not available at
the time of printing.]
______

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MR. WITTMAN
Mr. Wittman. I am not sure how you are soliciting for a new system
without a new authorization. I was told that the initial plan was to
purchase this new system using Operation and Maintenance funds, now I
understand that new systems should be purchased with Procurement funds.
Please clarify your authority for the RFP and whether a new start is
required.
General Shrader. [The information referred to was not available at
the time of printing.]
Mr. Wittman. The Marine Corps states that it wants a high glide
canopy, which covers significantly more horizontal distance when jumped
from the same altitude as the currently fielded system. Is a high glide
canopy truly a requirement? If so, where in the Corps did this
requirement originate and how was it approved? Also, does the Marine
Corps have all of the other equipment (oxygen bottles, tandem
parachutes, and guided cargo parachutes) required in order to employ
the high glide canopy?
General Shrader. [The information referred to was not available at
the time of printing.]
Mr. Wittman. The Marine Corps has a large number of PARIS, Special
Application Parachute (``SAP'') canopies that are high glide in
inventory but that are seldom used. Why is the Corps fielding a new
parachute when it already has parachutes with high glide canopies?
General Shrader. [The information referred to was not available at
the time of printing.]
Mr. Wittman. When the Army purchases parachutes, it relies on the
engineers at U.S. Army Natick Soldier Systems Center to develop a
specification addressing the military's unique requirements. Instead of
using a military specification, it appears that the Marine Corps is
using the Parachute Industry Association (``PIA'') specification, which
is for sports parachutists jumping from relatively slow moving planes
and without the equipment that military parachutists carry. What
assurances does the Marine Corps have that the PIA specification will
get the Marine Corps the gear they need?
General Shrader. [The information referred to was not available at
the time of printing.]
Mr. Wittman. I understand that the Marine Corps plans on conducting
a ``paper'' down select and only test the parachute once first articles
are received. I believe that testing is critically important. I would
like your thoughts on why testing is given short shrift in this
procurement.
General Shrader. [The information referred to was not available at
the time of printing.]
Mr. Wittman. The sports parachute industry has been unable to
develop reliable high glide canopies. The Army has struggled with the
RA-1 parachute and grounded the parachute for several months last year.
The reliability challenge, I am told, is one of aerodynamics. High
glide canopies have to be large and relatively flat. This geometry
requires longer lines and increases the opportunity for malfunctions
especially lines on top of the canopy. Why is the Marine Corps
considering going from a very reliable system to one that because of
the geometry is almost certainly less reliable? Do you have safety
concerns?
General Shrader. [The information referred to was not available at
the time of printing.]

[all]
