- [H.A.S.C. No. 115-45] HEARING ON NATIONAL DEFENSE AUTHORIZATION ACT FOR FISCAL YEAR 2018 AND OVERSIGHT OF PREVIOUSLY AUTHORIZED PROGRAMS BEFORE THE COMMITTEE ON ARMED SERVICES HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES ONE HUNDRED FIFTEENTH CONGRESS FIRST SESSION

[House Hearing, 115 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

[H.A.S.C. No. 115-45]

HEARING

ON

NATIONAL DEFENSE AUTHORIZATION ACT

FOR FISCAL YEAR 2018

AND

OVERSIGHT OF PREVIOUSLY AUTHORIZED PROGRAMS

BEFORE THE

COMMITTEE ON ARMED SERVICES

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FIFTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

SUBCOMMITTEE ON SEAPOWER AND PROJECTION FORCES HEARING

ON

AMPHIBIOUS WARFARE IN A CONTESTED ENVIRONMENT

__________

HEARING HELD
MAY 18, 2017

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

_________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

25-838                     WASHINGTON : 2018

SUBCOMMITTEE ON SEAPOWER AND PROJECTION FORCES

ROBERT J. WITTMAN, Virginia, Chairman

K. MICHAEL CONAWAY, Texas            JOE COURTNEY, Connecticut
VICKY HARTZLER, Missouri             SUSAN A. DAVIS, California
BRADLEY BYRNE, Alabama, Vice Chair   JAMES R. LANGEVIN, Rhode Island
SCOTT DesJARLAIS, Tennessee          MADELEINE Z. BORDALLO, Guam
MIKE GALLAGHER, Wisconsin            JOHN GARAMENDI, California
DUNCAN HUNTER, California            DONALD NORCROSS, New Jersey
PAUL COOK, California                SETH MOULTON, Massachusetts
JIM BRIDENSTINE, Oklahoma            COLLEEN HANABUSA, Hawaii
STEPHEN KNIGHT, California           A. DONALD McEACHIN, Virginia
RALPH LEE ABRAHAM, Louisiana
Dave Sienicki, Professional Staff Member
Phil MacNaughton, Professional Staff Member
Jodi Brignola, Clerk

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page

STATEMENTS PRESENTED BY MEMBERS OF CONGRESS

Courtney, Hon. Joe, a Representative from Connecticut, Ranking
Member, Subcommittee on Seapower and Projection Forces.........     2
Wittman, Hon. Robert J., a Representative from Virginia,
Chairman, Subcommittee on Seapower and Projection Forces.......     1

WITNESSES

Martin, Bradley, Senior Policy Researcher, RAND Corporation......     3
Sloman, Jesse, Analyst, Center for Strategic and Budgetary
Assessments....................................................     5

APPENDIX

Prepared Statements:

Martin, Bradley..............................................    29
Sloman, Jesse................................................    42
Wittman, Hon. Robert J.......................................    27

Documents Submitted for the Record:

[There were no Documents submitted.]

Witness Responses to Questions Asked During the Hearing:

[There were no Questions submitted during the hearing.]

Questions Submitted by Members Post Hearing:

Mrs. Davis...................................................    53
Mr. Langevin.................................................    53

AMPHIBIOUS WARFARE IN A CONTESTED ENVIRONMENT

----------

House of Representatives,
Committee on Armed Services,
Subcommittee on Seapower and Projection Forces,
Washington, DC, Thursday, May 18, 2017.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 2:00 p.m., in
room 2212, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Robert J.
Wittman (chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. ROBERT J. WITTMAN, A REPRESENTATIVE
FROM VIRGINIA, CHAIRMAN, SUBCOMMITTEE ON SEAPOWER AND
PROJECTION FORCES

Mr. Wittman. I call to order the House Armed Services
Subcommittee on Seapower and Projection Forces. I want to
welcome everyone here today. I thank our witnesses for being
here. We do have votes that will be called at some point. So
what we are going to try to do is to get through our opening
statements and the witnesses' opening statements and then take
a short recess to go vote, and then we will be back.
Well, again, I want to thank our witnesses for joining us
today and our members. As the Seapower and Projection Forces
Subcommittee chairman, I lead a group of my colleagues with
broad jurisdiction over naval and Air Force programs. And I
must admit that I have a particular affinity to the United
States Marine Corps and its amphibious warfare role, because I
represent Marine Corps Base Quantico in Virginia's First
Congressional District.
Because of my district and because of this subcommittee's
jurisdiction, I am particularly interested in our subject today
of assessing our Marine Corps' ability to project forces in a
contested environment.
Late last year, I was particularly intrigued to read a
report authored by one of our witnesses today entitled
``Advancing Beyond the Beach: Amphibious Operations in an Era
of Precision Weapons.'' In this report, the authors propose
that the current approach to amphibious operations needed, and
I quote, ``new operating concepts and capabilities that
circumvent or defeat increasingly effective coastal defenses.''
Their report proposes a new strategic approach that emphasizes
lighter vehicles, a rebalancing of the surface and aviation
assault capabilities, an emphasis on surface connectors that
optimize ocean travel, and improved armament on amphibious
ships.
I believe that the Center for Strategic and Budgetary
Assessment has accurately assessed the problems associated with
amphibious assault in a contested environment.
Projecting power in close proximity to shore in a contested
environment is fraught with challenges which may require a
shift in our approach. Fundamental changes to the Department of
Navy's strategic amphibious warfare investments may be
necessary to move more effectively above--to move Marines
ashore. I believe that it is incumbent upon the Marine Corps to
rapidly change their legacy force structure toward a capability
that is more expeditionary, capable of fighting in the
littorals, and, when called upon, able to project power ashore
in even the most challenging of environments.
To better assess this issue, I am pleased to have two
respected authors on amphibious warfare with us today: Mr.
Jesse Sloman, Center for Strategic and Budgetary Assessments;
and Dr. Brad Martin of the RAND Corporation.
Gentlemen, thank you for your willingness to testify before
our subcommittee today, and I look forward to your assessment
and recommendations to make our Marine Corps forces more lethal
and effective than ever.
I now would like to turn to our ranking member, Joe
Courtney, for any opening remarks that he may have.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Wittman can be found in the
Appendix on page 27.]

STATEMENT OF HON. JOE COURTNEY, A REPRESENTATIVE FROM
CONNECTICUT, RANKING MEMBER, SUBCOMMITTEE ON SEAPOWER AND
PROJECTION FORCES

Mr. Courtney. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for holding this
hearing on the future of amphibious warfare in a contested
environment. As you noted, this has definitely been a real
focus and passion of yours. So, again, we appreciate your
leadership on this issue.
As we have heard throughout our hearings this year, the
U.S. Navy and Marine Corps team must be prepared to meet new
challenges as our potential adversaries rapidly improve their
tactics and technologies to counter America's longstanding
superiority. This challenge is particularly true in examining
the future of amphibious warfare.
The United States Navy and Marine Corps team remains the
most lethal and advanced amphibious force ever put to sea. As
recent events around the world have shown, however, we cannot
afford to rest on our laurels. Rather, we must continue to
adapt and advance new technologies, tactics, and operational
concepts to maintain our capacity to strike from the sea
wherever needed and whenever called.
However, we must also recognize the realities and
limitations of existing platforms, equipment, and personnel who
have not engaged in a contested amphibious assault from the sea
in more than six decades. We must explore not only how these
platforms can be modernized to maintain relevancy but also to
examine how new technologies and operational concepts can be
employed to ensure America's security and to respond to world
crises.
Since the cancellation of the expeditionary fighting
vehicle in 2011--and I was trying to remember how many hearings
we had on that; yeah, it was at least close to a half dozen
before, finally, that decision was made--the Navy and Marine
Corps have wrestled with what is the right distance for the
Marines to disembark the ship and what type of vehicle that
should be in. This is not an easy debate and is one I am sure
we will talk more about today. However, there is more to this
than just what distance an amphibious ship should launch its
vehicles or what type of vehicle that should be. Our military
is a joint force and will always operate that way in any
contingency so that we need to be talking about how to fully
integrate our amphibious forces and ensure that they are
leveraging the technologies that other forces are relying on.
I have no doubt of the value that our amphibious force
provides in responding to an array of contingencies, from
supporting noncombatant evacuation operations to being the on-
the-scene responder to the world's next humanitarian disaster.
However, I also recognize that modeling, simulation, and
exercises predicated on uncontested ambitious operations are
becoming more outdated by the day. We must be trained, ready,
and equipped to operate in a contested environment.
Today, we welcome two experts in this field, Dr. Brad
Martin and, a graduate of Tufts University, Mr. Jesse Sloman--
we don't see too many Jumbos here, so it is great as a graduate
to see you here, Mr. Sloman--to help us better understand the
many underlying challenges of operating in a contested littoral
environment. I thank them for being here today. I look forward
to your testimony.
Mr. Wittman. Thank you, Mr. Courtney.
We are going to go to our witnesses now.
Dr. Martin, we will begin with your testimony. Then we will
go to Mr. Sloman.

STATEMENT OF BRADLEY MARTIN, SENIOR POLICY RESEARCHER, RAND
CORPORATION

Dr. Martin. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Chairman Wittman,
Ranking Member Courtney, I appreciate the opportunity----
Mr. Wittman. Dr. Martin, just for a second, we will get you
to pull that microphone closer to you. There you go.
Dr. Martin. Okay. Well, Chairman Wittman, Ranking Member
Courtney, I appreciate the chance to testify today.
Amphibious operations in benign environments are obviously
something that are of great importance to the Nation.
Amphibious forces can be used across a range of military
operations. And, in fact, they are a normally deploying part of
our Nation's forward presence. They are marked by flexibility,
mobility, and scalability, and they can be used in a variety of
threat environments. They bring the virtue of capability that
is based and sustained at sea with the ability to rapidly
project various different types of capabilities ashore, ranging
from the provision of humanitarian assistance, all the way
through significant kinetic strikes.
Navy and Marine Corps continue to make investments in force
structure capabilities that will both improve and sustain these
capabilities well into the future. However, a variety of actors
have acquired ways to contest aspects of amphibious forces and
landing force movement, and these range from the types of
weapons that nonstate actors have used against forces in Iraq
and Afghanistan, such as IEDs [improvised explosive devices] or
explosive boats--or things of that nature, through more
advanced and sophisticated systems, such as land-based
missiles, all the way through sophisticated anti-access and
area denial capabilities.
In some of these cases, the threats are significant but
manageable, but in the most stressing environments, those in
which opponents have significant A2/AD capabilities, anti-
access/area denial capabilities, the challenges are
significant, and there are some shortfalls that we are going to
need to address in the near and far term, and much of my
testimony deals with this.
However, as we discuss this, it is important to remember as
context that amphibious forces have always assumed a hostile
environment requiring that the force overcome opposition. A
benign environment was not and is not assumed to be necessary
for operations to take place. Moreover, the threats posed in
A2/AD environments face all conventional forces. So aircraft
carrier strike groups, tactical aviation flying from fixed air
bases, large ground force elements: All of those are things
that have to be overcome if they are going to operate in a
place where the enemy is making a significant attempt to deny
access. So solving some of those problems for the amphibious
force also assist in solving problems for these other forces.
Navy and Marine Corps, to their credit, understand the
challenges and have acted to meet them. The Navy continues to
develop and purchase amphibious ships and surface connectors.
The Marine Corps is experiencing significant improvement in its
aviation capability, which I would describe as being nearly
revolutionary, with the introduction of the CH-53 Kilo, MV-22
Osprey, with its many variants, and, in particular, the F-35B.
Moreover, the joint force continues to seek ways to effectively
operate in an environment in which sophisticated anti-access/
area denial capabilities exist and need to be neutralized.
There are, however, places where shortfalls could impact
the ability to conduct future amphibious operations and warrant
either additional investment and/or changes in operational
concepts.
The top three of these are--I hope we can get into more
detail on each of them--is, first, the Navy continues to face
difficulty fielding systems that deal with the threat from
mines laid at sea and in the surf zone. Mines are relatively
easy to acquire and deploy, and in some ways, the challenges
posed are more direct against the amphibious force than they
are against most others. And while there are promising efforts
for unmanned solutions, this remains a challenging area as it
has historically.
And the second issue is the Marine Corps continues to
require the movement of amphibious assault vehicles as a lead
element in an assault echelon. The legacy amphibious assault
vehicles required that the ships close the beach to 1 to 3
miles to allow a launch. And this was a movement that both
exposed the amphibious ship to threats, but perhaps more
importantly, it telegraphed the force movement in ways it could
endanger the landing force.
And the program replacements that Marine Corps are looking
at are improvement in terms of range and speed, but the most
fundamental issue here may be requiring these to be among the--
or may be in requiring this type of force to be among the first
elements ashore during ship-to-shore movement. This may be more
a matter of changing operational concept and doctrine than
investment in new capabilities.
And, finally, while Navy and Marine Corps will be making
near revolutionary--or Navy and Marine Corps, in particular,
will be making near revolutionary improvement in its aviation
capabilities, and while some of these may, in fact, be a big
part of the solution to some of the challenges we have noted,
it is not clear that the aviation support platforms that Navy
is delivering are optimized to take advantage of this
improvement.
For example, the Marine Corps insisted that the well deck
capability that was absent from the LHA 6 and 7 amphibious
assault ships be put back in LHA 8. And while this was
understandable, this was done at the expense of aviation
maintenance and ordnance storage capability, and ship options
that allow more spots, more ordnance, more aviation fuels and
stores probably should be looked at as we move into the next--
into further development of the force structure.
Now, to conclude, amphibious operations have never been
conceived as occurring absent a threat. Combatant commanders
value these forces, and Navy and Marine Corps have significant
and well-thought-out investment strategies to retain many
capabilities. However, there are some significant challenges--
some of them are very longstanding--that require conditional or
additional emphasis.
And so, with that, I will conclude and stand by for
questions.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Martin can be found in the
Appendix on page 29.]
Mr. Wittman. Thank you, Dr. Martin.
Mr. Sloman.

STATEMENT OF JESSE SLOMAN, ANALYST, CENTER FOR STRATEGIC AND
BUDGETARY ASSESSMENTS

Mr. Sloman. Chairman Wittman, Ranking Member Courtney, and
distinguished members of the committee, thank you for inviting
me to testify today on the future of amphibious warfare in a
contested environment.
I wanted to make a few quick points regarding the current
challenges the Navy and Marine Corps are facing and how they
can overcome those challenges. The margin of superiority that
the U.S. military can expect to enjoy on the battlefield has
eroded over the last several decades as potential adversaries
have developed new capabilities specifically intended to
counter American strengths.
Those capabilities mean that, in order to fully contribute
to a campaign against a capable adversary, amphibious forces
will need to adopt new concepts of operation and field new
equipment or use existing equipment in novel ways.
We also need to move beyond our bifurcated understanding of
conducting amphibious operations whereby the Navy drives the
Marines to the shore, then the Marines take over and execute a
ground fight to one where we also acknowledge the contributions
the Marine Corps can make to the Navy's fight for sea control.
One of these new concepts is the use of expeditionary advanced
bases. Advanced bases are small, temporary outposts that could
constrain the enemy's freedom of action through anti-air or
anti-ship attacks. For example, advanced bases positioned along
island chains can employ anti-ship cruise missiles to form--
fired from mobile launchers to form a barrier to ships
attempting to reach the open water.
The Marine Corps should also expand the use of amphibious
raids, a traditional Marine mission, to support sea control in
littoral areas by attacking enemy anti-air and anti-ship
missile batteries. And amphibious forces would be an important
enabler for blockade operations because they would be able to
contribute a large forwarding force as well as small craft to
enable those forwardings.
To execute these and other operations against future
threats, the Navy and Marine Corps should prioritize six areas
for investment.
First, increase the armament of amphibious ships.
Amphibious ships today contribute little to the strike capacity
of U.S. naval forces beyond what is carried by their aircraft.
The Navy should modify its small deck amphibious ships, so the
LPD [amphibious transport dock] 17 and the follow-on LXR class,
to include vertical launch systems so these platforms have a
greater offensive and defensive capacity.
Second, increase the size of the amphibious readiness group
[ARG]. Today, the air element of a Marine expeditionary unit
would be challenged to provide the volume of fires necessary to
support the concepts described above. Adding more strike
aircraft to the big deck ships in an ARG would displace rotary
and platforms that are needed to allow the Marines to execute
assault and airlift operations. Expanding the current three-
ship ARG to a four-ship formation that includes a third small
deck amphibious ship would enable the Marines to field a force
with more strike aircraft without sacrificing its airlift
capacity.
Third, expand the aviation capabilities of the amphibious
assault ship. The LHA flight zero, LHA 6 and 7, sacrificed a
well deck to increase their aviation capacity. The Navy and
Marine Corps added a well deck back in for LHA flight 1 or LHAs
8 and beyond, albeit at the loss of roughly half the vessel's
aviation gas storage capacity.
The only way that you can have a well deck and expanded
aviation capacity in a ship is to have a bigger ship. One
option is to lengthen the LHA flight 1 design, which would be
similar to a course of action the Navy and Marine Corps
examined in the mid-2000s for a ``plug plus'' variant of the
LHD 8, which would lengthen the hull by about 80 feet and widen
the flight deck by 10 feet. Eventually, the United States
should consider developing a light aircraft carrier that
potentially includes both a well deck and a catapult and
arrested recovery system.
Fourth, optimize surface connectors for ocean transit.
Minimizing the on-land requirements for connectors would drive
down costs while allowing the platforms to retain a high water
speed, a characteristic that will be critical to their
survivability. It would also drive us away from the problems we
encountered with the expeditionary fighting vehicle where you
try to have a high water speed and survivability on land, which
means you end up with a surface connector that is suboptimal
for driving on the ocean and a land vehicle that is suboptimal
for operations on land.
Fifth, the Marine Corps should acquire lighter vehicles.
The Corps' ability to move forces ashore has been hampered by
the steadily growing weight and size of its vehicles. To
capitalize on the mobility of the V-22 Osprey, the Marines must
continue to acquire vehicles and fire support systems small
enough to fit aboard the Osprey. In addition, the Corps should
prioritize modernizing and upgrading its existing light armored
vehicles, which is the lightest armored vehicle in the Corps'
inventory, and begin a new program to replace them with an
entirely new vehicle that weighs the same amount or less.
Lastly, the Corps should acquire cross-domain fires. The
Marine Corps currently lacks the ability to influence the sea
domain with its ground systems. The Corps should procure a
multidomain weapon with an anti-ship and land-attack capability
which can be fired by the Marine Corps HIMARS [high mobility
artillery rocket system] launchers. The Corps should also
acquire additional HIMARS launchers to supplement its two
batteries of missile artillery--two battalions. Sorry.
That concludes my prepared remarks. I look forward to your
questions and want to thank you, again, for inviting me to
speak here today. And go Jumbos.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Sloman can be found in the
Appendix on page 42.]
Mr. Wittman. Thank you, Mr. Sloman.
I am going to turn it to over to a Jumbo, to Mr. Courtney.
Mr. Courtney. Thank you Mr. Chairman. And thank you to the
witnesses. I am going to ask one question, and then that will
be hopefully good for the break.
To both of you, one distinguishing difference between the
capabilities resident in a carrier air wing and that of the
aviation combat element aboard a big deck amphib is E-2D. This
capability allows the carrier to be fully networked with the
rest of the strike group and thus leverage all of their
capabilities.
Are there ways, in your view, where the Navy could better
integrate amphibs with other surface forces in order for them
to better leverage capabilities like NIFC-CA [Navy integrated
fire control], counter air?
Mr. Sloman. Sure. You know, I think the Navy, as they look
to a situation where the Marine Corps has F-35Bs and the Navy
still has legacy fighters, has been potentially valuing some
options for operating a carrier with all of the aviation
enablers as well as its four-and-a-half, fourth-gen, fighters
alongside a carrier or LHA operating in a carrier mode with
fifth-gen fighters.
I also think that if we provided the Marine aviation combat
element with some sort of airborne early warning capability,
that would significantly increase the survivability of the ARG/
MEU [amphibious ready group/Marine expeditionary unit] as well
as just dramatically increase the offensive capability of those
F-35Bs. And the lack of an AEW [airborne early warning]
capability on amphibious ships has been a problem since the
British executed the Falklands campaign without an airborne
early warning asset and had trouble trying to do defensive
counter-air against the Argentinian fighters.
I think some potential options for doing that mission
cheaper without an E-2D if you are operating ARG/MEU without a
catapult could be putting some sort of less capable radar
platform on an unmanned air vehicle, like the MUX, and that
might get you some of the way there because you could get
persistence in a platform that could stay aloft for a lot of
time and still provide you with some sort of radar overwatch.
Dr. Martin. The provision of airborne early warning is
going to be absolutely essential for survival in the A2/AD
environment. And the limitation right now is that--one of the
major limitations, even with the F-35B for an ARG/MEU or even a
larger amphibious force to operate would be the absence of
that.
There are a couple of different ways that could be handled.
One is to--that the deployment concept will always--for which
an ARG/MEU or an ATF [amphibious task force] would enter into a
contested environment--would always involve a carrier strike
group with an E-2 in the vicinity. That is one thing that can
be done.
Across the longer term, though, I think we are going to
need to look at options that make it more organic to the force.
And those could include developing different aircraft which
carry an awful lot of expenses with them. The bill for
developing a new aircraft that can do all of the things that
you would like an E-2 to do can be quite large.
Another possible option, which I think both organizations
have looked at, is a possibility of building a bigger
amphibious ship that can--has catapults and arresting gear that
allows the provision of something like an E-2. Now, this isn't
something we are going to do in the next 5 years, but it is
something we can be working toward as we--as we assess future
force structure.
Mr. Courtney. I yield back.
Mr. Wittman. Thank you, Mr. Courtney. We do have time for
additional questions.
Dr. Abraham.
Dr. Abraham. No, I am good.
Mr. Wittman. You are good? Okay.
Mr. DesJarlais, I think he has stepped out.
Mr. Byrne. We are going down through the list, so----
Mr. Byrne. I thank the gentlemen. I appreciate your
testimony.
Back in 2014, the Deputy Commandant for the Marine Corps--I
am sorry.
We lectured you on using the microphone, now we have to
lecture ourselves.
Back in 2014, the Deputy Commandant for the Marine Corps
said that the Marine Corps will be looking to, quote, ``exploit
the gaps and seams in future amphibious operations.''
So are we still talking about pitting force on force in a
contested landing given that that was what he said back in
2014?
Dr. Martin. I would say that the future employment of
amphibious forces is going to be maneuver-based and is going to
involve the use of intelligence and mobility to take advantage
of the gaps and the seams. And that is the future that the
Marine Corps ought to be thinking about, the Navy and Marine
Corps need to be thinking about.
Part of the challenge, however, is, as long as we are
married to the idea of amphibious assault vehicles being the
first thing across the beach, you are pretty much in a force-
on-force engagement to begin with. So that is the type of
capability we would probably want to maintain, but it is
probably important to rethink the concept such that there is
more reliance on the inherent value of mobility, agility,
speed, hitting them where they ain't.
Mr. Byrne. Well, if the future of ship-to-shore connectors
are more than likely going to be conducted in a benign
environment or during an exploited gap enabled by local sea
control and air dominance provided by the Navy and Air Force,
is it wise, in a constrained budget environment, to increase
the cost of these connectors by adding requirements for
contested environments we won't be sending them into?
Dr. Martin. The connectors themselves need to be capable of
moving around a lot. I mean, connectors apply to both the
aviation and to the surface connectors.
Mr. Byrne. Right.
Dr. Martin. And the requirements that we are talking about
adding aren't necessarily things that are going to add a lot to
the cost. I mean, what we are trying to do is--say, the MV-22,
for example, is a connector; H-53 Kilo is a connector. Both of
those things are part of the program of record and are going to
be delivered. And, really, part of the challenge is how to
better exploit the capabilities that they provide.
I can certainly see an argument that says that an
amphibious assault connector that is launched from a ship is
maybe not your better investment. I think we both would agree
with that. I would agree with that.
Mr. Sloman. Yes, sir. I agree with Dr. Martin. And I would
add I think that even if you had a connector that had some--you
know, some amount of survivability in an environment where you
are doing an imposed landing, the ship would have to be so
close to shore that you would create, you know, just tremendous
risk for a capital ship.
So I think the Marine Corps has been trying for decades to
use range and maneuver, you know, on the sea side to try and
find those gaps and seams. I think there is great potential
here for unmanned systems. So the Marine Corps just completed
an experimentation exercise called ANTX [advanced naval
technology exercise] out in the west coast recently, and they
have looked at concepts for using Navy small unmanned surface
vehicles to be part of the first wave of some sort of landing
against a concentration of enemy forces if you have to do that.
That might help bring down the risk for platforms that carry
people and also because using unmanned systems maybe can reduce
the costs of those. But I think it is--you know, I think the
Marine Corps today would be certainly challenged to execute an
imposed landing against modern threats.
And the Marine Corps has been--would have been challenged
for quite some time. And it is not just the connectors. Some of
it is the loss of naval gunfire support, for example. You know,
if you look at the amount of naval gunfire support you could
use to prep a beach today versus in, like, the 1940s, it is a
tremendous delta there.
Mr. Byrne. Well, I wonder if it would make some sense to
focus on more flexible, agile, and fast connectors to move our
Marines to shore swiftly such as the expeditionary fast
transport ships we already have. Would those make sense?
Dr. Martin. The expeditionary fast transport ship is
certainly a very valuable capability. One of the things about
flexibility and agility, though, is not so much with the
connectors but with the platforms themselves. They need to be
able to provide at least--the amphibious platforms need to be
able to provide some level of self-defense capability. And that
would be--that is, really, what distinguishes an amphib from
something that is, you know, has a ``T'' in front of it. That
is going to be part of being able to move into certain places,
and it is part of the risk assessment about how close a force
could afford to get.
But, in general, the presumption that we need to be looking
more at maneuver and flexibility and the lightness is exactly
the right way to go. And the idea that we are going to be able
to knock down the door with something is probably not the way
to go.
Mr. Byrne. Well, if you listen to what the Deputy
Commandant was saying, he is saying, let's go to the places
where we don't have to knock down the door.
Dr. Martin. Exactly.
Mr. Byrne. So, if we are not having to knock down the door,
we can take something that is lighter, faster, more agile, get
in there, get out, and get it done cheaper. That is my only
point there.
Does that make sense?
Dr. Martin. I think we are in violent agreement.
Mr. Byrne. Good. Thank you. I yield back.
Mr. Wittman. Thank you, Mr. Byrne.
We are going to take a quick recess. We should be back
right around the 4 o'clock timeframe. So I urge our members to
come back. I know there are lots of questions that are needed
to be asked. So we will ask our witnesses if they will stay
with us, and we will recess. Two votes. And we will recess. We
should be back in the 4 o'clock timeframe.
[Recess.]
Mr. Wittman. We will reconvene the Seapower Subcommittee.
And now we go to Ms. Bordallo for the next set of
questions.
Ms. Bordallo.
Ms. Bordallo. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. And thank
you, gentlemen, for being at the hearing today.
This, I guess, whichever one of you would like to answer:
The latest Marine Corps operating concept outlines the desire
to see a second amphibious ready group in the Pacific by 2018.
Now, we understand that that relies on variables, such as
funding and vessel availability, but in your view, what
capability would a second ARG provide for the Marine Corps, and
what resourcing or logistical challenges would need to be
prioritized?
Dr. Martin. A second amphibious ready group would be quite
valuable in enabling theater security cooperation. Marine
forces, amphibious ready groups, and Marine expeditionary units
are extremely useful for exercises, for working with regional
allies. It would also reduce the reaction time for certain
types of contingencies. So, in fact, that would be, in my view,
a very good use of the force.
The sourcing challenges would be largely a matter of force
structure. As far as the Navy's ARGs go, it probably would not
be as big a deal because it--effectively, we would be moving
something out of the continental United States and putting it
somewhere in the Western Pacific and having it be there. With
the Marine expeditionary unit, it would likely be partly
composed of a rotational force and partly composed of people
who are stationed there permanently, just like we have now in
Okinawa now.
But in terms of sourcing, in terms of support, typically,
this is done with an agreement with the host nation, and it is
typically a mutually beneficial type of relationship, which, in
my view, would be something very much worth pursuing.
So Pacific Command's desire to do this seems to me very
consistent with what would be in the best interest of the
Nation.
Ms. Bordallo. Thank you. Thank you, Dr. Martin.
Mr. Sloman. I would also add, more broadly, you know, one
of the recommendations I reported was to add a fourth ship to
the ARG. And, obviously, that is a heavy lift in terms of
shipbuilding and, you know, actually building enough ships to
achieve that requirement. So you may not be able to do that
with all of your ARGs.
But one way you can get more presence from a fewer number
of ships to the same number of ships is to put more of them
forward. They can rotationally deploy faster. They don't have
to transit all the way from the west coast or the east coast.
So, when we look at potential posture options that go along
with some of those recommendations, and this also feeds into
the fleet architecture study that CSBA [Center for Strategic
and Budgetary Assessments] recently completed for the Navy, a
large part of that is posturing more ships forward to enable
them to have a higher presence.
Ms. Bordallo. Well, thank you. Thank you, gentlemen.
Both of you identified the challenges of sea-based mines,
particularly for amphibious operations.
Dr. Martin, you referred to the challenges associated with
legacy systems and opportunities specifically with unmanned and
underwater systems.
Now, I echo your concern regarding the very real and unique
A2/AD threat of mines and would be interested to hear your
perspective on what the Navy should be doing to strengthen its
mine countermeasure toolbox.
Dr. Martin. There are a number of things the Navy should be
considering as it moves forward with the mine countermeasures
problem. One is unmanned is the future of mine countermeasures,
and we need to be moving out of the legacy systems that are
manned and require exposure of personnel to the threat as they
attempt to clear things.
I think one of the big challenges is that the very shallow
water has been a place that has historically been a real
challenge. And the types of things that would help us there
would be improved unmanned aerial systems to allow better
battlespace awareness of what is going on, the fact that people
are laying mines. Other parts of it would be unmanned systems
that could be put into very shallow water and can track the,
assist in mine hunting and assist in neutralization. And in
addition, I think this has got to be coupled with some changes
to the operational concept such that you are not--that the
landing force is not necessarily always going where--it can go
other places. That is part of strengthening the aviation
capability.
Ms. Bordallo. Thank you. Thank you very much.
And, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Wittman. Thank you, Ms. Bordallo.
We will now go to Mr. Gallagher.
Mr. Gallagher. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I thank both of you for your extremely thoughtful testimony
in joining us in what is a critical conversation.
Mr. Sloman, it is always good to meet another Marine
intelligence officer. Every day on the Hill, I endure some joke
about whether Marine intelligence is an oxymoron. So your
thoughtful testimony is helping to prove that it isn't, and I
appreciate that very much.
And you mentioned something about the ANTX exercise, if I
am getting that right. And I would like to dig into that a
little bit, because when it comes to this conversation about
our Navy/Marine Corps team operating in a contested
environment, my concern is we are sort of always on the wrong
side of the cost curve at every step.
And from our amphibs to our aircraft, our rotary-wing
assets to our sea-based connectors, it seems like our
adversaries are always able to target that equipment at a lower
cost than we are able to protect them.
And I appreciate that we can--it seems like we can achieve
some cost savings in the requirements process, such as
minimizing on-land requirements for connectors, but I am afraid
that this bigger picture remains: The relative cost of our
systems and the high value we rightly place on survivability
may make political leadership less likely to deploy them in a
risky expeditionary environment.
So, on the subject of a greater role for unmanned systems,
which may be a way of getting on the right side of that cost
curve, could both of you just comment on, if we were going to
invest heavily in that approach, what would that look like? How
would we change how we are operating?
Mr. Sloman. So, specifically with reference to the ANTX
exercise, I think one of the two most potentially fruitful
areas for using those unmanned systems would be the counter
mine mission, you know, so--or sort of a beach reconnaissance
role: so having small unmanned vehicles that could operate well
forward of the manned assets to really determine what the, sort
of, picture of defenses are at whatever beach you are landing
at and especially mines and then, also, potentially as a host
for the sort of fires that you would need as you close to the
beach. The Marine Corps kind of has this problematic gap where
you have a lot of fires potentially resident on your platform,
your capital ships that you are launching ships from,
especially if you add a VLS [vertical launch system]
capability, like we proposed. And then you potentially have a
lot of fires once you kind of establish your forces ashore and
you can put your artillery in place and also use air support.
But as the forces are transiting to the beach, they don't
really have right now any fires capability. This is something
you had in World War II and subsequent, but we have sort of
lost in the force.
So having small unmanned vehicles that had fires that could
provide fire support for forces as they are doing that long
transit from wherever they left the capital ship to where they
are landing I think is a potentially very useful job for the
unmanned vehicles.
Dr. Martin. I agree completely with what Mr. Sloman just
said.
I would add that the ability to establish wide area
battlespace surveillance is an important feature of being able
to operate in this type of environment. Unmanned aerial
vehicles that are organic to both the ARG and the MEU would be
helpful in that respect. Also, the whole capability of doing
beach surveillance from unmanned system would be--is another
important feature.
And the last thing is it--we talk--I talked earlier about
the issue with surf zone mining. And that may be a particular
area where we have to look at specialized types of unmanned
vehicles that may be expendable that we are effectively using
to neutralize the broad range of mines that have been laid in
the surf zone and are going to be difficult to deal with in any
other way. And, right now, effectively, the only way we have
got to deal with it is blow them up or send somebody in to
countermine or whatever. And unmanned systems are probably
going to be very effective in that area.
Mr. Gallagher. And, Mr. Sloman, I would just be interested.
As a Marine intel officer, do you think--are we doing a good
job in that community thinking creatively about the future
threat environment and really challenging the assumption upon
which our amphibious doctrine is based? I mean, it has been my
experience, laying my cards out there, that we sort of
prioritize the short-term thinking over that real long-range
analysis. I just would be interested in your thoughts, given
your experience.
Mr. Sloman. Yes. I completely agree. You know, I mean, as
you have experienced, sir, when you are in a billet or you are
in the aligned unit, you are worried about the next exercise,
which usually is about some very near-term threat, or you are
going off and doing some sort of kind of narrowly scoped
operational problem. I don't know how many Marine officers get
the freedom to think, you know, about those mid- to long-term
threats.
And then I also am concerned if the Marines start spending
more time and sending more personnel to do the kind of GWOT
[global war on terrorism] type missions that, you know, may be
ascendant, we might run--end up in a situation like we have for
the past decade where we really become like a second land army
or the Marine Corps really becomes a second land army,
executing mostly counterinsurgency, counterterrorism type
missions and, again, sort of that amphibious knowledge base
kind of starts to drop out of the force.
Mr. Gallagher. Sure. Thank you both.
I yield.
Mr. Wittman. Thank you, Mr. Gallagher.
We will now go to Ms. Hanabusa.
Ms. Hanabusa. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
One of the most interesting part about the amphibious
operations is, as it was described once, about the image that
we all have is World War II and the wave and wave of amphibious
vessels. I tell people: Imagine the opening scene of ``Saving
Private Ryan'' and that is the image that most of us have.
But we also realize that that is not the way we are going
to, quote, ``fight'' in the future. It is just not part of it.
Dr. Martin is concerned about A2/AD. I represent Hawaii.
Believe me: We are very familiar with it, and we are also very
concerned. I am not sure that the amphibious vessels are the
way you counteract A2/AD. And then, as well, the whole issue
that we were discussing earlier, which is the role of the
unmanned. As we know with the FSA [fleet size assessment],
which was done, which the fleet size assessment with
Secretary--former Secretary Mabus' 355 and everyone else, and I
think your organization, Mr. Sloman, had a large number of
unmanned.
So, given what you are describing as you see potentially as
the role of the amphibious vessel, why do you not think that
you are actually moving towards a recommendation towards
unmanned versus on an increase in amphibious vessels with
Marines? Right now, we are, what, 10 vessels, 6,000 Marines
that are being deployed in any one day. So why do you not think
that that is not the way that the future is? Because it seems
like we have got to think about the future. What is the
effective way to do this battle? Whichever one of you wants to
start.
Dr. Martin. Well, obviously, Mr. Sloman has some thoughts
on this too. But I will start by saying, I would agree that
amphibious vessels in and of themselves are not the things that
are going to overcome an A2/AD environment. They are something
that we have to--we, the Nation--would have to address, the
military would have to address, to enable the use of that type
of capability. That type of capability is useful in achieving
certain types of effects, but my argument is that we should
consider the ability to carry out those types of effects as
being useful and find ways to enable them and use aspects of
the amphibious force to allow that to happen.
Countering A2/AD is going to involve a large component of
unmanned vessels that are unmanned capabilities. That is a
place we should be investing. I think that the major capability
enhancements that we are talking about for the amphibious force
largely deal with ways to exploit the potential capability of
the manned and also to exploit the inherent value of mobility
and scalability. So those are the things that the amphibious
force will continue to bring with us even as we move into the
other areas where challenges still exist.
Mr. Sloman. Specifically on the unmanned systems. I mean,
obviously, those have a role to play in this A2/AD environment.
I think we are at different levels of maturity with respect to
integrating those in the force. So I think unmanned air
systems, we have a lot of experience with, and there are some
technical reasons that we were just--it is easier to use those.
I think--and in the CSBA for the architecture study, we
were somewhat conservative, actually, about our use of unmanned
surface vehicles and even unmanned undersea vehicles, partly
because there are a lot of technical and policy challenges that
we have to work out, and I think we are not 100 percent certain
exactly the maximum extent that we can use those systems.
So, for example, from a policy standpoint, how willing are
you to put munitions on those systems? How willing are you to
grant--or how much autonomy could you potentially grant an
unmanned system if you expect to be operating in an anti-
access/area denial environment where your communications will
be disrupted and you may not be able to communicate that easily
with your unmanned systems? Do you mind if the enemy takes them
if it is an unmanned surface vehicle and it is operating at
peacetime? Theoretically, someone could just grab it, which has
happened in real life. You know, we don't have good norms for
protecting our unmanned vehicles right now.
So, you know, we opted to be a little bit conservative, and
I think we still have to work through those challenges.
Ms. Hanabusa. I am running out of time, but I just would
like to ask you to consider this: I believe that we set policy
by acquisition. So, as we talk about the balance here, when we
buy an amphibious vessel, it could be a lot of money versus an
unmanned.
So that is the tradeoff that we, I think, have to decide on
this particular area as to who better serves it with the
limited resources that we have.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. And I yield back.
Mr. Wittman. Thank you, Ms. Hanabusa.
We will now go to Mr. Hunter.
Mr. Hunter. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And if you already answered this, please tell me, and I
will ask the staff what the answer was.
It is a really simple question, though. Where could you do
a contested amphibious landing right now? Tell me, and
obviously, the countries that are peer competitors and also
nonpeer competitors, tell me, where could you actually do it
at?
Dr. Martin. There are a number of places you could do it
without getting into the actual plans. Anyplace that offers a
littoral type of----
Mr. Hunter. China has got littoral type of stuff. You
couldn't do China.
Dr. Martin. You couldn't do China without a whole lot of
prior preparation. There are places.
Mr. Hunter. I think that is arguable, but----
Dr. Martin. Yeah. There are places that--I don't know that
we would do China. There are places where it could be done
with--it could be done with an adequate amount of prior
preparation, prior dominance, and all the rest of it.
I would say that the areas that are most susceptible to it
would be the places where there is a moderate level of A2/AD
capability, which we are capable of overcoming. It would be
places where there is some strategic advantage to gaining parts
of the coast or gaining an island, and it would be places where
it would be valuable to have a level of force that might not be
the same as an outright major contingency operation but would
be in the nature of a limited type of response.
So there are--off the top of my head, I could think of many
places where that could be done and could be done in an
incredible way. I am a little reluctant to name specific
places.
Mr. Hunter. Let me ask it this way: So let's look out 15 or
20 years, right, when everybody, when even nonpeer competitors
have ballistic missiles to be able to shoot at ships, do you
think amphibious warfare may be going away? You are never going
to have a ``Saving Private Ryan'' or Iwo Jima again. You are
never going to have that because you are not going to make it
to shore, ever.
Dr. Martin. No, you wouldn't do ``Saving Private Ryan''
because it involves putting the ships so close to shore that
they would be vulnerable to a number of different things.
Mr. Hunter [continuing]. You would have to have the ships
close to shore by definition, right?
Dr. Martin. Well, part of the discussion we are having is
the ability to move around and stay out of range and provide
deception and provide surveillance and to attack the seams. So,
in a case where you--I can foresee a situation in 15 or 20
years where we have established sufficient dominance in a
particular part of the operating area that we would want to be
able to move forces other than aircraft, for example, where we
would want to be able to move forces into an area to achieve
some effects.
Mr. Hunter. But that wouldn't be a contested amphibious
assault. That would be an amphibious landing where you already
have dominance, where you have air dominance and so forth, and
you are not going to get hit with a cruise missile 500 miles
offshore.
Dr. Martin. Well, probably not that far. But it would be an
amphibious operation in an environment where you had to--you
had to figure out ways to counter the threat before carrying
out the operation, and that is part of it. And I can think of
many places where that could occur. And I guess and what I
would also emphasize is that this is not something that only
amphibious forces would have to deal with. Any conventional
force is going to have to be able to overcome some portion of
the A2/AD threat in order to be able to carry out any
operation.
And that is--and part of the balance between offense and
defense is something that is just part of the threat assessment
that we continually have to make. So I would--so, anyway----
Mr. Sloman. Sir, just real quick. I would offer that if you
can get the ships far enough offshore, so maybe 200 miles, for
example, against a competitor that doesn't have huge stores of
precision weapons, you may be able to thin the salvo, the
offensive salvo, from their end to the point that you could
potentially defend against that or at least you would reduce
the amount of weapons you might face to a pretty small number,
depending on your adversary's inventories.
And then I would also offer, with respect to China, it is
difficult, very different, certainly, to imagine landing on the
shores of mainland China, but I think there is a great
potential for using amphibious capabilities in some of the
claimed islands, for example. I could see a scenario where you
might want to put forces there or to regain control of some
disputed territories after they have been seized by an
opponent.
Mr. Hunter. Thank you. I just feel like, in some ways, we
are in an amphibious box. I was a Marine too. And I did three
tours, and I flew over all three times. I have never been on a
ship for more than 3 days in the Gulf. But I think we kind of--
we might put ourselves in an amphibious box where we assume
that it is still going to be relevant in 20 years when it might
not be.
Thank you.
Dr. Martin. Yeah. There is that possibility. At the same
time, by that chain of reasoning, there is a whole bunch of
things we couldn't do in 20 years. We wouldn't be able to fly
out of--PACAIR [Pacific Air Forces] out of fixed bases in the
Philippines. And there are ways to offset advantages, and part
of the--rather than taking the step of saying it is irrelevant,
part of the step we need to take is to figure out ways that,
given that we think parts of it are useful, are there ways that
it could be made?
Mr. Hunter. Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I yield back.
Mr. Wittman. Thank you, Mr. Hunter.
We will now go to Mrs. Davis.
Mrs. Davis. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And thank you. I am sorry. I wasn't able to hear the
remarks prior to the vote. But I had a few questions. They may
have been asked.
One of the things that we are talking about here--and
certainly, my colleague from San Diego in asking those
questions--is part of it, you know, what does the future look
like, and are the plans that we have today realistic or in some
cases unrealistic?
And if you could put that in the framework of I think you
may have mentioned on shipbuilding, you were--someone asked
that question, and the integration with more forward operations
versus not, and so what--you know, what is the proposed number
of ships that support our amphibious operations as appropriate
or not?
And then, when it comes to aviation, aviation readiness
shortfalls in the Navy and Marine Corps, how do they affect,
again, amphibious operations?
And, finally, the expeditionary support bases and advanced
bases, how are they incorporated into the future of amphibious
operations? If you could kind of go through that in a way that
is a little specific for us, that would be helpful.
And if I could throw in one more thing. So, as we are
talking about the updates to our connectors and--do we have
gaps in training around new technology that are problematic?
And how are we addressing those going forward?
Mr. Sloman. Yes, ma'am.
Mrs. Davis. And I am sorry if you have already addressed
this in great detail.
Mr. Sloman. We have not.
So CSBA recommended in our fleet architecture study in
response to an NDAA that we go from 16 small deck amphibs to be
procured over the next 30 years to 25 small deck amphibs
procured over the next 30 years. And we determined that that
would be about a 4 percent increase on average in the Navy
shipbuilding budget. That is averaged out over the entire 30-
year period. So it might be more, significantly more, in the
first 10 years, for example, depending on the rate at which you
want to procure those ships.
And there are some things that you can do to bring the cost
down a little bit of procuring extra small deck amphibs, like
potentially speeding the procurement of the LXR, for example,
the LPD 17 replacement.
With respect to advanced bases, I think the rationale for
arguing for advanced bases partly has to do with some of the
questions that the members have directed to us with reference
to the cost-exchange balance. When you look at these A2/AD
situations, our argument for using advanced bases or for
creating some capability to put Marine units ashore that can
implement the sea and air domains, is that that helps reverse
the cost-exchange ratio. So our potential adversaries have
tailored their capabilities to try and disrupt what is
traditionally seen as our strengths. So carrier-based aircraft,
short-range tactical fighters at large bases, surface vessels.
Expeditionary advanced bases would create a mobile capability,
certainly, for the bases close to an opponent to fire any ship
or any air weapons that would force them to try and seek out
smaller ground forces with low signatures that are relatively
cheap.
This is the problem the U.S. has frequently encountered in
our wars. You know, if you look at the Scud hunts in 1991,
trying to find out these mobile launchers, very difficult
problem. Trying to find mobile ground forces in Kosovo in 1999,
extremely difficult problem.
We have never exactly solved the problem of how to find
mobile transporter erector launchers that are driving about
with very low signatures. And so creating--even if your
offensive capacity isn't that high, but creating that threat
that the enemy has to honor and potentially divert some of
their spending towards and some of their military asset towards
I think is one potential way to help try to flip that cost-
exchange ratio and give them almost a mini A2/AD problem to
help try and combat within their near abroad.
Mrs. Davis. And on the training, just going back for a
second in terms of the shipbuilding, because we are also
talking about the number of ships that support the operations,
amphibious operations.
Mr. Sloman. Right.
Mrs. Davis. How comfortable do you feel we are moving ahead
with that? And where does it not connect in the sense of the
plans and what we would like to see are really out of whack
right now?
Dr. Martin. We don't meet 2.5 MEB [Marine expeditionary
brigade] lift.
Mr. Sloman. Certainly.
Dr. Martin. If the requirement is for 2.5 MEB lift, we are
not going to be anywhere close. It is also true that every time
you add an amphibious ready group and you project it to operate
it in a contested environment, there will be surface ships that
go with it, and all the services--Marine Corps has got a
problem with aviation readiness, and Navy has got a problem
with ship readiness. All of those things have to be addressed.
One of the problems with trying to greatly expand the size
of the force would be it is not just the initial cost; it is
the subsequent readiness costs that go along with this. So we
would have to--the Nation--not we, but the Nation would have to
consider all those things as it made a decision to seek a
particular type of capability.
Mrs. Davis. Do you think we do that very well?
Dr. Martin. I think the Nation and the services
occasionally do not take into account the long-term cost of
operating a force and, as a result, can make some investment
decisions that become questionable over time.
Mrs. Davis. Okay. Thank you. I think my time is up. Sorry.
Thank you.
Mr. Wittman. Thank you, Mrs. Davis. We appreciate that.
Gentlemen, I want to get your perspective on what we see
today as the mix of capabilities within the amphibious force.
We have connectors. About two-thirds of our connectors are to
move amphibious forces ashore, and the other element is the
aviation element that also moves the remainder of forces.
It has been suggested that we look at that ratio, and is
that ratio correct today, the two-thirds to one-third
connectors versus aviation? And those surface connectors--I
think, you know, as we look at modernizing the surface
connectors, that certainly is a situation.
Let me get your perspective. Do you think the current ratio
is correct? And if not, what should be the ratio? And then,
what would that new ratio mean for our legacy forces today, and
what would a future Marine force look like with a different
ratio of surface connectors to aviation assets?
Dr. Martin. As I said in my opening statement, the Marine
Corps is facing an explosion of improvement in capability in
aviation capabilities it has got, and it would be wise for the
Marine Corps to exploit that to a greater degree.
What that implies is that more of the force gets moved
ashore by aviation; less of the force gets moved to shore by
surface. And the challenge that that would impose is that some
of the things that the Marine Corps is used to requiring as
part of the landing force would not get there as quickly as it
might otherwise. And a lot of the fire support, for example,
would be more dependent on aviation fire support than it would
be that they--the tanks and armor, that type of thing, get
moved ashore by surface.
So, across the long term, the need to reexamine concepts
that depend heavily on armored forces moved by surface
connectors needs to be reevaluated, and that will affect--
doesn't really affect the Marine Corps aviation program of
record all that much. What it does affect is some of the Marine
Corps' thinking about its capabilities. It also affects--and
doctrine, it also affects some of what would go into the
amphibious shipping, what they are going to be optimized to
carry.
Mr. Wittman. Mr. Sloman.
Mr. Sloman. Yes. I think the biggest factor that would
affect that ratio, you know, if you sort of look at it from
what do you need on the beach and what do you need to have
ashore to fight and then you sort of backtrack it, think about
what connectors can get that there, the biggest limitation
right now is the vehicle weight problem. So there is really not
that much the Marines can bring ashore just by air, which
creates a challenge if you are a beachmaster trying to figure
out what your amphibious loading plan is.
I think that if you can drive down the vehicle weight
without sacrificing too much survivability--and we recommend
acquiring lighter vehicles--then your aviation lift becomes
much more useful and you can bring a larger percentage of the
force ashore.
And in the long term, I think it is important to move--or
to try and move beyond this paradigm where more survivability
necessarily equates to more weight. There are some DARPA
[Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency] programs that are
looking at ways that you could potentially have survivable
ground vehicles that leverage agility or leverage active and
passive defenses in addition to heavy armor.
But if every vehicle that you try to make more survivable
becomes exponentially heavier, you really run into a big
challenge trying to bring them ashore by aircraft. So then you
have to go to surface connectors, which may reduce the
vulnerability in the vehicles, because they have all this
armor, but it dramatically increases their vulnerability during
the ship-to-shore transit stage.
Dr. Martin. Absolutely.
Mr. Wittman. Very good.
Mr. Sloman, let me ask this: Mr. Hunter talked about what
the future environment will look like, and much of this is a
discussion about Marine Corps' capabilities, both in a benign
environment and a contested environment, and that obviously is
going to change as we look at it into the future.
Can you explain how the Marine Corps' approach to
amphibious warfare in a benign environment and in a contested
environment would be different? And is there a range at which
you would project forces in a benign environment that may be
different than what you would in a contested environment? So
just kind of give us your range.
We had talked about the contested environment, but you also
alluded to the ability to prosecute the seams or to find areas
where it is less contested or even a benign environment. Then
you have logistical issues about being able to move forces
distances to the objectives.
So give us your perspective because I would like you to
dive a little bit deeper into that realm of what was asked
earlier just so we understand the benign versus contested
environment in amphibious warfare capability.
Mr. Sloman. So I think one challenge when you look at a
potentially benign environment is the proliferation of anti-
ship cruise missiles with non-state actors. So environments
that, maybe 20 or 30 years ago, we assumed were benign or at
least benign for a ship that was stood off maybe 10 or 15 miles
from the coast may no longer be benign, and we might not even
know that it is not benign. In other words, a non-state actor
might have some sort of weapon system that could target our
capital ships. The Houthi attack on U.S. guided missile
destroyers and then also the Saudi or United Arab Emirates'
joint high-speed vessel, you know, brings that to mind.
I think in a truly benign environment or one where we can
be assured that there would be no anti-ship missile threat
within tens of miles of the coast, we would be able to bring in
our maritime prepositioning force [MPF] sealift capability, and
that would very much increase the--or decrease the offload time
required to put significant forces ashore. Having a defensible
port facility is hugely valuable if you are trying to move
heavy equipment off of the ship. But I think it is important
not to assume that that MPF shipping, so essentially civilian
shipping, can be used in even a mildly contested environment,
particularly close to shore.
And the Marine Corps and the Navy seemed to be moving a
little bit in that direction kind of in the 2000s with some of
the discussion about sea basing. I think that was a dangerous
direction to go, to assume that your MPF shipping would be part
and parcel of an amphibious force against even any enemy that
had the capability to reach out and hit ships at 10 to 20 miles
from the shore.
So I think we should acknowledge upfront that the MPF
shipping is not a substitute for amphibious shipping, and it
really can only be used if you assume that there is no threat
at all from an anti-ship cruise missile armed adversary.
Mr. Wittman. Very good.
Dr. Martin.
Dr. Martin. The important thing is not so much the distance
as the ability to not telegraph location, which may
occasionally be a matter of deception that puts the force in
range of anti-ship cruise missiles or the anti-access threat.
So the future probably doesn't mean that we should be--that
the Nation, the Navy, the Marine Corps--should be developing
long-range connectors that are supposed to move things hundreds
of miles. It is more in the nature of locating ways of masking
the movement, of finding ways to better understand what the
adversary is doing, finding ways of suppressing aspects of the
A2/AD network long enough to allow some significant part of the
operation. And that will involve a fairly highly mobile and
sophisticated effort that relies a lot on sensors, that relies
a lot on intelligence fusion, and relies a lot on the ability
to make the enemy fire the anti-access weapons into open ocean.
But trying to construct a situation where it is all range
based, it will never work. Range can always get increased.
As far as the general ability to operate in a close to
shore, not everybody is going to have an A2/AD capability
equivalent to what the Chinese or the Russians would be putting
out. There are lots of places where the contested environment
is such that it can be handled with less risk to the force. And
the way to be able to operate in those types of environments is
to accurately assess the threat and provide sufficient organic
capability for the landing force and for the amphibious force
to be able to operate in a fairly--in a more limited way.
And we have talked about a couple of other things that
would involve. Some of it is better unmanned surveillance
sensors. Some of it is possibly being able to organically
assign airborne warning. There are a lot of different things
that could enable that.
Mr. Wittman. Thank you.
Mr. Sloman, I wanted to pick up on the point that you made
about weight of combat capability being moved to shore. And I
want to ask you specifically about the Marine Corps' effort to
recapitalize the amphibious assault vehicle [AAV] through the
development of the amphibious combat vehicle [ACV] program,
looking at that transition. As you know, part of that is doing
a service life extension on AAVs, which is a 50-year-old
vehicle and then building new ACVs. So, in the effort to
recapitalize this legacy program, how does that fit into what
you look into the future about the forcible entry component of
an amphibious force? Do you see that direction in the
recapitalization of legacy programs there and what you bring up
about a weight and capability? Give us your perspective on how
that fits into where things need to be in the future.
Mr. Sloman. Yes, sir. I think the Marine Corps is moving in
the right direction with having a replacement for the AAV have
not a significant swim requirement. I think trying to build
another EFV [expeditionary fighting vehicle] is the wrong road.
You know, that creates significant engineering risk, very
expensive vehicle, and one that just seems unlikely to be
fielded anytime soon.
I am not sure that the ACV--the ACV is large compared to
other equivalent types of ground vehicles, and it perhaps is
underarmed relative to the threat. I think having a larger
weapon on it would be--would be a very useful capability. But I
think that generally having a vehicle optimized for the ground
with minimal swim capability that would be brought close to
shore by a connector and then disgorged is definitely the right
direction for the Marine Corps to go rather than have a gold-
plated, fantastically swimmable ground vehicle.
Mr. Wittman. Got you. Very good.
Dr. Martin, your perspective?
Dr. Martin. What this involves is the backing away from the
idea that the first thing across the beach is going to be
motorized as a mechanized inventory. And what that means is
that the first parts of the assault element are going to be
likely delivered by air and that these capabilities are going
to be only delivered after some part of the beach is made
secure enough that they can move this type of force over the
beach.
If that were to occur, I am not absolutely certain that
that would be the first thing to arrive. The first thing to
arrive might very well be some other portion of the Marine
landing force that is viewed as being more effective and
useful.
So I think the major thing that we would like to have from
this type of vehicle would be suitability as an infantry ashore
weapon and not at all really an amphibious vehicle. There is
really not a lot of value in having that capability, which I
think is pretty much what we both--we both agree on that point.
Mr. Wittman. Very good. Thank you.
Mr. Byrne, do you have any additional questions?
Mr. Byrne. I do not.
Mr. Wittman. Okay. Very good.
Mr. Hunter, any additional questions?
Mr. Hunter. Dr. Martin reminds me of Robin Williams, with
all respect.
Dr. Martin. I have had other people say the same thing, so
Nanu Nanu.
Mr. Hunter. That is right.
Mr. Wittman. Well, with that, if there are no further
questions, then this subcommittee stands adjourned.
And, gentlemen, thanks again for your testimony today.
[Whereupon, at 3:32 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]

=======================================================================

A P P E N D I X

May 18, 2017

=======================================================================

=======================================================================

PREPARED STATEMENTS SUBMITTED FOR THE RECORD

May 18, 2017

=======================================================================

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

=======================================================================

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MEMBERS POST HEARING

May 18, 2017

=======================================================================

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MRS. DAVIS

Mrs. Davis. How do you see expeditionary support bases incorporated
into the future of amphibious operations?
Dr. Martin. [No answer was available at the time of printing.]
Mrs. Davis. How do you see expeditionary support bases incorporated
into the future of amphibious operations?
Mr. Sloman. [No answer was available at the time of printing.]
______

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MR. LANGEVIN
Mr. Langevin. The U.S. Navy is exploring advanced ship defense
technologies--such as electromagnetic railguns and directed energy
weapons--that could mitigate the vulnerability of U.S. Navy surface
ships to anti-ship missile strikes. Additionally, the Navy is pursuing
a frigate variant to the littoral combat ship with varying mission
packages as a forward-deployed surface combatant. Could these assets
extend the missile defense layer over the Marine expeditionary units or
brigade sea-based connectors during ship-to-shore operations?
Dr. Martin. [No answer was available at the time of printing.]
Mr. Langevin. The U.S. Navy is exploring advanced ship defense
technologies--such as electromagnetic railguns and directed energy
weapons--that could mitigate the vulnerability of U.S. Navy surface
ships to anti-ship missile strikes. Additionally, the Navy is pursuing
a frigate variant to the littoral combat ship with varying mission
packages as a forward-deployed surface combatant. Could these assets
extend the missile defense layer over the Marine expeditionary units or
brigade sea-based connectors during ship-to-shore operations?
Mr. Sloman. [No answer was available at the time of printing.]
