- [H.A.S.C. No. 115-15] THE EFFECT OF SEQUESTRATION AND CONTINUING RESOLUTIONS ON MARINE CORPS MODERNIZATION AND READINESS

[House Hearing, 115 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

[H.A.S.C. No. 115-15]

THE EFFECT OF SEQUESTRATION
AND CONTINUING RESOLUTIONS ON
MARINE CORPS MODERNIZATION
AND READINESS

__________

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON TACTICAL AIR AND LAND FORCES

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON ARMED SERVICES

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FIFTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

HEARING HELD

MARCH 10, 2017

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

25-047                         WASHINGTON : 2017
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800;
DC area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104 Mail: Stop IDCC,
Washington, DC 20402-0001

SUBCOMMITTEE ON TACTICAL AIR AND LAND FORCES

MICHAEL R. TURNER, Ohio, Chairman

FRANK A. LoBIONDO, New Jersey        NIKI TSONGAS, Massachusetts
PAUL COOK, California, Vice Chair    JAMES R. LANGEVIN, Rhode Island
SAM GRAVES, Missouri                 JIM COOPER, Tennessee
MARTHA McSALLY, Arizona              MARC A. VEASEY, Texas
STEPHEN KNIGHT, California           RUBEN GALLEGO, Arizona
TRENT KELLY, Mississippi             JACKY ROSEN, Nevada
MATT GAETZ, Florida                  SALUD O. CARBAJAL, California
DON BACON, Nebraska                  ANTHONY G. BROWN, Maryland
JIM BANKS, Indiana                   TOM O'HALLERAN, Arizona
WALTER B. JONES, North Carolina      THOMAS R. SUOZZI, New York
ROB BISHOP, Utah                     (Vacancy)
ROBERT J. WITTMAN, Virginia
MO BROOKS, Alabama
Jesse Tolleson, Professional Staff Member
Doug Bush, Professional Staff Member
Neve Schadler, Clerk

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page

STATEMENTS PRESENTED BY MEMBERS OF CONGRESS

Tsongas, Hon. Niki, a Representative from Massachusetts, Ranking
Member, Subcommittee on Tactical Air and Land Forces...........     2
Turner, Hon. Michael R., a Representative from Ohio, Chairman,
Subcommittee on Tactical Air and Land Forces...................     1

WITNESSES

Thomas, LtGen Gary L., USMC, Deputy Commandant for Programs and
Resources, U.S. Marine Corps...................................     4

APPENDIX

Prepared Statements:

Thomas, LtGen Gary L.........................................    29
Turner, Hon. Michael R.......................................    27

Documents Submitted for the Record:

[There were no Documents submitted.]

Witness Responses to Questions Asked During the Hearing:

[There were no Questions submitted during the hearing.]

Questions Submitted by Members Post Hearing:

Mr. Carbajal.................................................    46
Ms. Rosen....................................................    44
Ms. Tsongas..................................................    44
Mr. Turner...................................................    41

THE EFFECT OF SEQUESTRATION AND CONTINUING RESOLUTIONS ON MARINE CORPS
MODERNIZATION AND READINESS

----------

House of Representatives,
Committee on Armed Services,
Subcommittee on Tactical Air and Land Forces,
Washington, DC, Friday, March 10, 2017.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 9:04 a.m., in
room 2118, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Michael R.
Turner (chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. MICHAEL R. TURNER, A REPRESENTATIVE
FROM OHIO, CHAIRMAN, SUBCOMMITTEE ON TACTICAL AIR AND LAND
FORCES

Mr. Turner. Good morning. This hearing will come to order.
The subcommittee meets today to continue informing our
members and the public about the ongoing readiness crisis that
all of our military services find themselves in. Readiness
includes many things, such as end strength, training, and
modernization.
Today, we will focus on how sequestration and years of
continuing resolutions [CRs] in our budgetary process have
impacted the Marine Corps' ability to modernize the current
force to be ready and capable against current and emerging
threats. We will have a similar hearing planned with the Army
next week.
I would like to welcome our witness, Lieutenant General
Gary L. Thomas, the Deputy Commandant for Programs and
Resources, United States Marine Corps.
General Thomas, we thank you for your service, and we look
forward to receiving your important testimony today.
Today's hearing will allow us for a much deeper review of
the modernization and readiness challenges identified by the
Assistant Commandant of the Marine Corps [ACMC] during last
month's full committee hearing on the state of the military.
Based on his testimony, we know that the Marine Corps is not
only out of balance, but also lacks the necessary resources
needed to rebalance itself. This is a dangerous trend that we
must reverse for the Nation's expeditionary force in readiness.
As such, General Thomas has been asked to address and
identify: one, the near- and long-term impacts that continuing
resolutions and sequestrations are having on the Marine Corps'
ability to modernize and ready its forces; two, the specific
impacts to ground system and rotorcraft modernization programs;
three, the processes the Marine Corps is utilizing to
prioritize modernization requirements in order to address
immediate and near-term capability gaps in a budget-constrained
environment; four, where the Marine Corps should be focusing
its modernization strategies across the Future Years Defense
Programs in order to address anticipated security environments;
five, the potential resources that would be required to support
these strategies.
To be clear about these resources, the top line is the
issue. I support the President's commitment to rebuild the
military, as well as his early directive to Secretary Mattis
that, quote, ``to pursue peace through strength, it shall be
the policy of the United States to rebuild the United States
Armed Forces,'' close quote.
However, early reports indicate that the administration's
plan is to offer a budget of $603 billion as a base for defense
in fiscal year 2018. I agree with Chairman Thornberry that a 3
percent increase above President Obama's budget request from
last year is not enough. While we cannot repair all of the
damage done as a result of sequestration in a single year, we
can and should do more than this level of funding will provide.
For national security reasons, we cannot afford to wait
until 2019 to begin the process to rebuild our military. I look
forward to working with the administration in order to increase
the fiscal year 2018 budget to get as close as possible to the
$640 billion number referenced in Chairman Thornberry's views
and estimates letter that was sent to the Budget Committee.
Before we begin, I would like to turn to my good friend and
colleague from Massachusetts, Niki Tsongas, for any comments
that she might want to make.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Turner can be found in the
Appendix on page 27.]

STATEMENT OF HON. NIKI TSONGAS, A REPRESENTATIVE FROM
MASSACHUSETTS, RANKING MEMBER, SUBCOMMITTEE ON TACTICAL AIR AND
LAND FORCES

Ms. Tsongas. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and good morning.
And welcome, General Thomas. Thank you for making the time
to be with us today. We appreciate it.
Before we begin, I would be remiss if I didn't mention the
ongoing investigation into the unauthorized sharing of
photographs by marines and former marines. Let me be clear:
These actions are reprehensible, harmful to our military and
our national security, and detrimental to not just service
women, but to all service members and to the culture of our
Armed Forces.
We must strongly support those who had their rights and
privacy violated and make sure they have all the resources they
need. But we must also fully investigate these acts and bring
to justice those who violated the law and the rights of other
service members.
I appreciate the fact that the Military Personnel
Subcommittee will be receiving briefings from the Marine Corps
next week, and I look forward to hearing what the service is
doing to make sure that those responsible are held accountable.
Today's hearing on Marine Corps modernization provides this
subcommittee with an opportunity to hear testimony on the
effects of continuing resolutions and sequestration, an
important topic, and also gives us a chance to review several
major programs and consider how best to equip the Marine Corps
of the future.
While I look forward to getting into the details on a few
major programs, I would also like to discuss what seems like an
imbalance in the Marine Corps budget and, in particular, its
procurement accounts. Specifically, for many years, the Marine
Corps has requested and received vastly more funding for
procuring aircraft as compared to ground equipment. While the
Marine Corps certainly has a need for aircraft of many types,
the ratio of spending on aircraft compared to ground equipment
is striking.
The fiscal year 2017 budget request was no exception to
this trend. In it, the Marine Corps requested approximately
$1.5 billion for procurement of ground equipment and
ammunition. However, in the same President's budget [PB], it
requested $5.3 billion for just five aircraft programs: the F-
35B Joint Strike Fighter, the CH-53K King Stallion helicopter,
the V-22 Osprey, the AH-1 attack helicopter, and the KC-130
refueler.
While the individual aircraft programs in question are
likely very important when taken individually, the scale of the
imbalance, more than 3-to-1 in just this fiscal year, suggests
that upgrading aircraft is currently valued higher than
upgrading ground equipment. I have some concerns about this
ratio of spending on aircraft versus ground equipment, given
the Marine Corps' mission to be the premier force in readiness,
and the historical reliance that the Nation has placed on the
Marine Corps' role in ground combat.
I look forward to hearing more about how the Marine Corps
is making tradeoffs in its modernization efforts and what risks
are associated with those choices.
And, with that, I yield back. And I look forward to hearing
from you, General.
Mr. Turner. Thank you, Ms. Tsongas.
While not the subject matter of this hearing, I share Ms.
Tsongas' concern of the allegations of improper behavior from
marines.
A part of the great working relationship that Ms. Tsongas
and I have is the history of being the co-chairs of the Sexual
Assault Prevention Caucus for over the last 5 years. We have
been the major authors of every piece of legislation that has
been in the National Defense Authorization Act concerning this
issue.
It is one that is of grave concern to us, because no one--
no one--should feel as if they are in a compromising position
in serving their Nation. And we want to ensure that not just
those who have been subject to sexual assault, but those who
fear of the consequences and of the potential are protected.
We are beginning our work and our investigation today after
this hearing in a series of meetings that we have requested
with the Marines on a briefing on this matter. And I am certain
that our Sexual Assault Prevention Caucus will be very active
in looking not only, as Ms. Tsongas had said, for issues of
justice and accountability, but also ways in which we can
impact future actions and prevention.
With that, General, I turn to you on our subject matter.

STATEMENT OF LTGEN GARY L. THOMAS, USMC, DEPUTY COMMANDANT FOR
PROGRAMS AND RESOURCES, U.S. MARINE CORPS

General Thomas. Chairman Turner, Ranking Member Tsongas,
and distinguished members of the subcommittee, thank you for
the opportunity to appear before the subcommittee today. I am
honored to represent your Marines and testify on the effect of
sequestration and continuing resolutions on Marine Corps
modernization and readiness.
Our role as America's naval expeditionary force in
readiness informs how we man, train, and equip our force. It
also drives how we prioritize and allocate the resources that
we are provided by Congress.
As we have experienced budget cuts and fiscal uncertainty
over the past several years, we have prioritized the readiness
of our forward-deployed forces. But in order to maintain this
readiness, we have assumed risk in our nondeployed forces,
infrastructure sustainment, and, most critically,
modernization.
Over time, this has resulted in maintaining older or
obsolete equipment at higher cost and more operational risk. As
we continue to spend limited resources to sustain legacy
systems developed for threats of the past, we risked steadily
losing our competitive advantage against potential adversaries.
The future operating environment is characterized by
complex terrain, technology proliferation, information warfare,
the need to shield and exploit signatures, and an increasingly
nonpermissive maritime domain. The threats of the 21st century
demand a modernized force with new capabilities that complement
our traditional warfighting skills and equipment.
The Marine Corps has learned to live with less and to
manage the instability brought about by continuing resolutions
and sequestration. We will always strive to be good stewards of
what we are given and will generate the maximum readiness
possible with the resources provided. But to be prepared for
crisis response and contingency now and in the future, we must
invest to restore readiness and achieve the right balance of
capability and capacity.
The Marine Corps is short of the resources required to
effectively modernize, and we do not have the budget
predictability that would allow us to optimize the resources
entrusted to us by Congress. The uncertainty of the current
fiscal year and looming threat of BCA [Budget Control Act] caps
continue to disrupt our planning and directly challenge our
current and future readiness. With your help, we can begin to
overcome these challenges and ensure that the Marine Corps is
postured for the 21st century.
Again, thank you for the opportunity to appear before the
subcommittee, and I look forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of General Thomas can be found in
the Appendix on page 29.]
Mr. Turner. General Thomas, I understand that the Marine
Corps has conducted a bottom-up review entitled ``Marine Corps
Force 2025.'' It has identified several capability and capacity
gaps which need to be addressed. Would you please elaborate on
some of those findings? And, specifically, what levels of
additional funding would be required to begin addressing these
gaps?
And I want to emphasize the word ``required.'' We can't
wish our way into filling those gaps. And it is obviously an
issue of resources and not just the Marine Corps deciding to
undertake addressing them.
General Thomas.
General Thomas. Thank you, Congressman.
I would just begin by saying, you know, that we feel that
we are not optimized in our organization, training, and
equipment for the new operational environment----
Mr. Turner. I am sorry, General. Could you move closer to
the microphone? Because it is not registering you very well.
General Thomas. I am sorry.
The first thing I would say is that we feel that we are not
optimally organized, trained, or equipped to meet the emerging
operational environment.
One of the things that has occurred over the past 15 years
is the change in threat capabilities. And while we have
overmatch in most areas, we are seeing in some cases that our
potential adversaries are developing capabilities that rival
and in a few cases exceed our own.
The capability gaps that we have seen are largely in terms
of force protection first. If you look at some of our current
vehicles, they no longer are adequate for the types of threats
that they face in terms of protecting our marines. Programs
like the Joint Light Tactical Vehicle begins to get at that
threat, and new technologies like active protection systems
will assist us in going up against counter-armor capability.
The other challenge that we face in terms of capability
gaps is an emerging UAS [unmanned aircraft systems] threat, and
we have to be able to counter that capability. One of the ways
that we have to counter that is be able to find it, to ID
[identify] it. Again, we have a program in place with the G/
ATOR [Ground/Air Task Oriented Radar] radar that performs an
important piece of that kill chain function.
In terms of maneuver, our current amphibious vehicle is 40
years old. With the Amphibious Combat Vehicle [ACV], that
addresses that need.
And then, in terms of capacity, we have several shortages
in terms of munitions and then just numbers of ready aircraft
on the flight line. Many of our aircraft have met or even
exceeded their planned service life, and so, as a result, many
of those aircraft, much more than we would like, are in depot
maintenance, and that means less on the flight line. Again, we
have programs in place, in the JSF [Joint Strike Fighter] and
CH-53K in particular, to address those challenges.
In terms of additional resources that we need, we need
additional funds above the PB 2017 request. The ACMC, in his
testimony, talked about $4 billion, top line. But regardless of
the top line, what we are seeking to do is to modernize, and
then whatever is required to modernize, we would address other
areas appropriately.
Mr. Turner. General, I have stood in front of a bunch of F-
18s that were disassembled. Would you please speak as to how
your readiness in aircraft affects training and, therefore,
affects readiness in pilots? And also talk about the need for
growth in the Marine Corps and how that is accomplished and
measured as we look to increasing the size of the force.
General Thomas. Congressman, with the help of Congress over
the past few years, we have actually seen an uptick in
readiness. But, overall, the readiness of our aviation forces
as well as the number of pilot hours per month is still much
lower than we would like.
The readiness that we desire for aviation is about 75
percent of our fleet. Nominally, across the entire fleet, we
are down around 45 percent. And then the average flight hours
per pilot per month is, you know, about 10 hours or less. That
has----
Mr. Turner. Sorry. Could we go back for a second? You just
said you want to be at 75. You are at 40-what?
General Thomas. Forty-five percent.
Mr. Turner. Okay. But you began by saying we have been
improving. So, I mean, that is pretty abysmal. To have that be
closing the gap, we must have been in dire straits.
General Thomas. So, Congressman, I just wanted to
acknowledge that, you know, we have received some assistance
over the past few years from the Congress, and that has helped
some, but you are right, the gap is still very wide.
I think a lot of it just has to do with, you know, old
metal. You were talking about F-18s. That is the community that
I come from. A year ago, I was back in Beaufort walking the
flight line, similar to what you did. And I noticed an
airplane, a bureau number that I recognized that I had flown as
a first lieutenant----
Mr. Turner. Just one question. Still, I am struggling with
this. At 75, is that a reduced goal? I mean, because that is
still one in four, right?
General Thomas. No. Seventy-five percent readiness is a
reasonable readiness of, you know, aircraft across a fly line.
You are always going to have, you know, routine maintenance
that you are going to take airplanes off the fly line. So if
you have a 75 percent readiness rate, you can perform all of
your missions. Obviously, we are well below that.
Mr. Turner. Yeah, we are currently below half.
General Thomas. Correct.
Mr. Turner. Thank you.
Ms. Tsongas.
Ms. Tsongas. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
General, I would like to circle back to the question I
posed in my opening statement, and that is just how you are
thinking through the priority that the Corps has placed on
aviation assets in comparison to ground capabilities and just
get your take on what risks you see for the Marine Corps, given
that 3-to-1 ratio.
Do you believe these risks are manageable? And do you see
in the future the Marine Corps shifting the other way to focus
more modernization dollars on ground capabilities in the
future? Do you have a plan, you know, whatever, looking out, so
that you are covering all the necessary bases in order to meet
the challenges you have to confront?
General Thomas. Congresswoman, I would characterize how we
have allocated our modernization portfolio is balanced. We are
not balanced across the Marine Corps because we haven't been
able to put as much into modernization as we like because we
have been applying our resources writ large to near-term
readiness. But in terms of the resources that we have been able
to apply towards modernization, we do feel like we are
balanced.
We have several needs, both on the aviation side and on the
ground side. It is true that we have, you know, a 3-to-1 ratio
in terms of aviation versus ground, but a lot of that is just
the nature of aviation platforms and the relative expense to
ground equipment.
But if I could paint a picture, I would just say, on the
aviation side, you know, our CH-53Es are over 30 years old; our
F-18s are over 30 years old. On the ground side, you know, our
Amphibious Assault Vehicle, 40 years old; our LAVs [Light
Armored Vehicles], over 30 years old.
So we have programs in place to address all of those. We
haven't been able to, you know, modernize as quickly as we
could to get out of the old metal. But in terms of balance, we
feel that we have got it about right.
When we spoke, you know, the other day--you know, we are a
light, general-purpose force. One of the things that gives the
Marine Corps an advantage on the battlefield is its mobility
and its fires. Much of that comes from aviation. The ground
side in terms of fires, mobility, those are equally as
important. But if we were just to look, relatively, how we are
investing across aviation and ground, not looking at the cost,
although there are significant differences there, but in terms
of capability and capacity, we think we are balanced in that
area.
Ms. Tsongas. Well, do you foresee a time in which that
balance will have to shift a bit?
And, actually, in that context, I would just like to ask a
question about the CH-53K helicopter program related to cost.
So the original unit cost for this program in current-year
dollars was about $95 million. Last year's Selected Acquisition
Report for this program showed that its average unit cost had
increased 14 percent above the baseline estimate to $116
million. This week, the Marine Corps provided information to
the committee indicating that it is now projected to be 22
percent above the baseline estimate, which would be about $122
million a copy.
The Marine Corps intends to buy 200 of these aircraft. So
that cost growth multiplied by 200 is a heck of a lot of money.
And even if there is no additional cost growth, it seems worth
pointing out that $122 million per aircraft in 2006 dollars
exceeds the current cost of an F-35A aircraft for the Air Force
by a significant margin.
So, while I know this helicopter will provide the Marine
Corps a very unique and useful capability, I would like to ask
you two things. First, can the Marine Corps really afford 200
of such an expensive helicopter? And, second, in comparison to
how little the Marine Corps is spending on upgrading ground
combat equipment, does the scale of this investment in niche
aircraft capability make sense for the Marine Corps?
And, again, it gets back to that 3-to-1 ratio. And, again,
you know, given this helicopter, this aircraft, just the
extreme cost of one unit, at some point it seems to me there
might be an imbalance.
General Thomas. Congresswoman, we are always paying very
close attention to the cost. You mentioned the $122 million
price point. We anticipate that the unit recurring flyaway when
the aircraft begins full rate production will shrink below $89
million. That is still very expensive, and we are working very
hard with the program office and the vendor to keep the cost
down and to drive value for the taxpayer.
In terms of, you know, can we afford it, we do have a plan
within our top line that would account for the purchases of the
new aircraft that we desire.
In terms of getting back to your question about the
balance, we intend to address all of the concerns on the ground
side that I am sure we are going to discuss here in just a
moment. We have good programs in place, we believe, that meet
the capability requirements at reasonable cost to the taxpayer.
But we have found, both on the ground side and the aviation
side, is we simply don't have the resources to do, you know,
either one at the rate that we desire.
Ms. Tsongas. Well, I think it is worth bearing in mind that
this is a very costly aircraft, that you have large numbers in
mind. And while, yes, the impacts of sequestration have been
great, continuing resolutions great--and we will debate how
many much more investment we need to make in defending our
country--as a country, we also have many other needs. And we
have to bear that in mind as each service makes its
commitments.
So I thank you for your testimony, and I yield back.
Mr. Turner. Thank you.
In looking at the members who are currently in attendance
and the fact that we have votes at about 10:30, we have just
enough time for everyone to get a question in, as long as
everybody complies with the 5 minutes. So I am going to ask
people to be diligent in that.
And we will start first with Mr. LoBiondo.
Mr. LoBiondo. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
General, thank you and all the members of the Corps for
their service.
You started to tell us you were walking a flight line and
you spotted the plane that you flew or a model that you flew?
General Thomas. Congressman, you know, as aviators, when
you are in a squadron, you become familiar with the bureau
numbers of the airplanes that you have flown. So it was just a
bureau number that I recognized and had flown over many years
early in my career, and it was still in active service. So,
again, a good capability for the Nation; it is just that the
fact is the bones are old on some of these machines.
Mr. LoBiondo. So what plane was that?
General Thomas. It was an F-18.
Mr. LoBiondo. And how old was it?
General Thomas. It was 30-plus years old. I am not sure
exactly the age.
Mr. LoBiondo. Okay.
Can you tell us what the current state of readiness is for
the Marine Corps rotorcraft?
General Thomas. Congressman, as I mentioned, we have seen
some improvement over the past few years with some help from
Congress, but our readiness is still below where we would like
it to be.
Our number-one degrader, if you will, has been supply--
essentially, parts and the funding for that. We still take
aggressive steps to help recover that readiness. We have
conducted what we are calling independent readiness reviews for
all of the rotorcraft that we have. And we are also taking
steps to making sure that we are doing everything we can to
lower lifecycle costs.
An example of that would be what we are doing with the MV-
22. We have several different configurations of the airplane,
just as over time they roll off the line. They have different
parts. And we are seeking to drive that down to a common
configuration, which will drive down lifecycle costs over the
long term.
But in terms of certain airplanes, with Congressman Tsongas
we have already talked about the CH-53. Again, those airplanes
are greater than 30 years old, and we have flown them pretty
hard over the past 15 years in Afghanistan.
Mr. LoBiondo. General, what would you say would be the top
two or three unfunded readiness priorities that you have?
General Thomas. Our top three priorities, I would say, on
the ground side would be our Amphibious Combat Vehicle, it
would be the G/ATOR radar, and the Joint Light Tactical
Vehicle.
Mr. LoBiondo. Are we likely to make any progress with that
with what we are looking at here in the near future?
General Thomas. Congressman, we are making progress. Again,
we have programs in place--vehicles like the Joint Light
Tactical Vehicle, we have requested a number in 2017, and that
number will ramp up as we go out.
The challenge that we face is not having programs in place
that provide the capabilities that we need. The challenge that
we have is we simply don't have enough resources to buy them at
the rates that we desire. So the transition to new equipment is
very slow.
Mr. LoBiondo. Very slow. Okay. Thank you.
I yield back.
Mr. Turner. Ms. Rosen.
Ms. Rosen. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you, Ranking Member Tsongas.
And I really appreciate your being here today and
explaining all this to us.
What I would really like to ask on another question is
this. The Trump administration has suggested that we go from 24
infantry battalions to 36. What are the challenges to create
over a dozen--potentially a dozen new battalions? And how do
you see that fitting in with what you are going to ask for?
General Thomas. Congresswoman, I would characterize that
question this way--or the answer to that question is, as the
Commandant says, we do need to grow, because we need additional
capabilities primarily in areas such as cyber, EW [electronic
warfare], and additional intel [intelligence] capacity. Those
are the capabilities that we would grow as a part of growing
to, for example, the 185,000 that was approved through the NDAA
[National Defense Authorization Act].
We also have capacity challenges. Our deployment-to-dwell
ratio still remains very high. Prior to 9/11, I would say for
every deployment you had three times that period, you know, at
home. Our average, you know, dep-to-dwell is, you know, around
1 to 2.2 to 2.3. So growth would provide capacity as well.
But, to your question, you have to balance any growth with
the equipment that you need for those new people, the training
and infrastructure that is required to get those marines ready
for their particular mission, and then, of course,
modernization.
So the plan to grow in this year to 185K will give us
additional capability, primarily in those areas--cyber, EW, and
intel--that I mentioned, as well as some relief on capacity.
However, we will not grow any more--or we will only grow
relative to the additional resources that are provided.
One of the things that we are trying to do, getting back to
Congresswoman Tsongas' question, is we are trying to protect
our modernization accounts. Over the past, you know, several
years, with the BCA and sequestration, our investment in
modernization has been as low as 7 percent. In our request for
2018, we are going to raise it to 10 percent, and our goal is
to get to 15 percent of our portfolio in modernization.
All of those things impact our ability to grow. So we will
stay in balance, and then we will only grow as additional
resources become available.
Ms. Rosen. I have one more quick question. And you talked
about drones, the unmanned aerial flying. How does that reduce
the number of manned flights? And how do you work--I know it is
not a short answer, but doesn't it reduce the number of manned
flights, therefore reducing the amount of stress on the
aircraft?
General Thomas. It can. But, you know, whether you have an
unmanned, a UAS, or a manned aircraft, you are still putting,
you know, hours on that particular--so if it is a new unmanned
system, it is going to do fine. If it is an old unmanned
system, you are going to have some of the same challenges.
But, to your question, you know, we are always looking for
the right capabilities, and if that right capability is in an
unmanned system, then we are going to pursue that.
Ms. Rosen. Thank you.
Mr. Turner. Mr. Cook.
Mr. Cook. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
General, it is good to see you again. Thanks for answering
a lot of my questions that I brought up about reactive armor.
Part of the problem, at least from my perspective, is the
tempo of ops [operations]. And this has been around as long as
I can remember in the Marine Corps, when I was in there, and
that op plan--umpty ump, umpty ump, umpty ump, umpty ump. It
keeps going on and on and on.
You can only so do so much. And I always thought, when I
was a captain many years ago, that we were overly committed,
because we are going to do NEO [noncombatant evacuation
operation] ops, we are going to do this, this, and this. And
Congress is going to ask you and all the armed services to
continue to do that, because you do it well. But do we have to
be more realistic in terms of the impact of the sequester and
the fact that a lot of this equipment is aging and we have to
fix that stuff?
General Thomas. Congressman, you know, you brought up an
important point. In any equation, you know, we talk about
resources, but the other side of the equation is demand signal.
And the higher that demand signal is, you know, the greater--
you are going to use up your resources at a greater rate.
So that is clearly something that, you know, the Nation has
to consider. Where we, the Marine Corps, bases its requirements
on is based on what we have been asked to do and the missions
that we have been given by senior leadership.
Mr. Cook. Well, you know, many years ago, in 1966, I was at
Francis Marion. And we had an exercise where we actually went
over the side in the nets. Now, I know I am old, but this was a
ship that, basically, it was 11 years since World War II. But
now we are talking about aircraft and items that are around 30,
40 years. It is just almost incomprehensible, with the changes.
Anyway, readiness indicators. I think at least in my short
time on this committee, I think there has been more attention
to readiness indicators. I think congressional Members are
going to be asking more and more about why is it unit C-4 or C-
3; how come more units aren't C-1 and C-2?
And I think that pressure is going to continue, unless I am
wrong, because I say to myself, just like the previous
question, where the money should go. How are we going to bring
these units up to speed? Is it just money or--I think you
answered the question already--is it the supply block,
maintenance, everything else which had been overlooked?
And I know we had talked about this a little bit. How are
we going to correct that maintenance--General Dunford had
talked about this earlier. How are we going to fix--do we just
have to say ``time out''? We have to have our maintenance game
in play, or we are never going to get there?
General Thomas. Congressman, you alluded to it, but, I
mean, there are several factors that come into bear. A lot of
it is resources. Some of it is time. That is, you know, you use
your equipment and your people up--you know, there is a period
of time that is required to get the equipment and the people
back up into fighting standard.
And then the third aspect of it is just--it is
recapitalization. That is, we can apply resources to many of
our old pieces of equipment. And in many cases, we can continue
to use them for many years to come, but in some cases, there is
a diminishing return. That is, you are spending resources to
keep old equipment going, but you are getting less and less
return on investment.
Mr. Cook. Yeah.
Is the IG [inspector general] specifically looking at units
that are C-4 or C-3 on how to best solve that problem, with a
report to the Commandant?
General Thomas. I think there are a number of looks within
the naval aviation enterprise, the DOD IG. Many people are
looking at the areas that you describe in an attempt to provide
more clarity to the discussion and what would be required to
address those.
We feel like we have a good understanding of what is
required to address it, and you have alluded to some of those.
Mr. Cook. Thank you very much. Thank you for being here.
I yield back.
Mr. Turner. Mr. Carbajal.
Mr. Carbajal. Thank you, Mr. Chair and Ranking Member
Tsongas.
Thank you, Lieutenant General Thomas, for being here. It is
always a good day when marines are in the room, being a marine
myself.
You know, I also share what Ranking Member Tsongas shared,
her concerns about the denigration, the allegations that we
heard of the circulation of photographs regarding women
marines. It is very concerning. And I do hope that there is an
expeditious adjudication of the perpetrators and that they are
brought to justice as soon as possible.
To that end, General Thomas--Lieutenant General Thomas--it
is my understanding the Marine Corps has been working on
developing body armor that provide better fit and coverage for
female marines. There were some concerns that the Marine Corps
was just developing more sizes rather than developing female-
specific body armor.
Can you update this subcommittee on what approach the
Marine Corps is taking and where we are in terms of getting
these body armors to our female marines?
General Thomas. Thank you, Congressman.
The Marine Corps is committed to providing high-quality
force protection for all of its service members in terms of
form, fit, and function and regardless of gender.
One of the policy changes that have been made in terms of--
previously made in terms of how we, you know, build our force
protection equipment, we used to have sizes that would only be
from the 5 percentile to the 95 percentile of marines writ
large. The new policy is down to the 2 percentile female on one
end of the spectrum, all the way up to the 98 percentile male.
And the reason I highlight the male in this case is because we
have actually had, you know, males who were very, very large
and they didn't have adequate protection as well.
We think that we have two pieces of gear, primarily. We
have the plate carrier and the IMTV [Improved Modular Tactical
Vest]. The plate carrier, we think, is in a good position for
females and males. It is 2 pounds lighter. And we believe that
we have the right sizes for females as well as some of the
larger males.
The IMTV is an area that we have also added additional
sizes. One of the things that we found was that they were too
long, in some cases, in the small, medium, and large sizes. So
we have added, you know, a small short, a medium short, and a
large short, much like we do with our camouflage utilities.
And, if I could, you know, one of the things that
Congresswoman Tsongas and I discussed the other day, she had a
question about, you know, fit, specifically for females, and
one of the things I did learn is that the Army, you know, has--
in their particular sets, they have included some features that
will help fit a female. We continue to look at those, and we
are closely aligned with the Army, but we don't have those
specific features incorporated into our equipment yet.
Mr. Carbajal. Well, Lieutenant General Thomas, I would say
we should be, at the very least, at the same standards that the
Army has for adapting our armor for women. And I don't think it
bodes well for us to not be at least on par in appreciating our
female marines as the Army seems to be appreciating their women
soldiers.
So I just want to encourage us to get going, because it
just doesn't bode well. Especially when you consider incidents
that we are dealing with, the allegations that we are dealing
with, it just doesn't bode well for the type of institution we
want to portray to our country and women marines and females in
general.
So thank you.
Mr. Turner. Mr. Kelly.
Mr. Kelly. Thank you, Mr. Chairman and Ranking Member.
And thank you, Lieutenant General Thomas. And just for
shortness, I am just going to say ``General Thomas.'' I
understand you are a lieutenant general.
One of the things that Ms. Tsongas talked about was the
cost of the aircraft versus the ground stuff. Is some of that
just not the cost and procurement and research for a F-35
versus a Joint Light Tactical Vehicle?
I mean, the costs associated with those things on the
ground are just much cheaper whether you buy them on bulk. The
cost of an asset on the ground is generally cheaper than that
in the air. Is that correct or incorrect?
General Thomas. That is correct. I mean, you know, buying a
car as opposed to a 737, I mean, there is that difference that
you are going to have. So anything that flies nominally is
going to be more expensive.
But, you know, the question is a good one. That is, you
know, are we balanced across, you know, the very important
needs on the ground side as well as the aviation side.
Mr. Kelly. And I think we need to be very conscious to make
sure we keep those costs low, but it is just going to cost
more.
And then, once you have and procure that equipment, it
costs more to maintain an F-18 or an F-35 than it does those
ground vehicles also. Would that be correct?
General Thomas. That is correct.
Mr. Kelly. Now, going back, on the parts thing. And I have
served in the Army, so I understand parts stockage and a lot of
those things. Is our shortage of parts to keep our current
fleets, whether it be aircraft or ground vehicles, is it a
shortage of supply and not being able to get the parts? Is it a
shortage of dollars?
And how much do things like having OCO [Overseas
Contingency Operations] funding, as opposed to top-line
funding, affect your getting the correct stockage of parts to
fix it when it breaks, as opposed to having to have it on order
for 90 days?
General Thomas. I think, to your last question, you know,
we are very appreciative for OCO, and it helps us in many ways.
As you may well be aware, there are sometimes limitations
depending on the type of money that you get in terms of how you
can actually spend it. And then there is also the issue of lead
time for, you know, parts.
But I would just say, broadly speaking, we know what our
parts requirement is, and we know what the resources required
to get those parts. We just haven't been able to afford the
quantity that we have needed.
Mr. Kelly. So it is a dollars, not a production, it is a
dollars--in order to get the right stockage and to maintain
that to fix the vehicles when they----
General Thomas. By and large, that is correct.
Mr. Kelly. Okay.
And, I guess, during this period of reduced funding but not
reduced missions or OPTEMPO [operations tempo], what types of
investments has the Marine Corps sacrificed to sustain the
deployable readiness level of operational forces?
General Thomas. Congressman, we have, you know, sacrificed
several areas in terms of modernization. You know, our end
strength was kept down.
One area where we have particularly felt--and I expect the
other services have, as well--is in terms of home station
readiness. That is important, because your home station
readiness is your ready bench that is going to respond to
crisis as well as major contingency. And the effect of having
lesser home station readiness is that, when they do need to go
forward, there is going to be a delay, because they are not
going to either have the equipment or they are not going to
have the readiness that they need.
We have also seen sacrifices in terms of infrastructure
sustainment, some quality of life. But as we, you know, have
discussed already, I would say that the biggest sacrifices have
been in terms of modernization, whether it is our long-range
precision fires capabilities, some of the things we are trying
to do to counter UAS.
And then there is the aspect of maintaining older equipment
at a higher cost with a lesser return on investment. So there
is that aspect of it. You know, we didn't get that way
overnight. We are not going to get out of it overnight.
And, again, I would just emphasize what has changed, also,
in addition to the resource environment, is the threat
environment has changed. And that is just something that we are
going to have to deal with going forward.
Mr. Kelly. Mr. Chairman, I yield back. Thank you.
Mr. Turner. Thank you.
The order of the list is Bacon, Banks, Wittman, McSally.
Going to Mr. Bacon.
Mr. Bacon. Thank you, Chairman Turner.
I really appreciate General Thomas being here today. I have
to say for the record we have known each other since 2003,
classmates. And I happen to know him as a humble leader with
great character and morals, treats people great.
So it is an honor to see you here today.
I wanted to ask you a little more about the readiness
levels and the spending cuts that we have had, you know, in
recent years. And you have already mentioned the top
priorities, so I will move to my next one. What would you like
to do with electronic warfare if you were properly resourced?
What areas would you want to expand in?
General Thomas. I think, you know, we have--Congressman,
first of all, it is good to see you again, sir.
And in terms of electronic warfare, we have a pretty good
understanding and a plan for where we need to get on the
aviation side, you know, as part of the joint force and how we
fit into that and working with our joint partners.
Where we are seeing areas of growth is on the ground side.
And we are also seeing the nexus of cyber and EW. And it is
about providing the equipment that allows to you do that, but
also now the organization that gives you that capability as
well. As part of the 185K growth, the Commandant is growing
what he calls a MEF [Marine expeditionary force] information
group, and it will incorporate all the critical aspects of
information warfare, to include additional intel capacity,
cyber capacity, and, yes, the EW capability.
We do have, you know, some very good EW capability on the
ground side in terms of protection, you know, against IEDs
[improvised explosive devices] and so forth. But our
perspective is now broadening in terms of additional
capabilities that we would need when you are going force-on-
force and being able to counter some of the EW capabilities
that our adversaries are developing as well.
Mr. Bacon. So if I understand right, with a little more
resourcing, you are going to put a focus on cyber,
intelligence, EW.
And one other question for you. I was going to ask you a
little more about ISR [intelligence, surveillance, and
reconnaissance], but I think you just did that, to a degree.
With our readiness levels being where they are at, what I found
with all the services, and I believe the Marines too, we are
focused on responding to Syria, Iraq, the Middle East right
now. And that is what our focus area is for the folks back home
getting ready to deploy, focused on that direction.
How able are we to respond if we have a second trouble spot
blow up in the world, say, like North Korea? With your
readiness levels today, how are we positioned and what would be
the roadblocks you are going to have to cross to get a force
there quickly?
General Thomas. Congressman, I will keep my comments, you
know, more general in nature, but to paint a picture--and you
correctly described. You know, the units that we are sending
out the door today are trained to a high level, they are
equipped, they have got what they need. But we are seeing, as
you point out, a slow degradation of that ready bench. And that
has been going on for several years now.
The way that manifests itself, if you are talking a major
contingency operation, plans call for certain units at certain
times within so many days of a conflict beginning, and what we
are seeing is delays at which those particular units can meet
those. And, in some cases, those delays are significant.
Mr. Bacon. Well, thank you. When our readiness levels are
down, it undermines deterrence and it makes this world a more
risky place.
So, with that, I yield back, and I thank you for your
testimony today.
General Thomas. Good to see you, Congressman.
Mr. Turner. Mr. Banks.
Mr. Banks. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
General, thank you for being here today. Thanks for your
service.
You have made a compelling case overall today about the
impact of the chaotic congressional appropriation process
through funding the military through CRs, sequestration, the
BCA. And while, statistically, that testimony is very
compelling, I often find, as a new Member of Congress, as a
freshman on this committee, that the anecdotal evidence is
often even more compelling.
When I read about marines raiding museums for parts for
aircraft, or when I read stories about units from the
chairman's home State of Ohio having to cancel training
exercises in my home State of Indiana at Camp Atterbury because
of government shutdowns and CRs and the congressional process,
those anecdotal stories are often most compelling when I make
the case to constituents at home about what is wrong with the
processes here on Capitol Hill.
And I wonder if you can--first of all, can you confirm
those anecdotal examples? And give us more examples of the
second- or third-order effects of what does it mean when we
have to cancel a training exercise, what does it mean to morale
when we have to raid museums for parts for aircraft, for
example.
General Thomas. Congressman, I would just say--and,
generally, I mean, you know, the stories that you hear across
the joint force as anecdotes, and, you know, to the extent that
there are limits on anecdotes, but they are generally--they are
accurate. What I have found is, you know, marines, they want to
be marines, they want to be good at what they do, and they want
to be trained to a high level. Part of that is making sure they
have the resources for, you know, equipment, but training and
other things that you have articulated.
If I would characterize from a, you know, higher level just
some of the additional challenges that we face with, kind of,
the budget uncertainty, you know, it really makes it difficult
for us to plan. We don't have predictability, and we feel like
we are not optimizing the dollars that the Congress has
generously allocated to us.
It also slows our acquisition programs. In many cases, we
have got the right program, but we are purchasing things at the
minimum sustained rate. And what that means is that certainly
has an impact on our industry partners, but we pay a premium
for that. We are not achieving economic order quantities.
And then there are all sorts of authorities aspects that--
authorities that we can't use, depending on the vagaries of
budget challenges. For example, with the continuing resolution,
you know, we can't do any new starts. That affects our research
and development. It affects buying more quantities of a certain
capability, even if we have the money to do that.
And then, you know, as you have said, all of these things
together, the uncertainty forces us to focus on the 5-meter
target and focusing on that near-term readiness, but,
meanwhile, our ready bench is being eroded.
Mr. Banks. Thank you.
On a final note, can you comment, maybe briefly, about the
impact of these processes on the Reserve Component of the
Marines, the undue stress applied to your reservists?
General Thomas. I think, you know, at our level, it is all
about managing risk, and we have to manage risk across the
entire force. That has an impact on the Reserves, as well, in
terms of equipment and training and so forth.
You know, one of the things that we have, you know,
struggled with is we would actually like to engage our Reserves
more and send them on deployments. We just haven't been able to
afford the additional O&M [operations and maintenance]
required. You do pay a little bit of a premium to, you know,
call up the Reserves or to activate them and send them on
deployment, but we haven't been able to use that to provide
some dep [deployment] tempo relief to our Active Duty forces.
Mr. Banks. Thank you.
I yield back.
Mr. Turner. Mr. Wittman.
Mr. Wittman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Lieutenant General Thomas, thank you so much for joining
us. We appreciate your leadership. And I am very proud to have
Marine Corps Base Quantico in America's First District. We have
a lot of great marines there, a lot of great things that go on
there. So I appreciate that.
I wanted to talk to you about the AAV [Amphibious Assault
Vehicle] and subsequently the ACV. I had an opportunity a
couple weeks ago to visit Textron just outside of New Orleans,
who, as you know, is producing the new Ship-to-Shore Connector,
which is the replacement for Landing Craft Air Cushion, better
known as our LCACs. And we all understand how important for the
Marine Corps our connectors are.
You stated, though, that the AAV, which is a 40-year-old
platform, needs to be replaced immediately. And we know the
process we have gone through to get to the development of the
Amphibious Combat Vehicle. Can you tell me, in that context,
where we are with modernizing those connectors?
Tell me, where are we with the ACV? How important is it for
the Marine Corps and total Marine Corps doctrine today to have
a modernized connector that is used in conjunction with our
Ship-to-Shore Connectors in what the Marine Corps needs to do
and its mission statement on having that forced-entry
capability?
General Thomas. Thank you, Congressman.
To your first question about, you know, connectors, you
know, the Department of the Navy continues to invest in
connectors, you know, the Landing Craft Air Cushion, to keep
that, you know, relevant for many years to come. But we are
also looking towards new concepts, particularly for connectors
for things like Amphibious Combat Vehicle, for example.
As you know, you know, amphibious operations are all about
rapid buildup of combat power ashore, so speed is important.
The challenge that we learned from the Expeditionary Fighting
Vehicle is that when you optimize a vehicle for high water
speed, for example, you are sub-optimizing it for operations on
land. So we are no longer pursuing that with the Amphibious
Combat Vehicle.
But what we are looking at are concepts of, for example--
many concepts. One example would be, you know, essentially a
sled that the vehicle goes on, gives you that high water speed.
And then, once the vehicles are ashore, you now have the, you
know, armored protection and so forth that you need.
To your question about the Amphibious Combat Vehicle and
where it is, it is fully funded. It is on track for an IOC
[initial operating capability] of 2020. And, as you know, that
will be the first increment of the Amphibious Combat Vehicle.
We are doing a survivability upgrade on our legacy Amphibious
Assault Vehicles as a bridge to the second increment of ACV,
ACV 1.2.
Mr. Wittman. Very good.
Let me ask you, too, about amphibious lift. Obviously, our
Marine Corps has a requirement of 38 ships today. We are at 31.
As we talk about growing the fleet, it is not just about the
number of ships, but I believe it is also about fleet
architecture; it is the type of ships. Give me your perspective
on where we are today.
And there has been some discussion about a ship like the
LHA, the large-deck amphibious ship that does flight
operations. The Marine Corps has gone from having a ship that
doesn't have a well deck, now back to having a well deck, as
part of the Marine Corps expeditionary unit, that amphibious
readiness group that we know is so critical, as you pointed
out, to put marines forward.
Give me your perspective about fleet architecture when it
comes to our amphibious ships and the importance of, you know,
large-deck amphibious ship, and especially whether or not it
should have a well deck. Should it be a platform for aircraft?
Should it have that multicapability? Give me your perspective.
Because I know there has been a lot of question about maybe
replacing that with a smaller aircraft carrier like a CVL
[light carrier]. Give me the Marine Corps' perspective about
where that is.
General Thomas. Congressman, as you rightly point out, it
is important for us, when we talk about amphibious lift, what
are we trying to do? And, you know, the requirement is for a
two Marine expeditionary brigade of lift. And then within that,
you know, what is the proper balance between how much you are
going to fly, how much you are going to ride on, you know, your
amphibious vehicles and your connectors.
That is an ongoing discussion. As you know, the new big-
deck amphibs [amphibious ships] will have a well deck. And we
think that that is a proper balance between both aviation and,
you know, the additional space that you need for your ground
forces and those maneuver vehicles.
In terms of fleet architecture, as you know, the Department
of the Navy is doing several studies, which we are
participating in, writ large. And, again, when you look at
threat environment, dispersal, signature are all the things
that, you know, have to be considered, you know, going forward.
And those may inform, you know, other options that we haven't
previously considered.
From a Marine Corps perspective, though, the big-deck, you
know, amphib provides a tremendous value to the combatant
commander and the Nation.
Mr. Wittman. Very good.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Mr. Turner. Ms. McSally.
Ms. McSally. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you, General, for your testimony.
I want to talk about how you have had to go to ``The
Boneyard,'' which is in my district--which they don't like
using that word, by the way--the Aerospace and Maintenance
Regeneration Group, or AMARG, in order to bring aircraft out,
F-18s out, going to be upgraded to C-plus to address some of
the issues you have talked about today.
You know, given the fact that you have many squadrons who
are unable to have the parts and supplies to have a readiness
level for those units--and I was an A-10 pilot, just so you
know; I get those challenges and those numbers--are these
aircraft intended to be additive to the ones in the squadrons?
If you don't have parts for them, how are you going to have
parts for additional ones? Or are you swapping them out because
they have less flight hours on them? What is the cost? How is
that going? How many are you bringing out?
I mean, you have seen the reports of, you know, the Marine
Corps is dumpster diving, you know, to try and meet their
aviation needs. I wouldn't call AMARG a dumpster, but you can
see how this is sort of shocking to people who are looking at
what is going on, where our Marine Corps is having to go back
into, you know, those that were put into various stages of
preservation in order to meet its aviation needs.
General Thomas. Congresswoman, I would just say that when
you look across any type of model series, as you know, it is an
enterprise effort. And if you have shortages in certain areas,
the enterprise will make decisions where it makes sense to
harvest, you know, in this case could be parts or, in lesser
cases, with regard to the F-18, you know, the body of an
airplane that has still got service life on it.
And it just speaks to the broader point. It is old iron.
You have got an originally planned service life, you have had
multiple extensions approved by Naval Air Systems Command, and
you are just managing that risk.
And, in some cases, if you've got, you know, full aircraft
in AMARG or specific parts that are difficult to produce, the
subs have gone away for whatever reason, it is one of those
one-offs, you may choose to take advantage of that. Again, it
is----
Ms. McSally. But are you swapping out a lower flight-hour
aircraft with a higher one that is in a unit right now? There
are reports that there are 10 F-18s being refurbished this
year, up to a couple dozen total. Can you just give me an
update and the cost of how that is all happening?
General Thomas. So, you know, again, you are looking across
an enterprise of several hundred. I would say, in most cases,
you are not replacing, you know, airplanes anymore. I mean,
that was done several years ago. You may be taking components,
primarily, from those airplanes to repair----
Ms. McSally. So we are not taking airplanes out of AMARG?
General Thomas. Well, we are taking airplanes out of AMARG,
but what we are doing for it--that is, we are not taking an
airplane out of AMARG and it is necessarily full-up. We may
take components off of it. Or if you do have service life
remaining on it--but my understanding is that all of the
airplanes are, you know, high service time.
Ms. McSally. Right.
General Thomas. So if we have life on it, we are just
trying to get parts from----
Ms. McSally. Okay. This is confusing me now, because the
reports were saying that there was a contract with Boeing
specifically to take these aircraft, 10 this year, up to a
couple dozen total, upgrade them to the C-plus----
General Thomas. Right.
Ms. McSally [continuing]. And get them into operation. So
are you saying that is not happening?
General Thomas. No, that is happening.
Ms. McSally. Okay. And do you know the number, how many,
and the cost?
General Thomas. I don't know the cost. I can get that
information for you.
Ms. McSally. Okay.
[The information referred to was not available at the time
of printing.]
General Thomas. The number of 10 sounds correct. I would
check with General Davis.
Ms. McSally. Yeah, if you don't mind getting back to me on
that.
General Thomas. Okay.
Ms. McSally. Because, again, these are media reports saying
10 this year and a couple dozen total.
General Thomas. Yeah.
Ms. McSally. It would just be helpful to understand.
General Thomas. Okay.
Ms. McSally. And, again, you know, I had a squadron of--
needed to get 24 airborne to deploy. I had 27 to make 24. Like,
they didn't give me 30 to make 24 when we had, you know, a
backlog in parts. So I am just trying to understand, are you
adding so squadrons have more airplanes that are, you know,
more of them sitting unable to fly? Or how----
General Thomas. You have got many squadrons sitting in
Beaufort that are remained behind that, you know, they have
maybe half to two-thirds of the actual shadows that they are
supposed to have on the flight line.
Ms. McSally. Right.
In the parts of the readiness we are talking about here
with these pilots flying 10 hours a month, I mean, those hours
are meaningless to me; it is what kind of actual missions you
are training on that matter. Is it related to flight-hour
money, or is it all about the parts and the backlog?
General Thomas. It is the parts and the backlog. It is the
aircraft.
Ms. McSally. Okay.
Are you seeing a pilot retention issue? There are push and
pull factors. Are you seeing any----
General Thomas. Today, we have all the pilots that we have.
We are concerned that we may have some challenges going forward
based on the plans of the airlines going forward.
Ms. McSally. Okay.
General Thomas. And, you know, again, you know, quality of
life for our marines, you know, a piece of quality of life is
giving the marines----
Ms. McSally. Doing your job.
General Thomas [continuing]. The equipment--exactly.
Ms. McSally. Yeah. I get it. So I look forward to working
with you more on this, because I think there are going to be
some push factors.
And I am over my time. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Turner. Thank you, General. Thank you for appearing
before us today.
We will be adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 10:11 a.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]

=======================================================================

A P P E N D I X

March 10, 2017

=======================================================================

PREPARED STATEMENTS SUBMITTED FOR THE RECORD

March 10, 2017

=======================================================================

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

=======================================================================

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MEMBERS POST HEARING

March 10, 2017

=======================================================================

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MR. TURNER

Mr. Turner. General Thomas, you obviously have some significant
challenges before you with respect to modernizing your ground combat
vehicle fleets. The Amphibious Assault Vehicles are more than 40 years
old. Your Light Armored Vehicle fleet is on average 26 years old, and
your M1 Abrams tanks are over 30 years old. I understand that as a
result of budget constraints you have had to defer modernization
efforts and are making incremental improvements to current systems. How
would additional resources in FY17 and FY18 help in accelerating ground
combat vehicle modernization?
General Thomas. In order to maintain balanced investment relative
to other capabilities, the Marine Corps deliberately planned to
selectively and sequentially modernize the combat and tactical vehicle
fleets. Achieving a comprehensive modernization of the assault
amphibian capability remains the highest priority within the portfolio.
Selective High Mobility Multipurpose Wheeled Vehicle (HMMWV)
replacement via the first increment of the Joint Light Tactical Vehicle
(JLTV) program has been timed to field to the elements of the light
combat portion of the fleet most at risk in conjunction with the first
phase of Amphibious Combat Vehicle (ACV) program. This approach enables
an affordable, incremental modernization of the two most pressing gaps
within the ground combat and tactical vehicle portfolio. All vehicle
modernization programs are funded to support their acquisition
strategies and require stable funding in order to execute effectively.
There is also potential to accelerate the second increment of the JLTV
program with additional procurement funding in FY20 and beyond, after
completing low rate initial production. Additional RDT&E funding in
FY18 and beyond will help to accelerate a critical element of
modernization, the development of Vehicle Protection Systems for tanks
and ACVs in order to increase force protection and survivability
against increasing proliferated anti-tank guided missiles.
Mr. Turner. It's my understanding the Army and Marines are
currently testing vehicle active protection systems (APS) for possible
use on a range of combat vehicles. The current Marine APS technology
demonstration effort, as understood, involves installing an existing
Israeli Trophy APS on the M1A1 tank in conjunction with the Army's
ongoing Expedited APS Non Developmental Item testing. Please describe
your ongoing APS tests and your plans for the rest of the fiscal year.
What are some of the challenges you have come across during testing as
well as some of your successes?
General Thomas. Your understanding is accurate. The Marine Corps
evaluation of Trophy is a technology demonstration to understand the
potential operational application and feasibility of installation and
integration of the Trophy Active Protection System on the USMC M1A1
Abrams. The Marine Corps is working closely with the Army's expedited
APS effort and our evaluation is complementary to the Army evaluation
of Trophy as applied to the M1A2SEP v2. The Marine Corps' effort
involves developing a technical package for an installation kit for
USMC M1A1, installing the Trophy system, assessing Human Systems
Integration analysis with Marine operators, experimenting and testing
the M1A1 with APS in order to capture unique operational, employment
and platform specific challenges and requirements as well as MAGTF
integration opportunities and challenges, and using lessons learned to
inform requirements and future deliberate acquisition and integration
programs. To date, we have completed the analysis, design and
fabrication of a suitable installation kit as well as leveraging the
Army's radar testing and tuning. The Marine Corps evaluation of the
system integrated on a M1A1 Abrams is planned to start at the end of
April and continue through the end of July. The initial focus will be
assessing the suitability of the Trophy systems integration by
performing a user evaluation, assessing stabilization, target tracking,
slew rate, physical characteristics, bonds and grounds, and main gun
live fire. Subsequently, live fire events will characterize the Trophy
system's effectiveness while installed on the M1A1 Abrams. These events
will assess system performance related to fields of fire and fields of
view, and target tracking. The primary focus of efforts to date has
been to rapidly create a suitable installation kit for the Trophy
system and address immediate technical challenges to ensure the system
can function as intended when installed on the M1A1 Abrams. The M1A1
current turret design is not optimized for the installation of the
Trophy system, resulting in reduced fields of view for the tank
commander, interference with the employment of the Stabilized
Commander's Weapon Station, required relocation of the CREW system and
relocation of several other components. The planned evaluations, which
will help inform how critical it is to address these challenges, will
be the focus of development and integration efforts during fiscal year
2018.
Mr. Turner. We've heard testimony that the most serious readiness
concerns are found in aviation units. There's a direct correlation here
to modernization. General Thomas, how have continued fiscal constraints
caused by sequestration and continuing resolutions affected Marine
Corps aviation modernization strategies, and if additional funding were
available, what programs would the Marine Corps invest in?
General Thomas. Lowered budgets have shallowed procurement
profiles, delayed introduction of the F-35B/C, and CH-53K and forced
the DON to accept risk in Naval Aviation modernization. Meanwhile,
sustained operational demand over the last 15 years has prematurely
aged our aircraft, kept them forward deployed, and flown them on harder
missions at longer ranges. With additional funding, Marine aviation
could simultaneously improve aviation readiness by investing in and
accelerating its transition to new platforms. For example, by
increasing and optimizing the F-35 ramp rate to the desired and
executable amount of aircraft that could be procured, Marine aviation
will transition from legacy TACAIR platforms to F-35 five years ahead
of forecast. Additionally, Marine aviation will continue to fully fund
the readiness accounts towards executable levels across the FYDP.
Although readiness accounts will improve with funding, they remain a
concern and require full funding in future years.
Mr. Turner. During this period of reduced funding, but not reduced
missions or operational tempo, what types of investments has the Marine
Corps sacrificed to sustain the deployable readiness levels of the
operating forces?
General Thomas. The combination of inconsistent funding and the
continuously high operational tempo has frustrated the Marine Corps'
modernization efforts. Operational tempo is not expected to slow and
the readiness of deployable forces remains a top priority. That
readiness comes at the cost of much needed modernization.
The pace at which we modernize is completely dependent on available
resources. With fiscal limitations, we have made the conscious decision
to work within the construct of 185,000 end strength (185K). Therefore,
we have decided to focus our modernization efforts on:

The Amphibious Assault Vehicle (AAV) survivability
upgrade. This will continue to provide a ship to shore self-deploying
capability bridge until we have replacement for our 40 year old AAVs.

The Amphibious Combat Vehicle (ACV) 1.1, which is our
first step in an incremental approach to replacing those AAVs.

The Joint Light Tactical Vehicle (JLTV), a joint USMC/
U.S. Army program to procure the next generation replacement for the
venerable High Mobility Multipurpose Wheeled Vehicle (HMMWV).

Common Aviation Command and Control System (CAC2S) and
Ground/Air Task Oriented Radar (G/ATOR) which will provide an ability
to control our airspace enabling freedom of action to employ our
organic weapons with the speed and tempo that makes the Marine Air
Ground Task Forces successful.

Networking-On-The-Move (NOTM) and MQ-21A Blackjack a
small tactical unmanned aircraft system (UAS) are some of the new
capabilities that we must buy to support the IW enablers.

Increase our quantities of Communications Emitter Sensing
and Attack Systems (CESAS II) and Intrepid Tiger II, an airborne
communications-band electronic attack pod, in order to support
increases in end strength.
However, the aforementioned investments come at the expense of the
other 150+ programs in need of sustainment and modernization. In most
cases lower priority programs are underfunded, not procured to the full
identified requirement, or not sustained at a level that would be
expected for the Nation's crisis response force.
While not a direct investment sacrifice, the Marine Corps has made
the following adjustments to rotational force allocations in order to
recover readiness for the operating forces to better meet major
contingency operation response requirements:

Reduced MV-22 and KC-130 allocations for Crisis Response
SPMAGTF's in CENTCOM and AFRICOM by 50% and 25%, respectively.

Reduced a future VMFA squadron deployment in the CENTCOM
AOR from approximately 6 months to 3 months.

Replaced a recent VMFA squadron deployment with a VMA
squadron in order to facilitate readiness recovery in the FA-18
community. Temporarily reduced the flightline entitlement for deploying
VMFA squadrons from 12 to 10 aircraft in order to facilitate readiness
recovery in the FA-18 community.
Mr. Turner. Modernization not only deals with next generation
platforms and technology, but also has a direct correlation to
capacity. Regarding long range precision fires, munitions, and
ammunition, are you currently experiencing any inventory shortfalls,
and if so, what are the plans to address them?
General Thomas. The vast majority of USMC ground ammunition
inventories are sufficient to satisfy the Total Munitions Requirement.
However, baseline funding is insufficient to replace training
expenditures and modernize munitions leading to an increase in
projected shortfalls. Additional funding was requested for FY17-
Amendment that will help with capacity concerns and improve the
outlook. The War Reserve Munitions Requirement is prioritized over
training and has minimal shortfalls. Additional efforts are underway to
reduce training ammunition expenditures to a level that is fiscally
feasible while ensuring readiness levels maintain acceptable risk. The
Guided Multiple Launch Rocket System (GMLRS) is the Marine Corps long-
range precision fires capability. The GMLRS Alternative Warhead (AW) is
an area-effects rocket designed to replace the GMLRS Dual Purpose
Improved Conventional Munition (DPICM), which is leaving the inventory
due to policy restrictions. The Marine Corps began procurement of GMLRS
AW in FY15. With FY17 funding, we have a sustainable path to reaching
the Total Munition Requirement for this munition in the mid-2020s.
However, there will be some risk to Marine Corps long-range area
effects capability as GMLRS DPICM will be removed from the inventory (1
January 2019 per current U.S. Policy on Cluster Munitions) prior to
GMLRS AW reaching the Total Munitions Requirement. Shortfalls of
critical aviation weapons do exist, but are being mitigated through the
use of inert training weapons and simulation. Additionally, Overseas
Contingency Operation (OCO) funding has been helpful, but late to need,
in further mitigating inventory shortfalls. We expect these shortfalls
to continue into FY18 due to the existing constrained inventory and
unplanned expenditures in support of OIR. Efforts are underway to
pursue maintenance and repair of the existing weapon inventory, which
will improve life cycle sustainment at significant cost avoidance when
compared to new weapons procurement.
Mr. Turner. The Marine Corps has had numerous security cooperation
engagements in recent years. In light of current readiness and deferred
modernization shortfalls, do you believe that this type of activity is
valuable in the long-term, or should they be deferred and the savings
put back into efforts such as modernizing equipment and facilities
maintenance?
General Thomas. The Marine Corps continually seeks to increase
efficiencies in security cooperation activities. No single Service--or
country--has the capability or capacity to be everywhere at once. In an
ambiguous security environment, faced with hybrid warfare, we stay
ahead of our adversaries by partnering with our allies and partners.
Marine security cooperation enables and sets the force up for success
in crisis response, contingencies, and major combat operations. The
Marine Corps engages with foreign partners to enable their forces to
operate with ours, to provide access for Marine power projection, to
build relationships that support strategic objectives, and develop
Service operational capabilities with minimal impact to readiness. Our
engagements maintain interoperability with capable partners who will
share our battlespace, ensure our forces can get to the fight--at any
clime or place--are trained and ready when they arrive, and can
alleviate the need for or improve the lethality of the Marine Corps. In
many ways, security cooperation is what we excel at: partnering in
peacetime to help the nation avoid war, but prevailing together with
our partners when conflict arises. Reducing security cooperation
activities would undermine the interoperability forged with allies and
partners through over a decade of conflict, threatens Marine access and
basing established through trust and sustained engagement, and
jeopardizes forward-training bases and ranges that ensure our forces
are operationally ready for any fight.
Mr. Turner. Staying in line with the specific focus of this
hearing, what are your top three ground force modernization priorities,
and are they currently fully funded?
General Thomas. The Amphibious Combat Vehicle (ACV), Joint Light
Tactical Vehicle (JLTV), and the Ground/Air Task Oriented Radar (G/
ATOR) are the Marine Corps' top ground acquisition priorities, although
G/ATOR will support the entire MAGTF in ground and aviation mission
sets. While these programs will be in full rate production over the
next five years, the Marine Corps will also be taking every opportunity
to address other modernization priorities, wherever possible, to ensure
we remain a Lethal Force with a 21st century approach to combined arms
that integrates information warfare, long-range precision fires, and
air defense and seeks to destroy and defeat our enemies across five
domains--air, land, sea, space, and cyberspace. These three
modernization programs are funded to support their acquisition
strategies assuming stable funding remains available.
Mr. Turner. Currently, the Amphibious Combat Vehicle Increment 1.1
(ACV 1.1) is in the preliminary stages of Engineering Manufacturing and
Development (EMD) testing with the current schedule requiring about 12
to 14 months of testing and an operational assessment in the 2nd
Quarter of FY 2018. If the operational assessment proves successful,
the Marine Corps would then down-select to one vendor in August 2018 to
provide 204 vehicles and achieve an initial operational capability
(IOC) in FY 2020. While admittedly this is an aggressive schedule, if
additional resources are made available in FY 2017 and beyond, is there
potential to achieve an earlier IOC for ACV 1.1 and perhaps accelerate
the development of ACV 1.2?
General Thomas. Additional resources in 2017 would not accelerate
the program. Through the efforts of OSD and all other stakeholders, the
aggressive ACV 1.1 schedule (currently fully funded) has been designed
to field a much needed capability as quickly as possible, while
solidifying the requirements and path forward for ACV 1.2.
______

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MS. TSONGAS
Ms. Tsongas. The question involves the Amphibious Assault Vehicle
Survivability Program. In the annual report, the Director pointed out
that ``additional armor coupon testing is required to fully
characterize all areas of the crew-occupied space against the expected
range of threats'' and that ``due to the lack of sufficient quantity of
armor coupons'' the Program Office deferred the additional armor
characterization to later in the program. Is the additional armor
coupon testing recommended by the Director is going to happen when he
recommends, and if not, why not? Also, if this is a funding issue, can
Congress help by providing additional funds through a reprogramming
action or some other way?
General Thomas. The armor coupon issue on AAV SU was worked out to
DOT&E satisfaction when the Program Office proposed the use of an EMD
vehicle to conduct all of the remaining testing, as opposed to
additional coupons. DOT&E is using the full vehicle exploitation and
characterization testing conducted from January through March of this
year to meet their testing requirements. There is no additional funding
required at this time.
______

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MS. ROSEN
Ms. Rosen. During this period of reduced funding, but not reduced
missions or operational tempo, what types of investments has the Marine
Corps sacrificed to sustain the deployable readiness levels of the
operating forces? How do we balance combat readiness with cyber
readiness?
General Thomas. The combination of inconsistent funding and the
continuously high operational temp has frustrated the Marine Corps'
modernization efforts. Operational tempo is not expected to slow and
the readiness of deployable forces remains a top priority. That
readiness comes at the cost of much needed modernization.
The pace at which we modernize is completely dependent on available
resources. With fiscal limitations, we have made the conscious decision
to work within the construct of 185,000 end strength (185K). However,
the Marine Corps' revised POM-18 submission is insufficient to maintain
either the 185K end strength or for modernizing equipment within an
acceptable timeline. The Marine Corps would require an estimated
increase of approximately $5B more per year in order to modernize
within an acceptable timeline for the 185K force. Therefore, we have
decided to focus our modernization efforts on:

The Amphibious Assault Vehicle (AAV) survivability
upgrade. This will continue to provide a ship to shore self-deploying
capability bridge until we have replacement for our 40 year old AAVs.

The Amphibious Combat Vehicle (ACV) 1.1, which is our
first step in an incremental approach to replacing those AAVs.

The Joint Light Tactical Vehicle (JLTV), a joint USMC/
U.S. Army program to procure the next generation replacement for the
venerable High Mobility Multipurpose Wheeled Vehicle (HMMWV).

Common Aviation Command and Control System (CAC2S) and
Ground/Air Task Oriented Radar (G/ATOR) which will provide an ability
to control our airspace enabling freedom of action to employ our
organic weapons with the speed and tempo that makes the Marine Air
Ground Task Forces successful.

Networking-On-The-Move (NOTM) and MQ-21A Blackjack a
small tactical unmanned aircraft system (UAS) are some of the new
capabilities that we must buy to support the IW enablers.

Increase our quantities of Communications Emitter Sensing
and Attack Systems (CESAS II) and Intrepid Tiger II, an airborne
communications-band electronic attack pod, in order to support
increases in end strength.
However, the aforementioned investments come at the expense of the
other 150+ programs in need of sustainment and modernization. In most
cases lower priority programs are underfunded, not procured to the full
identified requirement, or not sustained at a level that would be
expected for the Nation's crisis response force.
While not a direct investment sacrifice, the Marine Corps has made
the following adjustments to rotational force allocations in order to
recover readiness for the operating forces to better meet major
contingency operation response requirements:

Reduced MV-22 and KC-130 allocations for Crisis Response
SPMAGTF's in CENTCOM and AFRICOM by 50% and 25%, respectively.

Reduced a future VMFA squadron deployment in the CENTCOM
AOR from approximately 6 months to 3 months.

Replaced a recent VMFA squadron deployment with a VMA
squadron in order to facilitate readiness recovery in the FA-18
community.

Temporarily reduced the flightline entitlement for
deploying VMFA squadrons from 12 to 10 aircraft in order to facilitate
readiness recovery in the FA-18 community.
Lastly, ``Cyber readiness'' is inherent to ``combat readiness.''
All warfighting functions are increasingly dependent on freedom of
action in cyberspace--operating and defending our systems and networks,
and projecting power through cyberspace. The Marine Corps--Operating
Forces enabled by the Supporting Establishment--require resilient and
responsive cyberspace operations capabilities for mission
accomplishment. Without freedom of action in cyberspace, our ability to
plan operations, deploy and sustain Marines, find and fix targets,
conduct fires, and command and control forces would be severely
compromised.
Ms. Rosen. General, you named electronic warfare, cyber, and
intelligence capabilities as areas requiring the most growth in
response to my question about the equipment-related challenges
associated with standing up an additional 12 active duty infantry
battalions and growing the Marine Corps writ-large. How does the Marine
Corps plan to balance equipping new units, while also continuing to
modernize in a budget constrained environment?
General Thomas. With the additional 3,000 Marines added to our end
strength in the FY17 NDAA, we look to close some of our capability gaps
by investing in the Information Warfare, Long Range Precision Fires,
and Air Defense communities. However, the current budget constraints
will not allow us to sufficiently modernize even this 185,000 person
force. Additionally, these increased capabilities will not meet the
Marine Corps' desired capacity for a 1:3 deployment to dwell ratio.
Growing the Marine Corps past 185,000 would help mitigate dwell issues,
but we risk building a hollow force if no modernization funding
accompanies the growth. With fiscal limitations, we have made the
conscious decision to work within the construct of 185,000 end strength
(185K). However, the Marine Corps' revised POM-18 submission is
insufficient to maintain either the 185K end strength or for
modernizing equipment within an acceptable timeline. Therefore, we have
decided to focus our modernization efforts on:

The Amphibious Assault Vehicle (AAV) survivability
upgrade. This will continue to provide a ship to shore self-deploying
capability bridge until we have replacement for our 40 year old AAVs.

The Amphibious Combat Vehicle (ACV) 1.1, which is our
first step in an incremental approach to replacing those AAVs.

The Joint Light Tactical Vehicle (JLTV), a joint USMC/
U.S. Army program to procure the next generation replacement for the
venerable High Mobility Multipurpose Wheeled Vehicle (HMMWV).

Common Aviation Command and Control System (CAC2S) and
Ground/Air Task Oriented Radar (G/ATOR) which will provide an ability
to control our airspace enabling freedom of action to employ our
organic weapons with the speed and tempo that makes the Marine Air
Ground Task Forces successful.

Networking-On-The-Move (NOTM) and MQ-21A Blackjack a
small tactical unmanned aircraft system (UAS) are some of the new
capabilities that we must buy to support the IW enablers.

Increase our quantities of Communications Emitter Sensing
and Attack Systems (CESAS II) and Intrepid Tiger II, an airborne
communications-band electronic attack pod, in order to support
increases in end strength.
However, the aforementioned investments come at the expense of the
other 150+ programs in need of sustainment and modernization. In most
cases lower priority programs are underfunded, not procured to the full
identified requirement, or not sustained at a level that would be
expected for the Nation's crisis response force.
______

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MR. CARBAJAL
Mr. Carbajal. General Thomas, it is my understanding the Marine
Corps has been working on developing body armor that provide better fit
and coverage for female Marines. There were some concerns that the
Marines Corps was just developing more sizes rather than developing
female-specific body armor. Can you update this sub-committee on what
approach the Marine Corps is taking and where we are in terms of
getting these body armors to our female Marines? Why isn't the Marine
Corps taking the same approach as the Army?
General Thomas. The Marine Corps fits our female Marines with the
best personal protection systems available. The Plate Carrier (PC) is
the primary body armor system for the Marine Corps. The PC is 3.5lbs
lighter and provides better form, fit, and function to female Marines
than the Army's Female Improved Outer Tactical Vest (FIOTV). The female
specific modifications made to the FIOTV are either already
incorporated in the Marine Corps' PC or are in areas that were removed
from the Army's PC, which provides a better fit overall for the entire
population of Marines. Fit studies conducted by the Marine Corps
throughout 2015 and 2016, focusing on our body armor systems, have
shown that Marines and Soldiers (both female and male) prefer the
Marine Corps PC to the Army's IOTV/FIOTV and their new Modular Scalable
Vest (MSV)(replacing the IOTV) in form, fit, and function.
In 2013, the Marine Corps received the results of a comprehensive
anthropometric survey of U.S. Marines conducted through the Natick
Soldier Research, Development and Engineering Center. The survey
incorporated (94) directly-measured dimensions, (39) derived dimensions
and 3D scans of 1,301 male and 620 female Marines. This survey provides
the large body of data needed to inform the Marine Corps' design and
engineering needs and is the basis of the physical measurements used to
inform the design of personnel protective and load bearing equipment,
as well as clothing and individual warfighter equipment to accommodate
small-statured (2nd percentile) females through large-statured (98th
percentile) males. In the rare cases where a Marine falls outside of
the 2nd percentile female and 98th percentile male parameters, the
Marine Corps procures custom sized uniforms and equipment to ensure the
Marine is properly fitted with mission essential capabilities.
The Marine Corps is currently developing the Plate Carrier,
Generation III (PC Gen III). The PC Gen III is less bulky, lighter in
weight, and provides a smaller overall footprint than the current PC
while maintaining the same soft armor coverage and protection level. It
is 1.5" shorter than the current PC, provides reduced shoulder width
for a better shoulder and weapon stock weld, and has graded shoulder
strap lengths to better accommodate smaller and larger Marines. PC Gen
III will accommodate the 2d percentile female to 98th percentile male
and will be 4.8 lbs lighter and 2" shorter than the FIOTV. The Army is
currently evaluating the PC Gen III as a potential solution for their
Soldier Protection System Increment II vest. With the information
developed through multiple fit studies of the plate carrier systems,
neither the Army nor Marine Corps plan to make female specific variants
of their future body armor systems.
The Marine Corps has a standing Improved Personal Protective
Equipment System (IPPES) Integrated Product Team (IPT) to develop
requirements for the next generation of personal protective equipment.
The U.S. Army Maneuver Center of Excellence is an active participant in
the IPPES IPT, and both services continue to work hand-in-hand in our
research and development efforts for individual combat and personal
protective equipment--particularly with regards to female Marines/
Soldiers.

[all]
