- [H.A.S.C. No. 115-35] EVALUATING THE DEFENSE CONTRACT AUDITING PROCESS

[House Hearing, 115 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

[H.A.S.C. No. 115-35]

EVALUATING THE DEFENSE CONTRACT AUDITING PROCESS

__________

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT AND INVESTIGATIONS

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON ARMED SERVICES

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FIFTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

HEARING HELD

APRIL 6, 2017

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

25-151                         WASHINGTON : 2017
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800;
DC area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104 Mail: Stop IDCC,
Washington, DC 20402-0001

SUBCOMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT AND INVESTIGATIONS

VICKY HARTZLER, Missouri, Chairwoman

K. MICHAEL CONAWAY, Texas            SETH MOULTON, Massachusetts
MATT GAETZ, Florida                  TOM O'HALLERAN, Arizona
JIM BANKS, Indiana                   THOMAS R. SUOZZI, New York
LIZ CHENEY, Wyoming                  (Vacancy)
AUSTIN SCOTT, Georgia
Matthew Sullivan, Professional Staff Member
Barron YoungSmith, Counsel
Anna Waterfield, Clerk

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page

STATEMENTS PRESENTED BY MEMBERS OF CONGRESS

Hartzler, Hon. Vicky, a Representative from Missouri, Chairwoman,
Subcommittee on Oversight and Investigations...................     1
Moulton, Hon. Seth, a Representative from Massachusetts, Ranking
Member, Subcommittee on Oversight and Investigations...........     2

WITNESSES

Bales, Anita F., Director, Defense Contract Audit Agency, Under
Secretary of Defense (Comptroller).............................     3
Berteau, Hon. David, President and Chief Executive Officer,
Professional Services Council..................................    15
Panetta, John, National Secretary, Financial Executives
International..................................................    17
Thomas, James, Assistant Vice President of Policy, National
Defense Industrial Association.................................    19

APPENDIX

Prepared Statements:

Bales, Anita F...............................................    33
Berteau, Hon. David..........................................    52
Hartzler, Hon. Vicky.........................................    29
Moulton, Hon. Seth...........................................    31
Panetta, John................................................    68
Thomas, James................................................    87

Documents Submitted for the Record:

[There were no Documents submitted.]

Witness Responses to Questions Asked During the Hearing:

Mrs. Hartzler................................................   101

Questions Submitted by Members Post Hearing:

Mrs. Hartzler................................................   105

EVALUATING THE DEFENSE CONTRACT AUDITING PROCESS

----------

House of Representatives,
Committee on Armed Services,
Subcommittee on Oversight and Investigations,
Washington, DC, Thursday, April 6, 2017.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 9:00 a.m., in
room 2212, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Vicky Hartzler
(chairwoman of the subcommittee) presiding.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. VICKY HARTZLER, A REPRESENTATIVE FROM
MISSOURI, CHAIRWOMAN, SUBCOMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT AND
INVESTIGATIONS

Mrs. Hartzler. Good morning. This hearing will come to
order. I welcome our subcommittee members and witnesses
testifying before us today.
Over the last 15 years, the Department of Defense [DOD] has
become increasingly reliant on the use of government
contractors. When used properly, this public and private
partnership can both improve our national security and at the
same time preserve limited government resources. But this work
requires competent and timely oversight.
To that end, financial audits of defense contracts can play
a vital role in ensuring that expenditures paid by the
government for goods and services are fair and reasonable. It
also ensures that taxpayers are getting the best bang for their
buck.
Within the Department of Defense, the Defense Contract
Audit Agency, or DCAA, is charged with this critical mission.
Today's hearing seeks to learn more about where the auditing
process is working and identify any shortcomings with current
accounting efforts. I am always looking for productive ways to
improve government performance. I look forward to hearing from
our witnesses about their feedback on the current auditing
system.
At the outset, I have several overarching questions about
how the audit process is working within DCAA. In particular,
for years DCAA has had a significant backlog of incurred cost
audits. These audits are meant to identify instances where the
government might have overpaid. However, as I understand it, it
has been taking on average more than 2 years from the time DCAA
receives the information necessary to conduct an incurred cost
audit to the date the audit report is issued.
These delays can create problems for government contract
managers. Their efforts to recover improper costs are slowed.
It also means managers do not have important financial
information available soon after an expenditure takes place
when the information is most important. From a business
perspective, this delay can also create economic burdens. I
look forward to hearing from our panel of industry experts on
how these delays impact the private sector.
I also have questions about how efficiently DCAA is
performing these incurred cost audits. Although they account
for the most significant portion of total costs audited each
year, these audits only account for a relatively small amount
of reported savings. I want to understand how much these audits
are costing American taxpayers compared to the return from that
cost.
On a related note, I am interested to hear from our
witnesses about how DCAA audit practices compare to what is
commercially acceptable in the private sector. Perhaps there
are lessons to be learned outside of government that could
improve defense contract audit performance.
The bottom line is simple: We all want a fair, efficient,
and timely auditing process that works for all interested
parties. I look forward to everyone's views this morning in
addressing this important topic.
But before I introduce the witnesses, I turn to Mr.
Moulton, the Oversight and Investigations Subcommittee ranking
member, for any opening remarks that he would like to make.
[The prepared statement of Mrs. Hartzler can be found in
the Appendix on page 29.]

STATEMENT OF HON. SETH MOULTON, A REPRESENTATIVE FROM
MASSACHUSETTS, RANKING MEMBER, SUBCOMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT AND
INVESTIGATIONS

Mr. Moulton. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman.
The topic of our hearing today should be important to
anyone concerned about accountability, efficiency, and
transparency in our multibillion-dollar defense sector.
The Defense Contract Audit Agency is the government
organization charged with auditing the $287 billion in defense
contracts that the Pentagon and other agencies make with
private businesses every year. That makes it one of the main
organizations whose job it is to ensure that the taxpayers'
defense dollars are well spent and not stolen, wasted, or
otherwise abused. DCAA also helps the government negotiate more
competitive prices from the private sector.
These roles, in which DCAA holds a public trust, are
important to keep in mind as we discuss the pace of DCAA's
auditing process. According to their annual report, DCAA
currently has a backlog of incurred cost audits that it needs
to reduce to ensure defense contracts are not unnecessarily
delayed. But as we try to reduce this backlog, we should also
be wary of exactly what proposals are made to do so and
anything that could undermine the public trust.
One thing under consideration is proposals to privatize the
functions of DCAA and hand this important work over to private
auditors. I am a strong believer in public-private
partnerships, and I have personally advocated for them in many
sectors, including transportation projects in which I have
worked.
In this case, however, I caution that early estimates
suggest privatization could cost the taxpayers about 30 percent
more, and we would also be positioning a small number of
auditing companies to oversee defense contractors with whom
there would likely be conflicts of interest. Obviously, the
history of Enron and the financial crisis suggest we have to be
very careful in this situation.
We should also keep in mind the origin and state of DCAA's
backlog as we develop defense reform policies. DCAA first
developed a backlog when the number of defense contracts and
expenditures ballooned during the wars in Iraq and Afghanistan.
DCAA has certainly made mistakes. In 2010, it recognized
this problem, hired 400 additional workers, and adopted new
strategies to begin reducing the backlog. Those efforts have,
in fact, succeeded so far. And as you can see from the graph of
the backlog presented in the testimony, it has been shrinking
by about 4,000 contracts per year to the point where about
4,677 are left in the queue. When the pace has slowed more
recently, it has been due to sequestration and now President
Trump's hiring freeze.
This evidence suggests that we can make a lot of progress
on this backlog by properly resourcing DCAA's mission,
mitigating the impact of sequestration and hiring freezes, and
ensuring DCAA has enough capacity to cope with an unexpected
increase in defense spending.
I look forward to the testimony this morning to
understanding better how we can make reforms and improve the
process and, ultimately, preserve the important mission that
DCAA does for our taxpayers and for our defense.
Madam Chair.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Moulton can be found in the
Appendix on page 31.]
Mrs. Hartzler. Thank you, Mr. Moulton.
Today, we are going to have two panels. First, we will get
to visit with and hear from the director of the DCAA, and then
our second panel will be from the private sector. And we look
forward to both those testimony.
And we do have votes a little after 10, and so hopefully,
we can get both panels in and get this hearing wrapped up.
But I really am pleased to recognize Ms. Bales, Ms. Anita
Bales, director of the Defense Contract Audit Agency. And
members have already been provided with her biography.
So thank you for being here, Ms. Bales, and we will welcome
your opening statement.

STATEMENT OF ANITA F. BALES, DIRECTOR, DEFENSE CONTRACT AUDIT
AGENCY, UNDER SECRETARY OF DEFENSE (COMPTROLLER)

Ms. Bales. Thank you. Chairwoman Hartzler, Representative
Moulton, and members of the subcommittee, thank you for the
opportunity to appear before you today.
You have my written statement. And now in my opening, I
would like to highlight points related to our processes for
incurred cost audits and for bringing in independent public
accounting firms to conduct incurred cost audits.
The incurred cost audits have received a lot of attention
by several organizations concerned about us getting the backlog
down. I would like to recap that the backlog resulted from
significant increases in defense spending post-9/11 while DCAA
staffing remained stagnant.
To address the backlog, the agency came up with a
comprehensive approach. Despite the staffing challenges, we
have reduced the backlog 75 percent over the past 5 years. We
expected to be current by the end of fiscal year 2018, but need
to assess the impact of the current hiring freeze.
Let me expand on two of those initiatives. First, the use
of multiyear audits has reduced our audit time by 40 percent
over single-year auditing. Because of the efficiency obtained
through multiyear audits, we would see this as a methodology we
would like to continue after we resolve the backlog.
Second, implementing low-risk sampling allowed us to reduce
the number of audits we conduct. Based on risk and materiality,
we only audit a small percentage of low-risk submissions. Using
our low-risk procedures over the past 5 years, we closed over
14,000 incurred cost years without an audit.
I believe part of the desire to use IPAs [independent
public accounting firms] is a belief they are more efficient
based on people's experience with their financial statement
audits.
That brings me to our first concern: Contracting audit is
different from financial statement auditing. A financial
statement auditor attests that the financial statements fairly
present the financial position of the company in accordance
with Generally Accepted Accounting Principles, or GAAP. For
contract auditing, GAAP standards are only part of the
equation. DCAA auditors also have to evaluate the costs are in
accordance with statutory cost accounting standards and the
Federal Acquisition Regulations.
The risk the financial auditor faces is a material
misstatement in the company's financial statements. The risk
the contract auditor faces is the payment of improper cost. The
materiality associated with those risks is different.
Let me illustrate the risk and materiality aspect through
my experience doing financial statement audits. I worked on an
audit of a balance sheet, and applying materiality levels we
determined that if a line item wasn't at least $100 million, it
was not material and we wouldn't audit it.
However, if we had been concerned about making payments,
money actually going out the door that shouldn't, no company or
government entity would say, it is only $90 million, so that is
okay. So that is the difference in the risk, in the materiality
levels.
In addition, many expenses that are acceptable under GAAP
are unallowable under CAS [Cost Accounting Standards] and FAR
[Federal Acquisition Regulation]. The contract auditor has to
take additional steps to prevent that risk of improper payment.
Another challenge IPAs may face that would be difficult to
overcome is the efficiencies that DCAA can bring to bear
through having the knowledge gained by doing other types of
audits for contractors and for having access to all the
contractors and subcontractors.
First, our work on each type of our audits, be it incurred
costs, forward price, business systems, all of the different
audits that are in our portfolio, inform our risk assessment on
all other audits, allowing us to do less work, bringing
efficiencies in that will be lost if we don't do the incurred
cost audits.
Second, subcontracts are a large part of most audits.
Incorporating results of separate subcontractor audits into the
prime contractor report is very efficient for us, because as
one agency, we can share results and collaborate across our
offices. If an IPA were to perform the prime contract incurred
costs, the government would have to create new processes to
facilitate the subcontractor audits among the IPAs.
Finally, 65 percent of all incurred cost audits involve
auditor-determined annual indirect rates for incurred cost
submissions. FAR distinguishes this function as inherently
governmental.
In the coming year, I would like to continue to work with
the committee to better understand its objectives and how to
best achieve those. I will also ask that you give me the time
to work with industry and the acquisition community on these
acquisition reform ideas to include evaluating the appropriate
use of IPAs and doing a cost-benefit analysis of performing
single-year audits versus multiyear audits.
We have seen clear benefits. Multiyear audits reduce our
audit time by 40 percent, and industry has responded favorably
to the potential of reducing their resources as well. I want to
better understand any detrimental effects of a 2-year
inventory, and I will work with stakeholders to determine the
costs and benefits of auditing one year at a time. However, at
this point, I suggest that a 40 percent increase in efficiency
makes a compelling case for gathering more information before
discontinuing the multiyear process.
I commit to you that if a data-driven cost-benefit analysis
demonstrates that single-year audits are more beneficial than
multiyear audits, we will do single-year audits.
I would like to thank the committee for allowing me to
share my thoughts. If investments are going to be made in
additional resources, I would like the opportunity to restore
and stabilize DCAA's staffing levels. I would like the
opportunity to finish what we are so close to achieving.
I look forward to your questions, and if there are any
additional questions after the industry panel, I would welcome
the opportunity to answer those. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Bales can be found in the
Appendix on page 33.]
Mrs. Hartzler. You bet.
Thank you very much, Ms. Bales. That was very interesting,
especially your comments about the multiyear auditing, and that
is encouraging, something to look into.
You mentioned materiality, and I wanted to hone in on that
again. So what is the standard of materiality DCAA auditors use
when conducting? Is it $100 million? You used that example.
Ms. Bales. No. That example I used was when I worked for
the Army, I did financial statement audits. And due to the
magnitude of the assets and liabilities on the Army's balance
sheet at that time--and that information is dated--$100 million
was the materiality level we used. And so if there was an asset
on the balance sheet that was less than $100 million, it could
be entirely wrong and not materially misstate the financial
statements. So that is why we would not choose that line as one
to audit.
But within DCAA, we don't do a standard percentage, because
it depends on the risk level of the different cost elements
that we would look at. We may have a cost element that we have
experience with over the years and have not identified any
discrepancies or questioned costs. We would look at that--we
would make the decision whether we even want to look at that
cost segment first, because we do a two-step risk evaluation.
First, which audits do we do. And that gets into, like, our
low-risk sampling, because we have determined that certain
companies and their incurred costs are low risk. We don't audit
every one. We put them into a sample, and we only do a sample
of the low risk. We believe doing the sampling is important,
because it provides a deterrent effect. If there was the
possibility that you would never be audited, what would creep
into the incurred costs.
So that is the first step, is deciding which audits to do.
And then when we start an audit, we start looking at the risk
that involves the different cost segments, be it labor,
material, subcontract costs, other direct, and determine where
the risk is and decide which elements to audit and to the
degree that we audit those.
Certain costs are more sensitive, so we would have a lower
materiality level on those than we would ones that would flow
down and end up not having as large an impact on the overall
cost.
Mrs. Hartzler. Okay. Very good.
So talk about your backlog. You mentioned that a little
bit. And so as I understand it, in fiscal year 2011 the total
value of the backlog inventory was $414 billion and in fiscal
year 2016 the total value and the backlog inventory is $409
billion. So why has the incurred cost backlog not been reduced
more in terms of the actual value of the audits that are
pending?
Ms. Bales. The dollar value will continue to go up as we
get additional incurred costs in every year. Every year we get
about 5,000 additional incurred cost submissions, and the
dollar value that comes in relates to the dollar value that is
being contracted out over the past few years, because we will
get an incurred cost audit that will have the dollars for that
fiscal year for all contracts for that company. So part of the
increase is also due to how much is out on contract.
The dollar value we have probably reduced--we started
reducing the dollar value--I think you have a chart in the--if
not in my testimony, in the report to Congress--that shows
that, initially, we brought the numbers of incurred cost
submissions down more quickly than we brought down the dollars.
And part of that goes to the multiyear auditing. We started
with our multiyear auditing on the smaller contractors. So we
were able to bring down the numbers of submissions faster than
we were able to bring down the dollars. But we have now moved
into doing multiyear audits, sometimes upwards of 4 years at
our larger contracts, and you now see the backlog of dollars
coming down faster.
Mrs. Hartzler. Okay. Is it true that DCAA has issued
approximately 14,000 low-risk memos to reduce the backlog?
Ms. Bales. Yes, that is true. That is the ones I referred
to that we have closed without audit. We do a low-risk memo to
close those out.
Mrs. Hartzler. Sure. So how many audits were actually
completed during that time?
Ms. Bales. That number is--I apologize for not having
that----
Ms. Hartzler. Sure. That is fine.
Ms. Bales. I think that number is around 4,000. But let
me--I will confirm that and get back to you.
[The information referred to can be found in the Appendix
on page 101.]
Mrs. Hartzler. Okay. So you completed 4,000 and then just
wrote off 14,000, and that is the way to reduce the amount of
backlog quick.
Ms. Bales. Right. But that, it goes back into the risk
assessment of doing that. And, you know, that is one of the
things that we hear a lot, is, well, you audit everything and
you don't consider risk. So as we went into the low-risk
sampling, we did take a look at those submissions. And every
submission we get in, we do an evaluation of the submission to
help determine if it should be low risk or not.
Mrs. Hartzler. Okay.
Ms. Bales. So we see what is in there. We also do other
audits to say, you know, we have looked at vouchers that have
come in, we do interim vouchers, which is kind of like a mini
incurred cost. So if we don't have issues that are coming in on
those vouchers, that is another reason we can determine those
low risk. So if we haven't done an audit, it is not that we
haven't done anything in evaluating that contractor's cost.
Mrs. Hartzler. Very good. Thank you.
I have got more questions, but I will go to other members.
Ranking Member Moulton.
Mr. Moulton. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman.
So as I mentioned in my opening statement, I think that as
we all look at opportunities for Defense Department reform, one
of the things that we are taking a serious look at is the role
that the private sector plays and can play in the future in
functions like this and functions, frankly, across the
Department of Defense. There are a lot of places where the
private sector is better equipped to do things than the
military or the defense civilians, and we have done a lot of
contracting out in recent years. But I just want to dive into
that a little bit with you to better understand exactly what
that would look like here.
One of the issues that has been brought up in, sort of, an
early look at this is the potential for conflicts of interest.
So can you just explain a little bit more what that means, what
kinds of private auditors would be available to do this work,
and why there might be this heightened risk?
Ms. Bales. Well, one of the issues that an auditor that--a
company that would come in and potentially do the incurred cost
audits, they could not audit any company that they do any other
work for, because they would then be making a determination on
their own costs, because their own costs would be part of what
is in that contractor claim.
There is also the issue, potentially, of proprietary data.
One of the things that our contractors are very concerned about
is who sees their proprietary data. And I think this would be a
question that industry would have to ask is--have to answer is
how comfortable are they with sharing their proprietary data
with folks that may be auditing their competitors. And,
obviously, we audit the competitors, but our purpose is very
much into the government interest.
Mr. Moulton. Right. Sure. But there are a lot of--there are
thousands of companies. There are plenty of auditors out there.
Why is the issue that they be, you know, potentially auditing
their competitors in this situation, whereas that is not the
case in another typical industry?
Ms. Bales. And I think that gets down to the level of
proprietary data. One of the things that we find with our
contractors is they are very trusting and know that we take
care of very sensitive data in terms of their price
relationships and cost relationships and what they charge
different customers. We had a situation with one contractor
where they were comfortable giving us the information, but it
was very controlled, and we had to make a judgment on that.
They didn't really even want to share that information with the
contracting officer.
So I think that is the difference between sharing
contract--auditors that might do their financial statement
audits, which is very public information, versus doing audits
that are in the contract arena, which has that very sensitive
proprietary data.
Mr. Moulton. Well, what are the private companies that
could do this kind of contract auditing?
Ms. Bales. I would assume that the folks that are going to
come in and look at this would be, you know, all of your--the
public accounting firms. I think you will have to look at the
different sizes that would--you know, some of the smaller ones
would not be able to probably absorb an audit that relates to
the really large contractors. I don't know in terms of the
large contractors if they would really be able to come in and
do this type of work or if it would conflict them out on other
audits that they do.
Mr. Moulton. Okay. But the important thing to understand is
that, at least in your estimation, the big public accounting
firms would have the capability to do this?
Ms. Bales. They would.
Mr. Moulton. Okay. Even though it is different than the
typical financial statement accounting?
Ms. Bales. Right.
Mr. Moulton. Okay. That is very helpful.
When we are talking about the backlog, there is, obviously,
some concern across DOD with the hiring freeze and the impact
that that has been having on the work. Could you talk about
whether that is an issue and how you are working around it at
this point?
Ms. Bales. It is absolutely an issue for us, because we
came into fiscal year 2017 lower on our end strength than we
needed to complete the work years that we had planned for this
year. And we were under a hiring freeze in fiscal year 2016 as
a result of the 2016 NDAA [National Defense Authorization Act]
that didn't allow us to do work for nondefense agencies, so
that lowered the reimbursable dollars that we have in that fund
about 10 percent of our workforce.
So we had to go into a hiring freeze to accommodate that
reduction in funding in 2016. So we entered 2017 very low. And
we wanted to hire back that loss from 2016 as well as our
normal attrition. We were planning on hiring about 100 people a
month, and we started doing that in the first quarter. It got
turned on a little slower. And right now we aren't in a hiring
freeze--we are in a hiring freeze--so we haven't been able to
hire that in January, February, March, and still not hiring to
date.
So we are really getting behind the power curve on our
ability to execute the work years that we need to this year.
And the later we hire in the year--at this point, there is
probably no way that we can hire enough to complete the number
of work years that we need to this year.
Mr. Moulton. Okay. Great. Thank you very much. Thank you
for being here.
Madam Chairwoman.
Mrs. Hartzler. Thank you.
Mr. Scott from Georgia.
Mr. Scott. Thank you. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Ma'am, you will have to forgive me. I did not receive the
testimony until 9:30 last night.
Ms. Bales. I apologize.
Mr. Scott. When was the testimony due?
Ms. Bales. It was due 48 hours before. And quite honestly,
as it went through the approval process, it got kicked back to
us.
Mr. Scott. And the approval process, that is through OPM
[Office of Personnel Management]?
Ms. Bales. It is through our Pentagon and then over to OMB
[Office of Management and Budget].
Mr. Scott. I am sorry. OMB is what I meant.
Ms. Bales. Yes.
Mr. Scott. Madam Chair, I hope we will start taking note of
when we actually receive testimony.
Mrs. Hartzler. Yes, absolutely.
Mr. Scott. It makes it very difficult to do a good job when
you don't have the testimony prior to the meetings.
Ms. Bales. Sir, we were pushing as hard as we could.
Mr. Scott. I understand, ma'am. But there is a breakdown of
management there that has to be fixed for us to do proper
oversight. I don't blame it--and understand this, I don't blame
you for it. It seems to be habit in most of our agencies today.
Second, I will tell you, I think you are exactly right. If
you have a threshold of $100 million, I think you are going to
have an awful lot of stuff stop between $85 and $95 million. So
I hope you will continue to audit it.
One thing I would also encourage that we never do is
something in the auditing that has been done in health care,
which is what is called RAC [Recovery Audit Contractor] audits,
where auditors are actually paid a commission instead of a fee.
My question for you, though, is how do you measure success?
What are the most important metrics, in your opinion, to
evaluate your agency's performance?
Ms. Bales. So one of the things we obviously do is report
our return on investment. I think that is important for our
investors or taxpayers through Congress to know what they are
getting for the dollars they spend on us. And currently, in
fiscal year 2016, our return on investment was 5.7 to 1. And I
will say those are actual realized benefits and dollars that
don't go out on contract or money that we get back in through
our incurred cost audits.
One of the things that we learned back in 2007, 2008, is
you have to have a balanced set of metrics, because if you only
measure, like, production, then you forget about quality. Or if
you only measure return on investment, you may start doing
things that drive unintended behavior, and we don't want to do
that.
I know one of the rumors or myths out on the street is that
our auditors get appraised for finding dollars. None of our
auditors in any of their performance standards say, you get X
amount of dollar savings and you are going to get an
``exceed,'' you are going to get an award, you are going to get
anything like that. What we measure our auditors on is that
they do quality audits that meet the standards and that find
what is appropriate.
One of the things that we do is we measure the amount of
exceptions that we find on an audit, which is how many dollars
do we question. But then we also balance that with how much do
we sustain, because we don't want our auditors just questioning
cost because it looks good to question. You have to have that
balance of how much do we sustain.
So that is what we look for, is measuring--getting balanced
measures. Part of it is dollar return. That is what, you know,
obviously, we look at, is making sure we do fair and reasonable
prices, and that is very easily measured in dollars.
We also look at our timing. So, obviously, the incurred
cost backlog is not a good story as we look at our timing
metric, but as we look at our forward pricing and we look at--
we have brought down our elapsed time on that, we have brought
down our elapsed time on most of our audits, and we also look
for forward pricing, meeting what we promised the customer.
Mr. Scott. Can I ask you, obviously, you are auditing
things that happen on our bases and equipment that we purchase.
Ms. Bales. Right.
Mr. Scott. Are your auditors actually on-site at the base
permanently or do they simply go in as requested?
Ms. Bales. So our auditors, they go into the contractor
facilities and do the audit versus doing the audits on base. So
we have residencies at many of the large contractors, and then
with our smaller contractors we have branch offices where they
go out and go to the contractor facilities. Because while the
expenditures for what we audit are used on base, what we audit
is the contractor.
Mr. Scott. Thank you for your testimony, ma'am. I am out of
time. But I do wonder if maybe it would be better to audit at
the base level, would be a question if we have time I will come
back to. But I yield the remainder of the time that I am out
of.
Mrs. Hartzler. Well, thank you, Mr. Scott.
Mr. Suozzi.
Mr. Suozzi. Director, thank you so much for your time
today. Would you say your main job is to try and root out
waste, fraud, and abuse in the Department of Defense?
Ms. Bales. I would say it is to make sure that--absolutely.
I mean, that is, I think, a job of any Federal employee, is to
make sure we don't have fraud, waste, and abuse in our
expenditures. And the way we do that is making sure that we are
getting fair and reasonable prices for the goods that we--the
Department expends with our contractors.
Mr. Suozzi. So how many employees do you have in your
department now?
Ms. Bales. We are currently around 4,500. It fluctuates.
Mr. Suozzi. And in your view, what would be the ideal
number of people to have in that department?
Ms. Bales. We have estimated, as we went through this, that
if we could settle in around 5,000, that we would be able to do
our portfolio of audits. One of the things that we did to
reduce the incurred cost backlog was to go in and ask for more
resources and put that in the budget. And we were able to get
to about in between 5,000 and 5,100 a couple of times in
between the sequestration and the hiring freezes. And if we
could do that, we think we will be able to accomplish our
incurred cost backlog and then accomplish incurred costs on a
regular basis, as well as doing the other audit.
Mr. Suozzi. You say you would like to see a 10 percent
increase in your current employee level?
Ms. Bales. Yes. And that is what we have on hand.
Currently, we have a higher budget than what we have on hand,
as we said, because of the hiring freeze, so----
Mr. Suozzi. So the incurred cost backlog, you say it is
based upon the submissions. How do you get a submission in the
first place? How does something get in the queue in your list
of what is on the incurred cost backlog in the first place?
What makes that list?
Ms. Bales. So every contractor that has flexibly priced
contracts are required to submit an annual incurred cost
submission 6 months after the end of their fiscal year. For us,
that means we get most of ours in at 30 June, because most of
the contractors, about 75 percent of them, have calendar year
end as----
Mr. Suozzi. So 100 percent of those are subject to audit?
Ms. Bales. If they have flexibly priced, yes. And they are
subject to audit. And then we go in, again, as the low-risk
process. Not all of them will get audited. We do the sampling.
Mr. Suozzi. But 100 percent of those type of contracts
become on the list of incurred cost backlog?
Ms. Bales. Yes. Yes, sir.
Mr. Suozzi. And is that a reasonable way of doing that, of
looking at 100 percent of them? Is that a statute? Or is that a
requirement?
Ms. Bales. It is a requirement.
Mr. Suozzi. As a statute or is something you do, your
department determined?
Ms. Bales. No. It is statutorily required that if you have
fixed--flexibly priced contracts that you submit an incurred
cost submission.
Mr. Suozzi. Is that a good way of doing it, that all of
them make the list?
Ms. Bales. I think yes, because as I go back to the
deterrent effect, that if you have flexibly priced contracts
and you can report--record costs, we are going to say we are
going to reimburse you for all your costs, if no one is looking
at what your costs are or there is not the chance that the cost
that you submit will be looked at, there is that opportunity to
put a lot of costs on. And it is one of those things. It is
like we help folks be honest.
Mr. Suozzi. Okay. You think it makes sense that 100 percent
are on the list?
Ms. Bales. Yes.
Mr. Suozzi. That is all I want to know, your expert
opinion.
Do you issue an annual report of any kind that we could
read----
Ms. Bales. Yes.
Mr. Suozzi [continuing]. That says, hey, these are really
good examples of things we should be trying to go after, these
are good examples of waste, fraud, and abuse that we should be
trying to attack?
Ms. Bales. We annually issue our report to Congress, and we
also have--our audits in the DOD IG's [Department of Defense
Inspector General's] report that would show examples of audits
where we have found that.
Mr. Suozzi. And when you say you issue it to Congress, who
gets that?
Ms. Bales. All of the--the HASC [House Committee on Armed
Services], the SASC [Senate Committee on Armed Services], the
HAC [House Committee on Appropriations], and the SAC [Senate
Committee on Appropriations].
Mr. Suozzi. Okay. Let me see, the HASC, the HAC----
Ms. Bales. I figured this was one place I could use those
acronyms.
Mr. Suozzi. Okay. Well, I think, you know, as a practical
matter, it would be good for us to hear ideas from you as to
places you think that we can try and eliminate waste, fraud,
and abuse in the Department of Defense, because I think in
these difficult times when we are looking at increasing budget
and scarce resources, we would all like to hear in very
practical, straightforward terms: This is a good place to look.
Ms. Bales. Okay.
Mr. Suozzi. Thank you very much.
Mrs. Hartzler. Thank you, Mr. Suozzi.
So I had just a couple more questions here. So last year's
NDAA required the DCAA to accept certain audit findings of
indirect costs from commercial auditors. So has DCAA
implemented this policy?
Ms. Bales. We have not yet. I think we have--the timeframe
is, like, June that we have to start doing that. And I think
part of that is determining how we are going to do that.
One of the things in terms of our professional standards is
we can't just accept work from another auditor or auditing
company without doing certain things to know that we can rely
on their work.
And, in addition we have been talking somewhat about the
intent of that, and we are working through which of those do we
accept. Because, quite frankly, the way that is worded--and we
have put in a legislative proposal to clarify--is because it
says cost type not even flexibly priced, as we talk about the
intent, was it the intent that even our largest contractors
would not be audited. Because some of those, as a percentage of
revenue, even our--like, three of our top five defense
contractors would not have incurred cost audits done by DCAA.
And we think that that, with the fact that we are sitting
there at those facilities doing all of the other audits, that
that would be more efficient that if we were to be able to go
in and do those.
Mrs. Hartzler. So you have put in a legislative request to
get more clarification on that?
Ms. Bales. Right. Well, our legislative proposal hat is
requesting that we don't do that. And, really, as we see the
legislative proposals and having the discussions for 2018,
making sure that what we are asking to have in 2018 or
proposing in 2018 doesn't conflict with that. But our proposal
has come in to say if we could eliminate that.
Mrs. Hartzler. Okay. So if private auditing companies took
on a certain percentage of incurred cost audits how would DCAA
audit teams be redeployed? And could staff currently allocated
to performing incurred cost audits be tasked to work on other
audit types?
Ms. Bales. Absolutely. And that is our plan in terms of as
we--you know, the increase in workforce that we had, one of our
goals and plans in how to get rid of the incurred cost was to
dedicate those to doing incurred cost audits to eliminate the
backlog. And then, as we got current, we would move those to
audits that we aren't doing now that we need to be doing, more
cost accounting standard disclosure audits, TINA [Truth in
Negotiations] Act audits, those types of things, because we
aren't doing all of the audits in other areas that we should.
One of the questions that had come up is, well, if you had
hired more people earlier, could you have got the backlog down
more quickly? We could have, but then it would be, do I want to
staff up and have that temporary workforce or do I want to look
at what we would need for a steady state?
In addition, it is how many contract and how many auditors
can the contractor support at one time. Because we have had
pushback even now as we go in to do the backlog is we can't
support any more audit from the contractors.
Mrs. Hartzler. Very good.
Mr. Moulton, do you have any more questions?
Mr. Moulton. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman.
Just a couple things, and really points for clarification,
because I have some numbers in front of me that I just don't
fully understand.
The first question is just about the average time it takes
for an incurred cost audit to be completed, because I see one
number of 838 days, in some instances we have 124 days. Can you
just speak briefly to that discrepancy?
Ms. Bales. So the 885 days shows how long they have been in
inventory. It is not actually how long it takes to complete the
audit once started. The 134-day average is once we have an
entrance, let the contractor know we are starting to do that
audit, how long it takes us to do and issue the report.
The 885, as I said, especially, since we have a backlog, is
high, because that is when we first received the proposal, the
incurred cost submission.
Mr. Moulton. Great. That is very helpful.
And then we have heard this estimate that privatizing this
business would cost the taxpayer about 30 percent more. Can you
explain where that comes from and why--what you have to justify
that estimate, Director?
Ms. Bales. Sure. So we looked at that. We did a very simple
comparison of saying that--compare our hourly rate compared to
the GSA [General Services Administration] schedules for
companies that would be probable contenders in here. So looking
at that, we did a conservative estimate. Our rate includes our,
you know, all levels of our auditors, including up to our
senior management, and we compared that to a senior auditor
rate, which doesn't include the senior partners and everything.
So that is how we came up with an estimate on that.
But I think that is one of the things when I said that it
would give us some time to evaluate that, I think a business
case on whether, you know, will it be cheaper, will it not, I
think would be appropriate to do.
Mr. Moulton. That was some of my experience serving in
Iraq, is that a lot of times having private contractors made
short-term costs go down but long-term costs go up, and that
underlies some of my concerns.
Ms. Bales. Sir, like I said, we don't have a business case
analysis. I do have some anecdotal stories, but they are
anecdotes. We had some of our nondefense customers wanted to
come back to us. We had one that, because we were in backlog
and weren't getting the work done, went to an IPA to have their
work done.
Then, in fiscal year 2016, they wanted to come back to us,
but because of the other language they couldn't. But they
wanted to come back to us. One of the reasons was because the
contractor doubled their price in the second year.
So those, I think, are some of the concerns, that if we
could do and have the opportunity to do a good business case
analysis could be evaluated.
Mr. Moulton. Okay. Thank you, Director.
And then just one other quick question. Mr. Scott brought
up this issue with the testimony. Can you just describe in a
little bit more detail what the holdup is with OMB? That is
where it got held up? Is that right?
Ms. Bales. They passed it back for some language.
Mr. Moulton. Are these political considerations, or what
was going on?
Ms. Bales. They thought we were--because we talked about
potential legislative--acquisition reform legislation--and
because we--they had not been aware of legislation, they were
concerned that we had not went through them on legislation
reform and proposals. So that could have been I said the word
``legislation'' instead of that we are here to talk about ideas
for potential reform.
Mr. Moulton. Okay. Well, I would hope in the future that we
would be able to----
Ms. Bales. So I think that is what got us hung up.
Mr. Moulton. We would certainly value your feedback on
legislative proposals. After all, we are legislators, and we
are here to hear your views and opinions. And so, hopefully,
that will be not an issue in the future.
Director, thank you very much.
Madam Chairwoman, I yield back.
Mrs. Hartzler. You bet.
Well, thank you, Ms. Bales. We appreciate you being here
today. And so this will conclude the first panel. We appreciate
that very much.
And I ask the second panel now to come to the witness
table.
Thank you, gentlemen, for being here. We appreciate it very
much.
We have Mr. David Berteau from Professional Services
Council here, Mr. John Panetta from Financial Executives
International, and Mr. James Thomas from the National Defense
Industrial Association.
And the members have been provided with your biographies.
So, Mr. Berteau, we will start with you.

STATEMENT OF HON. DAVID BERTEAU, PRESIDENT AND CHIEF EXECUTIVE
OFFICER, PROFESSIONAL SERVICES COUNCIL

Mr. Berteau. Thank you very much, Chairwoman Hartzler and
Ranking Member Moulton and other members of the subcommittee
who might come in while we are talking here. We really
appreciate the opportunity to testify this morning on behalf of
the 400 members of the Professional Services Council. These are
all government contractors who fall into the category of both
being audited and some of them being potential third-party
independent providers for services being discussed here this
morning.
Your invitation letter asked us to discuss evaluating the
defense contract auditing process. And as part of that
discussion, my written statement includes a number of specific
recommendations as well as some criteria that we think are
useful to you. And I would ask that my full written statement
be incorporated into the record this morning. I would just
highlight a couple of things.
Mrs. Hartzler. So ordered.
Mr. Berteau. For efficiency and effectiveness, we certainly
endorse the idea that the government needs good, timely
auditing and proper accounting practices. They have actually
got pretty good guidelines out there to do it.
I have brought with me this morning the last printed
version of the DCAA contract audit manual. This roughly 4,000
pages gives very good guidance on how to do contract auditing.
It also, I think, illustrates the complexity of the process and
part of the reason why it might take a while. So I just bring
those along so you can get a sense.
These issues, though, have been with us for a long time. It
is not just a result of increased defense spending in the
aughts. And the questions are, clearly: How do we protect the
government's interests in a timely and cost-effective manner?
How do we do this without excessive burden on the system, both
the contractors and the program offices that manage those
contractors and the contracting officers? How do we focus on
getting the best and most useful results? And how do we use
contract auditing to support better contracting and better
program management? Because auditing is not an end in itself.
It is a means to support the execution of government missions
and the achievement of government objectives.
The private sector has these same issues, those same
questions. And they have made great progress over the years in
applying innovative processes and automated tools. And there
are some examples that I would be happy to go into during the
questions.
Simply adding more people doesn't really change the dynamic
of the problem. When you have got a backlog of 2\1/2\ years,
even if you cut the time in half, it is still taking more than
a year to audit a year's worth of costs. And at some point you
can't dig your way out of that hole. So that, I think, is an
important element to keep in mind.
Many of the functions performed by DCAA that we have talked
about this morning should, in fact, only be performed by
government employees. But auditing activities themselves as
compared to the use of the results of those audits are not an
inherently governmental function.
In fact, one of the things that we have seen over the last
couple of years is a dramatic increase in the use by civilian
Federal agencies of independent third-party contractors. You
may be aware there is actually a schedule from the General
Services Administration, a contract schedule, which has
prequalified auditors on there, and at the time an agency wants
to issue a potential task for bid by those prequalified
auditors, they can be screened so you eliminate anybody who has
a potential conflict of interest for the particular task to be
contracted.
So it addresses some of the questions that came up here
earlier today of how do you resolve those conflict of interest
questions, how do you make sure you only deal with actually
qualified entities who can do cost auditing and who have a
demonstrated track record.
And, in fact, if you look at the agency costs for these
audits, the costs they were paying to DCAA to do the audit
before and the costs they are paying to the independent third-
party auditors to do that now, you will see not a 30 percent
increase, but in many cases a dramatic reduction in those
costs.
And I would submit that it would behoove the committee to
get some data on that, and we will be happy to try to provide
some of that as well, what we have from the public record, but
the agencies themselves have substantially more data.
So how would third-party auditors help? They might reduce
the cost. They might reduce the backlog. They would certainly
help address the question that Ms. Bales raised of, I want to
increase, but I don't want to increase the permanent staff, I
want to be able to meet my surge requirements and then come
back down to a steady state. This is exactly where you use
contractors, is to increase that surge capacity and then draw
it back down.
I really wanted to associate myself with Mr. Moulton's
comments about what you saw in Iraq in terms of sometimes the
short-term costs went down but the long-term costs went up.
I had the privilege in 2007 of being a member of the
Gansler Commission that looked at contracting in Iraq and
Afghanistan, and then later had the opportunity in DOD to be
overseeing the policy associated with that.
And some of that was actually not the fault of anybody in
theater, but of policies and procedures back here. The Army,
for instance, releasing funds one week at a time so you can
never actually buy the thing, you could only rent it for a
week, with the cost built in at the end to haul it out of the
country, right?
That is not a good way to--that only matters if you think
you are only going to be there for another week. We won't go
there this morning.
So in the end here, DCAA, I think, has a critical role to
play. The numbers say they need some help, and they have
admitted that, that is what they have asked for here. The
question is, what is the best way to give them that help? And I
would submit that there is an enormous opportunity, and it
would be useful for them to test that opportunity in reality,
not just do a business case assessment but actually try it out
and see what the results are.
And rather than recommend to the committee that you repeal
the language that you put in the fiscal year 2017 NDAA,
actually test it out, and let's look at the results. And I
think we will have a very fair comparison under those
circumstances. And I would submit to you that would be a good
way to go forward.
So I am over my time here, so I will shut up.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Berteau can be found in the
Appendix on page 52.]
Mrs. Hartzler. Well, what you said was very, very helpful.
I appreciate that very much.
Mr. Panetta.

STATEMENT OF JOHN PANETTA, NATIONAL SECRETARY, FINANCIAL
EXECUTIVES INTERNATIONAL

Mr. Panetta. Good morning, Chairwoman Hartzler, Ranking
Member Moulton, and committee members. I am John Panetta, the
senior director of government accounting at Raytheon in
Waltham, Massachusetts. I am here today on behalf of and
representing the Financial Executives International Committee
on Government Business.
Defense contract auditing has been a matter of discussion
in both the private sector and the government for several
years. The timeliness of audits, and in particular final
incurred cost rate audits, are at the center of the
conversation.
Let me start by talking about how we got here. The current
state is due to a series of events starting in 2008 when
reports surfaced critical of DCAA audit practices. DCAA's
reaction was to stress audit quality and independence above all
other considerations.
Quality standards over a period of years were in a state of
flux. New, untrained auditors were added without sufficient
supervision and audit schedules were not considered.
From 2006 to 2015, DCAA's staff grew by approximately 20
percent. Incurred cost audits that were issued over that period
were generally incredibly long and packed with immaterial
items. This resulted in the number of audits being issued per
DCAA employee declining by approximately 90 percent.
In 2012, the Federal Acquisition Regulation Council, at
DCAA's urging, expanded the requirements for certified incurred
cost proposals in the regulations by adding 30 items for the
submission of final indirect rates. Many of these items are not
relative to final indirect rates.
DCAA used this FAR change to retroactively reject many
previously accepted contractor proposals. This action further
delayed the settlement of final rates as contractors needlessly
created complicated informational schedules for DCAA that we
view as having little, if any, value.
Recently, some progress has been made. DCAA has put a dent
in the audit backlog through the use of multiyear audit
techniques. Contractor resources have been strained supporting
these multiyear audits, and that is not sustainable over the
long run. We are not where we need to be. More needs to be
done.
The backlog of audits is merely a symptom of underlying
issues. Working off the backlog by applying resources will not
prevent the condition from returning after the spotlight has
moved on to other priorities.
In today's environment, risk management is a buzz word, and
risk avoidance is the practice. Adopting an outlook of risk
avoidance drives behavior. Perfection becomes the standard, and
perfection is an expensive commodity.
There is no question, perfection is something that we
should all strive to achieve. However, if the cost to implement
a perfect system exceeds the risks that are being addressed, we
are collectively wasting resources that could better be applied
in other areas.
The CGB [Financial Executives International's Committee on
Government Business] believes that getting back to basics,
implementing efficient audit management practices, and changing
how success is measured with respect to oversight will go a
long way in addressing the root cause of the issues we are
addressing.
Emphasizing audit practices such as establishing
materiality thresholds, relying on the work of others, meeting
schedules, and using documentation standards that are accepted
by other audit groups, will all speed up the process without
shifting significant risks to the government.
For example, a company that has received a passing grade
from a CPA [certified public accountant] firm with respect to
the requirements of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act has already run a
gauntlet of audits. Why should DCAA retest underlying systems
and transactions that have already been validated for financial
reporting purposes?
The current measure of success at DCAA is the amount at
annual findings. That is akin to paying a CPA firm upon the
receipt of a clean opinion. That works against the requirements
for independence, and CPAs would certainly grab the attention
of the SEC [Securities and Exchange Commission] for that.
This measure creates churn in the acquisition process.
There are a number of examples where DCAA's implementation of
the FAR to generate those findings resulted in legal disputes
overturning their positions. This, again, wastes both the
government and contractor resources. Success should be measured
by the completion of a timely, quality audit that promotes and
provides reasonable assurance of an effective acquisition
process.
These actions, together with the introduction of
independence CPA firms to conduct audits at DOD, as they do at
other executive departments, will result in the fundamental
change that is required for the acquisition process to function
as envisioned in the guiding principles of the FAR.
Thank you very much. I would be happy to answer any
questions that you have.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Panetta can be found in the
Appendix on page 68.]
Mrs. Hartzler. Very good. Only 12 seconds over 5 minutes.
That is pretty amazing.
I have a lot of questions. I want to come back to you on a
lot of good stuff there.
Mr. James Thomas, let's go to you, though, first.

STATEMENT OF JAMES THOMAS, ASSISTANT VICE PRESIDENT OF POLICY,
NATIONAL DEFENSE INDUSTRIAL ASSOCIATION

Mr. Thomas. Thank you. Chairwoman Hartzler, Ranking Member
Moulton, and members of the subcommittee, thank you for the
opportunity to appear before you this morning. I am here on
behalf of the National Defense Industrial Association, the
Nation's oldest and largest defense industry association,
comprised nearly of 1,600 corporate and 80,000 individual
members.
My testimony this morning will focus on the main theme and
associated recommendations within my written statement, the
change in DCAA's mission from its original purpose, and the
effect of that change on industry and the operations of the
defense acquisition system.
Industry recognizes that the audit responsibilities of DCAA
play an essential role within DOD's acquisition oversight
activities throughout the contracting life cycle. DCAA was
stood up in 1965 to serve as an advisory function for
contracting officer decision making, but has evolved to serve
solely as an enforcer of their own process requirements,
lacking a nexus with the contracting officer decision-making
process.
Industry is concerned that DCAA has lost focus of their
purpose within the defense acquisition system over the past
decade and has become much more closely tied with the inspector
general function than needed or desired to fulfill their
oversight role.
DCAA is not a profit center, but their reports to Congress
highlight that the measure of mission success is that their
audit activities provide a large return on investment by
identifying a large number of adverse audit findings rather
than on executing their primary advisory functions.
We also question whether the agency can inherently be truly
independent and objective in their audit responsibilities while
continuing to emphasize success based upon questioned costs and
return on investment.
Auditing is process based, not outcome based. DCAA asserts
that their return on investment to the taxpayer in fiscal year
2015 was $4.80 per dollar spent. Unfortunately, that value
computation does not accurately measure all costs to the
acquisition system and contractors. These costs include but are
not limited to delays in contract closeouts for the government,
legal disputes, and records retention for industry.
Another cost driver for industry occurs through the
misunderstanding of the concept of materiality as expressed in
the work product and inconsistent judgment of DCAA auditors. As
it pertains to business system, contractors incur high costs to
achieve perfection and internal controls to avoid any
allegations of deficiencies rather than achieve controls that
provide reasonable assurance.
Striving for perfection is admirable; however, the costs
incurred by industry to seek perfection of systems and controls
in order to avoid allegations of deficiencies when a reasonable
assurance standard would serve the agency mission objectives
and not result in increased costs to the government runs
contrary to the emphasis on risk management contained in the
FAR.
This level of process perfection driven by a reluctance to
employ judgment about materiality undermines the timeliness of
business systems in post-award audits. Instead, DCAA should
measure its success in quality audits that meet the
expectations of contracting officers in a timely manner, which
aligns more appropriately with DCAA's original purpose.
Contracting officers need audit reports with timely and
actionable findings to help them make decisions. A review of
aggregate data provided in the five publicly available reports
to Congress from fiscal year 2011 to 2015 and the DOD
inspectors general semiannual report shows decreasing
productivity in the number of audits completed per auditor and
that less than one-third of the questioned costs are sustained
for fiscal year 2014 and 2015.
Moving forward, the following recommendations should be
considered.
First, reevaluate the DCAA mission, organization, and
management and responsibilities and functions provided in DOD
directive 5105.36. This could be achieved by establishing a
working group of government and industry acquisition and
auditing professionals to align mission objectives with the
statutory audit record requirements.
Second, establish timely deadlines for the completion of
incurred cost audits. The optimal timeline would be 90 days
from submission of incurred cost proposals, which aligns more
closely with SEC requirements for a company's annual filing.
These filings incorporate an accounting firm's audit opinion
regarding these statements.
Third, embrace the use of third-party auditors for incurred
costs in business system audits. This is likely the only
solution to eliminate the incurred cost audit backlog and
should continue thereafter. However, it is not a complete
solution. The efficacy of Sections 820 and 893 in reducing the
backlog will be limited if DCAA still requests working papers
and backup materials on work performed by public accounting
firms, which we believe is not necessary or appropriate.
Fourth, publish an annual report card with assessment of
DCAA's services from DOD entities responsible for procurement
and contract administration. This feedback would be highly
beneficial in understanding how well DCAA is performing in its
customer service role. We are not aware of any existing
attempts to do this.
And lastly, Congress should strongly consider the
recommendations of the congressionally established 809 panel.
The Section 809 panel will be examining the defense contract
audit process as part of its larger review. Although their
final report is not due for another 18 months, it should
provide insight into the proper role and responsibilities of
DCAA and other oversight actors through a broader systemic
perspective.
Thank you for the opportunity to appear before you this
morning, and I am happy to answer any questions you may have.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Thomas can be found in the
Appendix on page 87.]
Mrs. Hartzler. Thank you very much. Some good information
here.
I would like to ask all of you, I guess start with you, Mr.
Panetta, because you mentioned multiyear audits in your
testimony. And DCAA has indicated to us, and she just
testified, that even after the backlog is eliminated, the
agency would like to see more multiyear auditing done as the
standard practice.
So how does that practice compare to private sector norms?
And what do you think of that practice for both audits in the
backlog and for new ones going forward?
Mr. Panetta. Well, thank you, Madam Chairwoman.
In comparing that to private sector norms, in the private
sector audits are done on a concurrent basis. And we don't see
multiyear audits. DCAA audits are retrospective. And what we
see when we look, say, at our financial statement audits, the
auditors are auditing the year as we are going along such that
when the year is complete, a couple months after the year is
closed, we issue our financial statements and they issue their
opinion.
So we don't really see multiyear audits. We see concurrent
audits. And I see a problem with doing multiyear audits from a
DCAA perspective, and it is because it is very difficult for
contractors.
We like to staff at a level of activity. And, normally,
audit activity will go along at a certain level. When you go to
multiyear audits, you are going to have peaks and valleys and
spikes. And to support that activity, it strains the
organization, because you either have to be overstaffed for
part of the year or you have to bring in excess resources
otherwise that aren't familiar.
So we would rather see a regular cadence of an annual audit
that is done quickly and concurrently.
Mrs. Hartzler. Obviously, votes are occurring, but I would
like to visit with you more about the concurrent. How would
that change if the DCAA would do concurrent rather than after?
What changes would there be?
Mr. Panetta. Years ago they used to do concurrent auditing
as a practice. They would roll it out. And what would happen
is, as the year would go along, they would test particular
accounts that were as costs were incurred, and contractors
would, say, make adjustments as they found things, such that
when the year was over, the audit work was complete, the
findings were known, and the contractors could actually make
the adjustments before we made the submission.
I mean, that to me would be nirvana, in that when you make
your submission 6 months after the year, it has already been
audited in terms of the underlying information and adjustments
have been made and you are done. I mean, that would be a great
goal to try to achieve.
Mrs. Hartzler. Yes, Mr. Berteau.
Mr. Berteau. Madam Chairwoman, if I could add one thing to
that. The value of multiyear is only there if you have a
substantial backlog that goes back a number of years. We have
some examples of third-party independent auditors for civilian
agencies that are current through fiscal year 2015 and soon
current through fiscal year 2016. And so there is no need for a
multiyear audit if you are up-to-date. And I think that should
be the objective that we want to achieve. Even if we can't go
nirvana, we can at least get partway to currency.
Mrs. Hartzler. Yeah. That is good.
I will go ahead and shift to Mr. Moulton.
Mr. Moulton. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman.
So just to hone in on that for a second. The director just
testified that she would be completely open to moving to
single-year audits if a cost-benefit analysis showed that they
would be more effective. I mean, do you agree with that
assessment?
Mr. Berteau. I think a level playing field assessment,
particularly if you tested it with real world experience and
try it out, would produce the kind of results that she would be
comfortable with and we would be comfortable with.
Mr. Moulton. And, Mr. Panetta, would you agree with that as
well?
Mr. Panetta. A single-year audit would certainly make more
sense to me.
Mr. Moulton. Well, that is not what I asked. I asked if you
would be open to having a cost-benefit analysis determine
whether a single-year audit or a multiyear audit is more
effective.
Mr. Panetta. Well, certainly. More information and
understanding is always something good. So data-driven
decisions always work out best.
Mr. Moulton. Okay.
And, Mr. Thomas, what is your opinion on this?
Mr. Thomas. I agree with the other two members. Having a
multiyear process is really not ideal for a standard practice.
Certainly, it is a benefit to address a backlog. Most of our
members agree that that is okay for that purpose. But as a
standard practice, having concurrent and timely audits is more
ideal.
In answer to your question just now about having a business
case analysis, I don't think that would hurt at all. But I
think if there was an analysis done, it has to take into
account all the costs associated with having all the
liabilities on the books, the time and the costs associated
with that, not just the efficiency of being able for the
department to move through those audits.
Mr. Moulton. Thank you.
And, Mr. Thomas, in your testimony you cited the fact that
DCAA talks about the ROI [return on investment] for taxpayers,
the dollars that it recovers. And I think the issue about risk
avoidance versus risk mitigation is well taken, and this is
something that we have heard from other folks as well. But it
just seems to me that if the agency is recovering a significant
amount of money here, then obviously there is a purpose to
having these audits. I mean, there is clearly some waste,
fraud, and abuse going on.
Do you disagree with that?
Mr. Thomas. I don't disagree entirely. I think, though, we
have to draw a distinction between waste, fraud, and abuse and
finding certain unallowable costs or things that can be easily
addressed. Most companies want to comply. They want to be able
to be audit ready and have these done in a timely, efficient
manner.
And when you look at the purpose of the DCAA, it is really
for an advisory role to the contracting officer to make a final
determination of price reasonableness and understand that risk
assurance. That is really separate from the role of an IG
[inspector general]. Certainly, you can identify where they
blend together. Obviously, you are identifying issues within an
audit.
But the purpose really shouldn't be to identify that. That
is why you have a separate entity. It really should be to work
with the contractor through the audit process, identify those
issues, make the appropriate changes, and move on so that the
contracting officer can make a determination in a reasonable
amount of time.
Mr. Moulton. So we have to wrap up, but just real quickly
so I understand here, you agree that, clearly, there is a role
for auditing in the Department of Defense? I mean, we have the
Secretary of Defense now saying we should audit the entire
Department, which is something I think we on the committee all
agree with. And yet you say the mission--there has sort of been
some mission creep here or whatever.
Look, I don't accept the premise that just because the
mission in 1965 is different than the mission today that
therefore it is wrong. I mean, the mission of the Marine Corps
that I joined is not the same today as it was in 1775. So that
can evolve.
But if there is this issue with auditing, we have
acknowledged at length the backlog, and you think that this
should be more taken up by the inspector general, then I must
assume that there are not enough resources with the IG to do
this. Would that be your conclusion as well?
Mr. Thomas. Not necessarily. I don't know that the two
roles are the same in audit. And first, I do agree, absolutely,
that it is an essential part of the government, particularly
DCAA, to be able to audit as part of the internal control
process of the acquisition system. So there is no question,
particularly from our members.
But I believe that the inspector general has a different
purpose in identifying abuse, whereas the auditor's financial--
going through the audit to find risk assessment with the rate
sustainment is very different, and that is really, again, just
more of an advisory function for the contracting officer.
Mr. Moulton. Well, there is a certain way to look at it,
which might be oversimplistic, which is that there is a
difference between outright fraud and abuse versus just getting
the best price so we don't have the sort of infamous $30,000
toilet. But, nonetheless, taxpayers want both, and I think
taxpayers probably deserve both. Is that right?
Mr. Thomas. Absolutely.
Mr. Moulton. Okay. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman. I yield
back.
Mrs. Hartzler. Well, we have had a very good discussion
with a lot of information here today, and we want to continue
this discussion. And we will look further into your testimony
and these ideas moving forward.
But we really appreciate your insights. Thank you for being
here today.
And this hearing is now adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 10:15 a.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]

=======================================================================

A P P E N D I X

April 6, 2017

=======================================================================

PREPARED STATEMENTS SUBMITTED FOR THE RECORD

April 6, 2017

=======================================================================

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

=======================================================================

WITNESS RESPONSES TO QUESTIONS ASKED DURING

THE HEARING

April 6, 2017

=======================================================================

RESPONSE TO QUESTION SUBMITTED BY MRS. HARTZLER

Ms. Bales. DCAA has issued over 34,000 audit reports between FY
2011-2016. However, the number of audit reports issued is only part of
our workload. Incurred cost audits continue to be a top priority for
DCAA and we have increased the number of audits covering multiyear
incurred cost submissions although a multiyear audit only counts as one
report. We believe multiyear audits help increase audit coverage and
reduce our audit time over single-year audits. Furthermore, we perform
other work that results in memorandums that are fed into other audits
but does not count as a report issued. For example, we perform annual
real-time labor verifications (also known as floor checks) and
interview a sample of contractor employees to ensure they are correctly
charging their time to the appropriate cost objectives. The results of
these verifications are summarized in a memorandum rather than an audit
report, and later incorporated into a future incurred cost report. We
do notify contracting officials on a real-time basis if we find
internal control issues and we notify the appropriate investigative
agency if we identify evidence of mischarging.   [See page 7.]

?

=======================================================================

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MEMBERS POST HEARING

April 6, 2017

=======================================================================

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MRS. HARTZLER

Mrs. Hartzler. In reference to DCAA's response to HASC (March 31,
2017) question #4 (``Return on Investment'') from FY 16 to FY 12,
provide the mathematical justification (nominator/denominator) for each
ROI reported. Please ensure the answer provides the amount of money,
and percent of budget, DCAA allocated to incurred cost audits, forward
pricing audits, and other audits in comparison to the respective net
savings of each audit type.
Ms. Bales. DCAA does not calculate its ROI in the nature requested
as DCAA does not collect the cost for each type of audit. DCAA
calculates ROI as the ratio of savings to total Agency funding each
year. Net savings are supported through a Contracting Officer's
documented actions based on DCAA's recommendations. As a result, in the
table below, we show a ROI breakdown by audit type for FY 2016 to FY
2012 by taking reported savings based on when we receive the
contracting officer's negotiation memorandum over the total operating
costs for the fiscal year we reported the savings.

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

.epsMrs. Hartzler. What specific findings from forward pricing
reviews are typically driving net savings? For forward pricing audits,
how does DCAA define when a cost is ``sustained'' and when a cost
generates a ``net savings''?
Ms. Bales. In responding to this question, we looked at some of the
audit reports issued in FY 2016 with large amounts of questioned costs
where negotiations have taken place and we have visibility into the net
savings. The majority of questioned costs related to labor and material
costs proposed. We have provided a summary of some of the common
findings related to labor and material below:
For labor, significant questioned costs have resulted from the
following:

The contractor overstated their labor hours when compared
to historical hours and taking into account improvement curves and
trends;

The contractor proposed hours to account for a
contingency with no basis to support the costs proposed;

The application of the indirect rates to the questioned
labor costs.
For material, significant questioned costs have resulted from the
following:

The inaccuracy of the prime/higher-tier contractor cost
or price analyses resulted in overstated costs on a subcontract;

The contractor did not update their proposal with current
purchase orders, quotes, and/or agreements with vendors resulting in
overstated costs;

The contractor did not incorporate cost reduction
initiatives in their estimates;

The contractor overstated quantities when compared to
historical actual quantities taking into account improvement curves and
trends;

The contractor did not include quantity discounts;

Exchange rates were overstated;

Escalation rates were overstated;

The contractor did not account for lower prices that were
available.
DCAA considers a questioned cost ``sustained'' when there is a
negotiated cost reduction in the contract price directly attributable
to audit exceptions and recognizes ``net savings'' as the amount of
cost and profit the Government saves through sustention of our
recommended audit exceptions. Because many factors affect the timing of
contract negotiations, we report audit exceptions in the year the
report is issued as a performance measure and document sustention and
net savings in the year the contract is negotiated.
Mrs. Hartzler. In Ms. Bales' oral testimony on April 6, 2017, she
indicated that DCAA had not implemented Section 820 of the NDAA FY
2017, in part, because DCAA ``can't just accept work from another
auditor or auditing company without doing certain things to know that
we can rely on their work.'' Explain in greater detail why DCAA has not
implemented Section 820 with respect to the mandate requiring
acceptance of commercial audit findings of indirect costs.
Ms. Bales. The amendments made by Section 820 are not effective
until October 1, 2018. In the interim, DCAA is taking the following
actions.
DCAA has met with HASC and SASC staff members to discuss some of
unintended consequences of Section 820 that do not appear to align with
Congress' intent. The results of these discussions are informing DCAA
as they begin working the proposed rule with Defense Procurement and
Acquisition Policy (DPAP). For example, while this provision was
intended to remove barriers to non-traditional small businesses, this
provision will apply to some of the largest Defense contractors
resulting in them not being subject to government audits of their
indirect costs. For example, some of the top defense contractors (e.g.,
Raytheon Missile Systems, Lockheed Martin Aeronautics, Boeing Military
Aircraft) performing contracts on major defense programs (e.g., F-35,
Chinook, AMRAAM) would be permitted under this provision to have their
indirect costs audited by a private sector auditor.
DCAA plans to work with the Government Accountability Office (GAO)
on the provision that requires DCAA to accept, without performing
additional audits, the audit findings prepared by a private sector
auditor. The law, as written, would have DCAA violate the auditing
standards as published by the GAO. DCAA is not allowed to accept the
work of another auditor without performing procedures for determining
reliance. (Generally Accepted Government Auditing Standards (GAGAS)
Section 2.09.) DCAA is committed to working with industry and
Government stakeholders on the appropriate use of private auditors;
however; they plan to seek the advice of the GAO to ensure they do not
violate their professional standards.
DCAA is currently working with DPAP on developing a proposed rule
for Section 893, Contractor Business System, which also includes the
use of private auditors. DCAA intends to the use the knowledge gained
in implementing this rule in developing the proposed rule for
implementing Section 820.
Lastly, DCAA has been asked to comment on draft FY 2018 legislation
prepared by the HASC. The proposed language will directly impact the
Section 820 language. DCAA plans to have additional discussions with
the HASC and SASC staff members on the effects of the draft legislation
on Section 820. These discussions will help inform DCAA as they begin
working with DPAP on a proposed rule.

[all]
