- [H.A.S.C. No. 115-19] The Effect of Sequestration and Continuing Resolutions on Army Modernization and Readiness

[House Hearing, 115 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

.
[H.A.S.C. No. 115-19]

THE EFFECT OF SEQUESTRATION AND
CONTINUING RESOLUTIONS ON ARMY MODERNIZATION AND READINESS

__________

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON TACTICAL AIR AND LAND FORCES

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON ARMED SERVICES

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FIFTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

HEARING HELD

MARCH 16, 2017

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
25-051 PDF                  WASHINGTON : 2017

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing Office,
http://bookstore.gpo.gov. For more information, contact the GPO Customer Contact Center,
U.S. Government Publishing Office. Phone 202-512-1800, or 866-512-1800 (toll-free).
E-mail,
[email protected]
.

SUBCOMMITTEE ON TACTICAL AIR AND LAND FORCES

MICHAEL R. TURNER, Ohio, Chairman

FRANK A. LoBIONDO, New Jersey        NIKI TSONGAS, Massachusetts
PAUL COOK, California, Vice Chair    JAMES R. LANGEVIN, Rhode Island
SAM GRAVES, Missouri                 JIM COOPER, Tennessee
MARTHA McSALLY, Arizona              MARC A. VEASEY, Texas
STEPHEN KNIGHT, California           RUBEN GALLEGO, Arizona
TRENT KELLY, Mississippi             JACKY ROSEN, Nevada
MATT GAETZ, Florida                  SALUD O. CARBAJAL, California
DON BACON, Nebraska                  ANTHONY G. BROWN, Maryland
JIM BANKS, Indiana                   TOM O'HALLERAN, Arizona
WALTER B. JONES, North Carolina      THOMAS R. SUOZZI, New York
ROB BISHOP, Utah                     (Vacancy)
ROBERT J. WITTMAN, Virginia
MO BROOKS, Alabama
Jesse Tolleson, Professional Staff Member
Doug Bush, Professional Staff Member
Neve Schadler, Clerk

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page

STATEMENTS PRESENTED BY MEMBERS OF CONGRESS

Tsongas, Hon. Niki, a Representative from Massachusetts, Ranking
Member, Subcommittee on Tactical Air and Land Forces...........     2
Turner, Hon. Michael R., a Representative from Ohio, Chairman,
Subcommittee on Tactical Air and Land Forces...................     1

WITNESSES

Anderson, LTG Joseph, USA, Deputy Chief of Staff, Army G-3/5/7...     5
Murray, LTG John M., USA, Deputy Chief of Staff, Army G-8........     4

APPENDIX

Prepared Statements:

Murray, LTG John M., joint with LTG Joseph Anderson..........    36
Turner, Hon. Michael R.......................................    33

Documents Submitted for the Record:

[There were no Documents submitted.]

Witness Responses to Questions Asked During the Hearing:

[There were no Questions submitted during the hearing.]

Questions Submitted by Members Post Hearing:

Mr. Bacon....................................................    57
Mr. Langevin.................................................    56
Ms. Tsongas..................................................    56
Mr. Turner...................................................    53

.
THE EFFECT OF SEQUESTRATION AND CONTINUING RESOLUTIONS ON ARMY
MODERNIZATION AND READINESS

----------

House of Representatives,
Committee on Armed Services,
Subcommittee on Tactical Air and Land Forces,
Washington, DC, Thursday, March 16, 2017.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 3:32 p.m., in
room 2118, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Michael R.
Turner (chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. MICHAEL R. TURNER, A REPRESENTATIVE
FROM OHIO, CHAIRMAN, SUBCOMMITTEE ON TACTICAL AIR AND LAND
FORCES

Mr. Turner. This hearing will now come to order. The
subcommittee meets today to continue the ongoing process of
informing our members and the public about the current
readiness crisis that all of our military services find
themselves in. This hearing will address how sequestration and
continuing resolutions [CRs] have impacted the Army's ability
to modernize the current and future force and to be ready and
capable against current and emerging threats.
We held a similar hearing last week with the Marine Corps.
I would like to welcome our witnesses: Lieutenant General John
M. Murray, Army Deputy Chief of Staff, G-8; Lieutenant General
Joseph Anderson, Army Deputy Chief of Staff, G-3. And we want
to thank you guys for your dedicated service to our Nation.
We look forward to hearing about your professional
assessment of the current status of Army modernization.
As you know, readiness includes many things, such as end
strength, training, and modernization. In many hearings, the
full committee and this subcommittee have heard testimony
regarding the serious challenges faced by our military services
with respect to overall military readiness. We have repeatedly
heard how the military services, as a result of budgetary
constraints, have had to defer modernization in order to
maintain near-term readiness. We have heard about the many
complex and evolving threats that this country now faces and
how we continue to lose our technological advantage and combat
overmatch against strategic adversaries.
Just last month, General Allyn, the Vice Chief of Staff of
the Army, reiterated many of these concerns and noted that, as
currently postured, the Army is outranged, outgunned, and
outdated in some respects. Right now, the Army is near the
bottom of a historically severe budget drawdown in terms of
modernization. For example, Army modernization funding declined
74 percent from 2008 through 2015 as a result of the drawdown
from two wars and the imposition of the Budget Control [Act]
caps. And as a result, tradeoffs and significant funding
reductions were made to critical modernization programs.
So the purpose of this hearing today is to conduct a more
comprehensive review of the state of Army modernization and
understand what the Army will require to rebuild itself and win
decisively. We need to better understand how and why the Army
is outranged, outgunned, and outdated in some circumstances so
we can begin the process of fixing this problem. As such, the
witnesses have been asked to address and identify, one, the
near- and long-term impacts that continuing resolutions and
sequestrations are having on the Army's ability to modernize
and ready its forces; two, the processes the Army is utilizing
to prioritize modernization requirements to address immediate
and near-term capability gaps in a budget-constrained
environment; three, whether the Army should be focusing its
modernization and strategies across the Future Years Defense
Programs to address the anticipated security environment; and,
four, the potential resources that would be required to support
these strategies.
To be clear about resources, as I said last week during a
similar hearing with the Marine Corps, the top line is the
issue, and we must repeal sequestration. I support the
President's commitment to rebuilding our military. For example,
just last year, the military services identified almost $22
billion in unfunded requirements. The Army's FY [fiscal year]
2017 supplemental request appears to require an additional $4.2
billion just for modernization requirements alone to begin
restoring needed capacity and capability.
The administration has now submitted a budget request of
$603 billion for base defense in fiscal year 2018. This is only
a 3 percent increase above President Obama's projected budget
request for fiscal year 2018 from last year. I have concerns
that a base budget request of only $603 billion does not even
start the process of rebuilding our military. While we cannot
repair all the damage done from sequestration in a single year,
we can and should do more than this level of funding would
provide.
I look forward to working with the administration in order
to increase the fiscal year 2018 budget. And we would like to
get as close as possible to the $640 billion number that was
referenced in Chairman Thornberry's views and estimates letter
to the Budget Committee, a number that is also supported by
Chairman McCain.
Before we begin, I would like to turn to my friend and good
colleague from Massachusetts, Niki Tsongas, for any comments
that she might have.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Turner can be found in the
Appendix on page 33.]

STATEMENT OF HON. NIKI TSONGAS, A REPRESENTATIVE FROM
MASSACHUSETTS, RANKING MEMBER, SUBCOMMITTEE ON TACTICAL AIR AND
LAND FORCES

Ms. Tsongas. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And welcome, Lieutenant General Murray and Lieutenant
General Anderson. It is good to have you before us here today.
I look forward to hearing from you both about the Army's
modernization priorities, particularly in light of the release
of the President's fiscal year 2018 budget outlined yesterday,
and the fiscal year 2017 amended budget earlier today.
Like many of my colleagues, I have long been concerned by
the Budget Control Act's [BCA's] spending caps on defense and
the constraints it has placed on our ability to make thoughtful
investments in areas needed to keep our country and our service
members safe. But I also believe that domestic spending caps in
the BCA are equally devastating to our economic health and our
national competitiveness, which are critical components to a
strong national defense and security.
The fiscal year 2017 budget amendment shows an overall
increase for the DOD [Department of Defense] of $30 billion,
along with $3 billion for the Department of Homeland Security.
However, it also shows an unspecified $18 billion reduction to
nondefense accounts without providing any details, which I find
quite concerning.
With regard to fiscal year 2018, though we have not yet
seen all of the details, many of the nondefense top line agency
numbers are deeply troubling, such as the proposed 30 percent
cut to the State Department, a move over 120 retired generals
and admirals spoke out against in a recent letter to Congress.
Likewise, the proposed fiscal year 2018 budget would make
devastating cuts to the EPA [Environmental Protection Agency]
and the Departments of Labor, Education, and Commerce, among
many others. Simply put, this budget would do great damage to
our Nation and our national defense. And I look forward to
working with my colleagues to strongly oppose its
implementation.
But with that in mind, I look forward to hearing from you
both on today's topic. Since the creation of the All-Volunteer
Force in the 1970s, the Army and the Nation have wrestled with
finding the right balance between prioritizing funding for
military personnel, including training, pay, benefits, housing,
and associated costs, and procuring the best and most capable
equipment. And this tension is more pronounced during times of
flat or declining budgets.
As the cost of recruiting, training, sustaining, and
retaining the most capable troops in the world has gone up, in
order to best prepare and protect them for the challenges they
face, finding the appropriate balance has grown even more
difficult. While all services would prefer to have both, lots
of troops and lots of modernization funds for better equipment,
there have been only a few times in the last 40 years where
fully funding both accounts has been possible given the many
pressing needs across the DOD budget. Various Army Chiefs of
Staff have confronted this issue, but in most cases, the Army
has chosen to maintain the size of the force while delaying or
even canceling important modernization efforts. The Army is
again facing this choice.
The full committee received testimony several weeks ago
from the Army Vice Chief, where we heard that the Army has
serious capability gaps in some areas, such as long-range
fires, air defense, vehicle protection, electronic warfare, and
mobility for light units. At the same time, this committee has
been told the Army is too small in size to carry out its
assigned missions without continuing to place a heavy burden on
current service members and their families.
Over the years, this committee has tried to help on both
fronts. In many years, Army equipment, research, and
procurement accounts have been increased, including this
subcommittee's efforts to fund M1 Abrams tank upgrades,
upgrades needed to maintain our superiority on the battlefield.
Just this past year, the committee stopped the Army's personnel
drawdown at 476,000 in response to increasing demand for
soldiers around the world by our combatant commanders. And the
committee has also shown increasing--also shown consistent
bipartisan support for increasing funding for force protection
initiatives, from body armor to vehicle armor, to make sure we
are providing the best lifesaving equipment for the men and
women we send into harm's way.
For today's hearing, I would like hear from you, our
distinguished witnesses, about how the Army is thinking about
this balance between people and modernization. If the Army is
asked to grow significantly in size in the forthcoming budget,
how will it plan to address the equipment gaps we have been
told about? What options are there for accelerating current
equipment programs? What is the tipping point where the Army is
simply too big to properly equip, given the higher cost of
today's more complex ground combat equipment?
I look forward to addressing these and other issues in
today's hearing. I look forward to your testimony.
And I yield back.
Mr. Turner. General Murray.

STATEMENT OF LTG JOHN M. MURRAY, USA, DEPUTY CHIEF OF STAFF,
ARMY G-8

General Murray. Chairman Turner, Ranking Member Tsongas,
distinguished members of the Subcommittee on Tactical Air and
Land Forces, on behalf of our Acting Secretary, the Honorable
Robert Speer, and our Chief of Staff, General Mark Milley, we
look forward to discussing with you the effects of
sequestration and continuing resolutions on the Army's ability
to both regain warfighting readiness and to modernize the
force.
As you have heard before today, the Army has roughly half
the funding for modernization and equipping the force it had
just 8 years ago. Sequestration, and year after year continuing
resolutions, has forced the Army to make some hard choices,
choices which have led us to focus our resources on generating
and maintaining the best trained and equipped forces that a
fiscally constrained environment would allow.
We find ourselves in a situation where our most capable
enemies are closing quickly. We are losing overmatch in every
domain: land, air, maritime, space, and cyberspace. And as
mentioned, in the words of General Allyn during his most recent
testimony, we find ourselves outgunned, outranged, and outdated
in some very critical warfighting capabilities.
Our current modernization strategy is to upgrade today's
equipment, focusing our limited modernization budget on the
equipment that will have the greatest impact against near-peer
threats and can be in the hands of our soldiers in the near
future.
For the last 10 years, we have focused on the immediate,
providing the equipment necessary for our soldiers to fight in
Iraq and Afghanistan, along with incremental upgrades to our
existing combat platforms. That strategy, driven primarily by
constrained modernization resources, forced us to defer the
development of new combat capabilities. I believe that we have
reached a point in time where we can no longer afford to do
just one or the other: improve existing systems or develop new
ones. We must find a way to do both.
We face critical capability and capacity gaps in areas like
air missile defense; long-range precision fires; critical
munitions production; the mobility, protection, and lethality
of our brigade combat teams [BCTs]; electronic warfare; assured
position, navigation, and timing; ground and aviation active
protection; and cyberspace, to name just a few. We must begin
to fill these gaps if we are to credibly deter and, if
necessary, defeat a near-peer adversary.
Near-term security challenges will be met with the
equipment we have today. And it must be improved to ensure that
we provide our current soldiers with the best we have to offer.
Tomorrow's security challenges will be met with the equipment
we develop and procure over the next several years. And we owe
our future soldiers the equipment they will need to fight and
win in a very complex battlefield.
We urge Congress to provide fiscal stability, funding that
is sustained, long term, and predictable, so that we can
maintain our current warfighting readiness while simultaneously
building a more modern and capable force for the future.
I would like to thank you and the entire committee for your
unwavering support of the men and women of the United States
Army, our Army civilians, and our families. And I look forward
to your questions. Thank you.
[The joint prepared statement of General Murray and General
Anderson can be found in the Appendix on page 36.]
Mr. Turner. General Anderson.

STATEMENT OF LTG JOSEPH ANDERSON, USA, DEPUTY CHIEF OF STAFF,
ARMY G-3/5/7

General Anderson. Chairman Turner, Ranking Member Tsongas,
distinguished members of this subcommittee, thank you for the
opportunity to testify on the state of your U.S. Army.
I appreciate your support and demonstrated commitment to
our Army and look forward to discussing the effects of
sequestration and the continuing resolution on our Army with
you today.
My experience has allowed me to witness significant,
lasting detrimental effects to Army readiness and modernization
caused by sequestration and continuing resolutions. The abrupt
implementation of FY 2013 sequestration significantly impacted
every aspect of the Army; from training to readiness to delayed
modernization, sequestration compelled the Army to take drastic
measures. Continuing resolutions compound resourcing solutions
and greatly affect our ability to generate readiness and
execute a modernization strategy.
Our competitors have studied our doctrine, made revisions
to theirs, and they are rapidly modernizing their militaries.
We now face the prospect of fighting in complex, anti-access/
area-denied environments against threats equipped to overmatch
several of our current capabilities. This strategic environment
requires a trained and ready Army that has both the capacity
and capability to meet current and the future challenges in
order to prevail across the full range of military activities.
Today, the Army remains globally engaged with over 182,000
trained and ready soldiers committed to meeting combatant
command [COCOM] deterrence and counterterrorism [CT]
requirements. The operational tempo required to meet current
and emergent demand consumes readiness as fast as we can supply
it. This places the Army's ability to meet wartime contingency
requirements at high risk.
Resourcing NDAA [National Defense Authorization Act] 2017
end-strength authorizations is absolutely necessary to bridge
gaps within our current formations and is the first step
required to meet our readiness objectives. The Army will
mitigate some manning shortfalls by optimizing its available
resources to enhance total force readiness by filling the holes
in our current formations and increasing our number of armored
brigade combat teams. Additional end-strength increases will
build greater quantities of critical unit types and develop
crucial capabilities in long-range fires and air and missile
defense formations that are required to adequately prepare for
major contingencies.
Readiness remains the number one priority, as I am sure you
heard from our chief this morning. We must stand ready at a
moment's notice to defend the U.S. and its interests. With your
assistance, the Army will continue to resource the best
trained, best equipped, and best led fighting force in the
world.
We thank you for your steadfast support of our outstanding
men and women in uniform. I look forward to taking your
questions. Thanks.
Mr. Turner. Thank you, General.
General Murray, the U.S. Army has enjoyed overmatch against
near-peers and strategic competitors for the last 70 years, but
the world has changed. And our adversaries have closed this gap
and, in some cases, as you mentioned in your comments and I
mentioned in mine, have overmatch in conventional capability.
In your statement, you said, in the past few years, you have
executed a very constrained modernization strategy and that it
is now the time for the Army to start a dual-path strategy:
improve current systems and begin the development of next-
generation combat systems. Can you describe this approach to
the committee in more detail? And do you have the resources to
execute that strategy? If not, what resources will it take?
And then could you also briefly discuss the impacts on
modernization of the Budget Control Act, sequestration caps,
and also the effects of continuing resolutions?
General Murray.
General Murray. Thank you, sir, for that question.
I do think that is a very astute question, and it is really
the central theme of what the Army, I believe, needs to begin
to address in a very serious manner.
As you mentioned, sir, so, for the past few years, we
have--the modernization strategy has been very limited in new
development, and it has been incrementally upgrade equipment as
best we could. And based upon resourcing, those incremental
upgrades take extended periods of times. So procurement
timelines are exceptionally long. So, for instance, we will
finish upgrading the Bradley and the tank with the most recent
upgrade in the mid-thirties, early to mid-thirties, with very
little investment in next-generation capability.
Based upon resources and based upon the number of programs
we have, any investment towards next-generation capability
comes when we buy out an upgrade, and when our procurement
timelines are extended, you never get to the next-generation
capability because you are always upgrading the equipment. And
it really becomes a time, risk, and resourcing equation you
have to balance. So, if you are convinced that you have the
potential of going into conflict in the near term, you have to
continue to upgrade what you have because you can't afford to
send soldiers in with less than the best capability we can
provide.
So it is a balance, and you heard General Allyn say this
last year and General Milley say this last year, is we really
mortgaged our future to take care of the near term. And I say
we need to start to do both, and we are starting to do both.
There was just an article the other day in the paper about the
next-generation combat vehicles. So we are starting some early
prototyping of next-generation combat vehicle.
And to answer your last question kind of at the beginning
here, the answer is, under the current resources, we have--and
I am talking under CR and sequestration--the answer to your
question would be no; we don't have the resources to do both.
And if we had the resources--and we are going to have to find
ways to carve out the resources to do both, and we would do
that by not executing some lower priority programs. And I will
talk to you a little bit later hopefully about the SPAR
[Strategic Portfolio Analysis Review] process where we sat the
chief down and prioritized what our most critical capabilities
are and where we would take risk. And some of those areas where
we would have to take risk are some of high operational value.
Our commanders on the ground are saying they are of high
operational value, that we can't afford to take risk there, but
we will have to if we want to get after this strategy.
And then the trades you asked about in terms of the BCA, so
if the BCA comes back in 2018, as you know, we are on a path to
upgrade the Abrams and the Bradley, we would have to stop that
upgrade program. And right now we are only doing one brigade
every 3 years with current resources. We have proposals, and we
are going to--with the 2017 money that you saw today, I believe
it was, we will get a brigade a year in 2018 and 2019, but then
we go back to one brigade every 3 years. And so it will be 2025
before we finish those upgrades and then have the money to
invest in next-generation combat capability. Stryker without
the upgrades would stop with the one SBCT [Stryker brigade
combat team] we are doing now. We would have to stop the APS
[active protection systems] development, the nondevelopmental
APS that we are doing right now with the--probably with the
characterization we may be able to field one brigade, but that
would be the extent of the active protective systems. And we
would have to significantly slow down the active protective
systems that we are providing for our aircraft, not only in
theater, but across the aviation fleet.
Mr. Turner. General Anderson, would you like to comment?
General Anderson. Yes, sir. Thank you for the question. In
my world, it is all about balancing the readiness. So Mike said
modernization has been the big bill payer; the other one has
been installations, and how do we juggle readiness? But what
the caps do to us is it decreases the level of training
proficiency we can achieve at the collective level from brigade
battalion, where it should be, down to platoons and smaller. It
reduces potential combat training center [CTC] rotations. It
decreases the mission command training program for our brigades
and battalion staffs. It reduces school seats for individual
soldier skills. And all those, of course, erode readiness, and
we only focus resources on outfits that are getting ready to go
on a named operation, be that Freedom's Sentinel, be that
Inherent Resolve, be that Spartan Shield, or be it the Global
Response Force. If you are not in one of those categories, you
are not resourced at the same level as other outfits.
Mr. Turner. General Anderson, obviously, you balance
modernization with also force size, and given your role with
operations and plans, could you please elaborate on why it is
so critical to join the Army to reduce military risk? Provide
us some details as what required funding we should look at.
General Anderson. The NDAA 2017 offer makes us get to that
476 [thousand] number in the Active Component with the
priorities. The number one problem we have right now is our
formations are manned at 95 percent, and typically any unit,
you have anywhere averaging 10 percent across the Army who are
nondeployable, and then typically any given month, you have got
3 to 5 percent of a unit that has got people leaving the Army:
retirement, permanent change of station, going to school,
taking leave, what have you. So the formations that are going
out the door are hovering around 80 percent, and our most
recent combat training center rotations are around the 77, 78
percent. So, when we say ``filling the holes,'' that means
getting units manned back to up around 100 percentile again,
and units do have to work on closing that 10 percent non-
available gap. But we owe--and when we say we are going to send
a formation out the door, we owe formations going at the 90
percentile, 95 percentile, and not the 80 percentile.
And what this will allow us to do beyond filling the holes
is to restore some of the combat power that we were about to
lose. Many different things in Europe, like the 18th MP
[Military Police] Brigade and things like the 4-25 up in
Alaska, we are short BCTs to meet the 3-to-1 requirements.
Again, the classic example is our armored brigade combat teams.
We have nine in the Active Component; it takes three to sustain
Korea, three to sustain Europe, three to sustain Kuwait. That
is it. So one is there. One is going. And one just got home.
And that is the cycle we are seeing in the Army. So if we can
build more capability and provide some other things, like
petroleum outfits, some bridging outfits, some other things for
Europe, that will buy us back some enablers that will help
folks like General Hodges in Europe doing all things Operation
Atlantic Resolve. So that is where it will buy us to restore
some capability and capacity.
Mr. Turner. So it sounds likes you are maxed out. What do
we do?
General Anderson. We either grow, which is what--so we do
have this incremental approach. And, again, what sequestration
and things will do will prevent the growth to go. So 476 is
1.018 number is still a high significant risk for us to meet
the defense planning guidance of a defeat-deny scenario while
doing CT and defending the homeland. So we either got to get
bigger or we have got to turn the rheostat down on demand. So
which of those are COCOM-driven? You know, the Army does field
the majority of all COCOM missions, and the emergent demand
when you grow, put more things back in Iraq, keep a higher
number in Afghanistan, do Syria, do Jordan, do Libya, do
Europe, do Korea, the math doesn't work. So you either have got
to turn something back or you have to grow the capability and
the capacity to meet the requirements.
Mr. Turner. Do you think the COCOMs are driving demand or
the security environment?
General Anderson. The security environment.
Mr. Turner. So we really don't have a choice. It is grow or
not respond to the security environment.
General Anderson. In certain cases, we don't. You'd have to
assess each COCOM's requirements based on what makes Africa
different than what makes Europe, and how much of this is
assuring allies versus how much of this is deterring
adversaries. I think that is the--and, obviously, when you are
talking about the CT fights, as you are very well aware of what
we are doing in northern Iraq and Syria, that is a fight. And
then the question becomes, what impacts and what effects are we
having in Europe as we are running around armored brigade
combat teams, combat aviation brigades, doing 85 exercises?
What effect is that having to the east? Is it truly a
deterrence, or is it assurance?
Mr. Turner. Well, according to the RAND study, it is
neither because it is insufficient for both deterring and
protecting the Baltics so that certainly provides us with a
dilemma.
General Anderson. It does. It does. And that is why when
you prioritize with things like he or I are doing, if you are
building equipment, but nobody is actually operating or using
it, like the SHORAD [short range air defense], the Avengers,
you know, stuff sitting parked in a motor pool--is what RAND
saw--is not going to dissuade anybody. So the question is, what
are the tanks doing? Again, what are the effects you are
achieving through live fires and other maneuvers, but you have
really got to--when you assess all of those exercises, which
ones actually have an impact versus which ones don't? And that
is what RAND was trying to get a good feel for; which of those
had accomplished the objectives, and which ones did not?
Mr. Turner. Excellent.
Ms. Tsongas.
Ms. Tsongas. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
As we are discussing the really important issue I think of
the modernization investments that the Army needs to make, I
would like to first address the modernization investments that
we have made in the past decade. So, General Murray, during the
height of the war in Iraq, from 2003 to 2011, the Army received
about $500 billion in total modernization funding, including
the peak year in 2008, where it received $91 billion in that
year alone. How did the Army use that funding? How much of that
equipment do we still have? Did it all simply get consumed in
the war? And do you see a present and future use for it?
General Murray. Thank you, ma'am. So most of that--and both
General Anderson and I were there during the years you
mentioned. So most of that was consumed, in my estimate, by the
counter-IED [improvised explosive device] fight. So it was
protection for our soldiers. It was MRAPs [Mine-Resistant
Ambush Protected vehicles]. It was up-armoring Humvees [High
Mobility Multipurpose Wheeled Vehicles]. It was additional
munitions procurement. It was better body armor, helmets. I
mean, that is where most of that money went, plus the
recapitalization of the equipment that was rotating in and out
of theater. My guess would be that is where the lion's share of
that money went.
Now are we using some of that equipment? We absolutely are.
So the Humvees are still in the inventory. The MRAPs we have
got in an APS set in Italy. A lesser number, but we are
retaining MRAPs for future contingency use, and we are also
using MRAPs within the current force. So, within FORSCOM [U.S.
Army Forces Command], our EOD [explosive ordnance disposal]
soldiers, route clearance soldiers, are still operating MRAPs,
just like they did in Iraq in 2008, the year you mentioned.
Ms. Tsongas. Well, the reason I wanted to bring this issue
up is to better understand the areas in which the Army didn't
modernize during the Iraq war and what areas were thought to be
of lesser priority and became delayed. I think you have
referenced some of them, but just again to sort of reiterate
where you see the capability gaps as a result of those
investments.
General Murray. Yes, ma'am. And I said this in the opening
statement, we focused on the equipment we needed for Iraq and
Afghanistan. And I look back on it, and I don't think I would
have done anything differently if I was in the position to make
those decisions. So the areas where we took risk were areas
that were not important to us in that type of fight. So it was
air defense systems. It was specifically maneuverable air
defense systems that could keep up with armored brigade combat
teams. And there are some assumptions about both of these.
The other one was probably long-range indirect fires. So
most of the indirect fires that I used in Iraq and Afghanistan
were cannon-delivered, and the range we had with cannon-
delivered was fine. And then you always had the collateral
damage concerns.
So the other thing that was an assumption is when the
defense strategy was written back in 2012--and I am sure you
heard the chief talk about this--there were some fundamental
assumptions made. One is we weren't facing a resurgent Russia
at that point in time, and we made the assumption--and it has
proved to be a bad assumption--a long time ago that we didn't
really need to worry about air defense and we didn't really
need to worry about long-range precision fires because we had
the best systems in the world; it was called the United States
Air Force. And with the capabilities that we are seeing right
now that the Russians have developed and the Chinese are
developing, we have to reinvest some effort. And we really
haven't upgraded those systems in a long time. It wasn't just
the war in Iraq and Afghanistan that caused us to assume some
risk in those areas.
Ms. Tsongas. I appreciate your forthcomingness, but I do
know that there were areas where the Army did recapitalize
quite substantially, and you mentioned, I think, some of them
in the areas of aircraft, wheeled vehicles, which you have
talked about, and communications gear. So I think it is really
just to sort of reiterate the point that the Army is not
saddled with old and outdated equipment across the board. There
are some areas in decent shape, wouldn't you say?
General Murray. Yes, ma'am. And you pointed out a couple of
other things that are absolutely still in use. So the
communications systems we are still using. We continue to
upgrade the tank and Bradley. It is really the equipment we
used in theater and aircraft specifically; we made some
significant upgrades with the aircraft. And we are in pretty
good shape in some areas.
The problem we are seeing now is you can only do so much to
old platforms. And you reach a point of, for instance, the M1
tank. I mean, with the most recent upgrade, it is approaching
80 tons. And we have just about upgraded that platform as much
as we can possibly add to or upgrade it. And we are reaching
the point of limited returns on the upgrades. And we will reach
that, I think, at some point. We have got to make some more
upgrades to the aviation because we added a lot of protection
to our aviation platforms, which has reduced the reach and the
range and the amount of equipment or personnel an aircraft can
carry. So it is things like the ITEP [Improved Turbine Engine
Program] engine are designed to regain what we have lost. But I
don't think we have any piece of equipment that you can say is
going to be good for the next 10, 15, 20 years. We are going to
have to continue to upgrade, or we are going to have to go to a
new development.
Ms. Tsongas. Well, I would like to do one more question,
sort of go in that direction, and that is the Army's 2017 R&D
[research and development] funding request of about $7.6
billion continued what I think is a very disturbing trend of a
decline in what I think is a very important part of the Army's
budget, in fact I think across the services.
As compared to the most recent peak of $14.3 billion in
2008, it is down almost 50 percent. Furthermore, last year's
projection for future years wasn't much better with R&D funding
holding steady around $7 billion in a year. In your testimony,
you mentioned these important capability gaps in several areas,
such as electronic warfare, long-range fires, and air defense
systems. And in addition, the Army continues to invest in
important research in areas such as body armor, materials, and
other force protection technology. My concern is this: how the
Army can possibly address those capability gaps in the future
if R&D spending doesn't go up. You are really, I think, really
making it very much more difficult, given the rapid change in
technology. What areas will the Army have to fund itself, and
how much more will be needed?
General Murray. Yes, ma'am. The ``how much more'' is a
difficult question. And the good news, the R&D is a piece of
it; the S&T [science and technology] piece is the other part of
that. We have protected S&T investments, and that is a little
bit further out than the R&D piece, is 6.1, 6.2, 6.3 dollars,
which you are familiar with. So I said about 50 percent over
the last 8 years what it was 8 years ago. So, in today's
dollars, 8 years ago is about $44 [billion]; today, in 2017
budget, it is about $22 billion in terms of what we would
consider research or what we would consider, without
controlling and equipping. R&D is a piece of that. So,
historically, RDT&E [research, development, test, and
evaluation] is about a third of that dollar figure, and
procurement is about two-thirds of that dollar figure. So it is
balancing that checkbook and getting the right balance between,
how much do you do to continue to field equipment--and we are
fielding a significant amount of equipment. It is not like we
have all the equipment we need right now and we are just
upgrading stuff. We are also fielding new equipment, and we
have equipment in the pipeline, JLTV [Joint Light Tactical
Vehicle], AMPV [Armored Multi-Purpose Vehicle], IFPC [Indirect
Fire Protection Capability], et cetera, that is under
development. And how much can you--the balance I talked about,
it is, how much risk do you take in the near term in order to
focus more resources on what comes a little bit further out,
and truly where do you want to accept that risk?
Ms. Tsongas. How much are you taking advantage of
technological innovation in the private sector? I know
Massachusetts is fortunate to have a Defense Innovation Unit
Experimental, or DIUx. There are others across--there is one in
California, I think in Texas--or to be in Texas. How are you
taking advantage of that innovation so you are not reinventing
the wheel?
General Murray. DIUx, one specific program that I am
working pretty much personally, it is called SMET. It is the
Squad Mission Equipment Transporter. So the concept is that you
take, you know, equipment that is available in the commercial
market, and you put it on what we would call a mule. It is just
a basic vehicle that transports equipment. It takes a 1,000
pounds; it can transport it. It is almost like a leader/
follower technology, follow soldiers, who are dismounted.
So you take all the ammunition off their back, you take the
water off their back, you take their rucksacks off their back.
And we are in very constant communication with DIUx on that
one.
We are also working with the Strategic Capabilities Office
on some other not necessarily commercially available, but stuff
that is already in DOD's inventory that we can reuse in
different ways to try to shave some costs.
Ms. Tsongas. Thank you. I yield back.
Mr. Turner. Mr. Cook.
Mr. Cook. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
This is obviously a very difficult situation, we have been
hearing more and more about--and this falls--the hearing we had
I guess was last week about the RAND study.
One of the things I am concerned about is that I am not
sure whether we are realistic when we have all these
commitments all throughout the world and we have all these op
[operational] plans, and I mentioned this before, and we have
so many units that are C-3 and C-4 [lower readiness ratings].
We have got to face that. These are the units that are going to
go to war, they have to meet these contingencies. And it just
seems as though we never cut back on them, they continue to
grow, and grow, and grow. And it takes a strain on the troops,
the training, how many--you know I have got Fort Irwin in my
district, and a couple of years ago we canceled I think it was
seven exercises. That is unpardonable. At least I am just an
infantryman, I don't understand everything like that.
But if we don't have people, and equipment, and units that
are ready to go to war, then how can we realistically have all
these commitments with the op plans that are in the top secret
vault? Now obviously, I am whining here and the problem is you
are preaching to the choir here. That I think most of us want
to end the sequester, most of us want to fund what you need,
but I think we have to be realistic in that you can only do so
many things.
And you have to tell Congress, hey, I am sorry, but you
haven't given us the money and we are going to be a permanent
C-3 or C-4 and we can't fight anybody. And I know that is a
tough thing to say, but can you kind of comment on that radical
statement I just made?
General Anderson. It wasn't very radical, Congressman, it
was real. The issue is without the sustained predictable
funding, we are not going to get to what you are describing.
So, if we can get off of CRs, get rid of sequestration,
enact budgets, we--as we look towards--as you heard us talk
before, with the expected resources we think we are going to
get, we are talking best case FY 2021 to get two-thirds of the
Army at a C-1 fully capable, C-1 means you can do all your
missions when you deploy, C-2 means you can do most. It will
take us until 2021, best case, 2023 worst case. And the issue
right now is we are trying to shoot for on or about 2019 to see
some impact based on the sustainable readiness that we are
trying to implement which gives people a much more predictable
model of how we employ them.
But your bottom line position right up front is, with the
current throughput requirements we have right now and what the
chairman talked about, the ones that we can't control, we are
still required to meet those COCOM requirements and that is
taking a unit to come right out of that place called the
National Training Center and get on a plane and take off. That
is exactly what the phenomenon is right now.
Mr. Cook. Do we need to do more in Congress, in other
words, a sense of Congress--to the commanders and say you have
got to be realistic in terms of the number of op plans on there
or we are never going to be able to be a C-1 or C-2. It is just
until we prioritize where we are going, you know, how they
going to do it? It is almost impossible.
General Milley addressed this this morning. I won't go into
it, it was classified, but most of us--he was spot on, it was
great. My God you walk around and you say to yourself, boy I
need some kind of antidepressant pills after this, but that is
the world we live in. And so, I know, obviously I am
frustrated, and I know you are frustrated, and we will do our
best. But you have--too bad we don't have all 435 Congressmen
and women packed into this and the 100 Senators and they heard
what we had to hear.
So I yield back. Thank you.
Mr. Turner. Mr. Kelly.
Mr. Kelly. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
At least week's HASC [House Armed Services Committee]
Readiness Subcommittee, I asked about the ITEP and if it was
still the number one modernization aviation program and you
said that it was. As you know, the high, hot challenges in both
Iraq and Afghanistan often require rotary wing to limit
payloads due to inadequate engine power for the mission or for
environmental condition.
ITEP was funded at $52 million in 2016, in FY 2016, and
$116 million in 2017 defense appropriation bill which has
passed the House last week but still has to go through the
Senate. That is a sizable funding difference year-to-year due
largely to the recently awarded contracts for the preliminary
design phase of the program.
Please tell the committee how the continuing resolution
impacts the ITEP program and what are the downstream effects of
ITEP modernization readiness for the Army's Black Hawk and
Apache fleet?
General Murray. Congressman, we don't think the CR in and
of itself will impact ITEP because it is not a new start as you
mentioned, so I think we are okay in terms of the CR.
Now, BCA sequestration is a whole different story. So if we
were to go back to sequestration or BCA in 2018, and I won't
presuppose that ITEP would be one of the bill payers, but the
Army would have to find significant bill payers just to do what
the most critical things the Army has to do. And ITEP is a very
important thing for all the reasons you mentioned. It does
restore high hot, it restores some of the mission payload to
commanders that we have lost over the last few years. And it
potentially is a critical stepping stone to FEO [forcible entry
operations]. So ITEP is one of our more important programs, but
it would have to be looked at it if we were to go back to BCA-
level funding.
Mr. Kelly. And my next thing, and you, Generals, will
understand this, we can't afford another Task Force Smith. We
cannot afford to put our soldiers in a risk situation which
they aren't equipped and trained to face any forces that we
have. And we talk about M1 battle tanks and we talk about
Bradleys, and infantry fighting vehicle, and we talk about the
main end items.
But I am an engineer, I just got through with the engineer
brigade command, and I can tell you our bridging assets today
don't look like what they did in the 1980s as far as
capabilities, and at the corps level and higher, I don't know
that we have enough. I don't know that they are modernized
enough. And you guys know the river crossing operation is the
most complex we face, either that or breaching operations and
also our short gap technology.
So what are we doing to make sure we are modernized whether
you are talking about air defense, mobile air defense systems,
or engineers, the newest best to make sure that we can fight an
enemy, because we are not always going to be in the desert.
There are some places that still have rivers and complex
terrain.
General Murray. I thought you were going to say our
engineering equipment looked exactly like it did in the 1980s
and I was going to agree with you.
So for the engineering piece, start with that. So you are
familiar with the JAB [Joint Assault Bridge] vehicles, so that
is continued and that is a program of record. We continue to
develop and field the JAB here eventually. But just like
everything else, it is going to be a very extended fielding
time line--based upon, how many we can afford to build in any
given year.
The AVLB [Armored Vehicle-Launched Bridge], as you know we
still have M48 chassis carrying bridging assets. And so in an
effort to get rid of the 48 chassis, we have only got 60 and
60s and M1 chassis carrying the scissor bridge. And we are also
doing a recharacterization of the scissor bridge right now,
trying to get it to at least an 80, if not 90-ton load so it
can carry the tank that we have got. HETs [Heavy Equipment
Transporters] are another issue. We are working on upgrades and
potentially a new HET to carry the tank as well. So a lot of
this is not keeping track.
Now on the air defense side really several efforts and so
we are bringing Stingers back into the inventory, although not
approved yet, we are looking at putting Stingers back into the
maneuver formations to provide some short-range air defense. We
have got to recap those Stingers. We are looking at a prox
[proximity] fuze on the Stinger as well, a service life
extension with a prox fuze.
We are pulling old Avengers out right now and recapping
them to get them to Europe because that is the quickest thing
we can do. We are also due to have an air defense maneuverable
SHORAD rodeo, if you will, this year where industry will bring
their best bids in and we will see if we can come up with a
better solution for the longer term. Plus upgrades to Patriot,
plus I think in the 2017 money you will see some buys for THAAD
[Terminal High Altitude Area Defense] missile interceptors.
Mr. Kelly. And the final point I will make and I don't have
time for an answer, but I just hope that we are really looking
in Europe and making sure that we have adequate forces. In the
1980s we had adequate armored forces over there to take care of
our business as a partner in NATO [North Atlantic Treaty
Organization].
And I just hope that we are looking at having HBCTs [heavy
brigade combat teams] over there, not light--and I see the
infantry thing, I want to be sure we have HBCTs and the proper
capabilities to go back to not necessarily to the Cold War, but
we need to be prepared to defend our NATO allies.
And with that, I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Turner. Mr. Banks. Mr. Wittman.
Mr. Wittman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Lieutenant General
Murray and Lieutenant General Anderson, thanks so much for
joining us, thanks for your leadership.
Lieutenant General Anderson, I want to go to your comments
where you talked about the funding deficits causing the Army to
leave our combined training centers, our combat training
centers. They are not used the way that they have normally been
used, but you also spoke about the need for units to have
opportunities at home training bases, to make sure they can
develop those tactical skills, those small unit level skills.
In Virginia I am proud to have Fort A.P. Hill in the First
Congressional District. As you know, it is a regional
collective training center. And I have talked to the folks
there recently we have had units like the 82nd Airborne come up
from Fort Bragg, do a heavy drop, do an exercise there. Our
units are able to learn, do the same things that they could at
the CTC, gather back up and go back home all in the same day.
Great training opportunities where we can use resources, assets
there, most efficiently.
Let me ask how you envision using our RCTCs [Regional
Collective Training Capability] in relation to not being able
to fully utilize our CTCs because of funding issues and
bringing units in for longer term periods of time. If you can
do this on a daily basis or at least a smaller scale where you
don't have the expenses associated with that. Give me your
perspective on how you use the RCTCs in this situation?
General Anderson. Sure, sir, thanks. They are enablers. So
as you know, the CTCs are very focused on the decisive action,
full spectrum, unified land ops. Places like A.P. Hill,
Muscatatuck in Indiana, when we can get closed networks, closed
environments, where we can deploy--obviously deployability is
very important to us, that I can snap somebody out, and bring
them back, and make sure they are out loading and putting
pallets and as you mentioned doing heavy drops, and rail and
convoys. But any time we can take somebody off of the backyard
that they know and send them somewhere else to do a focused
exercise, again preferably joint, preferably multi-compo
[multiple components], and preferably with our allies.
And the more we can package those and the niche
capabilities, and we use A.P. Hill a lot, that it is very
popular with places like Bragg as you said. Muscatatuck is
becoming the cyber because they have got an underground system,
you can shut the power off, you can shut the water grid off,
you can actually pick locks and manipulate cameras.
So places that have those kind of capabilities, we want to
leverage, and again, tend to make them a little bit more
functionally focused, but again collaborative with what we just
talked about.
Mr. Wittman. It seems to me that they have a great
opportunity there. I understand that it is tougher to do things
at the brigade scale in a joint training exercise, but our
JRTCs [Joint Readiness Training Centers] I think have that
capability. It is, I think, good to practice mission planning
for our teams to make sure they get there, they understand that
they go to an unfamiliar place instead of doing the same thing
time, after time, after time, in the same DZs [drop zones] that
they have been in all the time. So that I think is great for
our troops.
Let me ask too a little bit on the training side. You've
looked to reduce the mandatory training burden to make sure we
are actually doing things that are substantive. You know
sometimes we have gotten in this instance of checking the box,
you know doing those kinds of things and really looking at the
utility of that. And there is a value to MOS [military
occupational specialty] specific training opportunities.
Give me a perspective on how you have looked at maximizing
the utility of the time of our soldiers, both in the Active,
Reserve, and Guard Components to make sure that when they are
there training that they get the most of out of that, it is not
just a check the box thing. Many times it is kind of generic,
people look at it and go this really isn't helping me in the
time that I have to spend on my one weekend a month and my 2
weeks during the year. And we are going to have to use that
Guard and Reserve Component to the maximum utility and make
sure they can do things.
Give me your perspective on how we make best use of the
training time that we ask them to devote?
General Anderson. Sure, sir. Without the total Army we will
not survive. So three divisions right now, Guard divisions, are
deployed; one is homeland, two are abroad, Jordan, Kuwait,
Afghanistan. And five BCTs are employed in support of COCOM.
So the keys here are how do you incorporate, inculcate the
training requirements you want through what you describe like
going to places like A.P. Hill? Things you do actually in a
collective training environment versus sitting around like we
are right now and flapping some slides up and saying back to
you checking the block. Okay, I showed you five slides on
sexual harassment assault, that means we are going to be good
at sexual harassment assault. No, it is not.
It means leadership. It is training and you can take that
across any function, any area you want to talk about, but how
do you take those things off the plate, build resiliency for
example in road marches and on ranges, rule of law of land
warfare, conduct of law, that is on a range, that is not an
objective, not in a classroom saying you don't do certain
things to our adversaries.
So taking those off the plate in a classroom, putting them
in a field environment, and then maximizing the synergy from
those combined, joint, multi-compo exercises where you are
doing that stuff all together, because the key to a successful
combat training center rotation is great home station training
on the front side, backside, and all the other events that you
can do in between.
And when the Guard is doing something and the Active is
there, and when the Active is doing the something the Guard is
there and the Reserves are there, and you get the synergy from
that. But not going through saying this many hours, this many
slides, here is the program, and if you don't do that you are
not qualified, certified. And by the way, all the requirements
that the COCOMs put on us that are typically redundant,
excessive about getting somebody on an airplane to go to
someplace like Baghdad.
So how do you meter all those? But again, the Reserves, if
they follow the old mandatory training model it would take
every weekend, all year to meet all those requirements, and all
you would do would be the mandatory check the block type
training, not collective MOS training that you just described.
Mr. Wittman. Thank you. Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Cook [presiding]. Mr. Brooks.
Mr. Brooks. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I think most of here us get it when we are talking about
the impact of continuing resolutions and sequestration on the
military, so I am going to shift gears to a little bit of a
different subject.
What can we do to increase the efficiency of the
contracting process? We have got this Federal Acquisition
Regulation, the DFARS [Defense Acquisition Regulations System],
and all the different subparts there. And in particular, it
seems that there is a tremendous amount of time that is being
spent to get a weapon system from an idea to the warfighter.
Many years, maybe as much as 5 or 10 years on occasion, which
is unsatisfactory, particularly in an emergency situation.
Is there anything that we can do with our contracting
officers or our program managers or project managers and their
relationship to expedite the process or condense this time
period that not only takes so long, but also tends to drive up
the cost of any new weapon system that we try to implement?
General Murray. Neither one of us are acquisition or
contracting officers, sir, but I am probably closest to it. So
I will take a swing at that.
So in your estimate of 5 to 7 years was very generous, to
be honest with you; if you are talking about a new
developmental system, in most cases it takes longer than that.
So we are--and when I say acquisition, it is really--it is just
not the acquisition and contracting piece of it. It starts with
a good idea some places you mentioned versus we have a unit
equipped in the field with that piece of equipment, whatever it
happens to be. So I do think that there are areas that we can
find some efficiencies.
We are trying to do a much better job, as an Army, of
locking down requirements more quickly in the process and then
not changing requirements as we get into the development and
the contracting for that capability because that adds time to
the process.
We are trying to get prototypes into the hands of soldiers
a lot faster in the process so we can really--before we write a
requirements document, we understand truly what it is that the
soldiers think about that piece of equipment. And soldiers that
will be using that equipment help us determine what the
requirement is for that specific piece of equipment.
We are engaging industry earlier in the process and more
continuously in the process to make sure they understand our
expectations and to make sure we understand what is going to be
hard about what we are asking them to do and where we need to
be thinking about making trades before we get into development
and discover we have got a problem in terms of something we are
asking for.
So all that can help, and none of that really touches
contracting. I know within the [Army] Contracting Command, it
is a very regulated process that we follow, because every time
a mistake was made in the past, we added another regulation, we
added another standard operating procedure or we added another
whatever it is. And so the AMC [Army Materiel Command]
commander who is in charge of that has gone through and tried
to streamline the amount of requirements just down to what the
bare minimums are so we can actually get contracts done in a
more expedited manner.
Mr. Brooks. Lieutenant General Anderson, do you have
anything to add?
General Anderson. I do, sir. I would say from a couple of
jobs I have had and what I manage now I would say number one we
established that Rapid Equipping Force to provide a 10-liner
capability for the warfighter; when they were able to put in a
description of what the requirements were it went typically
straight from the warfighter to that organization who would
figure out how to outsource to make that happen in a very
similar to what our rapid acquisition office is trying to do
now in the Pentagon.
But also the operational needs statements, when you are
deployed and you are trying to meet requirements on a short-
term basis those are typically developed for cases where the
materiel exists, the hardware exists, the technology exists,
and it is more an off-the-shelf approach. But when you are over
there--like the counter-UAS [unmanned aircraft systems] fight
we are dealing with now in Iraq.
So how do you find current existing ways to deal with RF
[radio frequency] spectrum, the DroneDefender, the AUDS [Anti-
Unmanned Aerial Vehicle Defense System], the CORIAN [counter-
UAS system]. These are all things that have been patched
together in many cases using old Duke [counter-IED system] kits
and transmitters, and how you link that stuff all together, and
you use the ingenuity of soldiers to make a mobile capability
to knock these drones down. That is the kind of stuff we don't
have time; you don't have 10 years.
They are dropping bombs and dropping chemicals on FOBs
[forward operating bases] now. So you can't wait 5, 7 years, 10
years for that. It has got to get there as quick as it can. And
again, the more rapidly we allow people that are actually--like
we used to do when we were over there, take the technology
early and experiment with it over in theater, and if it works,
great. And if it doesn't, you send it back. But at least you
are not waiting for some long acquisition testing process to
achieve effects.
Mr. Brooks. Thank you for your service and for your
responses. Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Cook. Thank you.
Mr. Langevin.
Mr. Langevin. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want to thank our
witnesses for your testimony today and for your service to our
Nation.
To each of you, if you could comment on this, I have been
increasingly concerned about the atrophy of our electronic
warfare [EW] capabilities, as they are absolutely critical to
our operations abroad. We have probably touched on some of
these during the course of the hearing, but can you discuss the
most urgent modernization needs in this field? And how are you
prioritizing this capability within the Army?
General Murray. Yes, sir. And thank you for that question.
In terms of EW, we have got several programs of records
that are working so we have got electronic capability right now
in terms of counter-IED. And that is really where we have
focused our efforts for the last few years. So we are trying to
recapitalize what we have done with Duke to use it in, as
General Anderson mentioned, in different ways.
The current focus of effort is the counter-unmanned aerial
system fight in Iraq right now. And as General Anderson
mentioned that we have fielded numerous systems trying to
figure out the sweet spot the right way, but right now it is
primarily an electronic attack solution.
And then a little bit further in the future is really
developing tactical level EW capabilities. And we used to have
pretty significant electronic warfare capability, both from
understanding the electromagnetic spectrum, to the electronic
protect, to the electronic attack. And that is one of the
things when we got involved in counteterrorism was not nearly
as important that we hadn't put a lot of time into.
So things like the multifunctional electronic warfare suite
of equipment that is a program of record. So the first one is
to be mounted on a probably a Grey Eagle unmanned aerial
system, so it gives you an air capability, both to understand
the spectrum and to affect the spectrum.
Next would be a large ground system, and then finally would
be a small ground system to replace our counter-IED stuff and
do stuff at a smaller dismounted soldier, almost individual
soldier level. It is really getting that capability back into
our tactical formations.
General Anderson. And, sir, a subset of that is the
electronic warfare planning and management tool, which gives
commanders a common operating picture of what the environment
is. So you take that MQ-1 [unmanned aerial vehicle] capability
which will be fixed, will be rotary, it will be ground, and it
gives them the ability to see it. And then further developing
our electric fires, which is the lasers, the microwaves, the
railguns.
So back to what Mike is talking about, how do you enable,
how do you operationalize, how do you give capability to
commanders on the ground to actually do something with this
stuff besides just worrying about secure nets; it has got to be
bigger than that. It is how you actually have the capability to
attack something versus just defending yourself.
Mr. Langevin. Thank you. Can you talk about how Russia and
China in particular are employing EW against us? And what else
do we need to respond?
General Anderson. Well, that is one of the categories that
we have been outpaced here. So the question becomes again how
do we--what do we learn from those technologies they are
employing? And they are doing it very effectively. And the
issue becomes we are playing catchup. And so it goes back to
what Ms. Tsongas was talking about as you look at RDT&E, how do
we figure out what they are employing? We get pretty good
feedback from effects in places like the Ukraine, and a little
bit easier to focus on what they are doing in Eastern Europe
than China, per se.
But how do we learn from those technologies, capabilities
they are employing and then how do we enable us, evaluate,
assess, inform what we are doing forward, based on what we are
seeing; but right now we are in the learning mode from what
they are employing, in the catch-up mode.
Mr. Langevin. Okay. Thank you. As I said, I have become
increasingly concerned about how our capabilities have
atrophied over the years, have not kept pace with our
adversaries. I know that the Pentagon is responding and we have
a program that we are dedicated to in playing catchup, but I
know there is a lot of work to do.
The WIN-T [Warfighter Information Network-Tactical]
Incremental 2 system on-the-move broadband communications
backbone of the Army is currently being procured at a rate of
two per year, although I understand it may be possible to
reduce the overall cost of this program by as much as 40
percent by procuring these systems more quickly. In fact, the
Army reported to Congress in June 2014 that the most economical
projection rate would be as high as eight brigade sets per
year, which would provide WIN-T to our service members well
over a decade earlier than at the current rate, ensuring the
superior technology they are using is up to date.
Well, accordingly the decision was made in July 2015 to
move to full-rate production, but the Army has not yet done so.
Do you intend to use that full-rate production decision to
procure WIN-T units at a more rapid pace?
General Murray. Sir, WIN-T is identical to just about
everything we do. So we are procuring aviation assets at
minimum sustaining levels, we are upgrading tanks at minimum
sustaining levels. We started off with six brigade sets was the
goal for WIN-T, as you said, we are down to two. It is all
driven by the resources and how thinly I have got to spread the
resources to keep the programs going.
So I would love to buy everything at an economic price
point and save money on every system. The fact of the matter is
the best we can do right now in most every case under--I am
talking today and the past, is that min [minimum] sustaining
rates or close to that to keep production lines warm so we can
expand when resources come.
But my fundamental question is, I would love to buy
everything as cheaply as I possibly can, given what I have got
to buy and how thinly I have to spread the resources. We just
can't afford to go much above where we are right now in terms
of the production rates.
Mr. Langevin. I certainly hope we are going to be able to
address that, and certainly doing away with sequestration would
help quite a bit. But ultimately we want to get what the
warfighter needs to them as quickly as possible, at the same
time let's do what is right by the taxpayer as well. It seems
like it would be a win-win to me.
So thank you. Thank you for your service and for your
testimony today. I yield back.
Mr. Cook. Thank you.
General Bacon.
Mr. Bacon. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want to also thank
our colleague from Rhode Island for his questions on electronic
warfare. Someone who has served almost three decades in the Air
Force doing electronic warfare, I do know we are falling
behind, and the Russians are investing, the Chinese are
investing. We have a lot of catching up to do and I appreciate
your all's focus on that. I want to thank you both for your
leadership to the Army and the Army Staff. Grateful to you.
Your vice chief said recently that only 3 of 58 combat
brigades could deploy. Is that still the case?
General Anderson. It is, but a caveat. That was the three
in the top category. There is--and I am going to try and keep
away from numbers here, we had a problem with this last week so
you kind of forget where you are.
So we are in the ballpark of a little bit on the low side
of 20, that can actually go out the door at the next level of
ratings so he spoke about the top three, there is a remainder
that could go out the door.
Mr. Bacon. And so it would be at the top tier for a very
short response window and only 3 of 58, but there is a next
tier that could do better? Is that right?
General Anderson. That is correct.
Mr. Bacon. I got that right? I just think it is a disgrace.
Our Congress and previous administration owed you better. When
we talked about going back to the hollow force of the 1970s, it
has got to be one of our top priorities to fix. And I think
this Congress is set to do that. We are going to work hard to
put us in a better spot to do deterrence and make sure that we
keep the peace. And we do that by having the ability to deploy
and that our enemies and potential adversaries know that we can
do that.
In your testimony you talked about being outgunned,
outranged, outdated. Would you say the Russians' latest tank
can outgun and outrange our modernized M1?
General Murray. It depends probably, Congressman, on which
tank you are talking about. And I am not a T-14 or Armata type
of guy because I don't think they have gone into development or
full production of that capability. I would say that in terms
of what I would call their most recent fully fielded tank, the
T-90, I would say that the M1 is still very equivalent. I don't
think we are necessarily from that platform. Now there are
systems that they can use, that do outrange the M1 tank, but I
would stack the M1 up against the T-90.
Mr. Bacon. So right now they are producing tanks about
rough parity with ours. What about in the attack helicopter
range, are they producing helicopters, attack helicopters that
can outrange, outgun ours?
General Murray. I would say once again, probably close to
parity.
Mr. Bacon. Parity again. I don't like parity, by the way. I
don't want to have a close fight. I think we should not want to
have a close fight.
What about artillery, how does their artillery stack up
with ours?
General Murray. That is a little bit cleaner. They have--
and it is just not a capability, it is a capacity issue as
well. So in terms of capacity, they have significantly more
artillery, both rocket and cannon artillery than we do and they
do in fact outrange our systems.
Mr. Bacon. You know, the Russians have historically put a
lot of emphasis on artillery.
I wanted to ask you about Europe. When I was the commander
at Ramstein, I think the last combat brigade or last combat
unit for the Army was taken out of Europe. Do we have plans to
put combat units permanently back into Europe, especially with
what Russia's been doing?
General Anderson. There is two forward station brigades
there, the 173rd still headquartered in Vicenza and the 2nd
Cavalry Regiment in Vilseck. So those are the two assigned
forces to Europe. And we began here this January the first
ever--you know, I think you are familiar, we had the European
Activity Set where we were deploying----
Mr. Bacon. It's a great initiative.
General Anderson. That's part of ERI [European Reassurance
Initiative]. We put units on top of it, but they didn't stay.
Pieces, parts of the unit came for different parts of the year.
And for about a month or two, maybe up to three, the whole
brigade was actually all there at the same time. Starting in
January, we deployed the third brigade of the fourth ID
[infantry division]. Now we call it a heel-to-toe, so the whole
brigade is there.
They are based in Zagan, Poland, but they extend all the
way up into the Baltics, and they go all the way back to
Grafenwoehr by squadron, by battalion, for gunnery for a couple
of months. They will all consolidate in Romania in July for
Saber Guardian. But the bottom line is that brigade, with their
kit, they bring it from home so the kit is better maintained,
they employ it, go do gunnery, go do road marches, go do
CALFEXs [combined arms live-fire exercises], go do whatever
with our partners and then they go back home in 9 months. So
that will be now a second brigade----
Mr. Bacon. It is a rotating combat brigade.
General Anderson. It is a rotating. And before that brigade
goes, just like when we were brigade commanders in Iraq, you
didn't leave until the next brigade showed up. So now the next
brigade shows up, they download, they do an actual relief in
place, and then the brigade will go back to Colorado, and the
brigade from Fort Riley will be----
Mr. Bacon. If we had the resources and it plussed-up your
resources, would it be wise to have a permanent combat
brigade----
General Anderson. People argue that, obviously a policy
issue, and of course a very resource-intensive one. So you are
probably seeing some of the things in the press where Europe is
doing some of the costing of what they could do Germany pure
and then what it would take with some of the other host nations
in places like Poland to go ahead and have concerns, things
like that down the road.
Mr. Bacon. Okay thank you. I have one other question about
ISR [intelligence, surveillance, and reconnaissance] but I will
put it down for the record. Thank you for your time. I yield
back.
General Anderson. Thanks for your service.
Mr. Cook. Thank you.
Mr. Carbajal.
Mr. Carbajal. Thank you, Mr. Chair, and Ranking Member
Tsongas. Thank you Lieutenant General Murray and Anderson for
coming here today. I appreciate your service and your
addressing us today.
I would appreciate it if you could answer the following for
the record. Last week the Marine Corps testified before the
subcommittee on the same topics and I asked them to comment on
the female body armor programs and their plans for providing
better fitting armor for female marines. Could you share
details of the Army's program to do the same and how you are
coordinating, or not, your efforts with the Marine Corps?
General Murray. Thank you, Congressman. And absolutely. And
to answer your last question first, we meet with the United
States Marine Corps, both their combat developers and their
resourcers, about once a quarter to discuss topics just like
this. And as a matter of fact we have talked about this in the
recent past.
So we have kind of learned over the last few years that
body armor does not fit all makes, shapes, and sizes. And the
one thing I would say is you will never make body armor that is
completely comfortable. I have been wearing it for 35 years; I
don't think I've ever put it on that I would say it was
comfortable. So that is just a fact of life.
Protection has to be the number one priority; I mean, that
is why we build the body armor. But we do in fact have modified
the IOTV [Improved Outer Tactical Vest], the individual
tactical vest, to better form fit our females. We have reduced
the size of some of the plates, still providing protection, so
that it is a better form fit.
The combat ballistic shirt, we do have specific form fits
for our female soldiers. And we have gone through additional
sizes for the shoulder protections and the torso protection
which you hang on the sides to better form fit not only our
female soldiers, but our smaller male soldiers.
So the answer to your question is yes to both; we do work
with the Marines on that and yes, we have learned those
lessons.
Mr. Carbajal. Thank you. I have worn that body armor and I
know it is not comfortable. But certainly it could be a lot
more comfortable depending on your body shape, so I appreciate
you sharing.
According to the DOD's annual energy and management report,
DOD's operational and installation and energy represents
approximately 80 percent of total Federal energy consumption
and the Army is the largest consumer of installation energy. In
what ways is the Army working with the defense industries to
invest in energy innovation?
General Murray. That is again probably outside of both our
areas of expertise, but fortunately both of us have commanded
several installations so just from personal knowledge, and I
most recently came from Fort Stewart, Georgia, so I know for a
fact that on Fort Stewart, Georgia, we had a wood chip burning
plant if you will.
So obviously in Fort Stewart, Georgia, there is a lot of
pine trees and a lot of forestry goes on. We would go out as an
installation, police up tree tops, tree roots, tree trunks, et
cetera, grind them and burn them to heat the water--very clean
burning, but burn them to heat the water at Fort Stewart.
We also did a partnership with Georgia Power, put in one of
the largest solar fields in the State of Georgia just outside
of Fort Stewart that would serve that installation if power was
ever cut, but otherwise it goes onto the grid for the greater
use of the State of Georgia, and that is just one installation.
Our last ASA [Assistant Secretary of the Army] Miss
Hammack, was very focused on this effort so I know at Fort
Benning, Georgia, there is another solar grid and she was
working throughout the United States on initiatives just like
you are talking about.
General Anderson. And I commanded Fort Carson, Congressman,
which was an energy efficient megacity out there. And we had
solar panels because of the altitude and the sunshine there
virtually every day. We had panels everywhere. But we were also
the test bed for electric vehicles so we had--trying to reduce
energy consumption on it.
Now the question was going to be how well it was going to
be applied in a tactical environment. It was being applied in a
garrison environment, but it was not using fuel vehicles, it
was using electrical vehicles that would plug into the actual
division headquarters, a humongous charging power grid there
that recharged the vehicle for a 24-hour burn. And we were
using those things all over the place to deliver supplies,
mostly logistic sustainment related stuff.
And the issue was going to be what was going to be the
expandability in a field environment, and of course everything
we are dealing with here in the building in Washington does
deal with size, weight, and power. When we do procure things we
are looking on what is in the rechargeable realm, what does use
renewable energy, but how do you from weapon systems, to
communication systems, to vehicles, how do we import those
technologies so it is not a fuel heavy, petroleum heavy
environment.
Mr. Carbajal. Thank you. Thank you very much. I yield back.
Mr. Cook. Thank you.
Mr. Veasey.
Mr. Veasey. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I wanted to ask both
of you about the continent of Africa just because I have been
interested in some of the ungoverned areas there which, as we
know, can be an issue for new radicalism. And I wanted to ask
you about the effect of sequestration and budget caps on the
Army's missions in Africa. And how are units managing
preparation and training for missions to this region along with
the eight other operations the Army currently supports?
General Anderson. Well, one of the named operations,
Congressman, is in Africa, in the Horn of Africa. So the
problem we are having in Africa is, as you know, a huge
continent between Lord's Resistance Army, Boko Haram, Al Qaeda,
ISIS [Islamic State of Iraq and Syria], et cetera. The
migration north as you go up towards places like Libya, when
our brigade combat teams are going there, they are getting kind
of broken apart to deal with the numerous requirements. There
are some Gray Eagle [unmanned aircraft system] support, there
is security force issues, and there is also some of these
logistics bases as hubs that we are using in Africa.
So the problem is the expanse, the troop-to-task
requirements. And so when a BCT goes there, unlike when a BCT
goes to Europe, the BCT goes to Europe and stays pretty much
tactically pure at least to the battalion task force level with
fires, aviation, maneuver. That is not the case in the
continent of Africa because of what the requirements are there
and how we are breaking down into a much smaller company and in
some cases even platoon level to deal with the different
requirements.
So our challenge is how do we get a common operating
picture of what that looks likes requirement-wise and what is
the best way to support the requirement based on what the task
is. So what really should a BCT be doing over there versus
other types of units or smaller scale requirements in support
of AFRICOM [U.S. Africa Command] or United States Army Africa,
and that is the constant challenge we are having right now in
how we are providing support there.
Mr. Veasey. Do you think with the Chinese constantly
expanding their footprint on the continent of Africa, as you
know, we don't have--we have operations there, we don't have a
U.S. base there like we do in Europe and other parts of the
world. Do you think that that is a mistake in dealing with that
particular mission?
General Anderson. I think that is part of the assessment we
have to make. What are they trying to achieve? How much of that
again is via influence or action? And what is the counter to
that? But when you put that on the context of what I just
talked about, you are just complicating the factor by what they
are trying to do typically subvertly. And how do you counter
that? And what does it take to do that? And that just adds to
the complexity on the continent.
Mr. Veasey. Thank you. Let me move over to Army aviation
assets. I wanted to ask you which assets would you prioritize
if we still have sequestration in FY 2018? And which stand to
undergo the greatest cuts.
General Murray. So we haven't reached that point yet.
Hopefully, we won't, Congressman, but I would prioritize active
protective systems for our aircraft, because there are threats
out there right now that we just--we need to develop some new
technologies, and we are, to provide protection for our
aviators. I would put that as number one.
And then personally it would be difficult for me to decide
between the AH-64 versus UH-60 Mike model, the Echo model for
the 64 or the Mike model, or the CH-47 Block II, because they
are all required.
So my guess is we would prioritize the active protection
and then we would continue to go at min sustaining rates across
all of our aviation lines and upgrade as we can and we just
drag out further than we were planning right now.
Mr. Veasey. Which systems would you prefer to divest if
given the opportunity?
General Murray. Well obviously, we still have some [OH] 58s
out there that we still have to get rid of, the TH-67s we are
getting rid of--all part of our ARI [Aviation Restructure
Initiative]. We need to get rid of the Alpha model of the UH-
60s and we are on track to do that first in the National Guard
and then in the Active Component. And then as we go to Block II
of 47, the older 47s.
Mr. Veasey. Thank you. Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Cook. Thank you.
Ms. Tsongas.
Ms. Tsongas. I have one just sort of--it is more or less a
follow-up question. But General Murray, I would like to get a
sense of how the Army is integrating commercial off-the-shelf
[COTS] items in areas as basic as boots to areas as
sophisticated as software given the fiscal constraints. The
real needs around manpower, the needs to modernize, and needs
to equip.
What impediments are you facing to the further introduction
of COTS materials? Are these impediments related to procurement
regulations or issues related to licensing and intellectual
property? And what do you need from Congress--if these are
impediments, what do you need from Congress to better address
them?
General Murray. General Anderson mentioned how we do
equipment through the Rapid Equipping Force, which is based
upon ONSs [operational needs statements] and JUONSs [joint
urgent operational needs statements]. So there are some
statutes and legal things that can be done through that process
that are currently prohibited, for instance the Berry
Amendment.
So you mentioned boots; this is a recent scar tissue for
me. So we just went through jungle boots for the 25th [Infantry
Division]. And it was as simple as the Chief of Staff going
down there and identifying a problem, coming back and saying, I
want boots. And I basically spent probably a couple months
figuring out how to work my way through the acquisition rules
to get to a point where we could just go buy boots and put them
in the hands of soldiers. And we just fielded them in March, so
we were able to be do that in about 3 months.
So there are ways of doing this. I am not going to say that
it is easy. The software piece--and I am not the software
expert--our software is kind of procured through the PEOs
[program executive offices] and PMs [program managers], but I
know we procure software that way, not purely a commercial
item. And really we are trying to do this smarter, so in the
past we have--if I was going to buy boots or a very simple
vehicle like the ground combat vehicle--I am sorry, not the
ground combat vehicle, the small GMV [ground mobility vehicle]
basically to get soldiers from point A to point B, we would
figure out how to do it for the entire Army.
So for the boots, I am not buying for the entire Army. I am
buying for the soldiers that need the jungle boot and we are
putting some in contingency stocks if we have to go fight in a
jungle environment. And that is where we are going to stop the
jungle boot.
For the small Gator-like vehicle, we are going to buy off
of an existing SOCOM [Special Operations Command] contract. We
are going to buy five BCTs' worth, and we are going to see if
we need more. If we need more, we will go into a full and open
competition for the other 30 infantry brigade combat teams.
So we are trying to break the paradigm by doing things in
smaller scales, because the other thing is with the resources
we have, if I was going to buy for the entire Army, it would be
years, and years, and years, and the technology would be
updated by the time that I buy the last brigade's worth of
equipment.
If we buy in smaller chunks and then you know in 2 years, 3
years we go after the most up-to-date stuff, commercially, if
possible limited new development is we are having some pretty
good success. It is the same way we are going after mobile-
protected firepower. It is very clear to industry we are not
interested in new development because we want it quickly and we
know the technologies that are out there to give us what we
need.
Ms. Tsongas. Well, if there is any way we can be helpful,
we look forward to helping with that, because you are right on
a number of fronts, it is a huge investment if you are thinking
across the Army, technology changes so quickly it can become
obsolete just as quickly, so quickly and so a whole host of
challenges. We are happy to work with you.
And I yield back.
Mr. Cook. Thank you.
Gentlemen, I want to thank you very much. You spent a lot
of time here. A lot of questions, the whole subcommittee. I
didn't see any notes. So very, very impressed.
You know, for all your service, the troops you have, very,
very proud of you. And once again, on behalf of the committee I
want to thank you.
This meeting is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 4:52 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]

=======================================================================

A P P E N D I X

March 16, 2017

=======================================================================

PREPARED STATEMENTS SUBMITTED FOR THE RECORD

March 16, 2017

=======================================================================

[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

=======================================================================

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MEMBERS POST HEARING

March 16, 2017

=======================================================================

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MR. TURNER

Mr. Turner. What are the immediate and near-term impacts to Army
modernization if funded under a year-long continuing resolution (CR)
for FY17, and would you experience any Nunn-McCurdy breaches in
programs as a result of being funded under a year-long CR?
General Murray. A year-long continuing resolution (CR) would
significantly impact the Army. Capabilities that will be most affected
by these delays include lethality upgrades, electronic warfare and
cyber programs, air and missile defense capabilities, protection and
mobility systems, and intelligence, surveillance and reconnaissance and
engineer modernization efforts. Further, the Army's modernization
efforts would fall further behind to include procurement of Apache AH-
64E new builds and Abrams upgrades. Although no Nunn-McCurdy breaches
will occur with a year-long Fiscal Year 2017 (FY17) CR, 47 procurement
and Research, Development, Test and Evaluation new start programs in
FY17 have been placed on hold pending an appropriation. These programs
support Army priorities and a full year CR will delay initiation of
these new capabilities further into FY18.
Mr. Turner. Please provide the justification and the authorities
the Army is using to change the acquisition strategy for the Ground
Mobility Vehicle (GMV) program from a full and open competition to a
sole source award.
General Murray. In order to quickly provide the Global Response
Force with this critical capability, the Army approved a Directed
Requirement to procure a limited quantity of Ground Mobility Vehicles
(GMV), leveraging the existing Special Operations Command (SOCOM) GMV
1.1 contract, testing, and logistics support. The Army will procure 295
GMV 1.1 for five Airborne Infantry Brigade Combat Teams (IBCTs)
accelerating the First Unit Equipped by two years compared to a full
and open competition strategy. The Army is also adopting the SOCOM
Capability Production Document (CPD) and is no longer pursing a
standalone Army GMV CPD. We will develop an annex to the SOCOM CPD to
address requirements for the remaining IBCTs. The Army will pursue a
follow-on full and open competitive strategy to procure  1,770 vehicles
to fulfill the Army's total requirement.
Mr. Turner. In your view, what trade-offs, if any, would most
likely have to be taken should sequestration return in FY18?
General Murray. The Army has already been making difficult trade
decisions for the last five years, and frankly, is at the point of
losing its technological edge in certain capability areas, thus putting
overmatch at risk. If sequestration returned in FY18, we would be
required to further delay and stop development and delivery of critical
capabilities, putting our formations at greater risk of successfully
executing missions assigned.
Mr. Turner. In your witness statement, you list air and missile
defense (AMD) as a top capability gap to address the pressing needs of
combatant commanders. Would you please describe how CRs have slowed the
Army's ability to address this critical gap?
General Murray. The Army has identified an emerging capability gap
for a new Maneuver Short Range Air Defense capability. Current legacy
systems do not address the gap but the Army cannot begin a mitigation
effort because of Continuing Resolution (CR) new start restrictions.
Delaying this effort until the next fiscal year would likely delay
mitigation efforts by 2-3 years. In a similar vein, the Army pursued an
effort in 2016 to fill a capability gap against electronic attacks.
Deemed a new start, the impediment slowed our ability to defeat the
threat and reduce operational risk for deployed soldiers and defended
assets. A delay to fund the effort until the next fiscal year deferred
starting the mitigation effort and fielding a capability by 2-3 years.
I would also like to mention the effects of sequestration. Over 2013-
2015, Congress reduced funding for improvements to the Patriot software
which would improve capability against the Tactical Ballistic Missile
threats being faced in multiple theaters. This delayed development of
mitigation capabilities by 3-4 years. Sequestration also drives the
Army to fund procurement at levels below maximum production rates so
that other critical programs can also be produced. This lowers the
Army's ability to meet operational requirements, such as munitions,
which increases risk to the warfighter. Limited funding requires the
Army to strike a balance between munitions, platforms and capabilities
across all warfighting functions.
Mr. Turner. What areas of Army Aviation modernization are in most
dire need of increased funding due to sequestration? What does the Army
need to reverse this situation?
General Murray. The three main areas most at risk in Army Aviation
are: Protection, Reach, and Lethality. The proliferation of advance
threats requires us to stay ahead of potential adversaries by pursuing
better protection like Advanced Threat Detection System, Common
Infrared Countermeasures, and other detect and defeat efforts in the
radio frequency spectrum. Extending our reach in support of our ground
maneuver forces requires us to immediately address current aircraft
shortages, complete scheduled upgrades to the aircraft we have on-hand,
and continue developing future programs. First, we need to fill the
holes in our attack helicopter fleet; Apaches are our biggest capacity
gap. Reach also includes speed, range, power and agility in the
objective area, and those require us to continue to upgrade existing
platforms while developing Improved Turbine Engine (ITEP), CH-47 Block
II, and Future Vertical Lift (FVL). As potential adversaries increase
their air defense capabilities, we must field more lethal air-to-ground
munitions with greater ranges. We also have the ability to create the
capacity for more stored kills in our unmanned aerial systems and
attack fleets through small-precision guided munitions. If additional
resources were available, the Army would be able to fill readiness
holes in the fleet, complete scheduled upgrades to aging aircraft, and
accelerate developmental programs of the future like ITEP, CH-47 Block
II, and different FVL capabilities. Reliable and steady funding also
allows the Army to achieve more favorable economic price points and
continuity across our industrial base. We continue to mortgage the
future to pay for current systems.
Mr. Turner. Under the European Reassurance Initiative (ERI), the
Army is assembling equipment and ammunition required to support an
armored division-sized force. This equipment can be used for both
training and contingency operations. What is the timeline for this
effort and by when do you expect to have this effort completed? Will
this pre-positioning initiative require the procurement of additional
facilities/bases in Europe? Will the armored division pre-positioned
stock receive new systems such as Joint Light Tactical Vehicles (JLTVs)
and Armored Multi-Purpose Vehicles (AMPVs) before other units in
recognition of its important role in the event of a European conflict?
In a similar manner will pre-positioned stocks have priority in
receiving new technologies such as Active Protection Systems when they
become available as well as the latest versions of the M-1 Abrams and
M-2 Bradley?
General Murray. By Fiscal Year 2021 (FY21), the Army will build and
deploy one fully modernized Armored Brigade Combat Team (ABCT) to
Europe in addition to our current pre-positioned ABCT and rotational
ABCT. This fully modernized ABCT will contain the latest versions of
the M1 Abrams (M1A2SEPV3), M2 Bradley (M2A4), M109A7 Paladin and the
Armored Multi-Purpose Vehicle (AMPV). This will be the first ABCT to
have all four of those systems. Low Rate Initial Production AMPVs will
be used to begin equipping the two Army Prepositioned Stock (APS) sets
beginning in approximately FY20. Additionally, the Army is programming
funds to procure 120mm Mortars, Mortar Fire Control Systems, and
Javelins to meet the increased requirement generated by the additional
European Reassurance Initiative structure. Joint Light Tactical
Vehicles will eventually be added to the European APS but initial
fielding will go to our Regular Army and National Guard Infantry
Brigade Combat Teams. The current Army Prepositioned Stock set is
equipped with the Army's most modern tanks and Bradleys--the M1A2 SEP
V2 and the M2A3. Active Protection Systems are not yet available for
that set. The second Army Prepositioned Stock set which will be
completed in FY20 and in place in FY21, will be equipped with the next
versions of tanks and Bradleys--the M1A2SEPV3 and the M2A4. The current
plan is to equip that set with Non-Developmental Item Active Protection
Systems.
Mr. Turner. In recognition of the growing threat from unmanned air
systems, artillery, rockets, and cruise missiles, the Army is seeking
to expand its Short-Range Air Defense (SHORAD) capabilities. In this
regard, what are the Army's plans to develop a SHORAD capability to
support maneuver forces? Are there potential non-development candidate
systems which could provide this capability?
General Murray. We are looking at placing Stinger Teams into
maneuver companies and funding a Service Life Extension Program and
Proximity Fuse modernization effort to improve the lethality of Stinger
Block 1 missiles. Ongoing Army efforts will provide an initial
Maneuver-Short Range Air Defense (M-SHORAD) capability leveraging
materiel solutions currently under testing or evaluation. Those include
systems which can detect, track, Identify, and/or defend against
Unmanned Aircraft System targets. An M-SHORAD demonstration hosted by
the Army Program Executive Office, Missiles and Space, is scheduled to
conclude before the end of Fiscal Year 2017. This has the potential to
identify non-developmental candidates as well as include a mix of guns,
missiles, and non-kinetic solutions. In an effort to support the
European Reassurance Initiative, the Army initiated an Avenger
recapitalization effort with Letterkenny Army Depot to provide 72
systems (two battalions' worth of Avengers). One Avenger battalion will
serve as an Army Prepositioned Stock and one Avenger battalion will
become an Enduring European Equipment Set.
Mr. Turner. You have identified munitions as another top capability
gap. How are the restrictions contained within the Ottawa Agreement and
the Oslo agreement affecting the Army's ability to fill that gap?
General Anderson. Antipersonnel landmines (APL)  The United States
is not a signatory to the Ottawa Convention. As such, it is not
directly constrained by the treaty's restrictions on the use,
production, acquisition, stockpile, or transfer of antipersonnel
landmines (APL). The Army is limited by United States policies on APL.
Current United States APL policy was originally announced in September
2014 and is codified in Presidential Policy Directive 37 (PPD 37).
Under this policy, the United States is aligning its activities outside
the Korean Peninsula with key requirements of the Ottawa Convention.
This means the United States will not use APL outside the Korean
Peninsula; will not assist, encourage, or induce anyone outside the
Korean Peninsula to engage in activity prohibited by the Ottawa
Convention; and will undertake to destroy APL stockpiles not required
for the defense of the Korean Peninsula. One important, indirect impact
of the Convention is the majority of our Allies (including Japan,
Australia, and several NATO members) are signatories to the treaty and
are bound by its restrictions. The Ottawa Convention, in addition to
prohibiting the use of APL, also prohibits signatory states from taking
any action that would ``assist, encourage, or induce, in any way,
anyone to engage in any activity prohibited to a State party under this
Convention.'' This language would complicate and/or restrict
cooperation with Allies should the United States decide to utilize APL
in coalition operations with signatory states. This limits the Army's
ability to shape the battle in any conflict, other than Korea, with
current inventories of our Family of Scatterable Mines.
Cluster Munitions (CM)  The United States is not a signatory to the
Oslo Convention. Unlike the Ottawa Convention, the Oslo Convention
allows for ``military cooperation and operations with States not party
to this Convention that might engage in activities prohibited to a
State Party,'' subject to restrictions provided by national
legislation. The 2008 Department of Defense CM Policy prohibits the use
of any CM with a greater than 1 percent unexploded ordnance rate from 1
January 2019. The policy has significant impact on all Army indirect
fire systems--the Army Tactical Missile System, Multiple Launch Rocket
System and the guided variant, and 155mm artillery as there is
currently no near-term (by 2019) replacement for this important
capability.
Mr. Turner. Among other military-related initiatives, the
Administration has called for increasing the Army's Active Duty end
strength by 36,000 soldiers to 490K by the end of FY 18. As part of
this increase, I understand the Army is considering adding three new
Armored Brigade Combat Teams (ABCTs)--one by conversion and two through
growth--and an Infantry Brigade Combat Team (IBCT). Reportedly, the
Army plans to build two new Security Force Assistance Brigades in the
Active force--one in FY18 and one in FY19. These new brigades will
require a myriad of equipment ranging from small arms to vehicles. What
are some of the equipping and modernization challenges related to these
new brigades, as well as ``growing the Army''?
General Anderson. The Security Force Assistance Brigade (SFAB) will
be tailored to the security force mission, approximately 1/10th the
size of an Infantry Brigade Combat Team (IBCT), with most of the
equipment a subset of a standard IBCT's equipment. I do not anticipate
challenges equipping the SFABs if we are properly resourced. Ultimately
SFABs will allow us to more efficiently perform security force missions
while preserving the readiness of our IBCTs. In terms of converting an
IBCT to an Armored Brigade Combat Team (ABCT), we are looking at
options to utilize existing equipment to accomplish this conversion to
make it affordable and to get it done quickly. Although this equipment
is not our most modern, we will modernize this ABCT and replenish the
equipment set capabilities in the future. The Army will be challenged
to do so if we do not receive consistent, long-term, balanced, and
predictable funding.
______

QUESTION SUBMITTED BY MS. TSONGAS
Ms. Tsongas. How could operational forces in theater better
leverage high speed communications equipment like Link 16 for command
and control and situational awareness to allow them to reduce decision
to execution timelines and substantially reduce the risk of fratricide?
General Anderson. Link 16 is the standard used by operational
forces in the CENTCOM area of operations for situational awareness
(SA), as well as command and control (C2) between military aircraft and
ground forces. The US Air Forces Central Command, Combined Air
Operations Center, accesses US and coalition ground information and
disseminates relevant threat and friendly/neutral force information to
aircraft using the Link 16 network. This approach is accepted as the
model for conventional coalition operations, and is being adopted to
support NATO operations through development of STANAG 5528. To improve
our use of systems like Link 16, Army Soldiers and Joint forces should
be thoroughly trained to fully understand and maximize the capabilities
of these systems. Detailed mission planning, standardized procedures
for supporting immediate air requests, realistic training/mission
rehearsal, use of friendly tagging or tracking devices, effective staff
coordination, and sound clearance of fires procedures can significantly
improve C2 and reduce the likelihood of fratricide. In addition,
USSOCOM has developed a new way to leverage Link 16 called the ``Move
Out Jump Off'' (MOJO) kit. The kit enables their organic joint terminal
attack controller (JTAC) to use Link 16 or the Situational Awareness
Data Link (SADL) to share ground information with supporting close air
support (CAS) aircraft and rapidly talk them onto target. This
capability expedites the target acquisition process and provides SA
information to CAS aircraft well before they establish voice
communications with the terminal attack controller. The Army will
continue to review and explore all options for better use and
integration of high speed capabilities.
______

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MR. LANGEVIN
Mr. Langevin. Earlier this year, General Allyn told us that we are
``outranged, outgunned, and outdated'' in terms of our equipment. Can
you discuss how the Stryker lethality upgrades will aid U.S. Army
Europe in theater and remedy these shortcomings?
General Murray and General Anderson. The Stryker lethality upgrades
were initiated in response to a theater request and will provide the
2nd Cavalry Regiment with 83 Stryker vehicles equipped with an unmanned
30 millimeter (mm) turret. Currently, Infantry battalions in the
Stryker Brigade are only equipped with heavy machine guns and automatic
grenade launchers. The 30mm turret substantially increases firepower,
allowing the unit a greater capability to suppress/destroy light
armored vehicles and prepared positions in support of infantry
operations. Ammunition development will eventually bring an airburst
capability to the 30mm cartridge, providing increased counter-defilade
capability. The lethality effort will also equip 81 vehicles with the
capability to fire the Javelin missile under armor by using a remote
weapons station.
Mr. Langevin. Can you please discuss how the $3.4 billion for the
European Reassurance Initiative (ERI) is being spent, how it has
impacted our NATO partners, what specific challenges the Army has faced
thus far, and what advances are yet to be made?
General Murray and General Anderson. ERI funding is used for
increased military presence in Europe, exercises, training with Allies
and partners, expansion of Army Prepositioned Stocks, and improved
infrastructure to provide greater responsiveness. Currently, the Army
is conducting heel-to-toe rotations of an Armored Brigade Combat Team
(ABCT) and through increased exercise participation is building NATO
interoperability and assuring Allies of the United States commitment to
the Alliance. Elements of the 3rd ABCT, 4th ID, and a combat aviation
brigade are conducting bilateral training and exercises in the Baltic
States, Poland, Hungary, Bulgaria, and Romania to improve partner
capability and assure Allies. ERI contributes to a persistent presence
in the Black Sea region by investing in the training and mission
command capabilities at Novo Selo Training Area in Bulgaria and the
Mihail Kogalniceanu Air Base in Romania. ERI is funding the continued
expansion of Army equipment sets for Prepositioned Stocks at sites in
the Netherlands, Belgium, and Germany, which will contain a division
headquarters, two ABCTs, a fires brigade, a sustainment brigade, and
other capabilities. Encouraged by our efforts, NATO initiated its own
deterrence effort with the Enhanced Forward Presence Battle Groups.
Collectively, these initiatives improve the confidence of our partners
by demonstrating United States military intent to compete against
Russia's malign influence and indirect action in the region. Our
experience has identified areas for improvement including rail
operations in Europe. In addition, we have identified shortfalls in
capability, such as United States heavy equipment transport systems not
meeting EU axle weight standards, which are currently being met with
support from the British Army. Finally, we have identified sustainment
capability limitations due to the wide dispersion of the deployed ABCT
from Estonia to Bulgaria. The key Army challenge in the near future is
freedom of movement across borders, where numerous legacy barriers
exist from the Cold War era. United States Army Europe is working a
longer term NATO agreement similar to the European Union Shengen
agreement, which allows freedom of movement within NATO countries to
ease transit and speed of assembly for rapidly deploying allied
military formations.
______

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MR. BACON
Mr. Bacon. In your statement, you observed that the Army's
Strategic Portfolio Review (SPAR) identified electronic warfare as a
critical capability gap and a modernization priority. What steps has
the Army taken to date to ensure its forces can operate in a contested
electromagnetic environment? What specific Army modernization programs
and initiatives do you believe are vital to ensure electromagnetic
protection and dominance for the Army's combined arms team?
General Murray. The Army must dramatically improve our current
Electronic Warfare (EW) capabilities to counter the effect of
disruptive technologies on our forces, challenging us across the
electromagnetic spectrum. In addition to our efforts to provide a
trusted navigational capability under our Assured Positioning,
Navigation and Timing program, the Army is pursuing Communications
Security modernization of legacy and new radio equipment to deny threat
detection, disruption and exploitation. Science and Technology efforts
are also underway to pursue new waveforms that will make it
increasingly difficult for adversaries to detect and disrupt critical
communications. The Army is fielding the EW Planning and Management
Tool (EWPMT), which synchronizes electronic warfare planning and
management of the electromagnetic spectrum. The EWPMT Capability Drop 3
system will also provide commanders the ability to operate in a
disconnected, intermittent and limited environment to ensure they can
continue to operate in a contested electromagnetic environment.
Further, one of the Army's top priorities is the development of Multi-
Function Electronic Warfare Systems that will provide organic
Electronic Attack and Electronic Warfare Support capability with the
specific intent to dominate the electromagnetic spectrum in a time and
place of the commander's choosing. The capability will deliver scalable
EW effects in support of Unified Land Operations.
Mr. Bacon. What additional investments in Army EW range
infrastructure, simulators etc are required to ensure the Army is
prepared to operate in a contested electromagnetic environment?
General Murray. Currently, the Army invests in Electronic Warfare
(EW) infrastructure test range capabilities such as Electronic
Countermeasures Compatibility Test Infrastructure and Operations
platform. Specific testing suites include the Army Cellular
Communication Network which enables EW technique effectiveness and
compatibility analysis. Beginning in Fiscal Year 2018, the Army plans
to invest in home station closed looped training devices (i.e. jamming
simulators) which will allow the Army to train and evaluate the
performance of electromagnetic spectrum-dependent systems. Additional
efforts are also underway to permanently equip National Training Center
Opposition Force with open air jammers.
Mr. Bacon. Over the last decade Army maneuver units have become
increasingly reliant on airborne ISR capabilities--both manned and
unmanned--that operate in permissive environments. What are the Army's
modernization priorities to ensure effective ISR for Army maneuver
forces in a contested operating environment?
General Murray. To counter the effect of disruptive technologies on
our forces the Army plans to modernize the aerial manned and unmanned
Intelligence, Surveillance and Reconnaissance (ISR) fleets to provide
long-range sensors capable of collecting specific signatures at
increased distances. For tactical commanders, the Army plans to
modernize the ground-based Prophet system to enhance collection
capability across advanced signal sets. The Army will continue to
leverage the Tactical Exploitation of National Capabilities program to
partner with national intelligence agencies, enabling the secure
delivery of national collection and commercial imagery to tactical
commanders. Further, the Army is developing the requirements to provide
technologically advanced, expeditionary, and survivable ISR/Electronic
Warfare/Cyber capabilities at the tactical level to enable lethality
and provide commander's with overmatch against peer competitors.
Mr. Bacon. Does the Army's combat training enterprise have the
ability to simulate a contested electromagnetic environment and to
train and evaluate unit, staff and weapon system readiness in
electronic warfare?
General Anderson. Our ability to create a contested operating
environment to train Army units is limited, but the Army continues
moving towards normalizing unit level training in a contested
electromagnetic operating environment. In August 2016, during National
Training Center (NTC) Rotation 16-08, the Opposing Force was provided
representative electronic warfare support (electromagnetic spectrum
[EMS] sensing) and electronic attack equipment, in order to create a
contested environment targeting rotational unit's wireless (Mission
Command Networks) capabilities. This effort will be continued for
future NTC rotations under ``Cyberspace Electromagnetic Activities
(CEMA) Optimization''. We will continue to look for ways to increase
use of live, virtual, and constructive training capabilities to better
represent contested electromagnetic environments to prepare our
Soldiers for anticipated threat area environments. Current efforts to
increase this training are twofold, one for home station training and
the other for Combat Training Centers. Beginning in fiscal year 2018,
the Army plans to invest in home station closed looped training devices
which will allow the Army to evaluate the performance of EMS dependent
systems/networks for future operating environments.
Mr. Bacon. How is the Army currently addressing the non-materiel
force development aspects of electronic warfare such as concepts,
doctrine, training, exercises, wargames etc.?
General Anderson. This month the Army released Field Manual 3-12
(Cyberspace and Electronic Warfare Operations). It updates guidance and
directions for conducting cyberspace and electronic warfare operations
using Cyberspace Electromagnetic Activities (CEMA) for unified land
operations. We are transforming our Electronic Warfare (EW) workforce
(Military Occupation Specialty, FA29) by integrating personnel into the
Army Cyber Corps (Cyber Electromagnetic Operations Officer, FA17), and
we are working with the U.S. Navy to leverage their EW courses in order
to bridge training requirements as we evolve the Army's EW training
model. We are also developing new policies and strategies to address
how the Army develops and enhances operations in a contested
electromagnetic spectrum; it nests these documents with the 2017
Department of Defense EW Strategy. We expect the Department of the Army
to publish the new EW Strategy for 2025 that will aid in synchronizing
material and non-material solutions across the Army domains of
doctrine, organization, training, materiel, leadership and education,
personnel, and facilities. Our policy and strategy changes enable the
paradigm shift to CEMA, including spectrum management as well as roles
in multi-domain warfare. We continue working closely with the Joint
Staff and other Services. For example, we meet semi-annually with our
U.S. Marine Corps counterparts, exchanging future electronic warfare
information and development (i.e., electronic attack), exercise, and
wargaming support issues. Additionally, we are also a member of the
Secretary of Defense's EW Executive Committee, which is chartered to
develop new capabilities and modify existing non-materiel conditions to
make the Department economically efficient and to improve overall
combat effectiveness.
Mr. Bacon. Have you engaged with the Air Force or the Joint Staff
to develop new joint operating concepts to ensure effective ISR for
unified land operations against a near-peer competitor? If yes, how
have these concepts been exercised and evaluated and what is needed to
bring them into the force?
General Anderson. The Army engaged with the Air Force and the Joint
Staff to develop joint operating concepts to ensure effective ISR for
unified land operations against a near-peer competitor. Past efforts
include the Joint Concept for Electromagnetic Spectrum Operations
(JCEMSO), Joint Operational Access Concept (JOAC), Joint Concept for
Rapid Aggregation (JCRA) and Joint Concept for Entry Operations (JCEO).
The Joint Concept for Electromagnetic Spectrum Operations (JCEMSO)
states that, to endure in the future operational environment, the Joint
Force must first focus on achieving electromagnetic spectrum (EMS)
superiority, which includes ISR. EMS superiority is the critical
enabler across many domains and will be essential against near-peer
competitors. Similarly, the Joint Operational Access Concept (JOAC)
addresses ISR within the context of how joint forces will operate in
response to emerging anti-access and area-denial security challenges
from near-peer competitors. The JOAC emphasizes the importance of ISR
requirements as a means to understanding near-peer intentions, the need
to apply information in an effective manner, and the need to locate and
understand enemy A2/AD capabilities. The Joint Concept for Rapid
Aggregation (JCRA) describes actions necessary for the Joint Force to
improve its ability to aggregate forces rapidly at the outset of
crisis. For example, a Joint Force that is located forward in the
operational area may aggregate through the establishment of a command
relationship with supporting capabilities, such as ISR, space, and
cyberspace, which are far from the controlling headquarters. The Joint
Concept for Entry Operations (JCEO) describes in broad terms how joint
forces will enter foreign territory and immediately employ capabilities
to accomplish assigned missions. This includes conducting entry in the
presence of armed opposition characterized by increasingly advanced
area denial systems, as well as entry where the environment and
infrastructure may be degraded or austere. This concept emphasizes the
critical importance of synchronized ISR to set the conditions for
forced entry operations. Two recently begun threat based Joint Concepts
will discuss and assess effective ISR for unified land operations
against near-peer competitors. The new Joint Concepts are the Joint
Operating Concept--Russia (JOC-R) and the Joint Operating Concept--
China (JOC-C). In addition, the Army Multi-Domain Battle (MDB) concept,
which discusses the importance of ISR for unified land operations
against a near-peer competitor, is currently being developed with
substantial input and coordination with all of the other services and
Joint Staff. This concept envisions a future in which peer rivals will
attempt to disrupt our ISR capabilities in the opening days of a
conflict. Finally, the Army and Air Force conduct Warfighter Talks
every six months to discuss joint concepts, among other topics, and the
Army, Air Force, Navy, and Marines routinely discuss the Joint
Processing, Exploitation, and Dissemination (PED) of service ISR
assets. As with any Joint Concept, the concept is approved by the Joint
Staff, but the implementation of any of the recommended required
capabilities is determined by each service chief. Each service must
assess the required capability and decide on further evaluation,
exercising, priority, and funding. Each service chief determines if and
when a capability is brought into the force.

[all]
