- [H.A.S.C. No. 115-13] AN INDEPENDENT FLEET ASSESSMENT OF THE U.S. NAVY

[House Hearing, 115 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

[H.A.S.C. No. 115-13]

AN INDEPENDENT FLEET ASSESSMENT OF THE U.S. NAVY

__________

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON SEAPOWER AND PROJECTION FORCES

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON ARMED SERVICES

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FIFTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

HEARING HELD

MARCH 8, 2017

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

25-045                    WASHINGTON : 2018

SUBCOMMITTEE ON SEAPOWER AND PROJECTION FORCES

ROBERT J. WITTMAN, Virginia, Chairman

K. MICHAEL CONAWAY, Texas            JOE COURTNEY, Connecticut
VICKY HARTZLER, Missouri             SUSAN A. DAVIS, California
BRADLEY BYRNE, Alabama, Vice Chair   JAMES R. LANGEVIN, Rhode Island
SCOTT DesJARLAIS, Tennessee          MADELEINE Z. BORDALLO, Guam
MIKE GALLAGHER, Wisconsin            JOHN GARAMENDI, California
DUNCAN HUNTER, California            DONALD NORCROSS, New Jersey
PAUL COOK, California                SETH MOULTON, Massachusetts
JIM BRIDENSTINE, Oklahoma            COLLEEN HANABUSA, Hawaii
STEPHEN KNIGHT, California           A. DONALD McEACHIN, Virginia
RALPH LEE ABRAHAM, Louisiana
Dave Sienicki, Professional Staff Member
Phil MacNaughton, Professional Staff Member
Jodi Brignola, Clerk

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page

STATEMENTS PRESENTED BY MEMBERS OF CONGRESS

Courtney, Hon. Joe, a Representative from Connecticut, Ranking
Member, Subcommittee on Seapower and Projection Forces.........     3
Wittman, Hon. Robert J., a Representative from Virginia,
Chairman, Subcommittee on Seapower and Projection Forces.......     1

WITNESSES

Banerjee, Dr. Sunoy, The MITRE Corporation.......................     7
Clark, Bryan, Senior Fellow, Center for Strategic and Budgetary
Assessments....................................................     6
Werchado, Charles P., Deputy Director, Assessment Division (OPNAV
N81B)..........................................................     4
Wilson, RADM Jesse, Jr., USN, Director, Assessment Division
(OPNAV N81)....................................................     3

APPENDIX

Prepared Statements:

Banerjee, Dr. Sunoy..........................................    59
Clark, Bryan.................................................    50
Courtney, Hon. Joe...........................................    36
Werchado, Charles P..........................................    44
Wilson, RADM Jesse, Jr.......................................    38
Wittman, Hon. Robert J.......................................    33

Documents Submitted for the Record:

[There were no Documents submitted.]

Witness Responses to Questions Asked During the Hearing:

[There were no Questions submitted during the hearing.]

Questions Submitted by Members Post Hearing:

Ms. Bordallo.................................................    70
Mr. Langevin.................................................    69

AN INDEPENDENT FLEET ASSESSMENT OF THE U.S. NAVY

----------

House of Representatives,
Committee on Armed Services,
Subcommittee on Seapower and Projection Forces,
Washington, DC, Wednesday, March 8, 2017.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 3:42 p.m., in
room 2118, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Robert J.
Wittman (chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. ROBERT J. WITTMAN, A REPRESENTATIVE
FROM VIRGINIA, CHAIRMAN, SUBCOMMITTEE ON SEAPOWER AND
PROJECTION FORCES

Mr. Wittman. I call to order the Subcommittee on Seapower
and Projection Forces of the House Armed Services Committee.
I want to thank all of our witnesses for being here today
for the Seapower and Projection Forces Subcommittee hearing.
As this is our first subcommittee hearing, I just want to
say that I look forward to engaging all of our members on what
I believe is the bipartisan committee in Congress, and I
especially look forward to working with my ranking member,
colleague, Joe Courtney, and plotting a path forward to meet
the requirements for our armed services, so Joe, thanks again.
Thanks for your service, and thanks for your leadership. I
really appreciate that.
Two weeks ago we held a classified briefing with Rear
Admiral Wilson in regard to the Navy's 2016 Force Structure
Assessment. The Force Structure Assessment assumed that the
future plans for the Navy in ship types and numbers of ships
would continue with ships of similar capacity that serve in the
fleet today. This afternoon we transition from looking at the
Navy's Force Structure Assessment to considering three separate
future fleet architecture studies. These three studies were
directed by Congress and completed in recent months. These
three fleet architecture studies take a different tact and
consider what the composition of the fleet could be in the
future. Some of their proposals include new ship classes,
increased usage of unmanned vehicles, and redesigned ship
configurations, just to name a few.
We turn to three independent experts to provide more
details on alternatives to the Navy's proposed force structure.
I hope during the course of this hearing we can discuss options
that Congress could pursue to meet those Navy requirements. I
think there is broad agreement with the Navy and the three
independent studies on several themes.
First of all, the Navy today is insufficient to address the
challenges of tomorrow. I think everyone would agree that the
274 ships of the Navy fleet today are insufficient for a
variety of reasons and lead to a variety of bad alternatives,
including most prominently, aircraft carrier gaps.
I also believe there is general agreement that the future
conflict will reside in a contested environment requiring
additional large surface combatants in more robust weapons.
Advancements in naval gunfire with the electromagnetic railgun
and hypervelocity projectile are essential to getting on the
right side of the cost curve. I also believe that all the
studies agree that the United States has an asymmetrical
advantage in the undersea domain. Maintaining this advantage
will require increasing the build rate of the Virginia attack
submarine and introducing the Virginia payload module into the
next block of attack submarines.
While I believe the research and development community has
done a great job with developing unmanned underwater vehicles,
I also think it is time to down-select to specific systems and
rapidly deploy these capabilities throughout the fleet.
As to small surface combatants, I believe that there is
general agreement on expanding the capabilities associated with
a littoral combat ship. The Navy concluded a small surface
combatant task force that determined the requirements for the
frigate. However, I believe that we need to take a closer look
at these requirements. I look forward to better understanding
capabilities that our witnesses believe should be incorporated
into the frigate.
I also see our amphibious force with its complement of
Marines as vital to the ability of our Nation to deter
aggression. As we look to rebuild our Navy, we must ensure that
our Marine Corps also remains a large part of our plans. I look
forward to hearing how the L-class ships that make up our
amphibious readiness groups, our ARGs, can be used in the
future.
As to our preeminent strike capability, the aircraft
carrier, I believe that there is general agreement that we need
to expand this capability but continue to reduce costs
associated with the Ford-class aircraft carrier. I do not
believe any members of this subcommittee are willing to accept
an almost $13 billion unit cost for the USS Gerald R. Ford, and
efforts need to be taken to reduce overall costs. I look
forward to options that our witnesses could offer to make the
Ford-class more affordable, and finally, I look forward to our
witnesses better describing the communications challenges that
are expected in a contested environment and options to address
these concerns.
I would like to welcome all of our members in the
distinguished panel of experts we have with us today. This
afternoon we have with us Rear Admiral Jesse Wilson, Jr.,
Director, Assessment Division, OPNAV N81; Mr. Charles Werchado,
Deputy Director, Assessment Division, OPNAV N81B; Bryan Clark,
Center for Strategic and Budgetary Assessments; and Dr. Sunoy
Banerjee, MITRE Corporation.
Thank you all for testifying today, and we look forward to
your thoughts and insights on the fleet, architecture
alternatives, and other critical pieces of information.
I would now like to turn to our ranking member, Joe
Courtney, for any remarks that he may have.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Wittman can be found in the
Appendix on page 33.]

STATEMENT OF HON. JOE COURTNEY, A REPRESENTATIVE FROM
CONNECTICUT, RANKING MEMBER, SUBCOMMITTEE ON SEAPOWER AND
PROJECTION FORCES

Mr. Courtney. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and again
congratulations on your selection as chairman of this
committee, which again is a great committee. We have really
made a difference over the years. Your long years of work on
the committee, as well as your command of the subject, I think
really make you the right guy for the job, and I look forward
to working with you as well.
I think we have a great team on both sides of the aisle,
and obviously this could be a real sort of historic year given
the topic that we are going to discuss this afternoon. It is
the question of the day, obviously the Force Structure
Assessment that was produced last year and obviously all the
force architecture work that these witnesses were involved in.
So in an effort to sort of get to the heart of the matter,
I have opening remarks which is in writing. I am going to ask
that it be submitted for the record, and, again, let's just
jump right into it and hear from our great witnesses.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Courtney can be found in the
Appendix on page 36.]
Mr. Wittman. Very good. Thank you, Mr. Courtney. We will
now go to our witnesses. Begin with Rear Admiral Wilson.

STATEMENT OF RADM JESSE WILSON, JR., USN, DIRECTOR, ASSESSMENT
DIVISION (OPNAV N81)

Admiral Wilson. Good afternoon.
Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member Courtney, and distinguished
members of the subcommittee, I appreciate the opportunity to
testify on the future fleet architecture studies that were
conducted in accordance with the fiscal year 2016 National
Defense Authorization Act, or the NDAA.
Three independent studies for a future fleet architecture
in the 2030 timeframe were conducted, and the leads of each
team are here today to brief the findings of their studies. The
Navy-led project team, MITRE's National Security Engineering
Center, and the Center for Strategic and Budgetary Assessments.
These studies are a starting point in the analysis that the
Navy will use to develop our future fleet architecture and
design.
None of them, including the Navy project team study, has
been endorsed by the Chief of Naval Operations as a
comprehensive solution set to focus our future fleet
development. We will continue to incorporate what we have
learned from them into our ongoing research and development and
rapid fielding, our war-gaming, experiments, concept
development, and strategic thinking. They will contribute to
the high-velocity learning that is necessary to strengthen our
naval power to outpace our pure competitors and future threats.
All three studies were based on a 2030 strategic
environment defined by the reemergence of great power
competition and the growing availability of high-end
warfighting capabilities designed to counter U.S. military
advantages. While each entity conducted its study
independently, generated its own assumptions, and performed its
own analysis, several common themes emerge across the three
studies. We are examining these themes and ideas thoroughly.
Some of the recommendations in the studies will be acted
upon or acted upon more quickly than was already being planned.
Some recommendations show promise and will need further
analysis and exploration. These studies are part of a larger
effort to inform and focus our future fleet development efforts
in order to identify the most promising insights from each
study for inclusion in our future force plans and capability
decisions.
Further analysis will need to be conducted, informed by
both the studies and future operational concepts, to determine
optimum fleet size, mix, and required resourcing over time. The
Navy looks forward to working with the Congress and others to
achieve the maritime superiority the Nation needs today and in
the future in order to defend the American people and promote
global security and prosperity.
Thank you and I welcome your questions.
[The prepared statement of Admiral Wilson can be found in
the Appendix on page 38.]
Mr. Wittman. Thank you, Rear Admiral Wilson. Thanks so much
for your opening statement.
Mr. Werchado.

STATEMENT OF CHARLES P. WERCHADO, DEPUTY DIRECTOR, ASSESSMENT
DIVISION (OPNAV N81B)

Mr. Werchado. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Senior Ranking
Member Courtney, and distinguished members of the panel.
I appreciate the opportunity to testify on the results of
the Navy project team future fleet architecture study. I led
the project team with participants from across the Navy as the
senior Navy analyst and not as the Deputy of the Assessment
Division. This is not an official Navy study. It was
independent by design and does not represent an official Navy
position.
Although this study is focused on the architecture of a
future fleet, it also explores how that fleet might be used,
including alternative concepts of operations. The study was
conducted with the goal of defeating a near-peer competitor
with a robust anti-surface capability, while also deterring
another threat actor in any theater. The project team designed
a distributed fleet architecture which would allow the Navy of
the future to accomplish its missions, providing strong and
sustained forward presence to influence geopolitical events,
respond to crises, reassure allies, and deter potential
aggressors.
The distributed fleet was conceived to deliver decisive
combat power as part of a joint force to defeat U.S.
adversaries if deterrence fails. It was developed as an
asymmetric response to adversaries increasing reconnaissance
strike capabilities that can find, track, and target our
centers of gravity, including large naval formations. By
distributing our firepower, we challenged the enemy with up to
10 times the number of combat nodes that can strike them and
attack axis against which they have to defend.
The distributed fleet would encompass a widely dispersed,
robust network of air, surface, and sub-surface platforms
capable of delivering both kinetic and nonkinetic effects
employing three mutually supporting concepts of operations:
Distributed Fleet Lethality, Electromagnetic Maneuver Warfare,
and Distributed Agile Logistics. The distributed fleet would
enable a greater reliance on strikes from combat nodes beyond
the carrier strike group freeing more carrier air wing assets
to focus on surveillance, targeting, and electronic attack.
The robust information sharing environment enables us to
engage enemy platforms before they can attack, reducing
defensive weapons requirements and allowing more offensive
weapons to be deployed. Priority was given to long-range
weapons for sea control in a contested area as well as multi-
mode weapons capable of striking a variety of targets to
maximize mission flexibility and ship loading. The concept
would deploy unmanned air vehicles extensively on platforms to
give ships the ability to conduct organic targeting at long-
range employing advanced weapons, something the current fleet
cannot do. It would also call for the development and fielding
of armed, unmanned surface vehicles transported by and deployed
from ships that have well decks to further distribute shooters
within the theater.
Additionally, the concept would expand the use of unmanned
underwater vehicles to provide theater commanders with the
ability to deploy sensors and weapons into areas that are
currently denied.
Accelerating development and fielding the capabilities for
electromagnetic maneuver warfare allow the future Navy to
deliver the assured communications that is required to net the
fleet and enable kill chains while reducing our dependence on
military satellites. It will also accelerate the fielding of
key capabilities to counter adversaries' surveillance and
targeting systems, improving fleet survivability, and deliver
improved electronic warfare systems to better protect both
ships and aircraft.
Finally, distributed agile logistics enables the
distributed fleet by sustaining combat operations in a
contested environment. The U.S. Navy has not had to do this
since World War II. It shifts reliance from vulnerable shore
bases to more survivable afloat and expeditionary hubs. It
would also improve the Navy's ability to conduct maintenance
and reload weapons at sea.
Given the service life of today's ships and aircraft, 75
percent of the fleet today will still be operating in the year
2030. Adding to the years or even decades required to design,
build, and field new platforms, the Navy must look beyond fleet
architecture to new operational concepts to rapidly address and
defeat emerging threats. Implementing the distributed fleet
represents a far greater opportunity to effect change.
Increasing lethality can be achieved by distributing strike
forces, including unmanned.
Maneuver warfare provides an assured network and
communications system able to provide robust kill chains while
denying the enemy their targeting. These distributed lethal
nodes make every platform a sensor, shooter, or communicator,
or some combination of the three.
The Navy meets current and anticipates future threats and
will continue to innovate, adapt, fight and win. This study
developed a new concept, the distributed fleet, as a fleet
design architecture to beat the future threat.
I welcome your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Werchado can be found in the
Appendix on page 44.]
Mr. Wittman. Thank you, Mr. Werchado. Now we will go to Mr.
Clark.

STATEMENT OF BRYAN CLARK, SENIOR FELLOW, CENTER FOR STRATEGIC
AND BUDGETARY ASSESSMENTS

Mr. Clark. Chairman Wittman, Ranking Member Courtney, and
distinguished members of the committee, thank you very much for
having us here today to testify on this very important and
timely subject, as you mentioned.
I wanted to make five main points regarding the fleet
architecture study that we conducted at CSBA. First, as Admiral
Wilson mentioned, great power competition is going to be the
defining feature of the security environment that we are
looking at here, which is the 2030s. China and Russia already
have the desire to pursue objectives in their near abroad and
accrete influence and territory, and in that timeframe they are
likely to have the capabilities to be able to pursue those
objectives with a pretty high degree of aggression.
We are also going to face regional powers that have the
ability to use the capabilities that great powers might convey
to them like long-range missiles and long-range surveillance
systems and exploit their geographic advantage, so you think
about a country like Iran or a country like a North Korea.
Their geographic position combined with longer range weapons
and sensors enables them to punch above their weight, if you
will.
The second is the emergence of this great power competition
is going to put the onus on us to deter conflict with those
great powers. A great power war, if we think about
historically, could have damaging and potentially catastrophic
consequences for ourselves and for the global economy, as well
as our allies. So we are going to have to think about deterring
those kinds of conflicts and not just fighting them. If we get
into a position of having to fight a China or fight a Russia in
a large-scale conflict, then we have probably signed ourselves
up for a very damaging set of consequences.
The fleet architecture that you would need to deter those
potential adversaries is a little bit different potentially
than what you might use if you were simply looking to fight
them in some kind of scenario that we had developed arbitrarily
in advance. So we have got to think about how a fleet
architecture is prepared to deter conflict and then if
deterrence fails, shift to be able to actually fight that
conflict. And those might be two different things, so we need
to carefully think about that.
The third main point is because of this and because the
objectives of these adversaries, if you think about the Baltics
for Russia, or Taiwan for China, or the Senkaku Islands for
China, they are all relatively close to those countries. They
are all relatively close at hand, and it wouldn't take very
long for them to begin an act of aggression against them and
even culminate it before U.S. forces and those of our allies
would be able to arrive to stop them.
So our forces, our naval forces in particular, are going to
have to be able to persist, survive, and then fight in these
highly contested environments near the adversaries' territory,
thinking about the South and East China Seas when it comes to
China or potentially the Baltic or certainly the North Atlantic
when it comes to Russia.
This is going to drive us, and that is my fourth point, to
new operational concepts and new capabilities that enable our
forces to be able to survive in these high-threat environments.
This gets to ideas like Mr. Werchado brought up of distributed
forces, new concepts for electromagnetic maneuver warfare, and
undersea warfare that enable us to operate inside environments
where the adversary can find us relatively easily and certainly
attack us with large salvos of missiles. The new concepts are
necessary for that, and we need to equip the force to be able
to conduct those operational concepts, and that is in large
part what our study was designed to do, is describe that.
Our force packages that emerged from those operating
concepts are designed to be able to combine manned and unmanned
systems, autonomous unmanned systems, and those in manned
platforms to be able to conduct long-range sensing or counter-
ISR [intelligence, surveilliance, and reconnaissance]
operations, and conduct long-range strike with a distributed
force that allows a force with a large number of distributed
platforms to be able to have the same kind of firepower as we
would get from a traditional carrier strike group for example.
The fifth point I want to bring up is that this more
improved fleet and the fleet that is capable of deterring great
power conflict in the 2030s is going to be larger than today's
fleet and more expensive. Our study found that the 340- to 380-
ship Navy we believe we need is going to cost 15 to 20 percent
more to buy, to maintain and operate, and to man than today's
fleet. So we need to be prepared for the fact that entering
into a great power competition and being able to win or at
least sustain an advantage in that competition is going to be
more expensive.
And so I look forward to your questions. Thank you very
much.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Clark can be found in the
Appendix on page 50.]
Mr. Wittman. Thank you, Mr. Clark.
Dr. Banerjee, I want to welcome you here today. I know that
your wife and your mother has accompanied you today. I want to
welcome you all, too----
Dr. Banerjee. Mother-in-law.
Mr. Wittman. Mother-in-law. I am sorry; mother-in-law, got
you. We will get it straight. My apologies.
Dr. Banerjee, thank you so much for joining us today, and
welcome, and we look forward to your testimony.

STATEMENT OF DR. SUNOY BANERJEE, THE MITRE CORPORATION

Dr. Banerjee. Thank you.
Chairman Wittman, Ranking Member Courtney, and
distinguished members of the committee, I appreciate the
opportunity to testify on the findings and recommendations of
The MITRE's future fleet architecture. Congress directed the
Secretary of Defense to perform three independent studies of
alternative fleet----
Mr. Wittman. Dr. Banerjee, if I could get you to move the
mike just a little bit closer to you. It is a big room; we want
to make sure everybody can hear you.
Dr. Banerjee. Sorry.
Mr. Wittman. Thank you. No problem.
Dr. Banerjee [continuing]. Alternative future fleet
platform architectures for the Navy in the 2030 timeframe. The
MITRE Corporation's National Security Engineering Center and
FFRDC [federally funded research and development center] was
asked to deliver one of the three studies. MITRE conducted the
study over a 4-month period and delivered the final report
consisting of a 70-page unclassified report and a 30-page
classified annex on July 1, 2016.
MITRE recommended a 322-ship fleet in 2030 built around
three major themes. The first, improving missile defense
capabilities through the fielding of the hypervelocity
projectile in the existing 5-inch deck guns in the surface
force and an aerial layer missile system to be deployed within
the carrier air wings to deal with more advanced missile
threats. Our preliminary campaign modeling suggests these two
innovations significantly improve the survivability of the
naval force.
Second, improving the long-range strike through fielding of
new supersonic cruise missiles and ballistic missile
capabilities into the surface and submarine force. These
capabilities enable the naval force to project power while the
carrier force is maneuvering into striking range for the
carrier air wing.
Third, increase force size while controlling costs via a
high-low mix of platforms. The MITRE analysis recommended a
missile defense innovations to improve the effectiveness of the
existing surface force through a mix of Aegis surface
combatants, which is the high end, a new fast frigate design
built around the hypervelocity projectile in the 5-inch deck
guns. That is the medium-end capability. And the low end is a
magazine ship, so this is a container ship that has large
numbers of VLS [vertical launching system] cells to augment the
existing magazines and capacity of the surface force.
The cost savings from these alternative mixes of platforms
were used to buy an additional 5 Virginia-class nuclear attack
submarines, which is a high-end capability, and 14 air-
independent propulsion attack submarines, which would be a
conventional submarine that would be a medium-end capability to
significantly increase the size of the surface force--or of the
submarine force.
The study tasking emphasized the numbers and types of ships
and submarines needed by the future force. However, this force
also requires new sets of weapons, sufficient number of modern
aircraft, resilient C4I [command, control, communications,
computers, and intelligence] systems, integration of both
kinetic and nonkinetic effects and undersea enablers to be
effective. A balanced investment across not only shipbuilding
but all these other additional factors is required for the
naval force to improve both its capacity and its capability to
deter aggression in the future.
Thank you, and I look forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Banerjee can be found in the
Appendix on page 59.]
Mr. Wittman. Thank you, Dr. Banerjee. We will now go to Mr.
Courtney to begin our questions.
Mr. Courtney. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thank you to all
the witnesses for your testimony this afternoon.
Again, obviously there is a lot of overlap in terms of the
different studies that all of you conducted, as well as Admiral
Richardson's Force Structure Assessment. And, you know,
obviously we live in a different sort of realm in terms of
increments of 1-year budget cycles and 2-year terms.
And so when we are looking at a target of 2030 to get to
the numbers which--again, let's just sort of stipulate you all
have the same number at the end of the day--if you were sort of
advising Congress in terms of a short-term to-do list, mid-
term, middle-term, medium-term to-do list, and a long-term, as
far as, you know, how we get there, and I just sort of in terms
of where we focus our authorizations and appropriations, I
think that would be very helpful for the members here to just
kind of, like I said, focus it in terms of the task ahead in
terms of the Congress.
And, again, if anyone wants to jump in first or just go
right across the table, whatever you are comfortable with.
Admiral Wilson. Ranking Member Courtney, I will start.
Let me first say that we have already talked about the
Force Structure Assessment and the 355-ship Navy that that
directed or the results of that study resulted in. To
accelerate to a point that we feel we need to get to, and the
future fleet architecture three studies, are the results from
them, there are ongoing efforts right now to build a path to
accelerate with existing industrial-based capacity that we know
we can already ramp up with. And that information will be
coming out soon.
So we know we need to grow the force. We know we need to
grow it to 355 right now with existing platforms and ways of
fighting. So to get the rudder over, so to speak, we will start
building a path to start ramping up as rapidly as we can where
we know we can get started right away.
Mr. Werchado. Thank you. Ranking Member Courtney and Mr.
Chairman, in the interest of domestic harmony, I would like to
point out that my lovely wife is here as well.
Sir, my recommendation would be to go for a capability over
platform. Naval weapons have gotten so long range, so precise,
and so lethal, that in hundreds of studies that Admiral Wilson
and I run a year for the Navy, what really comes out strongly
is that it is the battle of the first salvo.
Naval forces by their nature are mobile, and therefore they
have to be targeted to be hit. And so whichever side completes
that targeting kill chain first and fires first almost always
wins. So I would make my investments in counter-C4ISR. Where is
our decoy ship? Where is our electronic warfare to create false
targets? Let's make us hard to find while we make ourselves
more capable of finding them.
I think if we make the investments in the counter-C4ISR
realm, there are going to be higher payoff first. We have lots
of cruise missiles. We can use them. We have lots of VLS cells
on the combatants, but we need to be able to complete the
targeting chain to make them effective.
Mr. Clark. Congressman, a couple of things I would say in
the near term are, just like Mr. Werchado was saying, we need
to invest in the unmanned vehicles that are going to be the
things that carry around these payloads of counter-C4ISR
systems or sensors to be able to enable things like distributed
lethality.
So investing in and buying new extra-large unmanned
undersea vehicles, buying new large unmanned surface vehicles,
the common USV and also the extra-large USV which may be a
variant of the DARPA [Defense Advanced Research Projects
Agency] Sea Hunter program. Those would be the platforms that
carry around some of these sensor packages and some of the
jammers and decoys that we are going to need to deploy in order
to keep platforms inside these highly contested environments.
The other thing we can do in the near term is to accelerate
construction of those ships that are already in construction
where there is additional margin available. So accelerating
LXR, as the Congress is already moving toward, accelerating
perhaps the next LHA; and then in addition to that, we are
going to have to make some investments in the shipyards in
order to enable them to further increase production. In
particular, if you think about Electric Boat up in Connecticut,
they are largely going to be maxed out in terms of their near-
term industrial capacity with the Columbia class and if we
tried to do two attack submarines.
But they have workforce limitations that are going to keep
them from growing further. There are some facilities
constraints that just over time that have grown and need to be
addressed. So putting some money into facilities and a training
infrastructure so that the shipyards are going to be able to
bring on the workforce they need to grow in order to start
doing the construction at the rate that we would need to get to
a 350-ship or so Navy.
And then in the mid term, I think the key will be to
facilitate in the Navy being able to create the kind of network
infrastructure it is going to need for these unmanned vehicles
with the sensors and the countersensors to be able to talk to
each other and then also talk back to their manned platforms
that are controlling them.
And so investments in some of the new line-of-site data
links, improvements to Link 16 that are currently making their
way into the program of record, those are going to be essential
in order for us to make our forces able to talk to one another
in an environment where it is going to be highly contested,
lots of jamming, loss of GPS [Global Positioning Satellite] is
likely.
So Link 16 in particular I think is a capability we need to
continue to enhance, and there is more room to grow for it.
Dr. Banerjee. I would just like to elaborate on what Mr.
Werchado said. I think that in the past it has always been the
one who strikes first does the most damage. One of the things
we were looking at is the hypervelocity projectile, railgun,
and aerial-layer missile system to provide us the capability to
actually absorb that first hit, minimize the damage to the
force, and then enable us to have a counterstrike that is both
powerful and can deliver a powerful blow to the adversary.
So in terms of things that can be done in the near term,
further maturation of the hypervelocity projectile, integrating
new seeker heads into that. If we are looking at actually
deploying railguns on ships when we think about new ship
designs, how do we get the 24 megajoules of wall plug power so
you can fire that thing continuously as opposed to having to
charge it off of a capacitor. Development and maturation of the
aerial-layer missile system that can be deployed on either an
F-18 or the new F-35Cs, or even the Marine Corps F-35 Bravos,
to be able to provide a long-range ability to intercept really
advanced hypersonic threats that are coming in towards the
naval force. That also is going to require an ability to target
those types of weapons and systems at range and the battle
management capability to be able to coordinate those types of
engagements.
I think in the mid term, building platforms that can
actually hold those capabilities and operate them in the manner
we think we are going to have to fight would be the second
piece. And to the extent that we can leverage work that has
already been done, if there are designs that are available that
other navies have that we can quickly leverage and deploy, or
leverage existing designs for AIP [air-independent propulsion]
submarines that we can license and then actually build here at
U.S. shipyards to get the numbers and the capacity that we need
in the mid term.
Mr. Wittman. Thank you, Mr. Courtney.
Mr. Conaway.
Mr. Conaway. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
All of you have mentioned many of the same things as a part
of your studies, whether it is weapons and/or connectivity or
command and control or whatever it might be.
Where are the long poles in the tent for getting all of
that done? The 2030 array of 240, 340, whatever the number of
ships you have got, assume a rational progression across all
those lines of things to be developed. Where are the ones that
are most likely to give us the most head-scratching or the most
trouble trying to keep up with all the other things? You can
put the hulls in or the keels down; you can do that pretty
mechanically. But all the other stuff you are talking about,
what are the choke points across that array of stuff?
Mr. Clark. So, I will jump in there. One thing in
particular we are finding trouble with is battle management. So
you can have great data links to be able to communicate with
all your unmanned vehicles, and they can be off sensing the
environment, and you can have all these weapons, but the
problem is that the speed of conflict is going to happen so
quickly that I need something autonomous to be able to look at
a threat, decide what it is, decide what the best weapon is to
address it, and then where that weapon is, be able to send it
from that platform to address the threat.
Or on the other side, attack a target that maybe is
amenable to a particular kind of weapon but not other kinds of
weapons. But having the battle management to be able to
coordinate all that information coming in and then be able to
make a decision as to what to do about it autonomously is a key
capability that there has been lots of projects going
individually on, but there has not been anything that has
totally cracked that nut.
Mr. Conaway. So if you can't do that, then you have to have
more ships because you have to have losses associated with--
unable to do that. Where is the break point? Your assessment
assumes that gets done. And if it doesn't happen, how many more
ships do you have to have?
Mr. Clark. So in our assessment, we were pretty
conservative with regard to our ability to do autonomous battle
management. So our fleet in some respects reflects the fact
that you are going to need more manned platforms to control
unmanned systems that are operating somewhat independently of
you.
If you could get more autonomy in your battle management
system--you think about Aegis system that automatically does
decision making for you--if you had that and were able to apply
it across the whole force, you might be able to reduce the
number of manned platforms significantly down from 350 to
somewhere in the lower 300s range.
Mr. Conaway. What about the weapons side, the railguns,
directed energy, those things, where is the----
Mr. Werchado. Sir, that one, if I can talk to that, we are
really taking a two-track approach. Right now there is over 100
barrels in the fleet that can fire an HVP [hypervelocity
projectile], and Dahlgren is working together with the Army,
and they are coming along well on the testing. That one could
be fielded very quickly.
Railgun is going to be a lot longer. We have to solve a lot
of problems: barrel wear, the repetitive rate, you mentioned
the recharge. So I think the low-hanging fruit is to get HVP
out as fast as we can. It does really well against cruise
missiles. It probably doesn't take down a ballistic missile,
but it would be a huge benefit to us to be able to have an
interzone cruise missile defense.
One thing Bryan alluded to is the command and control. We
have to assume that every time we go out we are going to get
jammed. We might have people take out our satellites. It is
always going to be a contested environment. At a minimum there
will be cyberattacks against our unclass networks. So we should
only train in areas where we can fight through a limited data.
So bringing UAVs [unmanned aerial vehicles] to do our own COMMs
[communications] links, do our own surveillance. Doing that
organically is going to be huge.
Mr. Conaway. Dr. Banerjee, are there other things that are
just wishes that are still in the development process?
Dr. Banerjee. I agree, I mean, the battle management to be
able to sort out and make the target weapon pairing, and I
think the challenge is how do you do that in a highly contested
environment. And I guess I would say the cyber threat, I think
there are ways of getting around the jamming, and depending on
how denied space is through line-of-site relays and other
capabilities, I think the long pole in the tent is how to do
that in a highly contested cyber environment.
I think that was a big concern that we had when we were
doing the study, and part of the reason we had the classified
annex to talk to what were some of the threats, and how do you
actually build a resilient architecture to try to deal with
some of those threats.
Mr. Conaway. Chairman--yes sir, Admiral Wilson.
Admiral Wilson. Yes, sir. I do want to mention an effort
that is ongoing as we speak. So right now at the Center of
Naval Analyses, we have a war-gaming tabletop exercise ongoing,
and it incorporates representatives from all three study teams,
the Marine Corps, and several other key stakeholders, to really
look at what are the long poles in the tent, as we look across
these three future fleet architecture studies, and also to
identify those key enablers that we will need to fight in
various scenarios and theaters as it relates to each separate
study. And we are going to be doing some red-teaming. And
several of the people here will also be in the room as well.
And so yesterday was the first day, and so we got a clear
indication of the cooperation and kind of the open-mindedness
that we have in discussing these types of issues, and we think
we are going to get a lot of fruit out of that. We will be able
to come back and tell you the results.
Mr. Conaway. I look forward to that. Sounds great. Thank
you. I yield back.
Mr. Wittman. Thank you, Mr. Conaway.
We will now go to Mrs. Davis.
Mrs. Davis. Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you
to all of you for being here.
I have been dealing more in personnel these last number of
years, so this is very interesting, but it just takes a while
to get it all, and I wanted to thank you for speaking English
for most of the time. I appreciate it.
I think, Mr. Werchado, you made the statement, I believe,
something to the effect that the Navy would have written this
differently, perhaps focused on different things, and Admiral
you might speak to this as well. How? In what way? I mean, do
you think that your experiences are lending a different--these
reports are lending a whole different view to what is required
and what kind of capacity we have to deal with it today versus
down the line?
Mr. Werchado. Thank you, ma'am. I appreciate the question.
I would say that the only difference would have been
because I was, and my team, we were given intellectual freedom
to look at the range of possibilities. And we aren't geniuses.
Distributed lethality was proposed by SURFOR [U.S. Navy Surface
Forces] 2 years ago. We just expanded it to all the fleet
versus just the surface ships.
I think what would have happened if it was an official Navy
study is it would have been chopped by the surface community,
the submarine community, the aviators, the Marines, and
everybody would have said I don't play enough in it. So we had
the freedom to not vet it. I don't think there was any new,
brilliant ideas that came out of it, but we were able to say
what is the most effective force to fight a high-end threat,
not what is the balanced, equal opportunity force.
Mrs. Davis. Yeah, and part of it too is the parochialism
which sometimes tends to seep into the discussion. Admiral,
yes? You smiled when I said that.
Admiral Wilson. No. I agree with what Mr. Werchado said.
Now although he had representatives across all those resource
sponsors, I think the nature of the culture that he developed
in the study team is that, hey, leave your badge at the door,
and we are going to be open-minded about this.
And not only that, the NDAA specified that they weren't,
you know, encumbered to anchor themselves on programs of
record, so they didn't have to incorporate any----
Mrs. Davis. Yeah. How confident are you then that as we
move forward, that those kinds of recommendations will come
forward as opposed to having people fall back on some of the
other ways?
Admiral Wilson. No, ma'am. I am very comfortable that we
will get kind of the honest assessment. As a matter of fact, in
the assessments division, that is kind of our job to be the
honest brokers on how things should be assessed throughout the
building cycle of how the Navy resources.
Mrs. Davis. All right. Anyone else want to comment on that?
Mr. Clark. Well, as a former employee of the N81
Assessments Division, I can attest they do very good work in
there, but in some ways in the Navy you are constrained by what
it is that the Secretary of Defense is going to use to grade
your homework.
So when you send your recommendations up in terms of the
budget, they have a set of scenarios and objectives that they
are going to grade that against. And so if we as a department
have established a set of requirements that are maybe not
reflective of what the future might really hold, then we may be
going down the wrong path in terms of our force structure
decisions, and so by doing it this way, you sort of freed the
teams to come up with their own assessment of what we think the
future operating environment is going to be and what may be
required of naval forces.
So at least you get a better idea of what I guess the
operating space might be, like how big a fleet, what kind of
fleet, what mix of fleet, might be necessary to address the
future operating environment.
Mrs. Davis. Do you think that how we prioritize the ships
and capabilities would be different under that? I mean, there
is such a range that we are talking about, and we obviously
don't have unlimited funds.
Mr. Clark. I think the priorities would be different, but I
think that there is a fairly limited range of fleet
architectures that make sense given the great power competition
we are going to face. And it all comes down to specifics with
regard to am I looking to deter a certain kind of conflict or
fight a different kind of conflict, so it kind of comes down to
exactly what the instantiation of that future threat might be,
but there is bounds on it.
Mrs. Davis. I wonder, Doctor, do you see the flexibility in
what we are looking at as well because we never can quite
predict that next war?
Dr. Banerjee. Yeah. As Bryan said, that is always the
challenge. And I think that is also compounded by the fact that
with ships they are 30- to 50-year hulls. So even though we are
looking out to 2030, and I think Mr. Werchado mentioned this at
the kickoff of the war game, that about 75 percent of the force
that is going to be there in 2030 is kind of the same ships and
hulls that we have today.
So the challenge is how do you adapt that force over time
to meet these advanced threats and these new challenges within
the constraints of the fact that the vast majority of the force
you are going to have in the future is very similar to what you
have today. So it is a complex problem.
Mrs. Davis. Yeah. Admiral, quickly.
Admiral Wilson. Yes, ma'am. I did want to add one
additional point. Although there were three separate studies
across the table here, there is not a lot of difference in the
DNA of the groups here. Bryan even mentioned he used to be in
81, and so although we are getting different kind of opinions
in ways of fighting, we are also casting a wider net to what
else is out there. There are things that didn't show up in any
of the three studies, new technologies that we get from
industry or from academia, that may be beneficial and help us
as well, so we are looking at those things also.
Mrs. Davis. Okay. Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Wittman. Thank you, Mrs. Davis. We will now go to Mr.
Knight.
Mr. Knight. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I am going to go back a little bit. I sit on Science, Space
and Technology. We talk about a couple of these things, but one
of them is hypersonic weapons. And we have been talking about
hypersonic for about 65 years in America. And we seem to start
a program, stop a program, start a program, stop a program,
collect data, give data to somebody else, wait for the Chinese
to steal it, and then that is kind of where we are. I would
like that to stop, and I know that the Navy, we have had
several admirals in here before that have talked about
hypersonic weapons and what kind of a game changer that would
be. I understand HVP is helping quite a bit, but that doesn't
get us to moving somebody way away because you are now going
4,800 miles an hour.
So give me an idea, and I know that we have problems with
the railgun, and I think that we will continue to have problems
with the railgun for a very long time just because of the
nature of what we are working there, and maybe we are just not
quite smart enough to get through the physics of what the
railgun brings to us.
So give me an idea of where we are, what that would mean to
our fleets. I think I know what that would mean to the Air
Force, but I also know that that would probably bring a greater
issue to the Navy than any of the four services, so I will
start with the Admiral.
Admiral Wilson. Yes, sir, I concur with your comments.
I particularly kind of locked on how we talk in open forum,
and one of the key words that we talked about at the very
beginning was this is a competition. And when you are in high-
level competition, you are very careful as to what information
you give your adversary. And so we do need to think more about
how we do that in the future and not talk about what we can't
do and what we cannot do and let the adversaries know kind of
where we are at.
Mr. Werchado. Sir, I would like to address a particular
aspect. You mentioned the different weapons and their
capabilities. Radar resources plays a huge part. I think
everybody here is aware of the Navy's effort for AMDR, advanced
missile defense radar, on the Flight III DDG [guided-missile
destroyer]. I appreciate all the support that program has
gotten to date, and we look toward to using that against future
threats, including hypersonic.
Mr. Clark. So I would add to that that one thing that U.S.
naval forces have as an advantage potentially is that you are
co-locating your missile defenses with the target. So if the
hypersonic weapon is coming at you and you are on the ship and
you have got some defensive systems, you can still shoot at it
because it has still got to eventually come to you.
And so the fact that the hypersonic weapon is going mach 5
or beyond is somewhat mitigated by the fact that it has to
eventually arrive at your location. So some of these missile
defense capabilities that might be very difficult to use in
defense of somebody else are somewhat effective when you are
dealing with getting shot at yourself.
The other thing we have to think about is us using
hypersonic weapons against the enemy, and there has been a lot
of work going on in the development of new hypersonic weapons
that U.S. forces could use. And so that is where I think we
should be investing more time and effort, because clearly if we
are worried about the threat coming from Russia or China, there
is no reason why we wouldn't be able to develop our own
hypersonic threat, whether it is air launched or potentially
even surface launched, ship launched.
Dr. Banerjee. Thank you, Bryan. That is exactly where I was
going to go. In the MITRE study, we recommended an aerial-layer
missile system, so that was actually a hypersonic terminal
seeker to be able to deal with some of the hypersonic threats
that are coming in and try and engage them at range and
potentially even at longer range engage those platforms that
are going to be launching large numbers of antiship cruise
missiles and other things coming at us.
So our report talked about how through the aerial layer,
and then also we talked about a Pershing 3 variant, so the
[Chinese] DF-21 missile is based off of the Pershing 2. You
know that is an example of where they have taken our design and
used it against us. The thought here is to have a Pershing 3
variant that could be launched from a ship so we could still
comply with the INF [Intermediate-Range Nuclear Forces] Treaty.
But that would be now something that they would have to deal
with, and now they will have to build defensive systems to try
to figure out how they are going to save their light holes in
the South China Sea or their ships.
Mr. Knight. Thank you, Mr. Chair. I yield back.
Mr. Wittman. Very good. Thank you, Mr. Knight. We are just
looking. There is a vote that has been called, so we are going
to try to get through a few more questions here.
Mr. Knight. That is why I was fast.
Mr. Wittman. Okay. Thank you. Thank you. We are going to go
to Mr. Garamendi.
Mr. Garamendi. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and for the
witnesses, a big thank you. Like Ms. Davis, a lot of this is
new. I have been on other subcommittees, mostly on strategic
arms. Some of it seems to intersect here.
Of particular interest to me is the unmanned vehicles of
various kind, underwater, surface, and the like. Mr. Werchado,
you seem to be enamored by these. I would like you to explain
more completely why and how they fit into the battlefield. And
also in this context, maybe all of you would like to comment on
the near term, all of which, of which all of you seem to
comment on requires defense, electromagnetic defenses, cyber
warfare, and the like.
So if you can hit both of those, it would be helpful to me.
Mr. Werchado. Yes, sir, I would be glad to. It was not a
pleasant moment, but I had an IPR, a [interim] progress report,
with our mutual boss, Admiral Richardson, and I used that
comment about 75 percent of the force still being here in 2030,
and he said only if I keep buying the same things. And he
challenged us to see how different we could make our force by
2030. And you know what, you really can't do that through just
manned systems. If you want to build things quickly, they have
to be affordable, and unmanned is a great way to get there.
So we said if we opened the aperture, what could we do? So
we gave ourselves some constraints. We couldn't invent a new
unmanned platform that didn't exist. It had to be either in
development or based on a current manned platform.
So we said what do we need to do? We need to have a backup
to satellites, so we said what kind of surveillance could we
provide? And we looked at what DARPA was working on, they had
TERN [Tactically Exploited Reconnaissance Node], excellent
capability, so we put that on the surface combatants. We wanted
to make ourselves more offensive, so we looked at the Mark 6
patrol boat. We said easy to make that into a robot boat. Can
put four cruise missiles on it without exceeding its
displacement. So now we have four times the strike capability.
So we went for niche unmanned capabilities where we needed
it. We wanted to have the decoy. I don't want a manned ship to
be the decoy because it will get shot. I used unmanned surface
vehicles for the decoys so we went after niche capability where
unmanned was better than manned, and the technology supported
it.
Mr. Clark. I would say, sir, in addition to what Mr.
Werchado just talked about, we looked at using unmanned systems
as an adjunct to manned systems because they are going to be
able to give you that longer reach and that greater
persistence, and operate in environments where you may need to
depend on them to be your eyes and ears, if you will.
So large unmanned vehicles like Mr. Werchado talked about
were essential. A couple of limitations that we found, in the
work we have been doing with DARPA, one is the sensor
capability that an unmanned vehicle has is usually pretty
limited compared to a manned platform, because we want these
unmanned vehicles to be relatively small and relatively
inexpensive, so we don't put the very sophisticated sensors on
them. That means that the brains in them, the autonomy, isn't
necessarily always going to be able to make the right decision
because it may not be able to see what is going on around it.
So you got to network them together to have one maybe one with
a really good sensor and others that will be able to talk to it
but that means you have to have these communications that are
sometimes highly contested in those environments.
And then the other thing with unmanned vehicles, when you
think about deterrence and in peacetime how you might use them,
is they don't necessarily provide the deterrent effect that you
are looking for in terms of preventing conflict. Not
necessarily because people don't respect them because there is
no people on them, but more so because they can't defend
themselves. So if you are driving around the South China Sea
and you run up against an unmanned Mark 6 patrol boat, you
can't have it just start shooting at people that happen to
wander up to it because in peacetime that is not appropriate.
So it limits your ability to deter conflict in peacetime if
you depend entirely on an unmanned solution.
Dr. Banerjee. I think all three reports, MITRE report
agreed that unmanned, I think, has a huge role on the undersea
side, and we were all for having unmanned underwater vehicles
as a critical enabler. I think our report differed from the
others in the sense that we deemphasized the role of unmanned
on the surface and on the air side. I think there is a role for
it in the air wing that needs to be worked out, but our
concerns were again from a counter-C4ISR perspective and a
counter-space perspective, to what degree are you going to be
able to actually network these types of platforms together and
use them effectively.
And then our other concern was from a cyber perspective,
how well are these platforms going to work in a highly
contested cyber environment. So MITRE made a conscious decision
to kind of deemphasize the unmanned on the surface and the air
side to some extent in our report.
Mr. Garamendi. [Audio malfunction in hearing room.]
Mr. Wittman. Thank you, Mr. Garamendi. I am going to go to
Mr. DesJarlais.
Mr. DesJarlais. I know we just have a minute before we have
to leave for votes. I have a quick question, and I will start
with Dr. Werchado.
Mr. Wittman. Go ahead and take your full 5 minutes. We are
going to have some folks coming back so we are going to keep
the hearing going. So please take your time.
Mr. DesJarlais. Gotcha, okay. Some advocates have indicated
a high-low mix of attack submarine assets to include diesel
submarines. What are the pros and cons associated with a high-
low mix of attack submarines?
Mr. Werchado. Thank you, sir. Excellent question. I had the
fortune to be on the Virginia-class analysis of alternatives
back in the 1990s and we did look at diesels. The problem is we
don't have the luxury of fighting close to our shore. We play
an away game. And if I was a country like China, I would buy a
lot of diesels because I know you are going to come and fight
me near home. We have to deploy, and the only way to deploy is
to bring your own fuel with you.
When we buy a Virginia, it comes with a lifetime of fuel.
And so I have nothing against diesel submarines, but you have
to say I am going to be fighting within a few hundred miles of
where I based them, or else now I have to buy extra oilers. I
am going to make them vulnerable when I refuel them. They are
going to have to snorkel. They are going to become vulnerable.
It is just not an option for us as long as we have to be a
global navy.
Mr. DesJarlais. Anybody else have a comment? Doctor.
Dr. Banerjee. I will take that. So MITRE put that into the
report. Our concern was on the capacity side and actually
bringing up the number of attack submarines, I think Mr.
Werchado pointed out that the diesels are going to have issues
with the speed of advance and magazine depth. They don't have
the magazine depth that you are going to have with the Virginia
and the VPM [Virginia payload module]. But our thought was base
them forward. Base them in Guam and Japan or the Baltics and so
they are close to the fight.
And then when the balloon goes up, flush them out early
because it is going to take them a while to get there and the
Virginias and the nuclear submarines that are deploying from
CONUS [continental United States] or from other locations can
speed into the AOR [area of responsibility] and get on station
very quickly.
Once they are on station, there is something that the
adversary is going to have to worry about, and so this is a way
of actually increasing the size of the submarine force
relatively cheaply because you can buy, you know, our back of
the envelope math suggests that you can get three diesels for
the cost of one Virginia, so it is a way of increasing it
quickly to try to overcome a loss of the Los Angeles class as
they retire out of the force.
Mr. DesJarlais. Thank you. That is all I have. I yield
back.
Mr. Wittman. Thank you, Mr. DesJarlais.
Okay. We are going to go to a very brief recess. We have
sent some members off to vote. They are going to come back. Mr.
Conaway will take the chair as we head off to vote, so we will
be back and continue the hearing, so just hang in there with us
for a few minutes. We are trying to navigate these votes.
So we will recess briefly.
[Recess.]
Mr. Conaway [presiding]. The Chair recognizes Mr. Gallagher
for 5 minutes.
Mr. Gallagher. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. There has been a
lot of talk, by all of you, about the concept of distributed
lethality, and to quote a fellow Wisconsinite, Rear Admiral
Fanta, if it floats, it fights, and Mr. Werchado, your study
goes particularly far in sort of incorporating this concept
into a distributive fleet, and you sort of claim this with an
increased independent units capable of offensive operations
tenfold over the current force.
In your study, the small surface combatant fleet would be
20 percent higher than the current 30-year shipbuilding plan,
48 vessels versus--48 vessels versus 40 vessels. The LCS
[littoral combat ship], we make it in Wisconsin. I would just
be interested in your thoughts on the LCS, in terms of
supporting the concept of distributed lethality in the future.
Mr. Werchado. Thank you, sir. Admiral Fanta was at--
chairing a meeting I was at this morning. I think there is a
distinction to be made in our force structure. So we have 28
LCS. We need those. We use those for mine countermeasure
missions and antisubmarine warfare missions. We don't trade
those against other ships. We also have 20 small surface
combatants. We need those ships. Those would be doing part of
the antisurface battle network.
So we have requirement for 48 small combatants. Twenty-
eight, which is the number that we have currently under
contract for LCS, we need every one of those. We also see a
need for 20 more of the small surface combatant to extend our
distributed lethal network. So I just wanted--it is not 48 of
the same ship.
Mr. Gallagher. Uh-huh. Well, on that point, Mr. Clark, I
would ask you to talk about this. Is there a need for a more
survivable and lethal frigate than is now being considered by
the Navy acquisition strategy, or what requirements need to be
built in that don't currently exist in the LCS program as we
look towards a frigate of the future?
Mr. Clark. Yes. Thanks, Congressman. So I think we
definitely recommended a larger, more survivable, and more
lethal frigate going forward. So in our fleet architecture, we
recommended that the Navy continue to build the LCS and the
frigate version of the LCS unless that design is ready to be
built, which we anticipate it not happening until the 2020
timeframe, and then we would transition to that frigate.
We think the essential capabilities needed in that frigate
are the ability to do air defense for another ship so it could
do an escort mission, which we saw in our analysis as being an
increasingly important mission for a situation in which our
logistics forces and civilian convoys and noncombatant ships
are going to be at risk of being attacked by an enemy that is
willing to go all out and attack civilians as well as attacking
just strictly military ships.
So we saw the need to have the ability to do air defense of
another ship as being essential. The other thing it has to be
able to do is antisubmarine warfare, and in particular, using
new antisubmarine warfare [ASW] concepts that will leverage
things like the variable depth sonar that the LCS mission
package has, and the medium--or the multifunction towed array,
which the LCS mission package has as well.
What those capabilities do is allow us to transition from
having a strictly, you know, man-on-man or single-ship-on-
submarine kind of ASW to now do multi-static ASW where multiple
ships can look for multiple submarines, and then we need
standoff weapons to be able to engage those submarines rapidly,
which could be from a TERN type of unmanned vehicle that an LCS
or a frigate could deploy.
But those capabilities that we need in that frigate end up
requiring a ship that is larger than the LCSs that we currently
are building.
Mr. Gallagher. And Dr. Banerjee, you seem to--is it fair to
say you disagree kind of with both those approaches. Your
report argues for the cancellation of the program. Have you
done any analysis of what that would do to the defense
industrial base, because I am sure you know this isn't sort of
turn it off and turn the spigot on somewhere else. I mean, this
is years of developing a skilled workforce and improvements and
efficiencies that happen every single day to make it more
affordable.
Dr. Banerjee. Roger that. To the first part of the question
that we agree with CSBA, I think we agree that it has to be a
larger frigate, larger size. We did look--and we were looking,
again, at an area of air defense, antisurface warfare
capability that was built around the hypervelocity projectile,
launched out of a 5-inch gun, I mean, the first part of
analysis that we did was to look at, okay, what kind of frigate
designs do that. It turns out there was a Garcia-class, you
know frigate, you know back in the 1980s that was a 35, a 100
ton, so it is about LCS size that had two 5-inch deck guns. The
naval architect that was on our team didn't think that that was
something that was--although it was done back then, that it was
something that was doable today.
So we actually recommended something that was a larger
size. I think we looked at a German, you know, F-125, which is
a 7,200-ton, you know, frigate design that had the two deck
guns, could get you some VLS cells as well as EW [electronic
warfare] capabilities and decoys and things you would need to
make that a much more robust and survivable ship within this
particular threat environment.
Now, the question in terms of whether or not that could be
built in those shipyards and whether those yards could be
expanded to handle a larger ship size----
Mr. Gallagher. Uh-huh.
Dr. Banerjee [continuing]. That wasn't something that we
looked at. What we did think about was whether it would be
possible to actually potentially license a design to try to
actually get something built sooner. If it is a design that
could be licensed and then manufactured at, you know, either or
both of the existing LCS shipyards and what modifications that
they would have to do at the yards to be able to do that, we
didn't actually look at that.
The other potential option--I mean, we did also talk about
a couple of different alternatives for the amphibious force.
One of that would be, you know, an option to build a smaller--a
number of smaller platforms for the new dock ship. Now, I know
since the study came out, there--I think there has been a
decision as to what that design is going to be, but if the Navy
and Marine Corps wanted to go down that road, then that could
potentially be another ship that is built within the existing
shipyards and facilities.
Mr. Gallagher. Thank you, gentlemen, for your work. Mr.
Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Conaway. The gentleman's time is expired.
Mr. Norcross, 5 minutes.
Mr. Norcross. Thank you, Chairman, and hopefully you didn't
address this while I was gone voting, but I hear more diverse,
spread our risk out, hidden, unmanned. Tell me how our aircraft
carriers fit into this new world and new vision that you have
been talking about? So start right with the admiral, work our
way down.
Admiral Wilson. Well, sir, I would like to defer to the
study team leads and let them explain how they incorporated our
existing carriers and how they are planning on using either an
America class or some alternate carrier in the future force.
Mr. Norcross. Thank you.
Mr. Werchado. Thank you, Admiral. I think one of the key
parts of our study that really hasn't gotten the visibility is
the synergy that you can have between a large aircraft carrier
like a Nimitz or a Ford and a big deck amphib. One thing that
doesn't get publicized too well is the Marines are far ahead of
the Navy in terms of fielding fifth gen fighters.
The F-35 Bravo will be out in numbers before the F-35
Charlie is, so the big deck amphib, which can host up to 23, 35
Bravos, you probably wouldn't want to deploy that many for
operational reasons, but it could host say 20, it could go to
sea and provide 2 extra squadrons of fifth gen fighters which
the Navy couldn't field until 2026 at current acquisition
plans.
However, it can't carry AEW, advanced early warning,
airborne early warning, it can't have electronic attack, so you
wouldn't want it to be out by itself. But if you put it out
with the big deck carrier, there is a win-win because now the
carrier air wing has fifth gen squadrons earlier and the L-
class ship affords the protection from the E-2s and the
Growlers that are on the big carrier.
So when we said we had so many more combat nodes, when we
deploy for combat, we send carriers out in twos. The reason for
that is you have to have 24/7 flight ops and you have to have
down time on the flight deck. So if I have to send my carriers
out in twos, I can cut the number of strike groups in half that
I can send to war. If I pair them up with big deck amphibs, I
am back to each carrier can be a strike group with an L-class
ship next to it.
Mr. Norcross. But the point I am trying to make is they are
larger, you are not going to hide them. If it does break out,
what are the chances of that surviving the first 10 minutes of
any conflict?
Mr. Werchado. It is large, sir, and it is hard to hide, but
it also hard to find. Remember, it is mobile. And so, big
Pacific Ocean. I can know a carrier is there, but I have to get
its location within the acquisition circle of my missile, and I
have to transmit that data to a firing unit before that circle
grows. You know, at 30 knots, I know where your carrier is
right now, go call the missile shot, get them to shoot
something. Every minute that circle is growing area of
uncertainty because the carrier is doing 30 knots.
And so what you really want to do is say you may know I
have a carrier there but you can't solve the firing solution
and you can't launch on it, and so all those things we have
been talking about, the decoys, electronic warfare, the cyber,
that is to keep the uncertainty. They may know we have a
carrier out there, but unless they can put a weapon on it, it
doesn't help.
Mr. Norcross. Thank you.
Mr. Clark. So one thing I would say in addition to that is
it also depends on how you use your carrier. If you use your
carrier as the front line of defense and deterrence, then you
are putting it into an environment where it is much more likely
to be found, targeted, and shot at. And what we found in our
analysis is not so much that the carrier gets sunk, is that its
operations get suppressed because it is driving around trying
to avoid being shot and it is not able to launch aircraft, and
therefore, it is not really doing its job.
So what we did in our fleet architecture study is we took
the carriers, which are very good at delivering combat power at
moderate levels for a really long period of time, and moving
them outside that immediate area of the conflict where things
might start. So you think about the South and East China Seas
in the Western Pacific, and we put the distributed forces that
we have been talking about inside that area because they have
missile-based fires that are much faster and can be delivered
in high volume for a short period.
So in a war, these distributed forces we are talking about
are likely to use up all their weapons relatively quickly. So
within a few days, they might be out of ammunition and have to
sort of withdraw, or they get attacked and sunk. So we need
somebody to be able to flow in behind them to be able to
continue the fight once those distributed forces have to start
withdrawing, and that is what the carrier strike groups are
able to do.
One, they are a little bit farther away as they are able to
maneuver and take advantage of the larger space they have at
their disposal, so they are harder to find, and they are also
then coming in at a point where we maybe started to attrite the
enemy a little bit and reduced his ability to launch large
salvos at the carrier.
So separating the force into these forward forces and this
larger carrier-based force enables you to take advantage of
what both do really well and minimize the chance that the
carrier will be suppressed.
Mr. Norcross. But you also have to keep them outside of the
range so that they are not going--they are going to stay out in
the North Atlantic in case the Balkans--are particularly when
we are dealing down there.
Mr. Clark. Right. So they stay outside the immediate area
of the conflict so they could still be attacked by some small
number of very, very long-range weapons, but you don't put them
in the place where necessarily they are going to be able to be
hit by large numbers of shorter range weapons.
Dr. Banerjee. In the MITRE study, we talked about using the
hypervelocity projectile to deal--you know, basically use the
surface combatants to protect the carrier from the cruise
missile threats, and we also talk about an aerial air missile
system to try to engage the more capable hypersonic threats, as
well as trying to actually shoot down the bombers and the
strategic aircraft that they are going to launch those things
off of at range.
So we use that to try to protect the carrier and provide
kind of a layered defense that is more robust and can be
layered on top of the existing standard missile systems and the
existing point defense systems within the strike group.
To get to the unmanned question, I think the interesting
question there is if you are on a combat air patrol where you
are trying to perform this mission, that is actually a fairly
nice role to actually have for an unmanned system because they
can stay up there for a long period of time and it is a
relatively boring job for a fighter jock to do, but then
actually slave the fire control for that system back to either
the E-2D or back to an Aegis combatant to actually perform--you
know, put that cap up while you are not conducting large-scale
flight operations. It is an interesting potential role for
unmanned systems for a carrier defense.
Mr. Norcross. Thank you. Yield back.
Mr. Wittman [presiding]. Very good. Thank you, Mr.
Norcross. We now go to Ms. Hanabusa.
Ms. Hanabusa. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you,
gentlemen, and if I ask any of the same questions, please
excuse me. I am coming from a vote.
So this is for Rear Admiral as well as Mr. Werchado. I am
sort of confused as to what the right number is for you for the
Navy because the FSA [Force Structure Assessment] in December
2016 said 355 and some of you are concurring or nodding to 355;
but in your report, you seem to go to a total of force, 57;
manned, 321, which is a force of 355, that number; and
unmanned, 136. So what is the number? What is Navy's position?
Admiral Wilson. Yes, ma'am. Let me clarify a little bit,
and I mentioned this earlier, but as you mentioned, you may not
have been in the room then. Three fifty-five was the results of
the Force Structure Assessment.
Ms. Hanabusa. Uh-huh.
Admiral Wilson. And that relates to current programs of
record, current platforms that the Navy has using current
warfighting concepts and keeping things fixed such as our
strategic laydown that we currently have.
Now, that is the foundation and the baseline for where we
need to go in the future. So right now that number is 355, but
as we look to future fleet architectures, different concepts of
fighting, different platforms, so within that 355 number, there
are no unmanned platforms.
So if you look at how you are fighting in a more
distributed fashion, how your forces are more netted and
integrated, now you can, you have an opportunity to replace
some manned platforms with some unmanned platforms, for
example, and some other things that are--have different
technologies, and then you are going to fight those things a
different way. So that number will look different.
One of the things that drives us to do a Force Structure
Assessment is change in strategy, change--a significant change
in programmatics. This is one example if you are going to a
more unmanned kind of centric force, and significant changes in
the threat, and that is what drove the 2016, significant
changes in the threat and there was a change in the strategy,
that is what drove the increase of the number. Any of those
changes that happen in the future, it will change the number
again. We will do another Force Structure Assessment, and it
will reflect what a future force would need to look like.
Ms. Hanabusa. I understand that, but the problem with doing
that is that if you--we can't, and then basically the
industrial base can't switch that simply. So for example, one
of the things that I noticed, which is dear to Hawaii, is the
fact that where everyone else seems to agree that the Virginia-
class attack sub should be around 66, one of you is higher than
66, you are not, and in terms of the Navy system is not.
The FSA is at 66, and we are also at the same number, I
believe, in the Columbia-class subs, so it seems to me that one
of things that I would like to know, first of all, is who do
you--who do you perceive to be the, quote, enemy that you have
to fight? Because if it is Russia and China, as many of you
allude to or actually state, then we shouldn't have this kind
of a discrepancy in my mind.
We should have some understanding of, one, where is that
force going to be? Is it going to be in the Pacific? Is it
going to be under the Arctic? Or is it going to be in the
Atlantic? So if you could--one of you could answer that.
Mr. Werchado. Yes, ma'am. I think there is an apparent
disconnect that isn't. So Admiral Wilson said he looked at
manned platforms in the Force Structure Assessment. He gets 66.
MITRE looked at a mixture of nuke and diesel and if you add the
two. We had 53 SSNs [nuclear attack submarines], but we also
had 48 large displacement UUVs [unmanned underwater vehicles],
so whether you do it all through manned, through manned nuke
and manned diesel or manned nuke and unmanned diesel, I think
what you are really talking about is a capability.
And I love the fact that you went from asking about the
total force structure number to the individual submarine
number. Inside the Pentagon, we never say 313, 325, 355 because
it is a not meaningful number. We say how many carriers do I
need, how many amphibs do I need, how many submarines do I
need. That is where the discussion really should take place.
Thank you, ma'am.
Ms. Hanabusa. So what about my question about where is the
threat? I assume all of this is driven by where is the threat?
So it has got to be some assessment on all of your parts as to
who or where is that threat.
Mr. Werchado. In order to keep it unclassified, we
specified we would take--be able to handle a high-end threat
with large anti-access capability. My colleague named two
countries that I wouldn't disagree with.
Ms. Hanabusa. Somebody named them. I read it.
Mr. Werchado. Yes, ma'am. I can. But while doing that,
deter anyone else. So that could be the next level tier of
country. So if you can handle one of the big ones, you should
be able to handle one of the medium ones and keep them
deterred. That is [inaudible] our construct.
Ms. Hanabusa. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Mr. Wittman. Thank you, Ms. Hanabusa.
We will now go to Mr. McEachin.
Mr. McEachin. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Up until December
31, I was just a small-town lawyer trying to make good, and now
I am trying to learn all these newfangled concepts, and
Admiral, you and I had a discussion the other day and I went
and did a little research and it turns out that I think we are
working under the assumption that we have to fight at least
two--we need to be prepared to fight two significant conflicts,
maybe with a non-state actor, maybe one with a state actor, and
that is what drives our preparedness numbers, and that what
drives presumably this 355 number with some variation.
And then I see my President propose this $54 billion to be
added in investment to defense, and then he flies down to the
south side of my district into Newport News, stands on a
carrier and starts talking about how wonderful this amount of
money is for building up our, presumably, our Navy. That is
certainly the implication.
And then I start hearing all these whispers about, well,
the $54 billion really isn't all for the Navy. It is for, you
know, most of it, quite frankly, is going to the Department of
Energy for our nuclear weapons systems. I don't know if any of
that is true. I don't want to deal with alternative facts. If
anybody at this table knows, how much of that $54 billion would
actually be going to building ships, hopefully, out of Newport
News and Connecticut and maybe elsewhere, too, but how much of
that $54 billion will actually be going to building ships?
Admiral Wilson. Yes, sir. I can't comment on specifically
how much money would be going towards building ships, but some
of that money will go towards making the current force whole,
and some of it will go towards ramping up and building the
ships; but specific dollar figure, I can't give you here.
Mr. McEachin. I appreciate that, and thank you for gently
chiding me in that fashion. To the extent that you can comment,
does any part of that $54 billion put us on track to get to
that 355-ship level, because I have got a whole bunch of folks
who are looking for work in Virginia, in Virginia's Fourth
Congressional District, and they are mighty excited. But I am
hearing things to say we need to slow down, we are not going to
get there too quickly with that number.
Admiral Wilson. No, absolutely. Congressman, we will be--
well, there is efforts ongoing right now to see what we can do
to ramp up in the industrial base where we can and start moving
quickly to that 355 number for platforms that we know we are
going to need.
Mr. Werchado. Yes, sir. Also, the Secretary of Defense
indicated his priority would be first restoring readiness,
fixing holes in the programs, and then growing force structure.
I would just point out that a lot of restoring readiness means
Norfolk Naval Shipyard because we do have to do the repairs to
those ships to get them back out, so I would expect a lot of
the investment would be going to increase the rate of overhauls
and the capacity to do overhauls.
Mr. Clark. Also keep in mind that the ship maintenance
industrial base would benefit from some of this money going
into readiness because right now all of our surface combatants,
all of our amphibious ships get maintained at private
shipyards. There is a bunch at Norfolk, there is a bunch along
the East Coast, and so there is a lot of workers that are going
to be brought in to help with that because that is where a lot
of our expansion volume is, if you will, in the ship
maintenance industrial base.
Mr. McEachin. If you care to comment. You don't need to
feel compelled.
Dr. Banerjee. No. I don't know where that $54 billion is
going. I don't have anything to say on that.
Mr. McEachin. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Mr. Wittman. Thank you, Mr. McEachin. I just wanted to let
you know, too, we have asked the Congressional Budget Office to
outline for us the pathway to get to 355 ships in a 15-, 20-,
25- and 30-year scenario. So we will have some additional
information for the committee as far as the pathway there so it
will give you a little more information to go on.
Mr. McEachin. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Wittman. Thank you. Thank you. We will now go to Mr.
Langevin.
Mr. Langevin. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want to thank the
panel for your testimony here today. Admiral, thank you for
your service and all of you, good work that you do in behalf of
our Nation. Thank you for your work.
Admiral Wilson, Mr. Werchado, so I am a long-term member of
this subcommittee, and I am very proud to represent Rhode
Island's Second District where we begin the build process for
our Nation's submarine fleet. So I--I have to, say, though, I
am frustrated that such a dramatic increase to our naval fleet
from 274 to 355 ships in the future was announced so quickly it
seemed without very little conversation.
So can you discuss with the subcommittee the decision-
making process that took place prior to this announcement and
what factors were most heavily weighted, and how are you
preparing to move forward now with this plan? I think it caught
a lot of people off guard that it happened so quickly, and I
have been around here for awhile, and to see that kind of a
dramatic shift so quickly was surprising, so----
Admiral Wilson. Yes, sir. I think you are referring to the
announcement of the 355-ship Navy?
Mr. Langevin. Yeah.
Admiral Wilson. I would answer that by saying that our
study was complete, and we had briefed leadership, and so once
you have a completed study and you brief leadership, leadership
then has--it is their prerogative on whether they want to go
public with it or not, and the Secretary of the Navy chose to
go public with that information, which was complete at the
time.
Mr. Langevin. Thank you. Mr. Werchado, do you want to add
anything?
Mr. Werchado. No, I think that covered it. I would just
point out that the work for the FSA actually started under
Admiral Wilson's predecessor, Admiral Mercado. It took us about
almost a year, so we had to go out to all the fleet component
commanders and the COCOMs [combatant commanders] and find out
what their demand signal was, we compared it to the results of
our campaign modeling the analysis we do for the war plan, so
it was an involved process. It may have seemed overnight based
on the speed of the roll-out, but again, that was SECNAV
[Secretary of the Navy] determined. We had been working pretty
much since last January on it.
Mr. Langevin. Okay. All right. Thank you. Dr. Banerjee, so
I--I see that the MITRE study included the addition of an
electromagnetic railgun onboard a new frigate and supplemental
platforms.
So I have been a long-time advocate for things like
directed energy and high-velocity projectile technologies, and
I understand that high-velocity projectiles have been discussed
today already, but did you evaluate directed energy
technologies outside of railgun in your study? If not, why not.
Dr. Banerjee. No, we didn't look at things like the solid
state laser technology maturation [SSLTM] program and some of
the other systems that are out there. I think our thought,
those are interesting technologies, technologies we should
continue to invest in. I think that there is still that
capability there potentially from--a counter-C4ISR perspective,
but our thought was that the hyper-velocity projectile was
further along and something that was, at least when launched
from a 5-inch deck gun, could be deployed within the existing
force.
In terms of the railgun, our thought was, if practical, if
you could put the power plant in to be able to operate it in
the new frigate design, that would be great. The other option
that we had put forward was potentially in the magazine ship
concept, if you are actually going to put VLS cells and other
capabilities into a commercial hull, in a commercial hull, you
can buy containerized power plants that could deliver that type
of power for a railgun and you could drop them in and that
might be the quickest way to actually get something like that
to the fleet.
We were focused on what could be done in the next 10 to 15
years, and I think our concern is, although I know SSLTM and
other capabilities are moving forward, we just weren't sure you
were going to get the power level out of those systems to have
effects against the types of systems that we are worried about.
Mr. Langevin. Okay. All right. And I would just point out
that the--we do have a 30-kilowatt laser right now on the USS
Ponce that is in theater. We don't have a railgun in theater
yet. I know it is only 30-kilowatt, but we are certainly
experimenting with an actual platform.
Dr. Banerjee. Yeah. So for that, I mean, to go against a
FAC/FIAC [fast attack craft/fast inshore attack craft] type
threat or small boat threat, or a UAV threat, I think you can
get away with it.
I mean, the question is though when we are talking about
the South China Sea and dealing with those type--the types of
platforms that they are going to launch out at us and the
ranges that we are going to be operating at is that what impact
is it going to have in that particular fight.
Mr. Langevin. Okay. Did you want to add something?
Mr. Clark. Yeah, Congressman, I will rise in defense of
directed energy. But we included in our study both solid state
laser, because in the 2030 timeframe it is completely realistic
to think that you could have a 150- to 300-kilowatt laser that
you could use.
And then also, high-powered radio frequency or high-powered
microwave could be an effective technology in that timeframe,
so we included both in our study.
Mr. Langevin. Thank you. I have another question I would
like to submit for the record, but I know my time is expired,
so I will yield back.
Mr. Wittman. Thank you, Mr. Langevin. We appreciate our
witnesses here.
We do have to get down to the floor and vote on fiscal year
2017 Department of Defense appropriations, so I think we want
to make sure we get down there and do that.
So I want to thank our witnesses for joining us today. We
deeply appreciate your perspectives, and we will continue the
conversation about future fleet architecture.
Thanks again, and we are adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 5:10 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]

=======================================================================

A P P E N D I X

March 8, 2017

=======================================================================

PREPARED STATEMENTS SUBMITTED FOR THE RECORD

March 8, 2017

=======================================================================

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

=======================================================================

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MEMBERS POST HEARING

March 8, 2017

=======================================================================

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MR. LANGEVIN

Mr. Langevin. To all witnesses--I am concerned that parts of these
studies seemed to take place without any regard to funding feasibility.
Were budgetary realities used as a qualifier across your studies? And
what do you recommend, or what would you implement, as far as cost-
savings measures go so that we are ensuring our dollars are spent
effectively without having to cut other critical programs across the
Department as well as the whole of government?
Admiral Wilson. Each of the studies used their own base assumptions
and were not directed to be constrained by current year budgetary
realities. As we start to determine best practices from the study
recommendations and other discoveries from our wargaming and
experimentation exercises then these results will have to compete with
other Navy programs within the Navy's TOA. Once we determine what our
funding levels are then we will balance our acquisition strategy
against acceptable risk to best meet warfighting demands.
Mr. Langevin. To all witnesses--I am concerned that parts of these
studies seemed to take place without any regard to funding feasibility.
Were budgetary realities used as a qualifier across your studies? And
what do you recommend, or what would you implement, as far as cost-
savings measures go so that we are ensuring our dollars are spent
effectively without having to cut other critical programs across the
Department as well as the whole of government?
Mr. Werchado. The NDAA Language did not specify if the
architectures were to be constrained or unconstrained fiscally. Our
original analysis did place due regard on funding feasibility. We used
current projected funding levels from the actual shipbuilding, aircraft
and weapons funding account (SCN, APN and WPN) out to 2030 and then
removed that funding, except for COLUMBIA Class SSBN, which was
considered mandatory to fund. With those three accounts providing an
asset, we funded our recommended concepts of operation--Distributed
Fleet Lethality, Electromagnetic Maneuver Warfare, and Distributed
Agile Logistics. After the enablers for warfighting were funded--the
sensors, communication systems, and weapons--we assembled the manned
and unmanned platforms to populate the fleet architecture with a focus
on fighting a major conflict. Later, when we saw preliminary drafts of
MITRE and CSBA's reports we realized that we need not constrain
ourselves to accept that much risk, so we went back and added assets to
the deterrence/presence force. The Navy FFA leverages emerging
technologies and operating concepts, including unmanned systems, in
accordance with the NDAA direction to consider ``opportunities for
reduced operation and sustainment costs'' and the ``role of evolving
technology on future naval forces, including unmanned systems.''
Mr. Langevin. To all witnesses--I am concerned that parts of these
studies seemed to take place without any regard to funding feasibility.
Were budgetary realities used as a qualifier across your studies? And
what do you recommend, or what would you implement, as far as cost-
savings measures go so that we are ensuring our dollars are spent
effectively without having to cut other critical programs across the
Department as well as the whole of government?
Mr. Clark. The tasking in the 2017 NDAA required the Navy conduct
fleet architecture studies to idenitfy the required size and shape of
the future fleet and develop a plan to implement it, including
associated costs. The Fleet Architecture study conducted by the Center
for Strategic and Budgetary Assessments did take funding into account.
We built a shipbuilding plan to describe how the Navy could reach the
fleet size and mix we recommend. Using models from the Navy and the
Congressional Budget Office, we developed estimates for the
shipbuilding and operations and maintenance costs associated with our
shipbuilding plan and fleet architecture. We constrained the
implementation of the future fleet by the capacity of the shipbuilding
industrial base. To account for funding feasibility, we also
established an upper limit of 20 percent for the increase in the
shipbuilding and operations and maintenance costs associated iht the
proposed fleet architecture. These two limitations resulted in the
shipbuilding plan we proposed in our study. We did not incorporate two
approaches into our study that the Navy should consider to reduce costs
associated with growing the fleet. First, the Navy could procure and
build ships faster to maintain the shipyards at a more efficient pace.
For example the Navy recently reported it could save tens of millions
of dollars per ship by building two T-AO(X) oilers per year instead of
only one. Similarly, Huntington Ingalls Industries assesses it could
save hundreds of millions of dollars per ship if the Navy purchased
aircraft carriers (CVN) at three-year intervals, rather than every 5
years as they are today. These cost savings result from the shipyard
being able to maintain workers on the same job in the shipbuilding
process for each ship. If ships are started less frequently, workers at
the beginning of the shipbuilding process, such as shipwrights, will be
idle between ships. During that interval they loose proficiency and
need to be repurposed in other jobs for which they are not as well-
trained. The other approach the Navy could use ot reduce costs is to
expand the number of multi-year procurement (MYP) contracts it uses,
even for larger ships not normally bought using this method. MYP
contracts allow the Navy and shipbuilders to purchase materials and
equipment in larger quantities for a group of ships, which normally
results in savings of 10 percent or more per ship. The Navy could
expand the use of MYP contracts to CVNs, amphibious assault ships (LHA/
LHD), or the new amphibious transport dock (L(X)R). The Navy could also
reduce its shipbuilding costs by keeping some ships in service longer
to allow new construction to be reduced. For example, the Navy's guided
missile cruiser (CG) phased modernization plan will keep CGs in the
fleet until the 2030s and enable the Navy to reduce guided missile
destroyer (DDG) construction. Some amphibious landing docks (LSD) that
will start retiring in the next decade could also be modernized again
and retained in active service to conduct lower end missions. Although
this may not alleviate any new construction of more capable ships,
these ships may enable the Navy to fill gaps in the current fleet to
conduct missions such as training and maritime security. Overall, the
Navy will need decades to reach the fleet size and mix it needs to
address the emerging security environment. A larger fleet will cost
more to procure and operate than today's fleet. How much more,
ihowever, is dependent on how much money the government is able to
allocate toward this priority. Because the fleet buildup will take 20-
30 years, there will be ample opportunity for this Congress and
Administration, as well as future ones, to adjust the pace of building
in concert with the government's fiscal situation. The most important
consideration now is to simply start the process of growing and
evolving the fleet.
Mr. Langevin. To all witnesses--I am concerned that parts of these
studies seemed to take place without any regard to funding feasibility.
Were budgetary realities used as a qualifier across your studies? And
what do you recommend, or what would you implement, as far as cost-
savings measures go so that we are ensuring our dollars are spent
effectively without having to cut other critical programs across the
Department as well as the whole of government?
Dr. Banerjee. Budget instability forces the Navy to make
acquisition decisions that undermine affordability initiatives. By the
end of 2016, the national debt will be $20 trillion dollars--more than
triple what it was on 11 September 2011--and for the last four years,
the Navy has been operating under reduced top-lines and significant
shortfalls. There will likely continue to be increasing pressure on the
procurement accounts, which in turn threatens the near-term health of
the defense industrial base.
The MITRE study assumed the Navy will receive historical levels of
funding and will not be subjected to further Budget Control Act or
sequestration actions. All cost estimates were based on analyses
reported by the Congressional Budget Office, with rough extrapolations
to estimate the cost of the new ship classes proposed. More detailed
cost estimating is required for all options recommended by our study.
Admiral Zumwalt outlined a high-low concept in 1962 that is still
relevant today. The only means of achieving both effectiveness and
capacity, within the constraints of expected budgets, is to build
varying amounts of exquisite (i.e., high), capable (i.e., moderate),
and expendable (i.e., low) platforms. MITRE's recommendations for the
numbers, kinds, and sizes of ships leverages this high-medium-low force
mix concept, with several focused investments, to deliver a force that
is more effective, has increased capacity, yet is affordable.
______

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MS. BORDALLO
Ms. Bordallo. With a potential greater reliance on unmanned assets
and networked defense playing a greater role there is a greater risk
for cyber intrusion. Can you address how the Navy is working to ensure
the command and control networks of these assets will be hardened
against cyber intrusion while allowing communication with the Joint
Force and potentially our allies?
Admiral Wilson. Navy understands the requirements for resilient
communications pathways and the increasing dependence of that
resilience on defense in cyberspace. Navy continues to architect our
systems--from platform sub-components up through Fleet Command and
Control structures--to provide resilience. Navy's TENTH Fleet has
engaged in active defense of our networks to date. In fact, Mr.
Stackley and the VCNO have signed a Joint Memo recently mandating cyber
standards to which all systems will be held accountable. From these
experiences, Navy has aligned cyber defense of afloat missions, to
include hardening of critical platform networks, defending key cyber
terrain and the deployment of Service-aligned cyber protection teams.
To assure mission success of current and planned unmanned vehicles,
Navy is investing in specifically designed command and control
architectures featuring multiple pathways, hardened communication
designs and supported by cyber hardened platforms linked to active
defense capabilities.
Ms. Bordallo. With a potential greater reliance on unmanned assets
and networked defense playing a greater role there is a greater risk
for cyber intrusion. Can you address how the Navy is working to ensure
the command and control networks of these assets will be hardened
against cyber intrusion while allowing communication with the Joint
Force and potentially our allies?
Mr. Werchado. Within the context of the Future Fleet Architecture,
defense of unmanned vehicle (UV) command and control (C2) structures
and against cyber intrusion are provided through orchestrated
investment strategies (Assured C2 and Cyber Resiliency). These
strategies harness multiple programs of record (PoRs) that allow for
robust communication pathways to support necessary assets as well as
defend our platforms in cyberspace. These strategies capitalize on
investments in platform cyber defense to provide networked, automated
defense capabilities which will permit active cyber defense measures
that provide resilience for Navy C2.

[all]
