- THE EFFECTS OF THE HEALTH LAW'S DEFINITIONS OF FULL-TIME EMPLOYEE ON SMALL BUSINESSES

[House Hearing, 113 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

THE EFFECTS OF THE HEALTH LAW'S
DEFINITIONS OF FULL-TIME EMPLOYEE ON SMALL BUSINESSES

=======================================================================

HEARING

before the

SUBCOMMITTEE ON HEALTH AND TECHNOLOGY

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON SMALL BUSINESS
UNITED STATES
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED THIRTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

HEARING HELD
OCTOBER 9, 2013

__________

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Small Business Committee Document Number 113-040
Available via the GPO Website: www.fdsys.gov

----------
U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE

85-084 PDF                       WASHINGTON : 2013
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (800) 512-1800;
DC area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-214 Mail: Stop IDCC,
Washington, DC 20402-0001

HOUSE COMMITTEE ON SMALL BUSINESS

SAM GRAVES, Missouri, Chairman
STEVE CHABOT, Ohio
STEVE KING, Iowa
MIKE COFFMAN, Colorado
BLAINE LUETKEMER, Missouri
MICK MULVANEY, South Carolina
SCOTT TIPTON, Colorado
JAIME HERRERA BEUTLER, Washington
RICHARD HANNA, New York
TIM HUELSKAMP, Kansas
DAVID SCHWEIKERT, Arizona
KERRY BENTIVOLIO, Michigan
CHRIS COLLINS, New York
TOM RICE, South Carolina
NYDIA VELAZQUEZ, New York, Ranking Member
KURT SCHRADER, Oregon
YVETTE CLARKE, New York
JUDY CHU, California
JANICE HAHN, California
DONALD PAYNE, JR., New Jersey
GRACE MENG, New York
BRAD SCHNEIDER, Illinois
RON BARBER, Arizona
ANN McLANE KUSTER, New Hampshire
PATRICK MURPHY, Florida

Lori Salley, Staff Director
Paul Sass, Deputy Staff Director
Barry Pineles, Chief Counsel
Michael Day, Minority Staff Director

C O N T E N T S

OPENING STATEMENTS

Page
Hon. Chris Collins...............................................     1
Hon. Janice Hahn.................................................     2

WITNESSES

Raymond J. Keating, Chief Economist, Small Business &
Entrepreneurship Council, Vienna, VA...........................     4
Steven Hermann, Vice President, Paul's Supermarket, Inc., Eldon,
MO, testifying on behalf of the National Grocers Association...     6
Stephen Bienko, President, Owner, Bienko Enterprises Moving Line,
Fairfield, NJ, testifying on behalf of the International
Franchise Association..........................................     8
Dean Baker, Co-Director, Center for Economic and Policy Research,
Washington, DC.................................................    10

APPENDIX

Prepared Statements:
Raymond J. Keating, Chief Economist, Small Business &
Entrepreneurship Council, Vienna, VA.......................    30
Steven Hermann, Vice President, Paul's Supermarket, Inc.,
Eldon, MO, testifying on behalf of the National Grocers
Association................................................    37
Stephen Bienko, President, Owner, Bienko Enterprises Moving
Line, Fairfield, NJ, testifying on behalf of the
International Franchise Association........................    41
Dean Baker, Co-Director, Center for Economic and Policy
Research, Washington, DC...................................    44
Questions for the Record:
None.
Answers for the Record:
None.
Additional Material for the Record:
Statement Submitted By The National Association for Home Care
& Hospice..................................................    50

THE EFFECTS OF THE HEALTH LAW'S
DEFINITIONS OF FULL-TIME EMPLOYEE ON SMALL BUSINESSES

----------

WEDNESDAY, OCTOBER 9, 2013

House of Representatives,
Committee on Small Business,
Subcommittee on Health and Technology,
Washington, DC.
The Subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 1:00 p.m. in
Room 2360, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Chris Collins
[chairman of the Subcommittee] presiding.
Present: Representatives Collins, Coffman, Luetkemeyer,
Hahn, Schrader, and Schneider.
Also Present: Representatives Mulvaney, Tipton, Rice,
Hanna, and Velazquez.
Chairman Collins. The hearing will come to order. I want to
thank the witnesses for appearing today for our latest hearing
on the potential negative consequences of the health care law
on small business. It has been a little over 1 full week since
individuals and small business could begin to enroll in the
public exchanges created by the President's health care law,
and the outcomes thus far, predictably, have not been
encouraging. The President promised his health care law would
reduce health costs and provide affordable coverage to
individuals and small business.
Instead, a number of small businesses have told us that
health care law is increasing the cost of health care
significantly, in some cases well over 50 percent. However,
while outcomes such as this were predicted, time and again by
me and many others, they are not the subject of today's
hearing.
What we are here today to discuss are some of the other
unwanted outcomes of this health care law, namely, what effect
it has on employment opportunities at small business.
As the Committee has examined in the past, the health law's
employer mandate that businesses with 50 or more employees
offer health insurance to their employees or pay a penalty is a
disincentive for businesses to grow and add new jobs.
This outcome is made worse by the health law's seemingly
arbitrary definition of full-time employee as someone who works
30 hours or more per week. While most Americans and other
Federal statutes define a full-time employee as one who works
an average of 40 hours per week, the health care law creates
its own definition of 30 hours or more per week. The
consequences of this 30-hour per week definition are all too
predictable: fewer hours for employees and administrative
nightmares for small business.
According to a recent survey of small business owners and
executives, nearly 75 percent intend to take some type of
action to avoid the health law's employer mandate including
moving more full-time employees to part-time status and
reducing hours of current part-time employees to less than 30.
In short, while most of the American public continues to
place job creation as their number one policy concern, the
health care law creates the perverse incentive for employers to
not only refrain from hiring new workers, but also to reduce
the hours of current employees.
The witnesses at today's hearing will explain the
challenges the health law's definition of full-time employee
creates and how it will affect the way they manage their
business and provide for their workers.
I would like to now yield to Ranking Member Hahn for her
opening statement.
Ms. Hahn. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Despite over 40 attempts by my Republican colleagues in the
House to repeal, defund or derail the Affordable Care Act, the
law is still the law, and it is moving forward to achieve the
objective of finally giving the almost 50 million uninsured
men, women and children in this country quality, affordable
health coverage. Last week, the most long awaited portion of
this law went into effect as online health insurance exchanges
opened across the country. These exchanges will mean lower
costs and expanded coverage for individuals and small firms
across the country.
We should all be really pleased that finally the millions
of Americans who have lived in dread that an illness or an
accident could plunge them into financial ruin will finally
have access to good coverage that they can afford.
But today, we are looking at a provision that could
potentially impact small businesses and their employees across
the Nation. The health care law defines a full-time employee at
30 hours per week. This change was intended to increase the
number of workers to whom coverage would be offered. This has
been the debate on both sides of the unintended consequences
for workers. This Committee has heard claims from employers
that they are cutting the hours of their workforce to avoid
offering coverage on those employees. Some labor organizations
such as Teamsters/Unite Here, UFCW have also expressed
reservations about the possibility of perverse incentives
created by this 30-hour threshold.
Of course, the law isn't perfect. We may need to make some
changes. Since the exchanges just opened last week, I think we
might have a clear picture of this impact of this provision if
we waited until we have a good sense of the proportion of
people who have bought insurance on the individual exchange and
when the small business exchanges are a little more
established.
I am concerned about how this new definition impacts
employees and small businesses, but I'm just as concerned about
the widespread misinformation and blame being put on this law,
misinformation specifically spread to deter Americans from
seizing the very real benefits of this Affordable Care Act.
One of the today's witnesses will discuss whether reduced
worker hours are due solely because of this section of law or
the economy. We must determine if these numbers are direct
impact of the revised definition or some combination of it and
other factors, like sequestration or a slow economic recovery.
Accordingly, this hearing will explore the current and
future impact of this new definition on our labor market.
As with any other major law, there has been much
speculation about how the law will affect small firms. For this
reason, it is important that we consider the legislation
proposals to address these challenges and work to improve
rather than repeal.
This hearing serves as a starting point to examine the
issue and start a dialogue so we can address it immediately.
I am open, and the President I believe is open to making
sensible improvements in the Affordable Care Act. But when the
opponents of this law are willing to shut the Federal
Government down and risk the full faith and credit of the
United States to destroy or at least sabotage this law, it is
difficult to have a real conversation about what is working and
what isn't.
I hope that when the politics die down, we can have that
conversation. And I think the Small Business Committee has a
really important role in ensuring that this new law proves that
it is affordable for employers and employees alike.
Thanks to the witnesses for appearing before us today, and
I look forward to this hearing.
Chairman Collins. Thank you. First of all, if Committee
members have an opening statement prepared, I would ask that
they be submitted for the record. I would like to now take a
moment to explain the timing lights. Each witness will have 5
minutes to deliver your testimony. The light will start out as
green. When you have 1 minute remaining, the light will turn
yellow. Finally, it will turn red at the end of your 5 minutes,
and I would ask you to try as you can to keep it within that
time limit, but certainly we will be a little bit lenient if
you go over.
Our first witness is Raymond Keating. Mr. Keating serves as
the chief economist at the Small Business and Entrepreneurship
Council, a nonpartisan small business advocacy organization
headquartered in Vienna, Virginia. Among his policy areas of
expertise are taxation, regulation, the U.S. economy and other
small business issues.
In addition to his position as the SBE counsel, Mr. Keating
also serves as an adjunct professor in the business school at
Dowling College in Oakdale, New York.
Mr. Keating, thank you for appearing today. You could now
deliver your message.

STATEMENTS OF RAYMOND J. KEATING, CHIEF ECONOMIST, SMALL
BUSINESS & ENTREPRENEURSHIP COUNCIL; STEVEN HERMANN, VICE
PRESIDENT, PAUL'S SUPERMARKET, INC., TESTIFYING ON BEHALF OF
THE NATIONAL GROCERS ASSOCIATION; STEPHEN BIENKO, PRESIDENT,
OWNER, BIENKO ENTERPRISES MOVING LINE, TESTIFYING ON BEHALF OF
THE INTERNATIONAL FRANCHISE ASSOCIATION; AND DEAN BAKER, CO-
DIRECTOR, CENTER FOR ECONOMIC AND POLICY RESEARCH, WASHINGTON,
D.C.

STATEMENT OF RAYMOND J. KEATING

Mr. Keating. Thank you very much. Chairman Collins, Ranking
Member Hahn, members of the Committee, thank you so much for
having this hearing today on the potential effects of the
Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act, or ObamaCare, on
employment and small businesses. My name is Ray Keating, and as
you said, I am chief economist with Small Business and
Entrepreneurship Council. I would like to highlight a few
points from my written testimony and then add some quick points
from a business owner and SB Council member who I spoke with
yesterday to get a feel for what he would like to relay to the
Committee if he were here.
Number one, obviously it is important to consider the
impact of ObamaCare within the context of our poor economic
performance in recent years regarding both economic growth and
employment growth. Just a quick rundown on a few numbers,
economic growth during this recovery has been running at about
half of where we should be during a recovery.
We are averaging about 2.2 percent real GDP growth,
historical average going back to 1950 is 3.4 percent, and
during recovery expansion periods it is actually 4-\1/2\
percent so we are badly underperforming. That leads to problems
on the jobs front. Throughout the recession and subsequent
recovery, for example, the labor force participation rate which
has gotten a lot of attention recently has been at a low that
we haven't seen since August of 1978, 63.2 percent. Now that
certainly reflects an assortment of things going on in the
economy, but very much a large number of people simply giving
up and not bothering to look for work.
Just to give you a little perspective, if we had a labor
force participation rate that was a little more within the
historical norm, the unemployment rate right now would not be
7--what are we, 3 percent it would be 12 percent roughly.
Now given the ObamaCare employer mandate and the definition
of 30 hours a week as full-time, we need to look at full-time
versus part-time employment. As for people who are working
part-time but want full-time work, in August this group
registered 7.9 million. That is, fortunately, down from a peak
of 9.2 million set in September, 2010, but it is far above the
pre-recession levels more than double for example the 3.9 level
that we registered in April, 2006.
It is also important to recognize a dramatic shift that we
are seeing in 2013 as to part-time versus full-time job
creation. During the whole recovery, a bit more than 90 percent
of jobs created have been full-time. However from January of
this year to August of this year, two-thirds of employment
gains have come via part-time jobs. That is a striking number.
That is a striking break from what normally happens. And I
think it does speak to the issue of how part-time workers are
treated under ObamaCare versus full-time.
If we are going to look at job creation, obviously we have
to look at small businesses, we are in the Small Business
Committee and as we well know the bulk of new jobs net new jobs
are created by small firms, small and mid-sized firms.
And if you look at the trend there, we have seen a decline
in entrepreneurship on a whole host of levels, whether you are
looking at self-employment, business births, the number of
employer firms, we have seen a dramatic decline. It is not that
surprising, then, that we see a lag in terms of job creation
among small businesses in this recovery.
In the testimony, I highlight several polls of small
business owners talking about their response to ObamaCare. It
hasn't been good. For example, 41 percent of owners in one
Gallup poll said they held off on hiring new employees, 38
percent have pulled back on plans to grow their business, 1 in
5 have reduced their number of employees and essentially the
same number have cut employee hours in response to the health
care law.
We have got a new poll coming out at SB Council that shows
that 76 percent of small businesses are not going to hire,
unlikely to hire within the next 6 months.
Finally, just, I wanted to hit on this point I spoke with
Mike Frederick, who owns a small manufacturing firm in
Wisconsin, 57 employees and he relayed several frustrations
with the new law including and he put a big emphasis on dealing
with the very large administrative costs related to the law. He
has got one person that works on this. He can't add anybody
else. He is also looking at probably a 30 percent increase in
premiums this year, and he faces the very real possibility of
having to cut staff to less than 50 workers.
To sum up, in a time of slow economic growth, lackluster
job creation, troubling trends on the entrepreneurship front,
we would hope that policy making would be directed towards
boosting incentives for private sector risk taking,
entrepreneurship, investment and so on such as broad and deep
and substantive tax and regulatory relief. But unfortunately,
when you look at this law and so many other areas, we have been
pointed in the exact opposite direction.
Thank you and I look forward to any questions you might
have.
Chairman Collins. Thank you, Mr. Keating.
I would like to now yield to Mr. Luetkemeyer so he may
introduce our next witness. Mr. Luetkemeyer.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. It is my honor
this afternoon to introduce our next witness which is Steve
Hermann, who is from our district. He is founder of Supermarket
Solutions and vice president of Paul's Supermarket
Incorporated. He is one of the only locally family-owned
supermarkets in the area and he expanded to three different
locations in central Missouri with 75 full-time employees and
100 part-time and seasonal employees.
Like so many other employers in my district, the Affordable
Care Act and its new definition of full-time employees is
greatly affecting Mr. Hermann's ability to grow the business
and employ more workers.
I am proud to introduce him this afternoon. I look forward
to his comments with regards to how the ACA is affecting his
small business. Welcome.

STATEMENT OF STEVEN HERMANN

Mr. Hermann. Good morning, Chairman Collins and members of
the Subcommittee. Thank you for that kind introduction and for
the opportunity to testify on behalf of the National Grocers
Association on an issue that is very important to independent
grocers and small businesses across the country.
NGA is a National Trade Association representing the
retailers and wholesalers that comprise the independent channel
of the supermarket industry. Independent grocers account for
approximately one-quarter of the total U.S. supermarket
industry with nearly $130 billion in sales, and over 944,000 in
direct jobs that pay over $30 billion in wages.
My name is Steven Hermann, and I am Vice President of
Paul's Supermarket. Our family-owned company has been in
business in Eldon, Missouri, for over 45 years. I started
working in my family's supermarket when I was 14 years old
learning the trade of my grandfather and father. Like many
independent grocers, I fell in love with the business early on,
and quickly gained an appreciation for hard work and customer
service.
Today my family operates three supermarkets in Missouri,
Lake Ozark, Eldon and Osage Beach. Like many small employers
across the country, we have weathered many economic storms
throughout the years and are proud we have never lost sight of
the two most important things in our business: our customers
and our employees. However we are facing a challenge in our
workforce unlike any we have seen before. I am fearful of the
unintended consequences of the Affordable Care Act will hurt
our employees and undermine our values as a family owned small
business.
Under the ACA, the definition of full-time employees has
created new barriers for our industry where working an average
of 30 hours per week is simply not considered full-time. The
supermarket industry employs a large number of part-time
workers to help meet the ever-changing needs and demands of our
customers which can change from day to day. The ACA created new
hurdles for businesses by greatly expanding the number of
employees eligible for health plans by defining a full-time
employee as an employee who has averaged at least 30 hours of
service per week over the course of a month. This new
definition of full-time will force small businesses to rethink
how they hire and schedule part-time employees. Employers are
likely to hire fewer employees, especially full-time employees
learning to do more with fewer in order to control costs.
Not only is the law redefining it what means to be a full-
time worker in this country, but it is permanently changing the
American workforce by interfering with part-time workers
ability to earn a living. Part-time employees in need of
additional money may no longer be able to pick up an additional
shift to pay for unexpected expenditures or earn extra money
around the holidays.
We employ a large number of part-time associates, many
during our busy summer season, but also others that help staff
our store throughout the year. These part-time workers include
kids working while attending college, spouses helping to
supplement their family's main income, and older associates
supplementing their retirement. Unfortunately many businesses
may now be unable to provide part-time associates with the
hours they need.
We have long felt that our associate are like family, which
is why we are proud to offer a wide range of great benefits to
our full-time associates, including funding 100 percent of the
health care premium after the deductible is met. Our associates
have access to a health savings account and the company
contributes a small monthly stipend toward that account. Today
we currently employ 75 full-time associates and 100 part-time
and seasonal workers between our three stores. We are proud of
the fact that nearly all of our full-time associates
participate in our health plan, and it is our hope that we can
continue to provide quality benefits in the future, although it
gets increasingly difficult each year.
The commitment to our associates is not without significant
costs, especially for a small family business such as mine.
Over the years, as health care costs have increased, we have
worked hard to maintain the benefits we offer, including
adapting our health plan to meet the changing times and
employees' needs. In this year alone, health care costs for my
company exceeded $300,000, not including any in-house
administration, and we are on track for a significant increase
again next year.
The supermarket industry operates on razor-thin profit
margins, where net profit before tax among independent grocers
hovers around a mere 1.65 percent. In this competitive
industry, pennies really do count. It can make the difference
between making a profit or not.
According to the NGA industry survey, 92 percent of
respondents indicated they currently offer health benefits to
their full-time employees, which is a testament to the
commitment that independent grocers have to their associates.
Employers, such as myself, very much want to continue providing
quality benefits to our full-time employees recognizing that a
healthy employee is a productive employee. However, many
businesses simply cannot afford to provide coverage to workers
who average 30 hours per week. Thus small business owners will
have to make tough choices and many part-time employees will
face reduced hours and smaller paychecks.
Independent grocers need the flexibility to be able to
manage their businesses and workers' forces to meet the meets
and demands of their customers. The burdens placed on our
business by this law hamper our ability to do just that and
make it more difficult to succeed in a hyper-competitive
marketplace. Paul's Supermarket prides itself in supporting
charitable organizations and community groups. However,
pressures from the health care law could impact our ability to
continue that support at the same level.
My strong recommendation to you today is that Congress
should do all it can to help businesses by removing any
barriers or any artificial threshold that will inhibit our
ability to hire workers and create good jobs. One of the most
effective ways for Congress to do that is to pass legislation
that amends the unrealistic definition of a full-time employee
under the health care law so that businesses can focus on
continuing to be an employer of choice in the communities we
serve. Thank you so much for the opportunity to appear before
the Committee today. I look forward to answering any questions
that you all may have. Thank you.
Chairman Collins. Thank you, Mr. Hermann.
Our next witness is Stephen Bienko. He is the owner and
President of 42 Holdings LLC, which maintains its headquarters
Fairfield, New Jersey. Mr. Bienko operates a number of College
Hunks Moving Junk franchise operations in various States. Very
catchy name there.
These business employ a large number of full-time and part-
time college hunks, right?
Mr. Bienko. Yes, sir.
Chairman Collins. He is testifying today on behalf of the
International Franchise Association. Mr. Bienko, thank you and
we look forward to your testimony.

STATEMENT OF STEPHEN BIENKO

Mr. Bienko. Thank you. And although I may no longer be a
hunk, my mother does think I am, so that is all that counts.
Chairman Collins, Ranking Member Hahn, members of the
Subcommittee, thank you for inviting me here today to testify
on the affects of the health care law's new definition of full-
time employee. My name is Stephen Bienko. I am the president of
42 Holdings. I am a member of the International Franchise
Association, I am a former cadet at the United States Air Force
Academy and a former trooper with the New Jersey State Police.
I own and operate an interstate and intrastate moving company,
and I also own 15 franchises of College Hunks Hauling Junk and
College Hunks Moving throughout Northern New Jersey, Nashville,
Tennessee, and Cleveland, Ohio. College Hunks Hauling Junk and
College Hunks Moving offer residential and household moves,
office relocations, junk removal, donation pickups and labor
services.
I am a proud business owner and offer the service that my
communities need, flexibility, and secure jobs for dozens of
motivated team members in multiple States throughout this
country.
As a franchise small business owner, my livelihood and my
ability to provide for my team members depends upon the economy
and the strength of Federal policies.
While well intentioned, the Affordable Care Act poses a
serious threat to my business' ability to continue providing a
fun, enthusiastic work atmosphere and quality jobs for people
who want them and deserve them.
For decades, U.S. employers have used 40-hour workweek as a
standard for workforce culture. Unfortunately, the Affordable
Care Act's provision requiring employers to provide coverage to
full-time employees and defining full-time as 30 hours, will
cause many employers like me to simply alter the employees'
hours in order to run a successful small business. This puts
all of us at a loss. Employers must implement new workforce
management methods and some team members will receive fewer
hours and reduced take-home pay, not to mention they will still
be ineligible for employer sponsored health coverage.
I currently have 72 employees in three short years. Twenty
of those are part-time. In 2014, we are planning on hiring an
additional 34 part-time workers throughout my locations. Many
of these part-time workers work 3 days a week. It is simple,
but 3 days a week, 10 to 12-hour shifts daily. These part-time
workers are attracted to our company culture because the
positions offered can easily fit with their schedules, whether
that includes school, child care coverage or something else
within their family needs.
During move season, what our industry considers the busy
time, we typically have a large number of customers who are
trying to schedule their family's move. I am sure all of you
have gone through that. Many of my part-time team members will
try to fit as many as five shifts in during that time to make
additional income for themselves and their families.
Currently, it is not uncommon for a part-time team member
who normally works 25 to 30 hours per week to double their work
hours during that time period to 50 or 60 to make that extra
money.
I currently offer health plan coverage to our full-time
team members, but in order to manage our health costs, I will
need to limit the hours worked by our part-time team members. I
have offered my full-time team members' health coverage even
without the employer mandate, and I have every intention on
continuing that coverage.
However, the increased costs of doing business by providing
coverage to employees with fluctuating schedules that only
occasionally put them in full-time status will leave me no
choice but to scale back my part-time workers' hours. I
consider myself lucky because I have succeeded with an
ambitious growth plan over the last 3 years. But many small
business owners have not. Not only has the employer mandate
discouraged job creation and business expansion, it also has
damaged existing jobs by including a misguided statutory
requirement that discarded more than a half a century of
established labor policy by now defining full-time as 30 hours.
Culture is everything in a small business.
Without a doubt, the 1-year delay of employer mandate is an
important reprise for franchise small businesses as they
prepare for ACA implementation. Unfortunately, it is a short-
lived solution. The 30-hour definition is the major change that
could have far reaching consequences we have not yet begun to
see. The revision of a new definition of full-time employee for
the purpose of the Affordable Care Act is a commonsense
solution that will put the ACA in line with many other Federal
wage hour regulations.
Thank you for allowing me to testify today. I will look
forward to answering any questions, and as a citizen, I am open
to conversations.
Chairman Collins. Thank you, Mr. Bienko.
I would like to now yield to Ranking Member Hahn so she
could introduce our last witness.
Ms. Hahn. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. It is my pleasure to
introduce Mr. Dean Baker, the co director of the Center for
Economic and Policy Research. Mr. Baker previously worked as a
senior economist at the Economic Policy Institute and served as
a consultant for the World Bank and the Joint Economic
Committee.
Welcome, Mr. Baker.

STATEMENT OF DEAN BAKER

Mr. Baker. Thank you. Thank you Ranking Member Hahn and
Chairman Collins. And I appreciate the chance to address the
Committee. My name is Dean Baker. I am codirector of the Center
for Economic and Policy Research, and I hear lots of talk about
our research, research I should say done with my colleague,
Helene Jorgenson, looking at the impact of the hours of the
sanctions, employer sanctions on employment practices through
the first half of 2013, the period prior to when President
Obama announced that the sanctions would not go into effect for
2014. So in other words, this is a period when employers had
reason to believe that they would be subject to the sanctions
based on their employment for 2013.
I will make three main points. First off, I want to talk a
little bit about the plausibility of some of the claims that
have been made about the ACA and make a point that at least
some of them clearly are not plausible. Secondly, I will review
the evidence the analysis that I had done with Dr. Jorgenson,
and last, I want to say a couple of things what we might say
about what we might imagine would be the long-term impacts of
this particular aspect the 30-hour requirement in the ACA.
On the first point, plausibility of some claims, there have
been a lot of claims about how the ACA would cause different
problems, how it is responsible for the downturn and the
weakness of the recovery, it is important to point out that the
first time you really have a direct impact of the ACA on
employment is in 2013. There are many people claiming that
businesses were deterred from making hires in 2010, 2011, 2012.
It is very difficult to see that as credible if you look at the
way the labor force behaves. Specifically, we have an enormous
amount of churning in our labor force. In the average month, we
have roughly 4 million people leave their job, a bit less than
3 percent of the workforce. The idea that an employer would not
hire someone in 2011, 2012 because they were worried they would
be, say, over the 50-person limit come 2013, that really isn't
plausible given the normal churning of the labor market. It is
extremely unlikely that an employer would even need to lay
someone off much less simply not replace someone who was hired.
So that part really just is not very plausible.
Second, in terms of the impact of this employer sanction, I
know no employer, I am an employer myself, you don't want to be
stuck with an additional bill, but just in terms of some
context, it is a $2,000 sanction, there is a lot of research on
the impact of minimum wage increases of 15 to 20 percent, the
vast majority of which funds little or no employment effect. It
is a little hard to believe that an employer sanction that
would be less than 10 percent of the pay of a worker who earns
$10 an hour full-time job would have that large an employment
effect.
So I simply don't think some of these claims on the face
are very plausible.
Now in terms of the evidence, Dr. Jorgenson and I looked at
the current population survey which is the most commonly used
survey for looking at the labor market. This is where we get
our employment data every month. We didn't get this month
because of the shutdown. But this is where we get the jobs
numbers that everyone hears about every month, and we looked at
the percentage of workers we focused on originally 26 to 29
hours a week with the idea that you have a lot of employers put
people just below the cutoff.
Now it turns out we did find a very small increase in the
percent who were working in that 26 to 29-hour range in 2013
compared to 2012. It went from 60/100s of 1 percent of the
labor force to 64/100s of a percent. Now we might originally
think that might confirm the story that workers are having
their hours shortened, but we looked at it more closely, and it
turns out that actually that increase came at the expense of
workers working less than 25 hours a week or reporting that
their hours varied.
The number of workers who were working 35 hours a week or
more in 2013 was actually a larger percentage of the workforce
than it had been in 2012.
So in other words, our data is showing the complete
opposite of the story. I won't say there was a big increase in
full-time employment, but it goes the wrong direction for the
change that the critics of the ACA have raised.
Now, the last point I wanted to raise is simply talking a
little bit about the longer term story. When you put a specific
cutoff, a 30-hour cutoff whatever it might be, you have to
imagine over time, employers will respond to that and there
actually is an interesting example to look at. Hawaii has had
an employer mandate on health insurance for about 30 years.
There has been some research on the effect. In that case, the
cutoff is 20 hours. The research found that it did have, after
a long period of time, a very modest effect for the bottom
quintile of the pay scale it reduced full-time employment, or I
should say employment above this 20-hour cutoff by roughly 3-
\1/2\ percent or for the total workforce roughly seven-tenths
of 1 percent.
Now before anyone runs off assuming that that is a very bad
thing, it is important to keep in mind the vast majority of
workers who work part-time do so voluntarily that is true even
today where more than two-thirds are working part-time
voluntarily.
Typically it would more than 80 percent. That is not
necessarily a bad thing that we see a small increase in the
number of part-time jobs available to people who might be
raising children, have other reasons to not want full-time
employment, and important to keep in mind there is nothing
natural about the length of our workweek, that came about in
part because we have had a condition of having health care
insurance as a fixed cost for employers which is likely make
them prefer a worker overtime even paying them time and a half
or double-time rather than hiring a second worker. That also is
not natural. If we change that by making it more easy for
people to get insurance other than through their employer, to
my view, that is more consistent with the free market. Thank
you for listening.
Chairman Collins. Thank you, Mr. Baker.
At this point we will start our questions, and I will delay
mine until the end. I am not sure when votes are coming. They
may come at 2 o'clock, so we will get this through this as best
we can but at this point I would like to yield 5 minutes to Mr.
Luetkemeyer.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Hermann, I just want to start with you this afternoon.
And what are your plans to try and be able to stay competitive
with the chain grocery stores that are in your area? You are a
mom-and-pop shop, and we thank you for that because as a mom-
and-pop shop you are a whole lot more engaged and supportive of
community activities and much more sensitive to the community
than a lot of the chain folks. What are your plans to try and
stay competitive with your competition and still be able to
maintain the quality of service with the number of folks you
have and trying to deal with the 30-hour situation? I know some
folks with, you have three separate stores, they go to three
separate organizations, three separate corporate entities, some
go with more part-time some temps, some downsize, what are your
plans to be able to maintain your stores and compete?
Mr. Hermann. That is a great question. As a successful
business operates, they have to make plans. And one thing we
look at, first with our existing employees, is that they are
our family. We are a small community and we are going to take
care of them as best we can. Health insurance is a big deal.
And what we have to look at is at our future hiring practices.
We may not be able to hire on someone with the potential of
being a full-time employee. We may not replace somebody, we
might have to do more with a little less. The other thing, too,
tough choices is our part-time employees, we offer a 401(k)
after they have been there for a year. We might have to look at
getting rid of the 401(k) and we have a great 401(k) program
that my father put in place back in the 1990s and we match 100
percent up to 5 percent of gross pay. And you look at areas
like that and you mention the community.
As a small businessman, charitable organizations are huge.
It is the people that work with us. I am fortunate to be on the
school board and we have a town that is a title 1 district, so
we are 50 per cent free and reduced lunch. There is a program
called buddy pack, and buddy pack unfortunately has been
defunded through ARA which is another thing, but where it has
been funded from is local businesses and churches in the
community. Things like that could potentially suffer.
So I hope that help paints the picture there of what we are
looking at. But our existing employees, we are going to take
care of them, they are family. They used to weigh me on the
scale when I was a baby and they are still there. So, it is
tough. It is tough. But we are going to do the best for our
community and that is what we will do our best to be successful
and stay in business.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. Mr. Hermann, Mr. Bienko, you guys did
build it, and we appreciate what you have done.
Mr. Bienko, would you like to answer the same question
about how you are going to try and maintain your competitive
edge with this Affordable Care Act trying to squeeze the hours
of some of your employees? I know you have kind of a unique
situation there, a lot of seasonal and part-time employees. Are
you going to wind up cutting back some of those hours on some
of those part-time folks so you can put more part-time people
in there? What are your plans?
Mr. Bienko. Our competitive advantage is just that, it is
us trying to actually change an industry in the moving world,
and that has been our mission from day one is to be a true
change agent in that industry. What we are trying to do is
offer opportunities for young individuals to get their career
start, not just a job start, with our organization and each
have individual work on the trucks even as young college
graduates to begin their process in their career on our
vehicles in the moving world and in the hauling world.
With that, we do have a lot of them as part-time workers.
If we have to reduce those types of hours that drastically,
those quality high end individuals that we are striving to hire
will not be interested in working with us.
That prevents us from growing.
Our expansion growth and expansion opportunities in 2014
are taking on three other cities to provide our services and
our job opportunities in three other cities throughout this
country. It may affect that growth strategy because of the
amount of part-time workers we hire in the beginning. With
that, we will have us draw back on those part-time employees.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. You know, one of the things that Mr. Baker
said a minute ago that two-thirds of the people who work part-
time want to do that, that means one third of the people that
are working part-time who don't want to do that, and I think
that is the tragedy and that is the point that we forget about
is those folks who are out there who want to work full-time and
can't do that and this bill is going to force a lot of that to
happen.
Mr. Bienko, you had a unique comment a minute ago. You said
culture is everything in a small business. Would you like to
elaborate on that just a second?
Mr. Bienko. Sometimes in a small business when you are
starting out, you are not in the, you do not have the ability
to pay the highest wages. And I have always been a believer
that it is not about the wages you are paying the employees, it
is about the culture and the opportunity you present for them.
So our environment is all about culture. It is about providing
an opportunity for our employees, for our team members to get a
start, to create a vision for them to give them an opportunity.
Many of our employees come as college graduates, however
they have never been given the backing and opportunity for
someone to say, you know what? You have an opportunity to
create something out of your life. And we find a lot of them
even with 4-year college degrees that have absolutely no idea
where they want to be when they grow up.
We have created a culture that drives them to success. I
have always believed in success breeds success. And when you
have other successful people around you that are striving and
aiming for that same goal, it attracts more and better people.
So when I say culture is everything, especially when you
are 3 years in in a start-up and having a high amount of demand
on a lot of people and not fully capable of paying the higher
wages at this point in time, if you don't have culture, you
die.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. Unique to a small business. Thank you very
much for your time this morning, gentlemen, this afternoon, and
I appreciate your testimony. With that, I yield back, Mr.
Chairman.
Chairman Collins. Thank you Mr. Luetkemeyer. At this point
I would like to yield to Ms. Hahn for her opening questions.
Ms. Hahn. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I am going to
do the same thing that you did and I am going to leave my
questions until the end and turn it over to my members.
The first one I would like to yield to is the ranking
member of our Small Business Committee, Ms. Velazquez.
Ms. Velazquez. Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for
yielding. Mr. Baker, is there any empirical evidence that one-
third of part-time workers are working part-time as a
consequence of the ACA?
Mr. Baker. No, absolutely not. The reason there was a big
increase in involuntary part-time employment was we had the
downturn, that happens every downturn. This downturn, of
course, is much more severe, it is a very different sort of
downturn. We had--the collapse of the housing bubble caused it,
it was an extraordinary crisis, I am sure I don't have to tell
people about this. The people here remember this, and that led
to a large increase in involuntary part-time employment. And
that has been falling over the last 4 years as this economy has
slowly recovered. So the rise in part-time employment predated
even the passage, much less any implementation of the ACA.
Ms. Velazquez. And basically your numbers concurred with
the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco that found and
concluded in their research that the share working part-time is
in line with historical norms, and concluded that part-time
work is not usually high relative to levels seen after the
1980s recession.
Mr. Barker. That is exactly right. So other people have
looked at it, there is another study which I can't place
offhand, but I know of no studies that have found and opposite
conclusion. Basically every study I know that has looked at the
data has found that involuntary part-time has followed the same
sort of pattern that you would expect to see given the weakness
of the economy.
Ms. Velazquez. Also there have been two recent surveys
conducted among small businesses, and one of them is from NFIB.
And they found that the biggest obstacle reported by businesses
were economic uncertainty and consumer demand.
Wouldn't these factors play more of a role in an employer's
hiring decisions rather than implementation of ACA?
Mr. Baker. Absolutely. In the NFIB survey, in particular, I
recommend to people because that dates back to the 1980s, so we
have reliable data going back for close to three decades now,
and they ask the same question of employers. I don't know if
they never changed it but basically it is a similar question
over that period: What are the biggest problems they face? And
they consistently answered during this downturn, the lack of
demand, so clearly that is their main obstacle to expanding.
Ms. Velazquez. So meaning that hiring practices or
decisions will be driven by economic uncertainty, the impact of
sequestration, and the lack of consumer demand.
Mr. Baker. That is right, anything that slows the economy,
anything that pulls money out of the economy, sequestration
being one of the things that pulls money out of the economy, we
had a reference earlier from Mr. Keating to comparing this
recovery to past recoveries. One important thing to consider
past recoveries, every prior recovery we have had a significant
growth in government employment, mostly State and local levels
throughout the recovery. If we had followed the pattern of
prior recoveries we would have roughly 7- or 800,000 more
government employees than we did at the start of the recession.
Instead we have about 6- or 700,000 less.
Now government employees spend money like everyone else
does, so if you get rid of government employees that is less
demand in the economy. That is clearly one of the factors, I am
not going to say the major factor, but it is one of the factors
slowing growth slowing employment.
Ms. Velazquez. We have held hearings in this Committee, and
I held a roundtable in my district with the manufacturing
sector. And what we hear is that they face a shortage of
workforce, of skilled workers. Don't you think that a way for
manufacturers and business owners be able to bring in high-
skilled workers is by offering health care benefits?
Mr. Baker. Absolutely, and I think my colleagues on this
panel have made that point very well. They know workers value
health care benefits, and if you can offer a good health care
benefit, that makes the job more attractive to employees. So
that is why most employers, most large employers certainly,
and, in fact, most small employers offer health care benefits
to their workers.
Ms. Velazquez. Mr. Keating, in your written testimony, you
say you blame the Affordable Care Act for reducing job growth
and employment in 2010 through 2012, yet the sanctions
impacting employers were not scheduled to be in full effect
until 2014, and now the employer mandate has been delayed.
Since 4 million people leave their job every month, is it
really plausible that a business wouldn't want to hire someone
in 2011 or 2012 because they were afraid of the penalty in
2014?
Mr. Keating. Yes, of course it is plausible, because
actually businesses and entrepreneurs plan unbeknownst to what
we heard earlier. When you run a business, you have to figure
out what your costs are today, and you have to figure out what
your costs are a year from now, and try to estimate going out.
So when you have a law that has passed in 2010 that has looming
mandates and regulations and so on and tax increases, that is
certainly going to impact the decisions that business owners
make. That is just the reality of the business world.
Incentives come into play. I was glad to hear people
talking about incentives before. As an economist, I try to
hammer that home with my students. Incentives matter. Economics
ultimately is about incentives. So, yes, when you put the
ObamaCare bill in with everything else, I mentioned at the end
of my testimony, that it is part of an unfortunate policy
agenda that has been pointed against faster economic growth and
more job creation. We would want to, as we have seen in past,
what is the best answer to a poor, to coming out of a recession
and growing an economy? It is not tax increases and more
regulations on businesses and entrepreneurs and investors. That
is exactly what we have done. So I would say that this is very
much part of the equation, yes.
Ms. Velazquez. Yeah, it could be, and also the lack of the
demand.
Mr. Keating. I am glad you touched on that. Right. The we
can't take the economy as just being, well, it is bad, so
therefore, we just have to deal with it. The question is why is
it bad? Why did we have such a deep recession and why are we
now over 4 years into a recovery having one of the worst
recoveries on record?
Now there is a lot of debate on that I am sure Mr. Baker
and I would disagree, but I would say a huge part of it, in
fact, I would argue the biggest part of it today that is
holding us back is this policy agenda that is pointed in an
anti-growth direction.
Ms. Velazquez. Mr. Baker, would you like to comment?
Mr. Baker. Yeah, well, first off, in terms of businesses
planning, of course they do, and presumably businesses know
that their employees turn over. So if they were worried in 2010
and 2011 that they are making hires that put them over the
limit for 2013. If they are doing good planning, they know that
they can count on some of their workers leaving so that really
wouldn't make a lot of sense.
In terms again, the downturn, I have written on this at
length as have others, we had a collapse of the housing bubble
that was driving the economy and none of us has a magic elixir
to simply replace that, and this is a qualitatively different
recession. Some of us said that at the time, we warned that the
housing bubble was easy to predict, or at least I thought it
was easy to predict so there are no surprises to me, it has
really followed pretty much the textbooks. So, and if we look
at business investment which is if this really is the case that
is actually pretty much back to the pre-recession levels, so
unless we know something George W. Bush was doing that was very
anti business back in 2007, it is hard to see anything Barack
Obama is doing because it is having no more effect.
Ms. Velazquez. And on top of that, the housing bubble and
the impact of sequestration on an economy that still is
struggling.
Mr. Baker. Well, again, we need every source of demand we
can get, and government demand is just like any other source of
demand. If we cut back government spending, cut back government
employment, and we are pulling out a source of demand for the
economy, so that certainty slows growth. And again, in terms of
the housing bubble we are not going to replace that at least
not in any easy way that I could see. And frankly, I would not
want it to be replaced by another housing bubble. That would
not the way to go but I don't know of any magic elixir that
just says okay, we will replace that source of demand, which
again, by my calculation, somewhere around $1 trillion a year
in lost demand.
Ms. Hahn. Thank you, Ms. Velazquez. Shall we yield back?
Chairman Collins. Thank you. At this point I would like to
yield to Mr. Rice 5 minutes.
Mr. Rice. Thank you. I am sitting here looking at a Forbes
poll, when asked will ObamaCare make health insurance more
affordable, 69 percent said no, online poll 78 percent of small
business owners think the law should be repealed, 93 percent do
not want to change from their current plan to plans required
under ObamaCare. And I want to read to you a little excerpt
from a constituent I got yesterday, or excuse me, the day
before. This fellow is in the steel business. I am going to
redact his name, and obviously, he has to compete
internationally and I know that when you are talking about
competition, some of you people some of you guys in the grocery
store business and the moving business are competing
domestically but not necessarily with international
competition.
And so I was really interested.
I am very concerned about American competitiveness. And I
think that a lot of our government policies make--American
businesses compete with anybody across the world and our
workers sure can, that our government hamstrings us with
uncompetitive tax system, uncompetitive regulatory environment.
And so he is talking about how it affects his business, and he
says, you know, we are already fighting for our lives against
the Chinese whose government is helping them to compete with
various subsidies and tax breaks. At the same time our
government is adding to our costs, not helping us to reduce
costs.
It is obviously what this does for jobs in this country.
And he goes on to say that the increase, he has got 90
employees, the increase in the health insurance will be about
$100,000 for 2014 over 2013, and that he currently buys
policies from Blue Cross Blue Shield who has decided they are
no longer going to sell the type of policy he has as anymore, I
guess, because they can't under the minimum required coverage
under ObamaCare.
So, I guess, Mr. Keating, going beyond this part-time
worker aspect, does this law make our domestic companies more
or less competitive in the world?
Mr. Keating. Well, the bottom line, it makes them less
competitive just due to the costs. Again, you cited polls, and
poll after poll confirms what kind of economics 101 teaches us
that if you add government costs, whether through taxes or
regulations and so on onto businesses, they are going to become
less competitive obviously, and when you think about what our
economy is like today in terms of the international
marketplace, I think it is a really serious impediment.
The gentleman that I spoke to yesterday who has a small
manufacturing firm in Wisconsin, he is just not a domestic
firm, he sells the parts that he makes for all sorts of
machinery globally. So he is very much involved in that
international competition.
And he is, when he looks at the premium increases that he
is calculating, that puts him at a serious competitive
disadvantage absolutely.
Mr. Rice. Mr. Baker, in terms of the plausibility of people
making hiring decisions today based on a law that the employer
mandate won't go into effect until next year, I have had people
in my office, I had a guy in my office 2 weeks ago who has a
franchise business in two locations and 40 employees, and he
has declined to open his third because he will go over 50
employees. So he is making a decision today based on opening a
business that will affect potential employees. It is absolutely
plausible people are going to make decisions based on this
right now.
I have a friend and a former client that is in the Myrtle
Beach, South Carolina in the tourism business employing 1,900
people, and they are absolutely moving people from full-time to
part-time when this law takes effect. They haven't done it yet,
because the law hasn't taken effect yet, but it will absolutely
have an effect on the service economy in my area. Do you want
to comment on that?
Mr. Baker. Sure. Thank you for asking. Well, a couple
points I would make. First off I am sure there are some people
who are making decisions, you know, based on this and you know
the gentleman you were talking about, you know, that may well
be one of them it is clearly not showing up in the data for the
first 6 months of 2013 when they thought the employer sanctions
would be in effect. So in aggregate, however many people might
have been doing that, it was too small to show up in the data.
Now in terms of moving people from full-time to part-time
over a longer term, I would be surprised if there is not some
of that going on. But again, the point I was trying to make and
perhaps I didn't make it clearly, we have a lot of people in
this country who choose part-time employment. So the fact that
you might have some employers that are offering part-time work,
that would actually be consistent with what many people desire.
So this isn't something I would expect to see overnight. I
would expect to see it, in the case of Hawaii, didn't even show
up after 10 years, it was only after 20 years that it was
visible in the data.
Mr. Rice. One more quick thing, in the Budget Committee I
asked Doug Elmendorf, who is head of CBO, what his estimate of
job loss from ObamaCare was, and he said CBO's estimates is
800,000 full-time jobs lost as a result of the implementation
of this law.
Mr. Baker. My understanding of Dr. Elmendorf's comment was
that was mostly people opting not to work because they would
have the option of getting health care through the exchanges
rather than through employer provided health insurance.
Mr. Rice. My time is up, I yield back.
Chairman Collins. Thank you. Unfortunately, it does look--
not does look, votes have been called, and we have a number of
members that still have questions to go. So what we are going
to do is adjourn. It is a quick two series votes so I am
guessing we will be back in less than 30 minutes.
Unfortunately, where you see 11 minutes now you can add
about 10 to that because they always hold over that first vote.
But we should be back in about a half hour, at which point we
will adjourn for right now for about 30 minutes and reconvene
after the votes.
[Recess.]
[2:33 p.m.]
Chairman Collins. The hearing will come back to order.
Let's see that was a little more than 30 minutes, but at any
rate we are back, and I appreciate the witnesses all coming
back. At this point in time, I guess I will yield myself time
for some questions and then we will go to Ms. Hahn and see if
any other members come back.
Ms. Hahn. The important members come back.
Chairman Collins. Yes, thank you, Mr. Luetkemeyer.
I am a small business owner, I have been an entrepreneur
for 40 years, so I know what is going on. But I have also, in
this role, I can remember asking the Director of the IRS in
charge of implementing the laws, I asked him a couple of
questions, so I am just curious if Mr. Bienko or Mr. Hermann
could even answer these, because as we are preparing for the
employer mandate, and while the penalty has been delayed, the
mandate has not been delayed, as has been misspoken time and
again. I hear people, both sides of the aisle, the
administration saying the employer mandate has been delayed 1
year. No, it has not. The penalty associated with it has been
delayed.
Ms. Hahn. Right.
Chairman Collins. The other thing to point out to everyone
is that when you try to determine who qualifies and whether
your company qualifies on the 50 employee level, it is the 12
months that precede the year. So now relative to being charged
with a penalty, the buckets or the measurement starts January,
so in less than 3 months. So when people talk about impact,
starting in January you have to put all your employees into the
part-time or full-time bucket and calculate the hours and the
full-time equivalents. You do that each month for 12 months
during 2014 and then divide by 12 to determine whether or not
in 2015, you hit the 50-employee threshold.
So I know I said--I asked the head of the IRS and we
submitted them questions and I was promised a prompt response,
and I guess I am still waiting, that was several months ago.
But I said, Mr. Director--and I am asking--for 5 or 6 days, but
not 2 months, but so as small business owners, here was the
question: Full-time employee, who would, say, normally work 40
hours a week so 160, 170 hours a month, takes 2 weeks vacation,
so he only works 80 hours in August. Is he full-time or part-
time in the months of August? Would either of you know an
answer to that?
Mr. Hermann. I believe that would be under your benefit
plan. In our business, we have paid vacation up to 4 weeks----
Chairman Collins. I am saying relative to the IRS
calculation of which bucket you put him in. He only worked 80
hours, he was paid for 160, but do you put him that month in
the part-time bucket because he only worked 80, and you count
his 80 hours to do your FTE equivalent, or because it was paid,
does he go in the full-time bucket. The head of the IRS
couldn't answer that question, but he does expect you to know
exactly which one to put him in.
Now the other one I asked him, and again, I know it is
difficult but this burden is falling on to the small business
owners in their HR departments. Many workers might, in any 1
month, work over 130 hours, even if they are part-time based on
overtime and so forth, but then the next month they don't; so
they work 135 hours in January, they work 97 in February, they
work 161 in March, they work 82 in April. Well, you know how
you put them in the buckets each month, if it is over 130, they
go in the full-time bucket, if it is less you accumulate their
hours, divide by 130, get the FTEs. But now you're into 2015.
They worked 6 months, and they were in the full-time bucket
that prior year, and for 6 months, they were in the part-time
bucket. Do you have to give them health insurance or not?
So this is the tough thing about the law. When the
regulators set definitions, it is how to you implement it? And
I'll say, as we are in October, and in the next two--and by the
way, the mandate has not been delayed, just the enforcement of
the penalty. The head of the IRS who is in charge of
implementation can't answer those questions. So again, it tells
you this isn't ready for prime time. I just bring that up, as I
am small business owner myself, and we have those very
situations and we don't know as we are going to be putting them
into buckets.
And I guess the other obvious thing is, we will see what
happens as we move through, but a question maybe for Mr.
Keating, because I have heard people talk about why 30 hours,
where'd it come from? It has never been there before. The
suggestion has been twofold. One was, we'll have small
businesses just provide health insurance to more people. The
other more cynical one is, it was a money grab that knowing
that this would subject them to penalties, it was a way of
raising money to pay for the expansion of Medicaid, or maybe it
is a little of both. I am just wondering Mr. Keating, if you
have a thought on that?
Mr. Keating. That goes to my public choice economics as to
what the incentives are in government. And just based on that,
I would say it is probably a combination of all of the above.
And to backtrack a little bit, when I get to speak on various
panels about this law from an economist's perspective, and
interestingly often, there are representatives from the SBA or
various government entities, and most of the audience are
obviously small business owners struggling to figure this out.
And they have very pointed questions about what this means for
their business, and I would say at least more than half the
time the people from the government that are there representing
it don't have the answers. And that says to the business owners
what, the folks implementing this don't know, how am I supposed
to possibly figure this out, and then it goes to the issue of
how many employees you have to--how much time and energy goes
into trying to figure this out when I talked about my testimony
we would hopefully want the time and energy and resources going
to something productive in terms of expanding the business and
creating jobs.
Chairman Collins. I think that goes back to the human
resource cost. So Mr. Hermann, you are not here only
representing yourself, but also other franchise owners, or is
that Mr. Bienko? I know a lot of franchisees have lot of part-
time workers, and by and large, from what I have been told,
those workers didn't sign up or didn't come in looking for
health care, they were there to supplement their income, if you
will. Many of them are working 37-\1/2\ hours and have now, in
fact, had their hours cut to 28, 27, and I just wonder because
I know Mr. Baker was saying that the data doesn't show it, but
then again, the data always lags. Are other franchisees sharing
with you as I heard from many that they are, in fact, taking
action to cut the workers under 30 hours?
Mr. Bienko. Yes. And Mr. Collins, if I can first comment on
your previous question regarding the new laws and regulations
and the controversy that it causes for a small business owner,
the IRS can't figure out what to do or to get back to you on
it. A small business owner, as you know, your time needs to be
spent on the growth of your business, not trying to figure out
laws and regulations. Each and every second that you detract
from your core business value is a decrease and revenue and
decrease in growth.
So I wanted to make a point on that that we don't have the
time and the opportunity to spend it on trying to figure out
new regulations that are uncustomary to what we currently have.
We have seen multiple franchisees, and the ones I have
spoken to myself that have decreased the hours or are planning
on decreasing the hours on their part-time employees. One of
the biggest things about being a small business owner is that
you have to plan three to five years in advance. If you are not
doing that planning, no one else is doing that planning for you
as the business owner. You need to be looking out for where
your business, where your employees are going to be in 3 years,
not just 1 or 6 months. So you have to take into account when
you are doing your budgeting in 2013 as we are going through
right now, we are not planning for 2013, we are planning for
2015, 2016 and 2017. And we are taking into account what is
going come ahead of us.
So it is not just about hiring new employees, we plan on
having those employees. Those employees may change, but the
system and the mandates don't change. So we need to take that
into account and know that we are going to have X amount of
additional employees. We need to be able to properly fund those
employees and plan for them.
Chairman Collins. Another quick question for Mr. Bienko. I
know a lot of companies have health insurance plans that they
and their employees thought were designed very well for their
business from a cost perspective and so forth. In many, from
what I am hearing, those plans are no longer available, unlike
when the President said, if you like your health care plan, you
can keep it. Well, you can't keep it if it is not offered
anymore. So I am curious of your college hunks, how many of
them needed maternity care?
Mr. Bienko. Zero.
Chairman Collins. Okay, and I have to assume how many
really needed prescription drug coverage?
Mr. Bienko. That varies. And the reason that varies is an
issue that I talked to them about on a consistent basis, I want
them to care about themselves and I want them to care about
their health. I don't want them just to go because they have an
opportunity to take a plan, and that is an open door for them
to look for or each and every ailment they might have to go
search out for a prescription medication. I want them to know
how to take care of themselves and become healthy individuals
and not just rely on something.
So we have actually had that conversation in our, what we
call our all-staff meetings that we have each month where we
either bring guest speakers or have internal conversations. And
the last conversation I had with them was based around taking
care of themselves is their best opportunity to lower any cost
that they may have. So it does vary between the individuals,
but inside our system, we are trying to cut back on that as
much as possible.
Chairman Collins. So Mr. Hermann, I am curious from the
policies that you have had versus now the policies you are
being offered, which now have to include maternity care, they
have to include mental health, they have to include
prescription drug coverage, health club membership. There are
things now that are mandated and not every workforce is looking
for those benefits, and now the day of an owner designing a
health care plan to meet the needs of their employees has now
been taken out into more of a one size fits all.
So I am curious, Mr. Hermann, plans that you have offered
to your employees, are they being offered now or if had you to
adjust now to the minimum benefit plan that is required by the
ACA?
Mr. Hermann. Well, we have been blessed to offer our
employees a robust plan, and our plan already met the
requirements of ACA so--what we have done, though, is how are
we going to control our costs? And we had to get inventive on
that and look at new ways to handle it, and potentially means
as a company taking on more of a risk in order to manage those
costs. What we have done is gone to Captive and, Captive is
sort of a reinsurance program that allows smaller businesses to
go out with a group of other businesses, but that is more risk.
I mean, we are taking a risk as with anything. Health insurance
is not about when you buy it, you are not supposed to be taking
a risk. But this forces us to go out there and take these risks
to hope that we manage it, you know, we are taking our own
shoulders, meaning more administration costs.
So put this in--you know, the health insurance is supposed
to be a benefit, and as a small employer, I am supposed to be
able to go to somebody and get insurance and not have to worry
about it, and this has put us in a predicament that we have got
to also understand the insurance law beyond what we need to.
Chairman Collins. Thank you. Mr. Keating, one last question
and then I will turn it over to Ms. Hahn. But one question that
is been raised, and I wonder if you have heard this before, and
that is, take the case of a company that has employees working
37-\1/2\ hours, they did not go to work there for health
insurance, did not expect health insurance, but now they would
be--the company would be required because they are full-time to
offer to pay that $2,000 penalty.
So the company cuts them very deliberately from 37-\1/2\
to, say, 28 for the sole purpose frankly of avoiding having to
pay--that provide that health plan. The employee wants to work
37-\1/2\, the company would like them to work 37-\1/2\, they
can't afford to give them at a donut shop health care, and they
also can't afford a $2,000 penalty.
So this is very real life and I am actually using a real-
life example. Now lo and behold there is laws called ERISA. And
ERISA states very specifically if a company cuts the hours of a
worker for the sole purpose of denying a benefit then they can
be fined and brought up on charges, that is what ERISA states.
So you think about this case, the employee is not getting
health insurance now, didn't expect it, doesn't want it. It is
true though, the sole reason that their hours are being cut is
to avoid giving them a benefit. Now to me, they are violating
ERISA. In complying with the ACA and to the extent of keeping
their business open because they can't afford the insurance or
$2,000, has anyone looked at that--I will call it a conflict, a
very serious situation of a company actually breaking the law
in complying with the ACA.
Mr. Keating. I have not looked at it myself, and I haven't
heard of that particular example, but it goes along with other
examples talking again to business owners and listening--they
are getting--I always tell people listen, what you need to do
is, unfortunately, get a good accountant and lawyer and figure
this out, but make sure you are getting the right advice.
The very disheartening situation, in addition to what you
just laid out, are other business owners that have made
decisions--splitting their companies thinking that they could
do that, and you can't do that under the law. Yet they are
getting advice from the people--they are doling out money to
get advice from people, and this is the advice that they are
getting. So that, unfortunately, is not unique in the sense
that, again, who really has a handle on all of these issues and
all of the costs, and this creates obviously all the
uncertainty that we have been talking about for a very long
time now.
Chairman Collins. Yeah, I think a couple of things that are
misunderstood, you can't split your companies, you also can't
use temporary workers. A lot of folks have said I will go hire
temporary workers, they are not on my payroll. In that
instance, not only do those workers count for the business that
is using them, but the person running the temporary service
agency is also hit with the same thing. So that workers
actually counting in two different companies, as unfair as that
sounds.
Mr. Luetkemeyer, do you have any other questions you would
like to ask?
Mr. Luetkemeyer. Thank you.
Chairman Collins. If so, we will yield 5 minutes to you.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. A couple quick questions with Mr. Keating.
One of the comments that you made that you are working with the
entrepreneurship group, how is this ACA affecting start-up
companies? Most businesses start out as a small business, and
then grow to whatever size they get to. Is this affecting a lot
of start-up companies being able to get started? Has your group
done some research on that?
Mr. Keating. I think the one people don't think of actually
that does come into play is the individual mandate, because
when you talk about somebody starting up their own business,
that is--now they have to buy their own health insurance or pay
the tax that could increase up to, I am trying to remember the
percentage, by 2016. The point is you do have a situation where
people again are losing resources that could be used to start
up their business number 1.
I think beyond that, you have got this air of uncertainty,
questions, costs. If I get this business up and running, what
are going to be the costs on the regulatory front in term of
Obamacare? You have got to plan, as the business owners here
talk about, and I talk about my MBA courses, you have to have a
business plan, and you have to be realistic with it, and lay
out where you want to go and that is from the very startup
stage, that is an ideal scenario. So how does that all factor
into the equation in terms of the total benefits package if you
are looking to hire people and bring them on board, how is that
going to effect the equation?
So yes, I have not seen any studies that say, you know,
this is affecting startups in this way. Again, I don't think we
have that information yet. But based on, again, good old
economics 101 incentives, it is clearly a negative in the
equation. And just a real quick point, all of things that we
are talking about here, the bottom line is it that it is an
additional negative. Now you can debate how much of a negative
it is for various businesses and it will range from business to
business, but it is a clear negative in the equation in terms
of cost for businesses, that is the bottom line. In this
environment, why are we going down this path in the first place
is the question.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. One of the figures that just jumped out at
me was the one in your testimony you mentioned a while ago is
76 percent of the small businesses are likely not to hire in
the next 6 months--and with other numbers in here with regards
to how many are pulling back the number of employees that they
have as well as cutting your hours.
Whenever you look at small businesses as being the drivers
of our economy that just immediately shows there is a blanket
of over this entire economy with regards to ability to generate
jobs. And I think you probably could extrapolate from that that
there is not a whole lot of new job creation going on out there
as a result, unless there is a particular niche industry of
some kind.
Mr. Keating. Right. Well, the energy industry is great,
right. Yay. When I go out and talk to people, I can talk about
the energy industry and how well they are doing. But yes,
across the board, again, the numbers are clear in terms of
where we should be in term of job creation during this recovery
and where we actually are. You can pick your survey whether it
is a household survey or the establishment survey, we are
nowhere near we are we should be.
So again, those--I put those surveys in there for a purpose
because again when you look at the economics we can discuss
theory an incentives so on. When people are going out there and
talking to small business owners, this is what they are
hearing. Surely there will be exceptions along the way that
think it is great or maybe their business growing so doesn't
matter to them, that is fantastic.
I would argue the fact we had 2.2 percent growth with
everything that has been working against entrepreneurship and
investment is pretty amazing. And I think that is where the
tipping hat to the resiliency of the American business owner
and the workers absolutely.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. I think your point is about the energy
industry is probably where the growth has been. If it hadn't
been for that, I think my numbers that I have seen would be a
flat GDP. I think the 2.2 is actually as a result of energy
industry that is going gang busters right now.
Mr. Keating. A huge contribution without a doubt when you
look at the GDP numbers and employment numbers without a doubt.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. Just one point before we close here. Mr.
Baker made the comment some time ago that the businesses did
not make any sort of plans and did not make adjustments prior
to 2000, and beginning of this year in 2013. And I can tell
from you the businesses I have visited or when I go home on the
weekends and have district court periods as well as people have
come to my offices, when you talk to those folks they have been
looking at this ever since it passed how they are going to
comply.
They have talked with their attorneys, they have talked
with their accountants, and many of them have made business
decisions on not expanding or not hiring additional folks based
on this law for a number of years already. And so just because
the numbers don't reflect it today, they already made those
decisions in the last year, year before when they decided not
to expand by new locations or not to expand existing location.
With that, Mr. Chairman, I thank you for the opportunity to
be heard here today, and the timeliness of this hearing.
Chairman Collins. Thank you. At this point I would like to
yield to Ms. Hahn.
Ms. Hahn. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Actually I would like to
ask Mr. Baker to respond to some of the comments that Mr.
Keating made. But honestly, I really disagree with the comment
that being an entrepreneur in this environment with the new
Affordable Care Act is a negative. I think just the opposite, I
think it is a positive. I think there are a lot of people that
get stuck in a job they don't want to be in because of the
health insurance that is provided them, and they are afraid,
and their families are afraid for them to step out and be a
entrepreneur.
And I think this law allows someone to strike out on their
own and be able to afford quality health insurance without
jeopardizing their family or themselves. So I look at it as a
complete opposite of what you just said. I think it is a
positive and I think there are resources now that people never
had before, and there are a lot of people who stay with a job
just for the health insurance, and really have that
entrepreneurial spirit inside of them and have been afraid to
do so specifically because of the inability to get health care
on their own. I don't know, Mr. Baker, if you wanted to respond
to some of those comments that Mr. Keating made.
Mr. Baker. Yeah, well, in particular I would take up on
that point there what is been a considerable amount of economic
research showing exactly this idea of job lock that you have
people that have a job with health insurance, either they or a
family member has an existing condition, and they know if they
had to go into the individual market, they would either not be
able to get insurance at all, or it would be actually
exorbitant.
And I actually was curious about this and clicked onto a
few of the exchanges, the State exchanges, and looked at the
oldest group 55 to 64 where you pay the highest premiums. And
you can get the silver plans, middle plans for 600 a month, it
varied by State and which plan you chose. But in other words,
insurance that would consider very affordable, not counting any
subsidy.
So if you are a more moderate income person, would you get
a subsidy on top of that. I actually do own my own business, my
own research center, but, you know, if I were thinking of
starting that out today, it would make a big difference to me
knowing that for whatever reason things went badly and I was
not getting insurance through the center, I had the option of
getting it through the exchange at an affordable rate. So I
would be very surprised if you don't see burst of
entrepreneurship in the next couple years.
Ms. Hahn. Thank you. That is what I think as well. And just
to remind everybody the health care in this country was broken,
and so this is really an attempt to fix what was terribly
broken. And actually National 2008 study by small business
majority said that small business health costs would more than
double by 2018 without any reform. So just to kind of remind
everybody, health costs were going up, and it was a broken
system. So this is an attempt to lower health costs and bring
it down, but there are some issues that we are finding out
today.
And just on the small business majority. I don't know if
you have connected with them, Mr. Bienko and Mr. Hermann, but I
have held several workshops on the Affordable Care Act with
small businesses in my district, and the Small Business
Majority and they have offices throughout the country are
really a good resource. I felt your pain when you said you
don't have the kind of resources to figure this law out, and it
is confusing to some extent, but this is a good resource that--
they are there for small businesses, they are champions of
small business. And they are very good at helping kind of go
through the maze of this new health care law, so you guys might
check into them.
I guess for both of you sounds like you have different
issues. Mr. Hermann, you sounded like you were saying you are
taking care of your employees now. You are going to take care
of them, they are like family. But it is more about your
hesitance to hire more in the future.
Mr. Bienko, it sounded like for you, you are more concerned
about having to offer health insurance for those who are
working 30 hours or more. Have you actually calculated those
costs of, you know, what it would mean to insure your full-time
employees or those part-time employees that, you know, you
talked about those that worked 3 days a week, sometimes 10 or
12 hours that would push them to the 36-hour limit?
Mr. Bienko. Sure if I can first comment on the previous
statement referenced the Affordable Care Act as a whole, our
health care system is broken, there is no doubt about it and we
need to make a change. But I think what we are addressing here
today is around the 30-hour workweek, not so much the actual
plan. And so for an individual like myself, we know, I want
entrepreneurs to have the ability to be able to step out, it is
just how it is done and how it is made. I don't think anybody
is against individuals being able to have health coverage. I
think as Americans, as people, as human beings, no matter what
background you come from, you want everybody to be taken care
of, and I feel the same exact way. However it may not be the
best system for businesses entrepreneurs. I think today we are
talking about the 30-hour workweek.
When it comes to us, we want nothing more than to provide
the health care coverage, that is why we made the step from day
one. First day I opened, I provided an opportunity for my very
first employees from day one and made that investment, and we
continue to make that investment. You made a comment on the
cost, it will cost us $2,200 as we have set up per new employee
on a part-time basis if it is not changed, reverted back to 40
hours. Now when we look at new locations----
Ms. Hahn. And how many is that for you? How many of those
employees fall into that category?
Mr. Bienko. Sure, when we open a new location, we open a
new location with 12 to 13 part-time employees and one full-
time employee. Those part-time employees work between 30 and 35
hours a week when we ramp up a new location and new city. We
march into a new city right away off the bat, we are providing
the--30--15 new opportunities right away.
Ms. Hahn. And they are like 36, 35.
Mr. Bienko. They are like 36 hours per week.
Ms. Hahn. Right now you don't consider them full-time.
Mr. Bienko. No, they are not full-time. And they will grow
into full-time positions and they will receive that benefit
from working hard and helping us establish our business, but
our business cannot be established if we do not profit. We need
that margin, we need every single margin.
You talk about 1.6 margins, 5 percent margins, 15 percent
margin, it doesn't matter what industry you are in and what
margins you have based upon your industry, when you are a
startup, you need every single percentage point.
Ms. Hahn. So if this doesn't get changed back to the
traditional 40-hour workweek, what will you do?
Mr. Bienko. We have that additional cost.
Ms. Hahn. You will have the additional cost, but you
won't----
Mr. Bienko. We will grow a lot slower. With our system and
our model and our scale that we have set up currently that has
worked tremendously. We went into Nashville, Tennessee, opened
up a location there as a franchise. I went in there and I
purchased a failing franchise. We grew by over 600 percent in
one year with our model and our scale, we know what works. It
doesn't work with the additional costs. When we moved into
Dallas, Texas and we opened up in Dallas, Texas on December
16th, with that in mind. If this was, in fact, currently right
now, those costs would prohibit us to grow upon the same scale
that we know we are capable of growing upon. When we went into
Nashville, we started out with three employees, we now have
over 30 in 9 short months.
Ms. Hahn. Is that cost calculated on your current insurance
provider, they have told you that adding more employees would
be at that cost?
Mr. Bienko. That is what I have to go on currently right
now working with our insurance provider. So if we are offering
it to the individuals that we are offering it to right now, we
have to offer it to equally amongst the other employees and
that is the cost burden that we have to take on a part-time
basis. It is not an issue of not wanting to do it. It is an
issue of the business will not grow and scale the same exact
way without it.
Ms. Hahn. And Mr. Hermann, what is your biggest concern?
Mr. Hermann. Biggest concern is go back to, we are taking
care of our full-time employees right now. We did run the
numbers and look back on past 4 weeks, and 30 hours could bring
in about 10 more under the plan. And----
Ms. Hahn. What would that cost you?
Mr. Hermann. That would cost me $36,000 a year at least.
That is not including administration costs, not including----
Ms. Hahn. For 10 more?
Mr. Hermann. For 10 more.
Ms. Hahn. I think he has a better plan.
Mr. Hermann. And here we go, we talk about these plans,
they are so diverse. We are talking apples and oranges here. To
have this conversation, and I am just concerned like I said--
you talk about the budget office. That is still time I have to
step out of the store, and go down there, when what happened to
just shaking my uncle's hand who is an insurance agent and
saying, thanks for getting us good coverage. I actually have to
leave him now, I am leaving my uncle in the local insurance
agency because they don't provide the plan that I think is
going to best keep us in business.
So a local insurance agent he has his hands in the air, he
sells this stuff and he says, I don't know what to do we don't
have a plan for you, I am sorry. So I am concerned about that.
That is a local guy that shops in my store, he has agents
there, he has other agents there.
Ms. Hahn. I thought your current plan provided the benefits
that the----
Mr. Hermann. No, to stay competitive for our rates. When I
look at our rates, his rates are going to go--we are going to
go up 10 to 20 percent at least. So we had to do something to
keep our insurance plan, to keep our costs in line. And as a
small insurance agency, they didn't have the ability to look at
their underwriters and see what options they have, they had to
go with someone else who is innovative and do something else.
It hurts the small business guy and it also drags you out of
the office more, and spend a lot of time on this. We had health
insurance and we still provide health insurance to our
employees, to our families. But I have spent a lot of time on
this.
I have taken time out of my schedule because I believe the
30-hour requirement can cause some issues, that is why I am
here today to comment on those 30 hours and hopefully represent
the independent supermarkets across the Nation and independent
business owners and make a difference.
Ms. Hahn. Thank you. Well, I appreciate all the witness
here today. I think we have all learned something.
Chairman Collins. Myself as well. I think we heard some
divergent opinions. I think at some point, where do we agree,
uncertainty is not good, uncertainty in any number of areas
including surrounding our deficit and debts and where those are
headed. The more entrepreneurs and small business owners have
certainty, the more likely they are to invest.
And it is interesting too, I think we are getting consensus
agreement in a bipartisan way that whether it is the 30-hour
workweek, whether it is now the new definition of large
business at 50 employees, or whether it is the medical device
tax, or whether it is the health insurance tax, all of these
revenue drivers that we are going to bring money the taxes into
the government to pay for this huge expansion Medicaid.
In each and every case, there is bipartisan agreement, they
are not good for the economy, whether it is 30 hours, 50
employees, health insurance tax medical, they are all bad for
growth, which is why, to some, we would say why don't we delay
this a year and let's get the economy growing a little bit more
before we would ever take on things that there is bipartisan
agreement. In fact, our cost in jobs, we don't have any jobs
that we can afford to lose.
So I just would leave that out there, that as we move
forward in these uncertain times the best thing we can do is
all get in a room. We can talk about this, we can talk about
the negative impacts, how could we change something in order to
deal with the negative impacts and yet understand the cost
associated with that so that we can all have a little less
uncertainty and clearly today, the exchanges aren't open, they
are not working. My own staff can't get on to the exchange here
in D.C., it is not open. Yet in a very short period of time,
you have to put your employees in buckets to prepare for a year
down the road.
Anyway I think those are all facts that would indicate we
should delay, but that is just my opinion.
So again, thank you all for coming, your insight has been
very valuable. I appreciate you taking time away from your
business traveling here, and I can assure you that that this
testimony is valuable to us.
So with that, I ask unanimous consent that members have 5
legislative days to submit statements and supporting materials
for the record. And seeing none, without objection, so ordered.
The hearing is now adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 3:08 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]

A P P E N D I X

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Collins, thank you for hosting this important
hearing today to examine the potential effects of the Patient
Protection and Affordable Care Act's (ACA or ObamaCare)
definition of 30 hours a week as full-time employment, and what
this might mean for employment at small businesses. The Small
Business & Entrepreneurship Council (SBE Council) is pleased to
submit this testimony.

My name is Raymond Keating, and I am the chief economist
for SBE Council, as well as serving as an adjunct professor in
the Townsend Business School at Dowling College where I teach a
variety of courses in the MBA program; a weekly newspaper
columnist for Long Island Business News; and author of several
books, with the latest being Unleashing Small Business Through
IP: Protecting Intellectual Property, Driving Entrepreneurship.

SBE Council is a nonpartisan, nonprofit advocacy, research
and training organization dedicated to protecting small
business and promoting entrepreneurship. With nearly 100,000
members and 250,000 small business activists nationwide, SBE
Council is engaged at the local, state, federal and
international levels where we collaborate with elected
officials, policy experts and business leaders on initiatives
and policies that enhance competitiveness and improve the
environment for business start-up and growth.

Economic and Employment Growth

It is important to consider the impact of the ACA--or
ObamaCare--within the context of our poor performance in recent
years regarding both economic and employment growth.

Real GDP growth during this recovery has averaged only 2.2
percent. That not only comes in far below the 3.4 percent
average since 1950, but also compares miserably to the 4.5
percent average during periods of recovery/expansion. So, in
effect, economic growth during this recovery has been running
at roughly half of where it should be.

Why does this matter? Well, keep in mind that if the
economy grows at an annual average rate of four percent a year,
our standard of living double every 17.5 years, while if growth
averages a mere two percent then it takes 35 years to double
the standard of living. The U.S. should not be content with
growth of roughly 2 percent a year. It hurts us today, and far
into the future.

Meanwhile, on the employment front, the latest data told a
story of continued under-performance. Consider several key
points.

First, in August, the labor force fell by 312,000 compared
to July. Throughout the recession and subsequent recovery, the
labor force participation rate has rather steadily declined.
The August level of 63.2 percent was the lowest since August
1978. That is, the worst labor force participation rate in 35
years. That speaks mainly to a large number of people simply
not even bothering to look for work.

As for what's going on with actual employment, the federal
government serves up employment data via two surveys. The
establishment (or payroll) survey gets widely quoted in the
media, and in August, nonfarm payrolls rose by 169,000. That's
far below the 250,000 or so expected during a solid recovery.

But the other set of data, i.e., the household survey, is
where we get the unemployment rate, and it also better captures
start up and small business activity. Unfortunately, the reason
that the unemployment rate declined in August to 7.3 percent
from 7.4 percent in July was because a 115,000-drop in
employment was outdistanced by the larger decline of 312,000 in
the labor force.

To put this in perspective, if the U.S. had a labor force
participation rate more in line with recent historical norms,
the unemployment rate would be nearly 12 percent.

And what about the number of long-term unemployed? The
number of people unemployed for more than 27 weeks came in at
4.3 million in August. That's down from the high of 6.6 million
set in may 2010, but is nearly four times the May 2007 level of
1.1 million.

In summary, as of August, we were still down by about 2.4
million in terms of employment compared to the pre-recession
level (November 2007).

Compared to the same point in the economic recovery of the
1980s, after the arguably worse economic period of January 1980
to November 1982, the U.S. had added 11.84 million jobs versus
the 4.17 million added so far in the current recovery.

No matter how you measure it, the U.S. is suffering through
one of the worse recoveries on record in terms of both economic
growth and job creation.

Given the ObamaCare employer mandate and the definition of
30 hours a week as full-time employment, we also need to look
at full-time versus part-time employment. It must be noted that
as for people who are working part time, but want full-time
work, in August, this group working part time for economic
reasons registered 7.9 million. That's fortunately down from
the peak of 9.2 million set in September 2010. However, it's
far above pre-recession levels. In fact, it's more than double
the 3.9 million level of April 2006.

(Keep in mind that the Bureau of Labor Statistics defines
full-time employment as 35 hours a week, versus the ObamaCare
de facto definition of full-time employment as being 30 hours
per week.)

It is important to recognize that a dramatic shift has been
going on in 2013 as to part-time versus full-time jobs being
created. During this recovery, a bit more than 90 percent of
jobs created have been full time. However, from January 2013 to
August 2013, two-thirds of employment gains have come via part-
time jobs.

So, job creation thus far in 2013 has been overwhelmingly
about part time jobs, which is a striking break from what
normally happens, and speaks to the issue of how part-time
workers are treated under ObamaCare versus full-time.

Small Business Role in Job Creation

Of course, it needs to be pointed out that small and mid-
sized businesses--that is, those with less than 500 workers--
create the bulk of net new jobs in the economy. As the SBA's
Office of Advocacy sums up: ``Small firms accounted for 64
percent of the net new jobs created between 1993 and 2011 (or
11.8 million of the 18.5 million net new jobs). Since the
latest recession, from mid-2009 to 2011, small firms, led by
the larger ones in the category (20-499 employees), accounted
for 67 percent of the net new jobs.''\1\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Office of Advocacy, Small Business Administration, ``Frequently
Asked Questions About Small Business,'' September 2012.

Given the importance of smaller businesses to job creation,
we should all be concerned about recent declines in various
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
measures of entrepreneurship.

For example, a good take on early stages of
entrepreneurship is the number of self-employed. Unfortunately,
the trend after 2006 has been very troubling. In terms of
unincorporated self-employed, the recent high of 10.68 million
(seasonally adjusted) was set in December 2006, and the numbers
have been on a general decline since. In August, the level came
in at 9.5 million, which showing no growth compared to a year
earlier. The range over the past couple of years has been
running at 25-to-27-year lows. Similarly, incorporated self-
employed also has trended down, though more unevenly, since
2008.

And not surprisingly then, data on business births revealed
a big decline from 2006 to 2009, with some growth in 2010 and
2011, but levels remaining far below just a few years earlier.
As for the total number of businesses, unfortunately, the data
from the U.S. Census Bureau has a long lag. According to the
latest available information, though, the number of firms with
employees declined for three straight years, dropping by 5.2
percent from 2007 to 2010.

The unmistakable and troubling trend in recent years has
been a decline in the level of entrepreneurship in the U.S.
That's worrisome for many reasons, including on the employment
front.

For example, as reported by the September 5 Wall Street
Journal, small business job creation activity lags: ``According
to ADP numbers, payrolls at private firms with less than 50
employees have increased 4.7% since the end of the recession
through August, medium-size firms (50-499 employees) are up
6.1% and large firms (more than 1,000 workers) have increased
payrolls by 7.4%.''

A similar finding was offered by Intuit's small business
employment index, released on September 4. Economist Susan
Woodward noted that small business job growth has been flat for
two months now. Over the long run, Woodward observed, ``Small
business employment continues to lag behind total private
employment, which has risen 7 percent since the trough in March
2010, while small business employment has only risen by 2
percent.''

Small Business Outlook and Incentives Under ObamaCare

A new survey of small business owners by TechnoMetrica
Market Intelligence done for the Small Business &
Entrepreneurship Council found the following regarding
ObamaCare and its impact on hiring decisions by small
businesses:

``Over three-quarters of small businesses
(76%) said they were not likely to hire over the next
six months.''

Among those likely to hire in the coming six
months, 57% said they would likely hire full-time
workers (28% very likely, 29% somewhat likely), and 77%
said they would likely hire part-time workers (36% very
likely, 41% somewhat likely).

One third of small business owners said that
ObamaCare has had an effect on their hiring decisions,
including 21 percent saying it has had a ``major''
impact. Those businesses that said ObamaCare has had an
impact on hiring decisions are largely firms with
actual employees, versus sole-proprietorships.

``Most small businesses (63%) do not believe
that ObamaCare will help businesses like them to
purchase more affordable health insurance for them and
their employees. More than half (52%) strongly disagree
with the idea that it would help them obtain affordable
health insurance.'' 12% of businesses are not yet sure.

Earlier this year, a Gallup poll put a variety of questions
to small business owners as to the impact of ObamaCare on their
enterprises.\2\ Consider the following results:
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ Dennis Jacobe, ``Half of U.S. Small Businesses Think Health Law
Bad for Them,'' Gallup Economy, May 10, 2013, accessed at http://
ww.gallup.com/poll/162386/half-small-businesses-think-health-law-
bad.aspx.

48% of U.S. small business owners said that
the 2010 Affordable Care Act would be bad for their
businesses, versus 39% anticipating no impact and only
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
9% saying it would be good.

``55% of small-business owners expect the
money they pay for healthcare to increase. Five percent
expect their healthcare costs to decline, while 37% say
the health law will have no impact on what they pay for
healthcare.''

``When asked if they had taken any of five
specific actions in response to the ACA, 41% of small-
business owners say they have held off on hiring new
employees and 38% have pulled back on plans to grow
their business. One in five (19%) have reduced their
number of employees and essentially the same number
(18%) have cut employee hours in response to the
healthcare law. One in four owners (24%) have thought
about eliminating healthcare coverage for their
employees.''

In August, the International Foundation of Employee
Benefits Plans also released a survey on the impact of the
ACA.\3\ Among its findings were the following regarding small
businesses:
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ International Foundation of Employee Benefits Plan, ``2013
Employer-Sponsored Health Care: ACA's Impact,'' accessed at http://
www.ifebp.org/pdf/research/2103ACAImpactSurvey.pdf.

95.1% of businesses with 50 or fewer
employees expected costs to increase due to the ACA,
with 51.2% expecting cost increases of more than 10
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
percent.

Among all businesses, the ACA provision
cited most often (by 21.2%) as having the most
significant impact in boosting costs was ``Offering
affordable coverage to all employees working an average
of 30 hours or more a week in a month.''

As for workforce adjustments due to the ACA,
among firms with 50 or fewer employees, 19.5% (11.3%
already having done so and 8.2% planning to do so in
the coming 12 months) said they are reducing ``hiring
to get/stay under the 50-employee ACA threshold for
small employers.''

Also in terms of workforce adjustment
responses, among firms with 50 or fewer employees,
again, 19.5% (11.3% already having done so and 8.2%
planning to do so in the coming 12 months) said they
are ``adjusting hours so fewer employees qualify for
full-time employee medical insurance requirement.''

Assorted media reports also have highlighted the threat of
per-full-time-employee (or FTE) fines under ObamaCare leading
to businesses cutting employee hours. A September 11 Fox
Business News story noted the following: ``The Obama
administration announced in July that it would delay the so-
called employer mandate until 2015. ObamaCare requires that
companies with 50 or more employees provide health insurance
benefits to very full-time workers, considered to be anyone who
logs an average of 30 or more hours a week. Employers will be
hit with a penalty for each full-time employee who isn't
covered and instead purchases insurance through a federally
subsidized exchange. Although the administration delayed
implementing the rule until 2015, the penalties for that year
will be based on staffing levels recorded in the second half of
2014 at the latest. As a result, several large companies and a
long list of smaller businesses have changed their policies to
cap weekly hours at 29.'' \4\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\ Matthew Rocco, ``With Eye on ObamaCare, Companies Move to Cut
Workers' Hours,'' FoxBusiness.com, September 11, 2013, accessed at
http://www.foxbusiness.com/industries/2013/09/11/with-eye-on-obamacare-
companies-move-to-cut-workers-hours/.

And regarding the high level of part-time jobs, a Reuters
report recently highlighted the ObamaCare role on the part-time
jobs front: ``Faltering economic growth at home and abroad and
concern that President Barack Obama's signature health care law
will drive up business costs are behind the wariness about
taking on full-time staff, executives at staffing and payroll
firms say ... Executives at several staffing firms told Reuters
that the law, which requires employers with 50 or more full-
time workers to provide healthcare coverage or incur penalties,
was a frequently cited factor in requests for part-time
workers. A decision to delay the mandate until 2015 has not
made much of a difference in hiring decisions, they added.''
Later, it was noted: ``Obamacare appears to be having the most
impact on hiring decisions by small- and medium-sized
businesses. Although small businesses account for a smaller
share of the jobs in the economy, they are an important source
of new employment. Some businesses are holding their headcount
below 50 and others are cutting back the work week to under 30
hours to avoid providing health insurance for employees,
according to the staffing and payroll executives.'' \5\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\ Lucia Mutikani, ``Analysis: Obamacare, tepid U.S. growth fuel
part-time hiring,'' Reuters, August 21, 2013, accessed at http://
www.reuters.com/article/2013/08/21/us-usa-economy-jobs-analysis-
idUSBRE97K05K20130821.

In addition, as health insurance costs continue to rise,
including with increased regulations and taxes via ObamaCare,
it must be noted that business owners with more than 50 workers
have every reason to calculate whether it makes sense to
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
continue offering coverage, or drop it and pay the panty.

For good measure, firms with less than 50 workers now have
an added incentive to drop coverage, perhaps provide a far
cheaper lump sum payment to workers, and let employees then
seek government subsidies and coverage via the insurance
exchanges. All of this means more government subsidies, and an
ever-growing tab for taxpayers, including, of course, small
business owners.

Conclusion

In a time of slow economic growth, lackluster job creation,
and troubling trends on entrepreneurship, policymaking should
be focused on how to incentivize private-sector risk taking,
that is, starting up, expanding and investing in businesses.
That would mean, for example, providing broad and substantive
tax and regulatory relief.

Unfortunately, policymaking has been pointed in the exact
opposite direction for a number of years now. In fact, an
assortment of public policy measures--with ObamaCare's
mandates, regulations and tax increases being prominent--
explicitly raise costs and create uncertainty for
entrepreneurs, businesses and investors.

So, at a time when we desperately need the entrepreneurial
sector of our economy to be focused on investing and creating
good-paying jobs, ObamaCare forces businesses to be focused on
how to deal with a massive government intrusion on the employee
cost front.

And when doing so, ObamaCare provides clear incentives to
hire part-time over full-time workers if possible; reduce
employee hours (getting them under the 30-hour mark); maintain
staff levels at less than or cut back to below 50 full-time or
FTE workers to avoid the employer-mandate; and seriously
consider dropping coverage altogether given the relative costs
of providing, or not providing coverage.

The recent numbers on hiring and in various surveys confirm
that the costs and incentives under ObamaCare push many small
and mid-size businesses towards hiring fewer workers,
especially fewer full-time workers, and reducing employee
hours. In the end, it's clear that ObamaCare serves as a very
real drag on economic and employment growth.
``The Effects of the Health Law's Definitions of Full-Time Employee on
Small Businesses''

Testimony of

Steven Hermann

Vice President

Paul's Supermarkets

On Behalf of

The National Grocers Association

Before

U.S. House of Representatives

Committee on Small Business

Subcommittee on Health and Technology

Washington, D.C.

October 9, 2013

Good Morning Chairman Collins and members of the
Subcommittee. Thank you for that kind introduction and for the
opportunity to testify on behalf of the National Grocers
Association on an issue that is very important to independent
grocers and small businesses across the country. NGA is the
national trade association representing the retailers and
wholesalers that comprise the independent channel of the
supermarket industry. Independent grocers account for
approximately one quarter of the total US supermarket industry
with nearly $130 billion in total sales, and over 944,000 in
direct jobs that pay over $30 billion in wages.

My name is Steven Hermann and I am the Vice President of
Paul's Supermarkets. Our family-owned company has been in
business in Eldon, Missouri, for over 45 years. I started
working in my family's supermarket when I was 14 years old,
learning the trade from my grandfather and father. Like many
independent grocers, I fell in love with the business early on
and quickly gained an appreciation for hard work and customer
service. Today my family operates three supermarkets with
locations in Eldon, Osage Beach, and Lake Ozark, Missour,

Like many small employers across the country, we have
weathered many economic storms throughout the years and are
proud that we have never lost sight of the two most important
things for our business: our employees and our customers.
However, we are facing a challenge in our workforce unlike any
we have seen before. I am fearful that the unintended
consequences of the Affordable Care Act (ACA) will hurt our
employees and undermine our values as a family owned small
business. Under the ACA, the definition of full time employee
has created new barriers for our industry where working an
average of 30 hours per week is simply not considered full-
time.

Independent grocers are proud to provide employment to
hundreds of thousands of individuals, many of whom are working
a second job or simply looking to help supplement their
family's income. As such, the supermarket industry employs a
large number of part-time workers to help meet the ever
changing needs and demands of our customers, which can change
from day to day. The ACA created new hurdles for businesses by
greatly expanding the number of employees eligible for health
plans by defining a full-time employee as an employee who has
averaged at least 30 hours of service per week over the course
of a month.

This new definition of full-time under the law will force
small businesses to re-think how they hire and schedule part-
time employees. Where an employer may have previously hired a
new part-time employee with the exception that they would work
33-35 hours per week, that employee will now be brought on
knowing they are a part-time employee and their work week will
be limited to less than 30 hours per week. Employers are likely
to hire fewer employees, especially full-time employees,
learning to do more with fewer workers in order to control
costs.

Not only is the law redefining what it means to be a full-
time worker in this country, but it's permanently changing the
American workforce by interfering with part-time workers'
ability to earn a living. Part-time employees in need of
additional money may no longer be able to pick up an additional
shift to pay for unexpected expenditures or earn extra money
around the holidays.

We employ a large number of part-time associates, many
during our busy summer season, but also others that help staff
our stores throughout the year. These part-time workers include
kids working while attending college, spouses helping to
supplement their family's main income, and older associates
supplementing their retirement. Unfortunately, due to the law,
many businesses may now be unable to provide part-time
associates with the hours they need.

We have long felt that our associates are like our family,
which is why we are proud to offer a wide range of great
benefits to our full-time associates, including funding 100
percent of the associate's healthcare premium after the
deductible is met. Our associates have access to a Health
Savings Account and the company contributes a small monthly
stipend toward that account. Today, we currently employ 75
full-time associates and 100 part-time and seasonable workers
between our three stores. We are proud of the fact that nearly
all of our full-time associates participate in our health plan
and it's our hope that we can continue to provide quality
benefits in the future, although it gets more and more
difficult to do so with each passing year.

This commitment to our associates is not without
significant costs, especially for a small family--owned
business such as mine. Over the years, as health care costs
have increased we have worked hard to maintain the benefits we
offer, including adapting our health plans to meet the changing
times and employees needs. In this year alone, healthcare costs
for my company exceeded $300,000, not including any in-house
administration costs, and we are on track for a significant
increase again next year. The supermarket industry operates on
razor thin profit margins, which was confirmed again in the
2013 NGA Financial Survey, where net profit before taxes among
independent grocers hovered around 1.65%. In this competitive
industry pennies really do count and can make the difference
between making a profit or not.

According to the same NGA Financial Survey, 92 percent of
respondents indicated they currently offer health benefits to
their full-time employees, which is a testament to the
commitment that independent grocers have to their associates.
Employers, such as myself, very much want to continue providing
quality benefits to our full-time employees, recognizing that a
healthy employee is a productive employee. However, many
businesses simply cannot afford to provide coverage to workers
who average 30 hours per week. Thus, small business owners will
have to make tough choices and many part-time employees will
face reduced hours and smaller paychecks.

Independent grocers need the flexibility to be able to
manage their businesses and workforces to meet the needs and
demands of their customers. The burdens placed on our
businesses by this law hamper our ability to do just that and
make it more difficult to succeed in a hypercompetitive
marketplace. Paul's Supermarket prides itself on supporting
charitable organizations and community groups; however
pressures from the healthcare law could impact our ability to
continue that support that the same level. My strong
recommendation to you today is that Congress should do all it
can to help businesses by removing barriers or any artificial
thresholds that will inhibit our ability to hire workers and
create good jobs. One of the most effective ways for Congress
to do just that is to pass legislation that amends the
unrealistic definition of a full-time employee under the
healthcare law so that businesses can focus on continuing to be
an employer of choice in the communities we serve.

Thank you for the opportunity to appear before the
Committee today and I look forward to answering any questions
you may have.
TESTIMONY OF STEPHEN BIENKO

PRESIDENT, 42 Holdings LLC

Before the

U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES COMMITTEE ON SMALL BUSINESS

SUBCOMMITTEE ON HEALTH AND TECHNOLOGY

``The Effectives of the Health Law's Definitions of Full-Time Employee
on Small Business''

OCTOBER 9, 2013

Introduction

Chairman Collins, Ranking Member Hahn, and members of the
Subcommittee, thank you for inviting me to testify today on the
effects of the health care law's new definition of a full-time
employee on a small business. My name is Stephen Bienko, and I
am the President of 42 Holdings, and a member of the
International Franchise Association. I own and operate an
interstate and intrastate moving company, and I also own 15
franchises of College Hunks Hauling Junk and College Hunks
Moving throughout northern New Jersey, as well as in the
Nashville, Tennessee and Cleveland, Ohio areas. College Hunks
Moving and College Hunks Hauling Junk offer residential
household moves, office relocations, junk removal, donation
pickups and moving labor services. I bought my first franchise
three years ago in 2010 after a career as an entrepreneur and a
previous stint as a New Jersey State Trooper. I'm proud of my
business; it offers a service that my communities need, and
flexible, secure jobs for dozens of motivated team members in
three states.

As a franchise small business owner, my livelihood and my
ability to provide for my team members is directly linked to
the strength of the economy and federal policies enacted by
Congress. Most recently, I have been studying the ways the
expansive Affordable Care Act will impact my business, our team
members and the company culture that supports all of it. While
the one-year delay of the employer mandate gives us more time
to properly implement the law, one thing remains clear: while
well-intentioned, the Affordable Care Act poses a serious
threat to my business' ability to continue providing a fun,
enthusiastic work atmosphere and quality jobs for people who
want and need them.

The Definition of ``Full-Time Employee''

For decades, U.S. employers have used a 40-hour workweek as
a standard for workforce culture. Unfortunately, the Affordable
Care Act's provision requiring employers to provide coverage to
full-time employees, and defining full-time as 30 hours, will
cause many employers--like me--to simply alter their employees'
hours in order to run a successful small business. This puts
all of us at a loss; employers must implement new workforce
management methods, and some team members will receive fewer
hours and reduced take-home pay, not to mention they will still
be ineligible for employer-sponsored health coverage.

I currently have 72 employees, and 20 of those employees
are part-time workers. In 2014, we are planning on adding an
additional 34 part-time workers across all of my locations.
Many of these part-time employees work three days per week,
with 10-12 hour daily shifts. These part-time workers are
attracted to our company culture because the positions offered
can easily fit with their schedules, whether that includes
school, childcare coverage, or other personal commitments.
During ``move season,'' what our industry considers the ``busy
period,'' we typically have a large number of customers who are
trying to schedule their family's move. Many of my part-time
team members will try to fit in as many as five of these shifts
in order to make additional income for themselves, and in many
cases, their families. Currently, it is not uncommon for a
part-time team member who normally works 25-30 hours per week
to double their work hours to 50-60 per week during these
periods of high demand.

I currently offer a health plan to our full-time team
members, but in order to manage my health care costs (which are
a company benefit and a line item on a Profit & Loss sheet), I
will need to limit the hours worked by our part-time team
members. The simplest way to accomplish this is to limit part-
time workers to only two full shifts per week. This will equal
between 20 and 24 hours per week, instead of the 30-36 hours
they are working now. These part-time workers will no longer be
permitted to pick up extra shifts and garner additional income
during high-volume ``move seasons.''

Reduced Hiring and Expansion

I have offered my full-time team members health coverage
even without the employer mandate, and I have every intention
of continuing that coverage, even as I continue to expand my
business. However, the increased cost of doing business by
providing coverage to employees with fluctuating schedules that
only occasionally put them into full-time status will leave me
no choice but to scale back my expansion plans. I consider
myself lucky, because I have succeeded with an ambitious growth
plan for my business over the last several years, but many
small business owners are not so fortunate. Not only has the
employer mandate discouraged job creation and business
expansion, it has also damaged existing jobs by including a
misguided statutory requirement that discarded more than a
half-century of established labor policy by now defining
``full-time'' as 30 hours per week.

The employer mandate will hurt franchise business workers
in many ways, but one of the most devastating effects of the
mandate is that fewer workers will be offered health insurance,
and employees will be less able to afford their own coverage
when working fewer hours. The true losers under this misguided
mandate are the employees, who work day-in and day-out to
provide a better life for themselves and their families.

Allowing employers to manage their workers to the
traditional 40-hour work week would give employees more
flexibility and eliminate the need to revamp longstanding
employer personnel policies. For my part, I would be able to
give my part-time employees more hours and pay them more wages,
without incurring the additional cost of providing health
coverage that true part-time employees are currently not
eligible for.

Conclusion

Without a doubt, the one-year delay of the employer mandate
is an important reprieve for franchise small businesses as they
prepare for ACA implementation; unfortunately, it is a short-
lived solution and is far from workable in the long run. Many
franchise businesses are being turned upside-down by the new
costs, complexities and requirements of the law. Allowing
employers to continue with the current and traditional
workforce management practices provides more personal stability
in a period of continued economic uncertainty and recovery. So
far, Congress has seemingly been willing to listen to testimony
from small business owners about these serious challenges, but
fast-approaching deadlines command your swift action to assist
our nation's franchise small businesses. Business owners are
already weighed down by complex reporting requirements, small
business health exchanges that lack competitive options, and
increased costs brought on by additional taxes and fees. The
30-hour definition is a major change that could have far
reaching consequences we have not yet begun to see.

I urge the Committee to support H.R. 2575, the Save
American Workers Act, and H.R. 2988, the Forty Hours Is Full
Time Act to help ease the employer mandate's enormous burden on
franchise small businesses. The revision of the new definition
of the full-time employee for the purposes of the Affordable
Care Act is a common-sense solution that will put the ACA in
line with many other federal wage and hour regulations, provide
small business owners such as myself with health benefit
consistency, and allow for increased hours and more take-home
pay for my hard-working and deserving team members.

Thank you for allowing me to testify before you today, and
I look forward to answering any questions you might have.
Testimony of

Dean Baker, Co-Director

Center for Economic and Policy Research

Before the

Small Business Subcommittee on Health and Technology of the U.S. House
Committee on Small Business

Hearing on

The Effects of the Health Law's Definitions of Full-Time Employee on
Small Businesses

October 9, 2013

I want to thank Chairman Collins and Ranking Member Hahn
for giving me the opportunity to address the subcommittee. I
will use this opportunity to discuss work that I did with my
colleague at the Center for Economic and Policy Research,
Helene Jorgenson, examining the extent to which the Affordable
Care Act (ACA) may have lead to more part-time employment as
employers cut work hours in order to avoid the employer
sanctions in the law.\1\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Helene Jorgensen is also my wife.

The ACA includes a provision that requires employers of 50
or more full-time workers (those working at least 30 hours per
week on average) to either provide affordable insurance
coverage directly to workers, as defined in the law, or to pay
a penalty for each full-time worker who is not covered and
subsequently buys subsidized insurance in the health care
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
exchanges. There are two obvious ways to avoid this penalty.

The first route would be to keep the total number of
workers under 50, either by not hiring workers for businesses
near the cutoff or shedding workers for businesses just over
the cutoff. The second route would be to reduce the number of
hours that employees work so that they fall under the 30 hour a
week average that would have them count towards the firm's
penalty under the ACA.

There are good reasons for questioning the extent to which
the employer penalty provisions in the ACA would affect
employment. Most importantly, the overwhelming majority of
firms that employ at least 50 already provide health insurance
coverage to their workers that would meet the standards of the
ACA. According to a survey by the Kaiser Family Foundation more
than 94 percent of firms that exceed the ACA's 50 workers
cutoff already provided coverage to their workers
voluntarily.\2\ Clearly these firms consider it a good practice
to offer a valuable benefit to their workers or they would not
do so. Since most firms in this category already provide
coverage voluntarily, it is difficult to believe that requiring
the remaining firms to provide coverage or pay a penalty would
create such an onerous burden.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ The Kaiser Family Foundation and Health Research & Educational
Trust. 2012. ``Section 2: Health Benefit Offer Rates'' in 2012 Employer
Health Benefits Survey, 33-46. Menlo Park, CA: The Kaiser Family
Foundation. http://kff.org/report-section/ehbs-2012-section-2/

Furthermore, the penalty for not providing insurance of
$2,000 per worker (excluding the first 30 workers), is
relatively modest. If the pay of full-time workers averaged
just $10 an hour, this would be an increase in annual
compensation of less than 10 percent. A considerable amount of
research has found no measurable employment impact from
considerably larger increases in the minimum wage.\3\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ Schmitt, John. 2013. ``Why Does the Minimum Wage Have No
Discernible Effect on Employment?'' Washington, DC: Center for Economic
and Policy Research. http://www.cepr.net/index.php/publications/
reports/why-does-the-minimum-wage-have-no-discernible-effect-on-
employment

For these reasons it seems unlikely that the ACA would have
a large negative impact on employment. However, there have been
numerous accounts of employers claiming to reduce employment or
adjust hours in order to avoid the requirements and penalties
in the ACA. If this is the case, we should have first begun to
see evidence of the impact of ACA in January of 2013, since
under the original law employment in 2013 would serve as the
basis for assessing penalties in 2014. (The Obama
administration announced on July 2, 2013 that it would not
enforce sanctions in 2014 based on 2013 employment, but
employers would not have known that sanctions would not be
enforced prior to this date. Therefore we can assume that they
would have behaved as though they expected to be subject to the
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
sanctions.)

Some employers claim to have reduced employment because of
the provisions of the ACA as soon as its passage in 2010, and
many have blamed the ACA for the slow pace of employment growth
in the years from 2010-2012. This is not plausible. There is
enormous churning in the labor market, with close to 3 percent
of employees leaving their job every month (half voluntarily
and half involuntarily).\4\ If an employer felt the need to
hire additional employers in 2010-2012 to meet the demand for
labor they were seeing at the time, they would have no
difficulty getting their employment. Just the normal churning
in the labor market would bring a firm with 52 or 53 employees
below the 50 employee threshold in a few months. Since
employers generally have the option to dismiss workers at will
(unless they have a union contract), there is no reason that
they could not have added employees in the years prior to 2013
to meet their demand for labor at the time, and then reduce
employment in 2013 to avoid the ACA penalties.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\ The Kaiser Family Foundation and Health Research & Educational
Trust, op. cit.

---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Evidence from 2013

It is too early to assess the claim that employers are
staying just below the 50 employee limit since we do not yet
have data available on employment by firm size in 2013. However
as a practical matter it is implausible that the behavior of
these firms could have any noticeable effect on employment
growth. It is unlikely that more than 1 percent of potential
employment growth would be in firms that are near this cutoff.
Furthermore, most of these firms would already be providing
health care insurance for their employees and therefore need
not be concerned about the sanctions in the ACA. If some number
of firms actually are limiting or reducing employment to stay
below the 50 worker cutoff then the impact would be too small
to be noticed in the economy as a whole.

The alternative course of evading ACA penalties, reducing
average hours of work below 30 per week, could at least
plausibly have an impact on employment patterns. In fact,
several large employers have claimed that they would
deliberately keep workers' hours below 30 hours per week in
order to avoid having them count toward the number for whom
they would have a $2,000 penalty.

It is possible to test whether employers are actually
reducing hours below the 30-hour threshold. The Current
Population Survey (CPS) provides monthly data on workers usual
weekly hours. We used the CPS to compare the first six month of
2013 with the first six months of 2012. Our original focus has
been on the group of workers who reported working 26-29 hours a
week. We considered this range a reasonable cutoff for an ACA
effect. Presumably if an employer would have a worker put in
more than 30 hours a week in the absence of ACA penalties, they
would require a worker to put in close to, but less than, 30
hours in order to avoid the penalties.

In an analysis done on the first four months of data from
2013 we found a modest drop in the percentage of workers who
worked this number of hours compared with the corresponding
months of 2012.\5\ This suggested that concern over the
employer sanctions in the ACA was leading firms to reduce work
hours below the 30 hour cutoff.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\ Jorgenson, Helene and Dean Baker, 2013. ``The Affordable Care
Act: A Hidden Jobs Killer?'' Washington, DC: Center for Economic and
Policy Research. http://www.cepr.net/index.php/publications/reports/
the-affordable-care-act-a-hidden-jobs-killer.

We repeated the analysis after the July data became
available, giving us all six months for which employers might
have acted on the belief that they would be subject to the
ACA's sanctions based on 2013 employment levels. With the full
six months of data we instead found a modest increase in the
percentage of workers who are putting in 26-29 hours. The share
went up from 0.61 percent of the workforce in 2012 to 0.64
percent of the workforce in 2013, an increase that corresponds
to slightly more than 40,000 workers who have work schedules
that put them just below the threshold as shown in the table
below.

------------------------------------------------------------------------
Percent of works in
Ususal weekly hours in ------------------------------------------------
primary job                  2012                    2013
------------------------------------------------------------------------
0                     0.07                     0.07
1 to 19                     8.97                     8.69
20 to 24                     1.39                     1.37
25                     1.78                     1.81
26 to 29                     0.61                     0.64
30                     3.03                     3.12
31 to 34                     1.78                     1.79
35 or more                    75.37                    75.79
varied                     7.01                     6.74
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Source: Author's analysis of Current Population Survey.

This may look like it is confirming exactly what opponents
of the ACA warned against, that employers are responding to the
threat of sanctions and cutting back workers' hours, exactly as
several prominent business owners had promised they would do.

However a closer examination shows that the data don't
support this story. The percentage of workers putting in 25-29
hours is up, but so is the percentage of the workforce that
puts in 35 hours a week or more. In fact, the share of the
workforce that reports working just over the limit, either at
30 hours a week or 31-34 hours a week, is up also.

It turns out that the big declines are in the percentage of
workers who put in 1-19 hours a week, 20-24 hours a week, or
who report that their hours typically vary. The data indicate
that fewer workers are in these low or ``hours varied''
categories and more workers report falling into all the
categories at 25 hours a week or above.

These changes are all small and mostly not statistically
significant. They also reflect the influence of many factors
other than the ACA. But the data certainly provide no evidence
supporting the claim that the shortening of workweeks has been
a widespread phenomenon.

Just to be clear, it is likely that the 30-hour sanction
cutoff will have a modest but measurable effect on hours
through time as employers adjust schedules and new businesses
open.\6\ And any movement away from employer-based insurance
will eliminate an important overhead cost that discouraged
firms from shortening hours and hiring more workers.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\6\ An analysis of the impact of Hawaii's employer mandate, which
first took effect in the early 1980s, found that it led to an increase
of 3.7 percentage points in the share of workers in the bottom wage
quintile who worked less than the 20 hour a week threshold specified in
the state's law (Buchmueller, Thomas C., John DiNardo, and Robert G.
Valletta. 2009. ``The Effect of an Employer Health Insurance Mandate on
Health Insurance Coverage and the Demand for Labor: Evidence from
Hawaii.'' FRBSF Working Paper 2009-08, April). This implies an increase
in the percentage of the whole work force working less than 20 hours of
0.74 percentage points.

There are three points that should be kept in mind about
any possible movement to shorter hours that may result from the
ACA. First, the vast majority of people who work part-time do
so voluntarily. In many cases they have family or other
obligations that make part-time employment desirable. Even with
the current weak labor market more than two-thirds of the
people who work part-time report that they do so voluntarily.
In more normal times this share would typically be close to 80
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
percent.

Second, the United States is an outlier in that workers put
in far more hours each year on average than they do in other
wealthy countries. One of the factors that has prevented the
same sort of decline in the length of the average work year
that we have seen in other countries is that health insurance
is typically seen as an overhead cost by employers. Typically
they pay the same amount for workers' health insurance
regardless of how many hours they work.\7\ This gives employers
an incentive to get more hours from each worker instead of
hiring more workers. Insofar as the ACA leads to a movement
away from employer provided insurance, it will take away one of
the factors leading to longer work hours. The result is that
employers may more often decide to hire more workers at fewer
hours per worker than would have been the case in the absence
of the ACA.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\7\ Some employers do make contributions to health insurance
policies based on the numbers of hours worked, but this practice is
still the exception.

Finally, the impact of the ACA's sanctions is only likely
to be seen over time. It is very disruptive to a workplace to
overhaul work schedules, especially if workers see the goal as
being to deny them a benefit that they would otherwise receive.
For this reason, it is not likely that many employers would
restructure work hours immediately after the ACA employer
sanctions took effect. However over a longer term, new
businesses are established and employers do periodically redo
business plans, including restructuring of work hours. It would
stand to reason that when employers have the option of having a
worker put in a number of hours that is just over the cutoff
for sanctions or just under the cutoff, they will opt in many
cases to give workers a schedule that has them put in just
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
under the cutoff.

In this respect, it is worth noting that the analysis of
the impact of Hawaii's employer sanctions for firms not
providing coverage \8\ found no effect on the percentage of
workers employed at less than the 20 hours cutoff for the
period 1992-1993, more than ten years after the law had been in
effect. The impact only appeared in an analysis of work
patterns for the years 2002-2005; more than twenty years after
the law had been in effect. Based on the findings of this
analysis of Hawaii's law, any possible effect of the ACA's
employer sanctions will not be large enough to be picked up in
the data for many years into the future.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\8\ Buchmeulller et al., op. cit.

---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Conclusion

The employer sanctions in the ACA do provide a modest
incentive for employers to reduce work hours below the 30 hour
cutoff in the law. However, research suggests that the size of
the sanction is relatively modest compared to other
interventions, like the minimum wage, which have generally been
found to have little or no effect on employment. Our analysis
of hours data from the Current Population Survey for the first
six months of 2013 actually finds a small increase in the
percentage of workers who usually work more than the 30 hour
cutoff. This suggests that the number of employers who may have
actually cut hours to avoid the sanctions is too small to have
a noticeable impact on the labor market.

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

The National Association for Home Care & Hospice (NAHC) is
the leading association representing the interests of the home
care and hospice community since 1982. Our members are
providers of all sizes and types from the small, rural home
health agencies to the large national companies, including
government-based providers, nonprofit voluntary home health
agencies and hospices, privately-owned companies, and public
corporations. NAHC has worked constructively and productively
with Congress and the regulators for three decades, offering
useful solutions to strengthen the home health and hospice
programs.

As the House Small Business Subcommittee on Health and
Technology examines the effects of the Affordable Care Act
(ACA) definition of full time employee on small businesses,
NAHC appreciates this opportunity to provide our views. The
great majority of the estimated 25,000 home care agencies are
small businesses. While many of these agencies employ more than
50 workers, the vast majority are considered small businesses
under the SBA threshold. All told, there are over 2 million
persons employed in home care. These home care agencies are
innovative job creators that provide much needed compassionate,
high quality care to elderly and disabled individuals in their
homes and communities. The Department of Labor forecasts that
home care workers are among the largest area of growth in
employment today and in the decade to come. Our economy is
built on millions of small enterprises like these. We should be
doing all we can to promote policies to help them survive and
thrive.

Currently the provision in the ACA that imposes penalties
on employers with more than 50 full-time equivalent employees
for not providing health insurance for their ``full time''
workers defines an employee working just 30 hours a week as
full time. This definition of full time is entirely out-of-
keeping with standard employment practices across the country.

The majority of personal care home care workers do not
receive employee health insurance because home care agencies
have three problems that are fairly unique: reliance on
government programs such as Medicaid where payment rates as low
as $11 an hour won't cover the increased costs of providing
health insurance; consumers of private pay home care that are
often elderly and disabled with fixed low incomes; and a home
care workforce with widely varying work hours primarily to
accommodate the needs of their infirm clientele.

Home care agencies that are unable to provide health
insurance or absorb the ACA penalties will have to restrict
their employees to no more than 29 hours per week to ensure
their workers are considered part-time under the ACA. A survey
that NAHC conducted earlier this year showed two-thirds of the
private pay home care companies and three-quarters of the
Medicaid home care companies are expecting to reduce working
hours of staff to avoid the penalties. Millions of home care
workers could find their hours, and thus their earnings, are
cut back at a time when many of them are already struggling.

A good example of what we are talking about is a small home
care agency, Health Force, located just outside of Buffalo that
serves Chairman Collins' district. HealthForce employs more
than 50 workers, but is revenue puts it well below the small
business threshold. The following is a message we received from
its CEO.

``I am Patricia M. Krall-Dwyer. I am CEO of a small woman-
owned business called Health Force. We opened this family
owned, licensed home care agency in 1985 to assist and empower
the elder and disabled communities throughout western New York.
Many of our clients would be confined to a nursing home without
our assistance.

``Health Force is located in Cheektowaga, NY, a suburb of
Buffalo. Our services include nursing, physical therapy, home
health aides, and companion care. A predominant majority of the
populations that we serve receive their care through government
funded programs. Thus, our organization is continually required
to implement and comply with the significant rule and
regulation changes and additions over the past 36 months while
balancing complying with these requirements with cuts to our
firm's reimbursement rates.

``Our small family business is built on the mission of
empowering these communities to age in the residence that they
choose and matching the best people to care for them. Being a
smaller provider allows us to provide a personal touch that our
clients need from such an intimate personal service. Our
elderly and disabled clients get lost in the maze of many of
the large institutional care companies. Clients that have no
advocate for themselves need the small agencies to be there to
``hold their hand'' through the trials and tribulations of
living a life with decreased mobility or mental capacity. We
help them with the everyday tasks you and I take for granted.
The current pace of additional Federal and State unfunded
regulatory mandates are placing family run organizations like
ours at risk of being eliminated while rewarding large
conglomerate organizations.

``With the pending onset of this legislation already
creating massive expenditures not just in the cost of health
insurance but also the additional employees needed to comply
with the numerous mandates contained within the Affordable Care
Act. In particular, the mandate of 30 hours being defined as
full time sets the stage for disaster. Health Force doesn't
sell shoes or serve food, our product is people who take care
of people. So our small business will meet the 50 (FTE)
requirements for the provision of affordable health care
coverage.

``Due to the continuing cuts to our reimbursement rates our
agency has to remain very lean administratively to continue to
operate in this current environment. Increasing the hourly
requirement to 40 hours to be considered a full time employee
will accomplish a number of benefits and allow for the spirit
of the Affordable Care Act to be implemented. By using a 40
hour work week to define full time, our organization would be
able to comply with the mandate without having to add an
additional FTE to enforce compliance and would incent our team
members to increase their hours to access affordable coverage
instead of reducing hours to avoid it. Implementing this change
could reduce our costs by nearly 40%. We do not have other
departments to help us absorb the costs of tracking,
monitoring, yet another individual mandate. We track our
employees for 40 hours for overtime. We track our employees for
40 hours of vacation. This mandate of 30 hours will mean a
massive IT overhaul and redevelopment of compliance processes.
Most small agencies do not have an IT department; it's us on
the Internet trying to figure out how to adjust our computers.

``It truly is small businesses that run this country.
During the last economic period, it was small businesses that
added jobs. It was small business that increased economic
growth. I ask that Congress please not add us to the endangered
species list.''

During consideration of the Senate Budget Resolution, the
Senate adopted an amendment calling for legislation setting a
more sensible definition of a ``full time'' employee for
purposes of the ACA employer obligations and penalties. The
amendment was endorsed by organizations across the political
spectrum. As you know, there are two House bills and a Senate
bill with bipartisan support that would define full time for
purposes of the ACA as 40 hours a week: the Forty Hours Is Full
time Act (H.R. 2988 and S. 1188) and the Saving American
Workers Act (H.R. 2575). We urge the members of this committee
to support this legislation and help advance it to enactment.

Small home care agencies are an essential part of the
network of services that our growing population of elderly and
disabled individuals rely on. The last thing we need is an
obstacle to helping them grow and create much needed jobs.


