- SMALL BUSINESS ADMINISTRATION: MANAGEMENT AND OUTLOOK

[House Hearing, 113 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

SMALL BUSINESS ADMINISTRATION: MANAGEMENT
AND OUTLOOK
=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

COMMITTEE ON SMALL BUSINESS
UNITED STATES
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED THIRTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

HEARING HELD
SEPTEMBER 10, 2014

__________

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Small Business Committee Document Number 113-081
Available via the GPO Website: www.fdsys.gov

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
89-675                      WASHINGTON : 2015
_____________________________________________________________________________________
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing Office,
http://bookstore.gpo.gov. For more information, contact the GPO Customer Contact Center,
U.S. Government Publishing Office. Phone 202-512-1800, or 866-512-1800 (toll-free).
E-mail,
[email protected]
.

HOUSE COMMITTEE ON SMALL BUSINESS

SAM GRAVES, Missouri, Chairman
STEVE CHABOT, Ohio
STEVE KING, Iowa
MIKE COFFMAN, Colorado
BLAINE LUETKEMEYER, Missouri
MICK MULVANEY, South Carolina
SCOTT TIPTON, Colorado
JAIME HERRERA BEUTLER, Washington
RICHARD HANNA, New York
TIM HUELSKAMP, Kansas
DAVID SCHWEIKERT, Arizona
KERRY BENTIVOLIO, Michigan
CHRIS COLLINS, New York
TOM RICE, South Carolina
NYDIA VELAAZQUEZ, New York, Ranking Member
KURT SCHRADER, Oregon
YVETTE CLARKE, New York
JUDY CHU, California
JANICE HAHN, California
DONALD PAYNE, JR., New Jersey
GRACE MENG, New York
BRAD SCHNEIDER, Illinois
RON BARBER, Arizona
ANN McLANE KUSTER, New Hampshire
PATRICK MURPHY, Florida

Lori Salley, Staff Director
Paul Sass Deputy Staff Director
Barry Pineles, Chief Counsel
Michael Day, Minority Staff Director
C O N T E N T S

OPENING STATEMENTS

Page
Hon. Sam Graves..................................................     1
Hon. Nydia Velaazquez............................................     2

WITNESS

Hon. Maria Contreras-Sweet, Administrator, United States Small
Business Administration, Washington, DC........................     3

APPENDIX

Prepared Statement:
Hon. Maria Contreras-Sweet, Administrator, United States
Small Business Administration, Washington, DC..............    22
Questions for the Record:
Questions from Hon. Sam Graves and Responses from Hon. Maria
Contreras-Sweet............................................    25
Question from Hon. Steve Chabot and Responses from Hon. Maria
Contreras-Sweet............................................    31
Question from Hon. Mick Mulvaney and Response from Hon. Maria
Contreras-Sweet............................................    31
Additional Material for the Record:
None.

SMALL BUSINESS ADMINISTRATION: MANAGEMENT AND OUTLOOK

----------

WEDNESDAY, SEPTEMBER 10, 2014

House of Representatives,
Committee on Small Business,
Washington, DC.
The Committee met, pursuant to call, at 1:00 p.m., in Room
2360, Rayburn House Office Building. Hon. Sam Graves [chairman
of the Committee] presiding.
Present: Representatives Graves, Chabot, Leutkemeyer,
Schweikert, Collins, Velaazquez, Schrader, Chu, Hahn, Meng,
Schneider, and McLane Kuster.
Chairman GRAVES. We will call the hearing to order. And I
would like to welcome everybody for being here, or welcome
everybody to the hearing room.
Today we are going to welcome for the first time to the
Committee the Honorable Maria Contrares-Sweet, the 24th
administrator of the Small Business Administration. Since being
confirmed as administrator and a member of President Obama's
cabinet of this year, Administrator Contrares-Sweet has been
responsible for leading the SBA in its wide array of programs.
In addition to overseeing the Agency, including its loan
portfolio worth more than $100 billion, the administrator is
responsible for positioning the SBA to succeed in the years
ahead. And with this hearing, we plan to both examine the
current management of the Agency and develop better insight as
to how the SBA has poised itself to tackle future challenges in
a dynamic, economic climate.
We all know that small businesses are the engines of our
economy and responsible for the creation of two-thirds of all
new jobs, and access to capital is critical to these job
creators. In the last fiscal year, the SBA supported more than
$29 billion in lending to small businesses, and this was led by
the 7(a) Loan Program, which guaranteed over $17 billion in
lending and is on pace to do so again this year.
The SBIC program also had another record year and the 7(a)
and 504 loan programs required less taxpayer dollars to operate
last year than in any since the recession. While there have
been recent successes, fundamental concerns associated with the
SBA's management remain. As the Committee has expressed before,
the Agency continues to create policy without the benefit of
notice and comment rulemaking, thereby ignoring valuable input
of those affected.
For example, in June, an announcement of a new credit
scoring model for loans of under $350,000 was made by an
internal agency notice. Additionally, the Agency has a history
of pursuing initiatives it creates on its own while ignoring
congressional mandated activities. Contracting reforms this
Committee debated and approved and which were signed into law
more than two years ago have not been fully implemented, while
resources instead have been devoted to potentially duplicative,
unauthorized entrepreneurial development programs dreamed up by
the Agency with little public input.
To ensure the Agency is accountable and operating in the
most efficient manner while reducing risk to the taxpayers, it
is critical moving forward that the SBA works with Congress,
complies with the law, and engages the public more effectively.
We are very fortunate again to have the administrator here
with us today, and we look forward to hearing her perspective
and working with her to improve SBA and better serve small
businesses. And I now recognize Ranking Member Velaazquez for
her opening statement.
Ms. VELAAZQUEZ. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
This hearing is timely. While we have not yet seen the pace
of economic growth all of us would like, America's
entrepreneurs are creating jobs, growing, undoubtedly leading
us back to prosperity.
In August, small firms with fewer than 500 employees led
job growth, adding 153,000 positions to the payrolls. At the
same time, early August numbers for the broader economy were
disappointing. Clearly, the outlook for both our recovery and
the small business sector remains mixed. Small businesses do
appear poised to ramp up investment in their operations. A
recent survey found 51 percent of companies with less than $20
million in revenue, plan to increase capital spending during
the next year, an investment that will hopefully fuel further
growth.
Despite positive trends, obstacles remain. Access to
capital is a perennial challenge for entrepreneurs. That
remains the case today. Even now, lending activity has not
returned to pre-recession levels. Commercial loans of less than
$1 million, loans that primarily go to smaller companies,
remain down by about 20 percent, compared with the year leading
up to the financial crisis. At the same time that capital is
tied, two-thirds of small companies report rising expenses in
broadening their businesses. Fully a quarter of firms say
rising costs are the biggest challenge, making clear the need
to expand entrepreneurs' financing options.
Likewise, small businesses continue seeking demand for
their goods and services. This committee has repeatedly
examined how small firms and other disadvantaged businesses can
benefit with the federal government as a customer. While the
federal government may hit its 23 percent small business
contracting goal this year, more can always be done.
In all these areas, the SBA performs a vital mission, and I
just want to take this opportunity to welcome Ms. Contreras-
Sweet to the SBA. I am looking forward to working with you. SBA
credit programs get capital into the hands of small firms by
guaranteeing loans that banks might otherwise be unwilling to
make. Last year, the agency supported $29 billion in loans to
small firms. As commercial credit remains tight for small
companies, it is critical the agency continue helping
entrepreneurs access capital.
Likewise, the agency has a crucial role in ensuring federal
agencies meet their small business contracting goals. While
hitting the 2013 government goal constituted progress, it comes
after small businesses received nothing for many years. The
entire federal government can and must do better. For aspiring
entrepreneurs and early-stage businesses, the SBA is equally
important. Studies have consistently shown that federal
investment in these programs net a positive return for the
taxpayers.
I look forward to hearing how the agency will manage these
programs in the future. The small business administration can
provide an important boost to small companies, and when small
businesses succeed, the broader economy does well. In that
regard, I look forward to hearing the administrator's views on
how the agency is currently functioning, what improvements can
be made, and how she plans to strengthen SBA services to
benefit America's entrepreneurs.
Mr. Chairman, I thank you for this time, and I yield back.
Chairman GRAVES. Okay. Testifying before us today is the
Honorable Maria Contrares-Sweet, who is the administrator, as
we have mentioned, of the Small Business Administration. The
administrator oversees the Agency's loan portfolio, as well as
small business counseling and contracting programs.
Administrator Contreras-Sweet is a successful entrepreneur,
business executive, and former state cabinet official, and
prior to taking over the helm of the SBA, she founded the first
Latino-formed commercial bank in California in more than 35
years and focused on providing access to capital and counseling
to small- and mid-size businesses in Los Angeles. She also
started and ran a venture capital firm that invested in small
businesses.
Administrator, thank you for being here. I look forward to
your testimony.

STATEMENT OF MARIA CONTRERAS-SWEET, ADMINISTRATOR, UNITED
STATES SMALL BUSINESS ADMINISTRATION

Ms. CONTRERAS-SWEET. Thank you so much, Chairman Graves,
and to you, Ranking Member Velaazquez. I am delighted to be
with you and with all of the members of this wonderful
Committee. Thank you for the opportunity to address you today.
Since being confirmed, I have taken time to sit with many
of you, and I have come to know that you not only share my
passion to promote entrepreneurship, but have been actively
engaged in supporting our nation's small businesses. I am
grateful to you.
In my engagement with the chairman and ranking member, I
have seen firsthand the bipartisan commitment of this
Committee, working together to help small businesses. At the
SBA, our team remains focused on our core mission of
facilitating access to capital, counseling, contracts, and
disaster assistance. When meeting with our lenders, clients and
borrowers, I understand their concerns because I have been in
their shoes as an entrepreneur, five years as California's
chief bank regulator, and in starting a community bank. This
guides my belief that SBA can help more businesses create jobs.
I have also learned the significant work that happens in
this Committee and the importance of working with you to make
our programs better and the Agency run more effectively. SBA's
capital is infusing dollars into local markets and improving
our American economy. Small businesses inject capital into the
economy more quickly as they cover payroll, buy equipment, and
acquire local real estate. This is good, so we can stamp more
often ``invented, grown, and made in the USA.''
In the 21st century, the SBA must be as innovative as the
businesses we serve. I want SBA to mean ``Smart, Bold, and
Accessible.'' Implementing smart systems so our agency keeps
pace with the technological advances that change how Americans
conduct their business. Championing bold initiatives to open
new business channels for entrepreneurs within the federal
government, corporate supply chains, and international
commerce. And making our services more accessible to small
business owners, regardless of their gender, race, age, or
neighborhood.
From my conversations with Chairman Graves, and many of
you, we see that the prevailing challenge SBA faces is that our
loan documentation is too complex and labor intensive, forcing
banks to hire specialized staff, contract it out, or worse,
walk away from loans. We cannot afford to lose these partners
and turn job creators away. To combat this, we have launched a
predictive business credit scoring model the SBA has been
developing for more than a decade, combining an entrepreneur's
personal and business credit scores. This new scoring model is
now available to all of our lending partners for loans of
$350,000 or less, making it easier and less time-consuming for
banks to do business with us and for entrepreneurs to do
business with them.
Strong stewardship of our flagship 7(a) program has allowed
us to keep fees at zero on loans less than $150,000, and we
continue to operate it at zero subsidy. The 504 program is
moving closer to zero subsidy. Next year, we will roll out SBA-
1, an interactive, user-friendly platform. It will automate the
uploading of documents and generation of forms, and allow for
electronic signatures. On each 7(a) loan, the SBA will say
banks' hours of processing time and money. The combination of
predictive credit scoring and SBA-1 will incent more banks to
partner with us to promote underserved lending, generating more
loans and igniting more economic activity.
Being bold means opening new markets, both here and abroad.
Over the next decade, new markets around the world are going to
open up, but only 1 percent of small businesses are selling to
them. We are focused on ensuring small businesses have the
financing they need to engage internationally.
I am pleased to announce that for the first time in eight
years the federal government met the 23 percent goal of federal
contracting to small businesses in FY13. This was an important
achievement, but lamentably, we fell short of our women-owned
contracting goal. We must do more to meet it.
The face of entrepreneurship is changing in America. Being
an accessible SBA is key. More of those faces today belong to
women, to Latinos, to African-Americans, Asian-Americans,
Native Americans, our veterans, and our seniors. To this end,
in addition to promoting small dollar loans, we are focused on
building referral networks with micro lenders so new businesses
can get startup capital.
At the SBA, our team is working to find creative ways to
put micro capital into the hands of emerging entrepreneurs.
While this has been a priority from Ms. Velaazquez, we have all
seen too many entrepreneurs with great ideas and products
default because of poor financial planning. We look forward to
working with her, all of you, and our national network of
partners to increase technical assistance to small businesses.
Our guarantees allow lenders to make loans they otherwise would
not.
The SBA fills market gaps. Every dollar we inject into the
economy is capital that would have potentially stayed on the
sidelines. I thank you for all your bipartisan commitment to
small businesses. Mr. Chairman, I am delighted to take your
questions.
Chairman GRAVES. All right. We will start with Mr. Chabot.
Mr. CHABOT. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. We are
honored to have you here this afternoon, Madam Administrator.
And thank you for taking the time to speak with me over the
phone last week. I know that you had an opportunity to learn
about The Brandery in Cincinnati, which is one of the startup
accelerators. It has been quite successful around the country,
and the accelerator fund.
Looking at the most recent metrix for the SBA's Capital
Access Programs, it is clear that the SBIC program is an
important one, and I think the SBIC program fills a critical
gap in the market caused by the financial crisis, and to some
extent, by the burdens on lenders under Dodd-Frank. But many
successful SBICs have hit the family of funds limit, and there
are many more funds that will hit it if they raise another
fund. In other words, if they try to support more small
businesses. So we should encourage investments in small
businesses, not limit it.
The administration has previously been supportive of
raising this limit. Does the administration still support
raising the family of funds limit, and will you work with us to
help pass an increase?
Ms. CONTRERAS-SWEET. Thank you, Mr. Chabot, for that
question.
I think the SBA sees a very interesting tool. Just thinking
and harkening back to my banking days, I can share with you
that sometimes we do not always have enough to collateralize a
loan, and so I find that the notion of providing mezzanine
capital, patient capital, is really key, and I am delighted
that this program is blooming and more and more are hearing
about the program.
I just received another application for a SBIC yesterday,
in fact, so I am pleased to tell you that out of this office,
this Office of Innovation and Investment, we were able to shape
the growth accelerators to which you just referenced. And I am
pleased to tell you that through that program we are incubating
the incubators, because it is important to connect with those
who wanted just some seed capital to get started. I call it
sort of angel financing without taking an equity position. So
overall, I find that this program is very complemented to the
other suite of programs that we have at the SBA, and I am
supportive of it. I have been watching that ceiling, and I can
share with you that at least so far I have not seen a challenge
with it, but others have come to me, and I would be delighted
to come back and work with you to support the ceiling of that
opportunity.
Mr. CHABOT. Yes. We would like to follow up with you and
work with you on the family of funds issue. Thank you.
Let me ask you this. All of our financial institutions play
a role in small business capital formation, and credit unions
are no exception. I happened to speak before the credit union
folks who were in town this week, this morning for a while. In
fact, they experienced a 12 percent growth in small business
loans from last year. Is the SBA trying to collaborate more
with credit unions, and if so, could you elaborate on any of
those efforts?
Ms. CONTRERAS-SWEET. Thank you again. I have to tell you
that I think credit union are quite special. I think they can
play a very important role considering that they complement the
for-profit community of the private lenders which I was a part
of, but I find that their model is quite interesting. And so as
soon as I took office, I reached out to the chairman of the
regulatory body, Debbie Matts, to engage and to discuss what
role--what is the proper role of our credit unions. I was
delighted to see their interest in wanting to engage, and I am
pleased to share with you that just recently we are now in the
throes of actually penning an agreement where we can work more
collaboratively and collegially.
I was just in San Diego meeting with our AARP organization,
which is also a marvelous organization. And so the three of us
are looking to form a troika, if you will. I think credit
unions can play a special role, particularly with respect to
micro lending, and that is the target that we are looking at.
Mr. CHABOT. Thank you.
Ms. CONTRERAS-SWEET. And it would not affect their business
cap, and so I think that it works and it would be complementary
to what they are doing already. Thank you.
Mr. CHABOT. Thank you.
I have got about a minute, so let me just ask you this. You
had mentioned that you are interested in gauging
internationally, meaning trade, I am sure. Do you know if the
president is going to expend any political capital anytime in
the near future to push some of his allies in the House on TPA,
the Trade Promotion Authority, and therefore put us on the road
to TPP in the Pacific area, or TTIP in Europe, because
international trade is absolutely critical, the economy, and it
is kind of a heavy lift, and we have not really seen much
effort there by the administration at this point. Not you, but
your boss.
Ms. CONTRERAS-SWEET. Thank you. Thank you for that.
I have to tell you that as we see that in the next 10 years
we are going to see about a billion new consumers in the middle
class join the ranks of the middle class, and so it is
important that we keep a keen eye on the international
opportunity. Right now, 95 percent of the world's consumers are
outside of the U.S., and only 1 percent of small businesses are
partaking of that opportunity. So I think it is important for
us to look at ways in which we help the small business adapt
and grow into international strategies.
So to that end, you know that we have the STEP program that
we use. We have, of course, our USEAC centers where we provide
services throughout the country. We work collegially with
Congress, with the Ex-Im Bank, with all the others, and the
president has indicated that he supports TPP and asked us to
get behind it as well. I cannot tell you particularly exactly
his strategy, but I can tell you that he stands ready to do
what he can to encourage small businesses to partake of the
enormous international opportunity.
Mr. CHABOT. Thank you very much.
Chairman GRAVES. Ms. Velaazquez?
Ms. VELAAZQUEZ. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And welcome again,
Ms. Contreras-Sweet.
Ms. CONTRERAS-SWEET. Thank you.
Ms. VELAAZQUEZ. You mentioned, and I mentioned in my
opening statement, that access to capital is still a challenge
for a great number of entrepreneurs. And one of the sectors in
our economy that is facing serious issues in accessing capital
are women entrepreneurs. When the Small Business Jobs Act was
passed in 2010, we were told that we needed larger loans to
help spur the economy. However, lending volume to women-owned
firms actually decreased in that time. More shockingly, larger
loans seem to have disproportionately benefited male-led firms.
The gap in average loan size reached almost 50 percent in 2011
and remains above 35 percent today. How can we tell women
entrepreneurs that the SBA is there for them when such large
discrepancies exist, and what do you intend to do about it?
Ms. CONTRERAS-SWEET. Thank you for asking me a question
that is very important to me personally, and I started a
financial institution because I care deeply about making sure
that all people have access to capital in a very consultative
and respectful fashion.
So, to that end, on day one, when I inquired about what the
opportunities were, I have learned as a banker that there is no
one silver bullet for any target market. We have to make sure
that we have a continuum of capital available so that as we
grow, that the SBA can continue to be there, bearing in mind
that the SBA is not there to compete with the private capital
markets; we are only there to fill the market gaps.
And so in that regard, we have, I would say, a triple,
quadruple prong strategy. First, it is the way we consult our
women. We have Women Business Centers throughout the country
that are helping them understand how to build a sold, strategic
plan. You all know that you gave us an important tool then in
terms of once they have a plan, they need to get work. You gave
us an important tool, and that is you said to us a 5 percent
goal on contracting. We are working on that. We have not
reached that goal, but I think we have an opportunity to do
more.
One of the first things I did as soon as I took office, my
initial first trip, was to launch a ChallengeHER event to help
the word get out and also to promote more matchmaking
opportunities. But with respect to capital, all of our efforts
have been to make sure that all of the stream of capital is
available to everybody in that regard. And I can tell you that
so many bankers always say that they want to get the bigger
loans out, and we have to make sure that we are pushing forward
on the small dollar loan.
So you probably have heard, I know that you have been
support of the fact that we have zeroed out fees on loans under
$150,000. We are getting the word out through our micro lending
program about that, and we are looking at technical assistance,
which I know is so vital. And then, of course, the system that
we just recently put in place around the predictive scoring
will help community banks get more loans out to women as well.
Ms. VELAAZQUEZ. Administrator, I would like to hear at
least one or two specific steps that you intend to take in
order to make sure that when you come to us and ask to increase
the cap, that you can put more money out there. That we benefit
a sector that is growing, because we know that women-owned
businesses are growing faster than any other group within the
economy. But yet, they are facing problems in accessing
capital. So I would like to hear that you are going to revise,
look, the 7(a) program, the mission of it when it was created
was to put money into the hands of able and credit worthy
entrepreneurs that for whatever reason had problems accessing
capital through traditional banks and traditional lending
institutions. So I would just like for you to go back and
review the data and see what specific steps you will take.
Now I would like to ask you about Super Storm Sandy,
because this is close to home. It happened in New York and the
Tri-State area. Right after Katrina, we revamped the disaster
program, and we provided tools that gave the flexibility for
SBA to act quickly and swiftly and provide a system that
homeowners and small business needed in a timely manner so that
we could save those businesses that were impacted by any
disaster, any natural disaster.
Here we are. The OIG is going to come out with a report on
the response of the disaster loan program for Sandy, but what
we know is that once again, the disaster program has been
exposed, and it shows the shortcomings as long processing times
averaged 46 days for small businesses. The budget shows that
SBA has requested $186.9 million for disaster administration
next year.
In what ways will this funding be used to reduce processing
delays so that businesses and homeowners can get funds more
quickly?
Ms. CONTRERAS-SWEET. Thank you again, Congressman, for that
question as well.
Let me just say to you that I cannot speak with great
specificity about what happened in the past, but what I can
tell you is that when we heard about the disaster in the State
of Washington, I flew out there immediately to meet with all
the people in the Oso, Darrington, and Arlington communities,
and I can share with you that within 24 hours of hearing that
the disaster was declared, our people were on the beat. And
within a few days, money was out the door. And so I think that
our systems continue to be refined and continue to be evolve,
and will be strengthened over time. I am now on it, and I am
delighted to tell you that I think we are making great
progress.
Moreover, I just spent yesterday with those who process our
loans to find ways in which we can develop organizational
systems, to make sure that we are processing them more
efficiently, and form a more informed basis.
Ms. VELAAZQUEZ. Well, I would like for you to come back to
the committee or send us an answer to my question because we
provided specific areas that you needed to improve, and to
execute those that were continued within the disaster program
legislation that we passed. And some of those tools that were
included were not used, and I would like to know that, in fact,
you have implemented them so that the next time you are ready
to answer and provide the assistance that those businesses
need.
About Washington, I do not know. I hear you, but the
numbers will tell us whether or not you were able to provide
the loans that those businesses needed, because in New York,
many of those businesses are not in the system today. Studies
show that when a disaster loan strikes, it will take--if you do
not provide a response, if you do not provide the system that
they need within the four weeks after a disaster, the
probability of those businesses not succeeding and getting back
on track are very, very high. So after Katrina, now Sandy, I
hope, and I pray that we will not face any other natural
disaster. But we cannot fool ourselves. We know that it will
happen again, and we want to make sure that you have everything
you need to have in place so that the administration is able to
provide the system--that we promised, that this government
promised.
Ms. CONTRERAS-SWEET. I just wanted to add, Ms. Velaazquez,
that my mother-in-law experienced Northridge earthquake, and I
have experienced the riots of Los Angeles. And I want to tell
you that disasters are very important to me. I have met with
our district offices. I have gone to the sites, and I track our
numbers every day. And I am working with our department
directly to assure that every one of our programs is well
executed and on-time, and on-target budget-wise.
So I thank you for your concern to this topic. I want to
assure you that we are on it. Thank you.
Chairman GRAVES. Mr. Luetkemeyer.
Mr. LUETKEMEYER. Madam Administrator, I will take a moment
to follow up on a letter that I sent to you, me and my
colleagues as well, to the Agency several months ago. The
letter addressed changes to the SOP 50-10F, which states we
still have some concerns about with the overall policy, but I
have heard some assurances from SBA that the policy is
currently being amended. I am pleased to know that. What I am
following up on today is how the changes came to be, which is
without any public input.
According to the regulations, it is required to obtain
comment from the public on its rules, and given that fact, many
of the standard operating procedures governing the loan
programs are actually rules under the guise of standard
operating procedures. What actions are you taking to ensure
that the public can offer comment on changes to SBA standard
operating procedures?
Ms. CONTRERAS-SWEET. Thank you again for that question. We
are examining all ways in which the public can engage the SBA
while using the usual governmental procedures as well as we are
deploying smart systems to make sure that people can
communicate with us in the current ways of technology today.
And so, for example, we are now launching more initiatives
around connecting through the social networks. Our people are
getting out in the field more. We are directing them to get out
and to do front-end conversations so that we can be proactive
in the community. And I want to ensure you that----
Mr. LUETKEMEYER. Let me interrupt just a second here.
Are you advertising this so people who have concerns about
it, people who will be in the process of utilizing these
services can find this opportunity for themselves? Or is it
just stuck on a computer site somewhere and you have got to go
digging, digging, digging before you can find it?
Ms. CONTRERAS-SWEET. Thank you for that comment.
No, the Agency has been very proactive in connecting. We
have so many outlets to engage the outlet. One, we meet
regularly with the NAGGL partners, our government guarantee
lending partners. We meet with people through our Women
Business Centers, through our SCORE partners, through our
Veterans Business Outreach Centers. Our regional administrators
are out in the field. Our district directors are out in the
field, and our key program lead, regularly hold comment
opportunities for those who are affected by any of our
programs, to be able to provide feedback and input.
Mr. LUETKEMEYER. Well, the concern is that it did not
happen properly on this situation that we tried to address with
the letter, and you are assuring me that that is not going to
happen again.
Ms. CONTRERAS-SWEET. That is correct, sir.
Mr. LUETKEMEYER. Following up, in your statement you say
that on each 7(a) loan, SBA-1 will save banks hours of
processing time and money. Do you have a study to show how many
hours it is going to save?
Ms. CONTRERAS-SWEET. I can share with you, Mr. Chairman,
that--excuse me, Mr. Congressman--that as a banker, I can tell
you that first and foremost what we have to do as a banker is
accept these loan documents through a fax machine, and we
communicate with our client through a fax machine. And so when
you consider the smart technology that is available today, it
is important to sort of blow up the fax machines and allow the
SBA to be current with----
Mr. LUETKEMEYER. Madam Administrator----
Ms. CONTRERAS-SWEET. Yes?
Mr. LUETKEMEYER. As a banker, I am telling you, asking you,
where is the information to back up what you said? I deal in
facts. This is a statement that should have facts, studies,
something backing up. I am asking you have you got a study that
shows how many hours you are going to save. Yes or no, do you
have a study?
Ms. CONTRERAS-SWEET. Mr. Chairman, we do have an
understanding. We have a very clear understanding that when you
cut out paperwork and extra visits----
Mr. LUETKEMEYER. So in other words, you do not have----
Ms. CONTRERAS-SWEET. And then what you do is when you
launch a pilot, then you track the metrics and then we will be
able to come back and report to you.
Mr. LUETKEMEYER. So we have not tracked the metrics yet?
Ms. CONTRERAS-SWEET. We have not launched the program yet.
Mr. LUETKEMEYER. So you do not know how much you are going
to save yet?
Ms. CONTRERAS-SWEET. We will track the metrics.
Mr. LUETKEMEYER. It may cost more hours.
Ms. CONTRERAS-SWEET. Mr. Congressman, I have not seen a
program that when you take out steps and steps and take out a
lot of paperwork, that it ends up costing more. I just have not
seen that in my experience.
Mr. LUETKEMEYER. Madam Administrator, you are talking with
somebody who was with the government here. We deal with this
every day. Every day our constituents of inundated with more
regulations, more work. You take off two regulations, you put
on five. It happens all the time. And here you are telling us
this is a wonderful program. I hope it works. All I am asking
for is documentation that can prove what you just said. And you
cannot do it.
Please do not come to this Committee and make statements if
you cannot back them up. That is my point. And it is a pretty
simple request here. It is made on page two, the bottom of two
here. I see my time is up.
Ms. CONTRERAS-SWEET. As an experienced banker, I can assure
you it is going to take--it is going to take some savings, and
it will be more efficient. And I will be delighted to buy you
lunch if that does not happen, Mr. Congressman.
Mr. LUETKEMEYER. Madam Administrator, as a fellow banker, I
can tell you this stuff causes he headaches, heartburn, and
costs me lots of money because it takes lots and lots of time
of my people in my business to adjudicate and work with.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Ms. CONTRERAS-SWEET. I am hearing great enthusiasm from our
banking partners. Thank you so much for your support.
Chairman GRAVES. Ms. Chu?
Ms. CHU. Administrator Contreras-Sweet, welcome.
Ms. CONTRERAS-SWEET. Thank you.
Ms. CHU. I have questions about the SBA 7(a) Guaranty Loan
Program and the 504 Loan Program. I know they both fill
critical needs in the market for small businesses that cannot
access traditional lending sources. It is important that these
loans reach underserved communities and the small business
owners that need them the most. So my question has to do with
whether the program is reaching its intended target. Can you
tell me about the lending demographics of the 7(a) loan
portfolios of the lenders, such as the types of loans being
administered and what types of communities have been receiving
the loans for the past two years?
Ms. CONTRERAS-SWEET. Thank you for that question. I am
pleased to say that what we are learning in the loans under
$150,000 are dramatically up. We are seeing that the women
loans are up, the African-American loans are up over 100
percent. I believe the women loans were up 35 percent. Every
single target population has gone up since we have zeroed out
fees on the 7(a) loan on the community advantage loan. So we
need to continue to push that because I think that that is
where so much of our diversity is looking for capital at the
lower end just to start their business and to grow it, but we
need to also continue to provide the continued continuum of
capital so that is they grow and scale up. They also have the
alternative products available to them.
Ms. CHU. And can you submit for the record information on
whether any of the top 7(a) lenders have internal loan policies
that restrict who gets a 7(a) loan? For example, do any of
these lenders not make loans under a specific size or only make
loans available to certain industries?
Ms. CONTRERAS-SWEET. I cannot speak for every financial
institution, but clearly different programs, different banks
have different programs. We are encouraging all of our banking
partners to partake more and more of the SBA, and that is part
of the work that I have underway. I am also expanding, as I
mentioned earlier, that I think it is also important to
continue to engage the credit unions, and I also think that it
is important that as we think about the continuum of capital,
that we also study and examine what role the SBA can play, if
any, in helping direct also those seeking to have more access
to capital to the alternative financing channels.
I was interested, for example, yesterday you probably heard
that the Apple Company just launched a pay program, Apple Pay.
And so all of those, when you see that Square launched a
lending program, when you see that Amazon launched a lending
program. So all of these have to be studied so that we
understand how the SBA plays in that community to make sure
that we are complementary to what is taking place in America.
Ms. CHU. And so we could get information such as that?
Ms. CONTRERAS-SWEET. We would be delighted to look into
what we can offer you, and we would be delighted to reach out
to our financial partners to see what we can get you. That is
important data, and we track it internally, and I would be
delighted to see what we can share with you just honoring the
Privacy Act and all the other things that we have to honor, but
I am delighted to share with you the data that we are tracking.
Ms. CHU. Very good.
The SBA 504 Loan Refinancing Program helped many small
business owners survive the recession and go on to create more
jobs and bolster the economy. However, the program expired in
2012. In the last year of the program, over 2,400 small
businesses benefitted from refinancing over $2.2 billion. I
introduced H.R. 1240, the Commercial Real Estate and Economic
Development Act (CREED), which would help reauthorize this
program. At a time when our economy is still recovering, do you
think extending the SBA's 504 Loan Refinancing Program would be
beneficial to small business owners?
Ms. CONTRERAS-SWEET. I had some knowledge of when it was
first launched the first time, the first go-around, and I can
share with you that I thought that it was not left exactly, you
know, in a coherent way at least to us in Los Angeles, and so
it took a little while for it to take hold and to get started,
but once it did I thought it was an important tool, and I would
be supportive of a 504 Refi continuance, and I think, in fact,
we are hoping that everything will go well and you will see it
in our budget soon.
Ms. CHU. Very good.
Ms. CONTRERAS-SWEET. Thank you.
Ms. CHU. You referred a little bit earlier about the goal
for women-owned businesses, and I was glad to join you at the
ChallengeHER event in Los Angeles to help women-owned
businesses get contracts with the federal government. And
congratulations on getting the 23 percent contracting goal for
small business met this year. However, the contracting goal for
women-owned business is 5 percent, and yet, women only got 4.3
percent of all federal contracts. And that means that they
missed out on $2 billion worth of federal contracts. What can
we do to finally get to the 5 percent?
Ms. CONTRERAS-SWEET. You are right to hone in on that
challenge. Women represent half of our population, and it was
not, you know, the old days where we always had, you know, an
alternative as to whether we worked or not. So many of us now
are the sole providers for our families, so this is a very
important body of work, and I can share with you that we will
continue to reach out through all of the channels that the SBA
has. Again, through the vast network of Small Business
Development Centers to the Women Business Centers. But it is
also important that we have an extra tool at every buying
activity. When you are there at the ground at the actual buying
activity and that buying officer has an important tool that he
has for other HUBZone and for our vets, and that is sole-source
authority, we are seeking sole-source authority for women as
well so that they can be at the same level and be parity with
other disadvantaged groups. And I have also tasked the SBA with
expediting the way in which we conduct the study to find if
women are found to be underserved in more of the NICs codes
because we think that if that study proves to be that they are
underrepresented in other categories, then that is another tool
that the SBA and its officers can use in the field.
Ms. CHU. Thank you. I yield back.
Chairman GRAVES. Mr. Schweikert?
Mr. SCHWEIKERT. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Madam Administrator, and forgive me because I am harkening
back to I think one of my very first hearings sitting on this
Committee a couple years ago on the discussion of the adoption
of technology for loan management, for loan servicing, for
participating lenders' application process. Was it not supposed
to come online two years ago? Some of that moving from a
proprietary system to sort of more of an open source system? I
mean, where are you at right now technology-wise? And why a
couple years behind.
Ms. CONTRERAS-SWEET. Yeah. Thank you so much, sir, for that
question.
Technology is key in executing what we do when the SBA is
interacting with financial institutions that all are deploying
some of the smartest systems America has. You recall when--at
least when I was growing up--I can speak for myself--you would
go into a bank to actually deposit your check so that you can--
--
Mr. SCHWEIKERT. I have been involved in the technology side
of collections, so more just let us do technology talk instead
of policy talk.
Ms. CONTRERAS-SWEET. That is what I was referring to.
So in terms of policy, I can share with you----
Mr. SCHWEIKERT. Why the two-year delay.
Ms. CONTRERAS-SWEET. So I can share with you that we feel
that technology can help us in many ways be efficient and
effective. With respect to the question that you asked----
Mr. SCHWEIKERT. I am desperately trying not to be rude. I
understand that is the same discussion we had a couple of years
ago. Why the two-year delay in what was supposed to be the
rollout?
Ms. CONTRERAS-SWEET. Of the seven tranches of work, they
have now been all completed, but what I wanted to share with
you, sir, is that at least in my view, as I see it, it is
important that we continue to evolve technology. So I would
hope that the SBA never sees that their work in technology is
complete.
Mr. SCHWEIKERT. Okay. So a quick checklist. So loan
servicing and management is now no longer on a proprietary
system but on a system that all participating lenders have
trackability authority through the web; right?
Ms. CONTRERAS-SWEET. All of the seven subprograms under the
LMAS have now all been completed.
Mr. SCHWEIKERT. And so if I am my community bank or credit
union, I can now do my loan applications and my filings all
through the web now?
Ms. CONTRERAS-SWEET. As soon as we complete the SBA-1,
which will be in Q2, then we will be able to, as I was
outlining earlier, we will be able to do everything online with
respect to the seven----
Mr. SCHWEIKERT. And the two-year delay on that is just,
what is it, technical issues? Contracting issues? Security
issues? Any idea what drove that?
Ms. CONTRERAS-SWEET. I can tell you that at this point they
are all complete, and I can tell you that technology is an
ongoing opportunity for us to continue to be efficient.
Mr. SCHWEIKERT. And technology will always be an ongoing
opportunity. The two-year delay was because of what?
Ms. CONTRERAS-SWEET. Mr. Congressman, what I can tell you
is that we will continue to evolve it, and I hope that
technology is never a completed project.
Mr. SCHWEIKERT. If you have one of your staffers here who
actually speaks technology, I would love a response actually to
that question to be helpful.
There is a conceptual enlightenment because I think this is
a great opportunity particularly for minority and underserved
populations and everything out there, and even another article
from two days ago that one of the earlier executives of Google
and others are moving into crowd-based funding, crowd-source
lending. It is almost a peer-to-peer type lending, particularly
I know our ranking member here has always had an interesting
sort of the micro lending world, and many of us have had--how
bureaucratic, you know, if you have ever done an SBA loan from
walking in the door and been handed the paperwork----
Ms. CONTRERAS-SWEET. Yeah, it takes your breath away.
Mr. SCHWEIKERT. How does the world change for the SBA when
I have dozens of peer-to-peer lendings out there now who are
doing almost a direct loan environment? Does the SBA--have you
looked at the technology? Remember you were just talking
about----
Ms. CONTRERAS-SWEET. Sure.
Mr. SCHWEIKERT.--the future and what is happening around
us, and the cost of those funds seems to be coming in very
competitive.
Ms. CONTRERAS-SWEET. Indeed.
Mr. SCHWEIKERT. As to the lack of staff and bureaucracy and
their technological way of doing credit modeling. Has that
changed the world of access to capital?
Ms. CONTRERAS-SWEET. I think it does. I absolutely think
that these are all very encouraging developments. When I met
with Accion, Kiva Zip, Cabbage, PayPal, Square, all of these I
think are wonderful developments, and I think it is important
for the SBA to examine, as I was referencing earlier, that we
examine what proper role we have in understanding which ones
are working effectively. Again, track their performance
accountability, and then be able to properly counsel small
businesses so they can navigate through those strategies.
Mr. SCHWEIKERT. Would there ever become a time if certain
categories had very egalitarian access to capital because--I am
actually, I have a couple apps now where you can actually, on
Crowd Source, loans for your small business right off your
phone--that the SBA would say this market now is appropriately
served. Our needy populations are receiving; that the SBA will
come here to Congress and say, ``Job well done. The market
found a way to serve this. We are now going to go someplace
else.''
Ms. CONTRERAS-SWEET. I think your question is a really
important one, and that is why as soon as I arrived at SBA I
launched the ``Smart, Bold, and Accessible'' initiative,
because I think it is important for Congress to allow us to be
flexible, to allow us to evolve, to make sure that we are
addressing the emerging technological advances, not just to
provide access to capital but for counseling. We have
international opportunities that we can also use technology
for, and so I think that these will all present new
opportunities for the SBA.
Mr. SCHWEIKERT. And forgive me, Mr. Chairman, for going
over the time. It is an area of personal interest.
Thank you, Madam Administrator.
Chairman GRAVES. Ms. Hahn?
Ms. HAHN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member.
Thank you, Madam Administrator Contreras-Sweet for being
here today. I am very pleased that you are in this position. I
think that you come to this position at a great time. We are
coming out of the recession. Small businesses are becoming
successful. They are growing. You and I both grew up in Los
Angeles, and I know you were in Los Angeles just recently
talking about some of your initiatives. And a lot of my
questions have been asked, but I did want to, just a couple of
things, one was just to hear you talk a little bit more about
what we can do to reach out to our women-owned and minority
businesses. I know before the recession, women-owned small
businesses were receiving 40 percent of the SBA loans. Now they
are receiving just 16 percent. African-American entrepreneurs
have gone from receiving 11 percent of the SBA loans to just
2.3 percent. So I do not like that trend, so I would love to
hear--I do think some of the changes that you have
implemented--not charging the fees for the loans, is going to
be valuable, and I know you have already seen an impact from
that. I am wondering if enough changes have been made or are
there other things that we should look at changing? And then I
meet with small businesses all the time. It is one of the
things that I do.
And by the way, you have some great folks on the ground in
Los Angeles. Victor Parker is a star, and he has worked with me
on every roundtable I have had. We have done stuff with the
Port of Los Angeles, connecting our small businesses with the
international trade industry, and he is terrific.
The other complaint that I get from a lot of my small
businesses, particularly some of the new startups, not really
clear on how they can access small business resources. They are
not really sure what the SBA is or does. How do they access
them? Is there a better way that we can outreach to our small
businesses, particularly the new ones? And what is available?
Because listening to you, there is a ton of stuff that is
available and innovative and creative that you are really going
to be implementing, and how do we get that word out to the
businesses? So two things, women, minority-owned businesses,
and then could we do a better job of outreach?
Ms. CONTRERAS-SWEET. Thank you. And it is good to see you
again, too. Thank you for your support while we were in Los
Angeles.
I can share with you that one of the things, and I think it
addresses also the earlier question, and that is how do we
evolve as an organization to meet the challenges of today's
economy? And so to that end, that is why I launched the
``Smart, Bold, and Accessible'' initiative. We are examining
the ways in which we can modernize the Agency to make sure that
we are current and relevant in today's technological pace. And
so in that regard, we are examining all the smart systems that
are currently out there in the private marketplace and to
understand how we can complement those systems in SBA. Who are
they reaching effectively and who are they not, and where
should we be to make sure that we are filling that gap. So that
is an important role.
In that regard, Madam Congresswoman, what we did is
launched a program that we call VERA VSIP, which is where we
offer those who have served the SBA so well, so eloquently, and
have helped to create two out of three new jobs that we are
finding in America, but some of them are saying it is time for
me to return and spend more time with my family. And so in that
regard, we are offering some of our employees early retirement.
What that will allow us to do is to reexamine how we deploy our
personnel to more effectively and strategically respond to
today's and tomorrow's challenges. So that is one. How we align
our----
Ms. HAHN. You better not redeploy Victor Parker.
Ms. CONTRERAS-SWEET. Well, and to that point, I have
traveled now the country and meeting with our district offices,
and in each district I hear a story about how special our
district offices are, so I am delighted that you had that kind
of experience.
The second thing that I wanted to say is for our women,
Native-American, African-Americans, Latinos, and women--excuse
me, and Asian-Americans, we need to make sure that we are
accessible to all, and that is why the SB, and the A stands for
accessible. And so again, how do we use technology? How do we
outreach to these communities? How do we make sure that our
products are being responsive? Setting our fees at zero for
loans under $150,000 will help and go a long way. Tracking and
meeting regularly with the financial institutions, both the
private and the public sector, the credit unions who have now
again we have reached out to them and they have accepted the
challenge of doing more of the small dollar loans, and by that,
Ms. Congresswoman, I am speaking to the loans under $50,000,
which is where many women who just want to start their business
want to be. And so I am focused on the three initiatives--
access to capital through every channel that is available to
the SBA. I am committed to making sure that through our vast
network, national network of Small Business Development Centers
and all of the other partners; that we are reaching out to
women to talk to them about the strategies, to make sure that
they have a proper plan in place for their optimal success. And
the third piece of it is just in general to make sure that we
are getting contracting opportunities to women in three
avenues. First, with the federal government. The U.S. is the
largest procurer in the world. We want to make sure that we
meet the goal of 5 percent with women. Second, we want to make
sure that we are working to make sure that more women benefit
from the private sector supply chain. To that end, the
president announced a 15-day pay period. So in 15 days, the
federal government pays small businesses. For me, having been
in a small business, and having a large corporation hold me up
for 90 days, I will tell you, 15 day is sweet music to me. That
was an important tool. And so we are challenging the private
sector in their supply chain to follow our lead. And the third
is how we help small businesses partake of the largest growing
market, and that is outside of the U.S.
Ms. HAHN. Thank you.
I yield back.
Chairman GRAVES. Ms. Meng?
Ms. MENG. Thank you, Chairman Graves and Ranking Member
Velaazquez. And I, too, want to congratulate you, Madam
Administrator, and thank you for the tremendous job that you
have been doing, and especially in terms of outreach since day
one.
A few months ago, we had a field hearing with our
Subcommittee with Chairman Richard Hanna of the Subcommittee
and our Ranking Member Nydia Velaazquez in our district in New
York, and talked a lot about the issues that a lot of minority-
and women-owned businesses face in terms of accessing capital
and lack of outreach. And I do want to thank the SBA members of
your team for coming to our district recently to explain the
new lending program to a lot of our local community banks,
especially the banks that serve minorities. So I just want to
emphasize that whatever we can do here in Congress to continue
to spread the word and help with outreach I think will continue
to be very important.
My question is actually about veterans. I know that the SBA
has a Boots to Business pilot program that so far has relied
heavily on Internet-based video instruction, and I just wanted
to know have you found that to be effective? And what is the
rationale for relying on online training modules as opposed to
maybe person-to-person?
Ms. CONTRERAS-SWEET. Thank you. I think that is an
important question. I cannot tell you how proud I am to know
that the SBA is connected with those who are defending our
freedoms and upholding our values. And so it is important that
the SBA continue to refine and continue to expand the Boots-to-
Business Program. It is largely electronic because we are in
all the world installations, and so this works so that first I
think while people are still in-service, they are trying to
examine what they are going to do next, and many times their
first--and appropriately so, their first thought is how do I
just get home and be with my family again.
And so you want to just begin to give them some exposure so
the first is, you know, a couple hour video and then an eight-
hour program, and then we finally launch into the fuller
program. And so it is an important, you know, it is important
to allow them to ease into the thought, to explore
entrepreneurship, but once they are back at home and back in
their communities, then we have the full panoply of programs
that the SBA offers. Our VBOC centers, the Veterans Business
Outreach Centers, the SBCDs, our SCORE partners are out there,
and the SCORE partners often go to your place of business to
give you personal advice. And so I would hope that once they
are back in their community that they can partake in the full
panoply of offerings that the SBA community has in the
communities.
Ms. MENG. Thank you. I yield back.
Ms. CONTRERAS-SWEET. I should just add one more that I am
also really proud of because, you know, I know that you also
care about women, and so marketing is becoming increasingly
digitized, you know, where you have to make it more and more
personal. And so we learn from our women armed forces folk that
they are very interested in having their own program. And so we
launched a specialized training that we call VWISE, Veterans
Women Inspiring the Spirit of Entrepreneurship. And I was in
New York to help launch that program, and there was just such a
great dynamic to see that taking place. That program was done
in partnership with Syracuse University, which also has more
services there available for them.
Chairman GRAVES. Ms. Velaazquez?
Ms. VELAAZQUEZ. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Administrator, in the Small Business Goaling Report
released by your agency for the last fiscal year, it shows that
the overall small business goal of 23 percent was finally
achieved. And some of the members made reference to that. But
when you look at the list that is included in your report, I
would like to ask if you are aware that Northrup Grumman,
Raytheon, and Chevron have been included as small business
contracts by some of the agencies. I do not know how. I do not
know when they became small businesses, but I am asking you,
were you aware that agencies were taking credit toward their
small business contracting goal by the fact that they included
contracts that were given to larger companies?
Ms. CONTRERAS-SWEET. Yes, Madam Ranking Member.
In reviewing the list, I had a similar question, and when I
took a deep dive to understand what the answer was to that
important question, what I learned is that we have a rule in
place that says that once you get in a contract with
government, that you are given five years. And so if a large
company acquires a small business, then it is grandfathered in
for a number of years. And so that is one of the instances that
we identified.
But I can assure you, and the really important thing is
that the SBA has disbarred more companies in the last four
years than has happened in the last 10 years combined. So I
want to assure you that the program is working and that we are
delighted that we have met the goal and that now small
businesses are getting their fair share.
Ms. VELAAZQUEZ. So will you make a commitment with this
committee that you are going to go back and assess and review
every contract that was given to these companies so that you
can assure us that they are not in violation of the contracting
goals to small businesses and the numbers are not being cooked
by some of the agencies?
Ms. CONTRERAS-SWEET. I can share with you that the
community has strong policing activities.
Ms. VELAAZQUEZ. No, you do not, or maybe now, but
administrator, let us be clear, the GAO conducted an
investigation, and we held a hearing when that report was
released. And what it showed is that many contracts that were
intended to go to small businesses were given to large
companies, and that is in violation. So I just want to make
sure that we do not ask the GAO to go and do another
investigation and it is going to show again that the proper
oversight within the agency is not in place, and therefore,
this kind of situation happens again. That is all I am asking
you. Because at the end, those small business contractors that
are playing by the rules are the ones losing out.
Ms. CONTRERAS-SWEET. I can share with you that I am keenly
committed to making sure that small businesses get their fair
share. The president asked me to do three things: run an
effective SBA, be a voice for small businesses, and help take
them to the next level. In that regard, we want to make sure
that they get the 23 percent that they deserve, and I consider
that, by the way, a floor, not a ceiling. And so in that
regard, we are amping up. We are challenging more. I can tell
you that our people are motivated and they come in and they
tell me about, you know, what they are doing out there to make
sure that they are speaking up and fighting for small
businesses. We pass hundreds of thousands of contracts, and so
generally, the system is working, and I am proud to say that
our team is on it. There are good cops on the beat. And the
policing mechanisms that we have in place are working. And as I
said, we have disbarred more abusers in the last four years,
and the penalties are stiff, and we will continue to convey the
message that we are going to have a zero-tolerance policy.
Ms. VELAAZQUEZ. Thank you.
Chairman GRAVES. Mr. Collins?
Mr. COLLINS. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you for coming in today. I guess my question is
whenever I hear about a new program like SBA-1, on the one hand
that is good news. The only concern would be in the past--we
will use the word ``past''--the GAO and the SBA's inspector
general both have, on occasion, found some problems with the
SBA's management of information technology. So now as we are
looking at a new program, can you share with us some of your
thoughts on how you are going to make sure that is integrated,
is seamless, works well, and motherhood and apple pie?
Ms. CONTRERAS-SWEET. Thank you so much, Mr. Collins.
Again, I think technology can be a very important tool for
us, and that is why I launched at the Agency an initiative that
I call ``Smart, Bold, and Accessible,'' which really refers--
the underpinning really is how we modernize the SBA, and so I
think technology investments can be key in helping us become
more efficient and effective throughout the system. SBA-1 will
be complementary and the good news is that it is adding
functionality from an existing contract that we already have,
and so we are able to continue to manage all of our programs to
make sure that they are seamless, and I am delighted to say
that I look forward to coming back and sharing with you how
effective the SBA-1 will become. We think that it is going to
increase lending in our 7(a), our core lending product, and
allow more people to get these loans that otherwise would be
sitting on the sidelines.
Mr. COLLINS. So did part of this come from the lenders or
from the borrowers where they would say another vehicle like
this could be useful? Is this, you know, if I am a small
business, am I going to go to SBA-1 to initially apply for a
loan, or is it something that I am going to apply to my lender
and he is going to use SBA-1?
Ms. CONTRERAS-SWEET. Thank you for that clarifying
question. It is a platform that we are setting up for our
lending partners, and so we process our loans through our
lending partners. So what the client will see is just a much
cleaner interface and more important, they will be able to do
e-consent. So many times when you are an entrepreneur and you
are fighting, you are the CMO and you are the CFO and the CFO
and the CEO; you do not always have time to go into the
financial institution. So now this will be able to all be done
online and we will have the e-signatures, the e-verify that you
see on other products in the commercial space, and so they will
have a seamless interaction with their financial institution,
and that institution will do the same with us through this
platform.
Mr. COLLINS. So would the borrower initiate his loan
request through SBA1, the borrower?
Ms. CONTRERAS-SWEET. No, I am sorry. I apologize if I did
not clarify. It will still be the bank that will initiate the
loan, but they will now be able to interact with their borrower
on line, and the lender will also be able to interact with the
SBA now online.
Mr. COLLINS. So it generates out of the lender, but the
small business can be using it as well as the portal of
information?
Ms. CONTRERAS-SWEET. Yes. Financial institutions already
have largely the e-consent in these tools. The challenge has
been that SBA has not been able to interact with the
institution online. And now this will facilitate that
intermediary role that the bank relies upon. They will now be
able to also be online. So most financial institutions have
already had this technology. Now the SBA is catching up.
Mr. COLLINS. Well, I am glad to hear you are aware of what
we would be asking, which is about how it actually rolls out,
and I am confident you will be reporting back very good
results. Thank you very much.
Ms. CONTRERAS-SWEET. I look forward to it, sir.
Mr. COLLINS. I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman GRAVES. I just have one quick request. Back in
March, we sent a letter to the SBA. We were asking for about
145 separate requests on information concerning the process by
which the SBA reviews franchise agreements, and at that time
the Agency said that they needed to address some concerns or
some issues that they had raised in the letter, and so I agreed
to delay that, the compliance with that. And so that was about
six months. I am just curious when we can expect some answers
or some revisions.
Ms. CONTRERAS-SWEET. Thank you again for that question, Mr.
Chairman.
The franchising opportunities are vast and complex. And I
can tell you that at first blush, I think the notion of a plug-
and-play company is really attractive. You know, for small
businesses, when we go out to launch a business, first you have
to think about how you are going to lay out your plan, how you
are going to brand it, how you are going to create a niche
market, how you build barriers to entry, how you attract
customers, your marketing initiatives. And so when you
contemplate a franchise, it is really a wonderful tool that you
can come in with a branded name, you can come in with an
institution that already has addressed the branding question
and has mentoring in place. So these are very attractive
programs for the small business person. So I am very interested
in this. I have met with the association to understand where
they are headed and reviewed with our general counsel and our
capital access and our partners to understand exactly what the
opportunities are. And I can share with you that we are
clarifying these more and more. We are staffing it up because I
think this is an important alternative, and we will be sure to
get you those answers that you asked in the letter that we
reviewed. Thank you.
Chairman GRAVES. Soon, I hope.
Ms. CONTRERAS-SWEET. Yes, of course, sir.
Chairman GRAVES. Any other questions?
With that, we are honored to have you testify before the
hearing, and we look forward to--I think the whole Committee
looks forward to working with you in the future on issues,
obviously, that you are facing, and we feel that the country is
facing when it comes to small businesses.
And with that, I would ask unanimous consent that all
members have five legislative days to submit statements and
supporting materials for the record. And without objection----
Ms. CONTRERAS-SWEET. Mr. Chairman, if I may, I do not know
if I will have another opportunity to come before you again,
and so I just wanted to publicly acknowledge your leadership
and thank you so much for your stalwart effort in leading the
Small Business Committee. You know small businesses are
creating so much of the economic activity in this country, and
your leadership is well recognized and appreciated. Thank you
so much, sir.
Chairman GRAVES. Thank you very much. I appreciate that.
And this is my second to last hearing. There will be one more.
With that, this hearing is adjourned. Thanks.
[Whereupon, at 2:12 p.m., the Committee was adjourned.]
A P P E N D I X

U.S. Small Business Administration

Washington, D.C. 20416

TESTIMONY of

MARIA CONTRERAS-SWEET

Administrator, U.S. Small Business Administration

House Committee on Small Business

Small Business Administration: Management & Outlook

September 10, 2014

Chairman Graves, Ranking Member Velazquez and distinguished
members of this committee, thank you for this opportunity.
Since being confirmed I have taken time to sit with many of
you, and I know the members of this committee not only share my
passion to promote entrepreneurship but have been actively
engaged in supporting our nation's small businesses. In my
meetings with the Chairman and Ranking Member I have seen
firsthand the bipartisan commitment of this committee, working
together to help small businesses.

I look forward to continuing this work to help these job
creators in our economy realize their potential and put
Americans back to work. At the SBA we remain focused on our
core mission of facilitating access to capital, counseling,
contracts, and disaster assistance.

When meeting with our lenders, clients, and borrowers I
understand their concerns because I have been in their shoes as
an entrepreneur, five years as California's chief bank
regulator, and then starting a community bank. This guides my
belief that the SBA can help more businesses create jobs. I
have also learned the significant work that happens in this
Committee, and the importance of working with you to make our
programs better and the agency more efficient.

SBA's capital is infusing dollars into local markets and
improving our economy. Small businesses inject capital into the
economy more quickly as they cover payroll, buy equipment, and
acquire local real estate. This is good for Made in America,
Grown in America, and Invented in America.

In the 21st century, the SBA must be as innovative as the
small businesses we serve. I want SBA to represent Smart, Bold
and Accessible. This means we're implementing smart systems, so
our agency keeps pace with technological advances that change
how Americans conduct their business. Championing bold
initiatives to open new business channels for entrepreneurs
within the federal government, corporate supply chains, and
international commerce. And making our services accessible to
small business owners, regardless of their gender, race, age,
or neighborhood.

From my first conversations with Chairman Graves and many
of you, we see the prevailing challenge SBA faces is that our
loan documentation is complex and labor-intensive, forcing
banks to hire specialized staff, contract it out, or walk away
from the loans.

We cannot afford to lose these partners and turn job
creators away. To combat this we launched a predictive business
credit scoring model the SBA has been developing for more than
a decade--combining an entrepreneur's personal and business
credit scores. This new scoring model is now available to ALL
of our lending partners for loans of $350,000 or less. Making
it easier and less time-consuming for banks to do business with
us--and for entrepreneurs to do business with them.

Strong stewardship of our flagship 7a program has allowed
us to keep fees at zero on loans less than $150,000 and
continue to operate at zero subsidy and we move closer to zero
subsidy with the 504 program.

Next year we will roll out SBA One an interactive user-
friendly platform. It will automate the uploading of documents
and generation of forms, and allow for electronic signatures.
On each 7A loan SBA One will save banks hours of processing
time and money. The combination of predictive credit scoring
and SBA One will incent more banks to partner with us to
promote underserved lending, generating more loans and igniting
economic activity.

Being bold means opening new markets--both here and abroad.
Over the next decade new markets around the world are going to
open up, but only 1 percent of small businesses are selling to
them. We're focused on ensuring small businesses have the
financing they need to engage internationally.

I'm pleased to announce for the first time in eight years--
the federal government met the 23 percent goal of federal
contracting to small businesses in FY13. This was an important
achievement, but we fell short of our women-owned business goal
and must do more to meet that goal.

The accessible component of the new SBA is close to my
heart, as the face of entrepreneurship is changing in America.
More of those faces today belong to women, Latinos, African-
Americans, Asian Americans, Native Americans, veterans and
seniors. In addition to promoting smaller-dollar loans, we are
focusing on building referral networks with microlenders so new
businesses can get the start-up capital. At the SBA our team is
working to find new and creative ways to put micro capital into
the hands of entrepreneurs. Ranking Member Velazquez and I have
seen too many entrepreneurs with great ideas and products
default because of poor financial planning. We look forward to
working with her and all of you to increase technical
assistance to small businesses.

Our guarantees allow lenders to make loans they otherwise
would not. We fill market gaps. Every dollar we inject into the
economy is capital that could potentially stay on the
sidelines.

Again, I want to thank all of you for your bipartisan
commitment to small businesses, and how welcoming you and the
entire small business community has been to me.

With that Mr. Chairman, I would be happy to take your
questions.
Questions for the Record

Chairman Sam Graves

Question 1

According to SBA officials, the agency was to migrate its
loan management accounting system from a proprietary system by
January 1, 2012. When can we expect the SBA to complete this
first step in modernizing its loan management accounting
system?

Response: All of the originally planned LMAS Incremental
Improvement Projects (IIPs) were successfully completed;
however, there has been some additional follow-up required by
OIG and Independent Verification and Validation (IV&V)
guidance.

Additionally, SBA initiated a project to migrate the non-
proprietary code to production in a new consolidated data
center and complete the shutdown of the proprietary system. The
following items have been completed:

Migration of user interfaces off of
proprietary COBOL to a web environment. No lending
partners or SBA personnel handle any loan transactions
via a COBOL system.

Migration of loan management accounting
system code from a proprietary system environment to a
generic platform and software in June 2013.

Awarding of contracts for hosting facilities
and hardware to support Production Operations of the
generic loan management accounting system.

All of this modernization occurred during record-breaking
loan production years and without any material weaknesses in
SBA's Financial Audit.

Status of the original LMAS Incremental Improvement
Projects from SBA's OIG's report on September 30, 2014:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9675.001

Question 2

In determining the priorities for the agency, where do you
put implementation of directives from Congress signed into law
by the President in comparison to initiatives developed by SBA
personnel?

Response: SBA's core mission is to aid, counsel, assist and
protect the interests of small business in America. Through the
Small Business Act, Small Business Investment Act and other
acts, there are statutorily mandated programs that the agency
is responsible for implementing to carry out its mission. SBA
also has statutory authority to establish and manage other
initiatives to assist small business, including underserved
communities and businesses. The SBA handles all of its programs
with equal priority in management and oversight. We effectively
execute on these programs daily and report their results
annually to Congress.

Question 3

The SBA waives the upfront fee for loans under $150,000.
Under what legal authority does the SBA waive the upfront fee
since the statute provides that the ``Administration shall
collect a guarantee fee''?

Response: Section 7(a)(18) of the Small Business Act, 15
U.S.C. 636(a)(18) provides the authority for the fee relief.
This section of the statute sets a ceiling on the guarantee fee
but no floor, which means SBA has some discretion in
determining how low, including zero, that fee can be as long as
it does not exceed the amount stated in 7(a)(18)(A).

Question 4

As you know, the Anti-Deficiency Act prohibits federal
employees from agreeing to arrangements that exceed
appropriated funds. Some SBA loans, secured by property,
include covenants that may create undefined liabilities in the
future for the government and thus might violate the Anti-
Deficiency Act. What actions is the SBA taking to resolve these
concerns?

Response: Open-ended indemnification clauses in real estate
title documents applicable to 504 project real estate
collateral may create a violation of the Anti-Deficiency Act
(ADA) if SBA were to take title to the property (during a
foreclosure action). Certified Development Company (CDC)
closing counsel and SBA District Counsel currently review real
estate title documents prior to closing and identify such
clauses. When identified, the CDC works to obtain a waiver of
the clause as applicable to SBA, which ensures Agency
compliance with ADA requirements.

Since indemnification clause waiver(s) cannot always be
obtained, SBA has established a procedure that ensures
compliance with legal requirements while reducing closing
delays. The procedure provides that if a waiver cannot be
obtained, those projects will be tracked for further
consideration after debenture purchase.
We understand a legislative solution might be created to
better address the issue.

Question 5
Given the fact that the federal government has not met
statutory goals for providing small businesses with
subcontracting opportunities, should not the SBA reallocate
some resources from its own entrepreneurial development
initiatives to the hiring and training of commercial marketing
representatives?

Response: In FY14, SBA conducted approximately 1,300
subcontracting plan compliance or orientation reviews of large
prime contractors. These reviews encourage large prime
contractors to use small business subcontractors. In FY13, the
federal government achieved 34% in subcontracting awards of its
36% goal, which was an improvement over FY12's 33.6%
achievement. The subcontracting achievements for FY14 will be
released with SBA's annual scorecard later in FY15. We believe
our entrepreneurial development initiatives play an essential
role in helping small businesses grow and create jobs. These
efforts include a wide range of assistance services including
contracting. Additional resources for CMRs and PCRs is one path
to providing opportunity for more coverage, and SBA has
requested and supported that in past budgets.

Question 6

Do you think that the SBA budget for FY 2015, which
requested $39 million for new entrepreneurial development
initiatives but only $5.8 million for lender oversight of a
loan portfolio in excess of $100 billion, constitutes an
appropriate allocation of agency resources?

Response: SBA's FY 2015 Congressional Budget Justification
(CBJ) request for the Office of Credit Risk Management (OCRM)
is $13,992,000 (Table 3, p. 18). This amount does not include
salaries and benefits for the employees who perform the
oversight function. The $5,827,000 amount you reference is
listed as ``Lender Oversight--7(a) Loans'' along with a
$1,825,000 amount listed as ``Lender Oversight--504 Loans''
(for a total of $7,652,000) in the FY 2015 CBJ, Table 10, p.
26. Table 10 reflects an allocation of the costs of SBA
programs based on a cost allocation study conducted in FY 2013.
The FY 2013 study did not fully allocate all of the lender
oversight costs, such as contracts, to the oversight program.
Some of the costs were allocated to the Office of Capital
Access. This resulted in the discrepancy between the Table 3
and the Table 10 amounts. In FY 2014, SBA revised the cost
allocation survey to fully reflect the OCRM costs under Lender
Oversight. Those revised figures will appear in the FY 2016 CBJ
tables.

Question 7

To follow up on the concerns of my colleagues, since the
answer was not provided during the hearing, do you have a study
to show how many hours the proposed SBA One would save?
Additionally, as required under federal statue and OMB
guidance, can you provide the business case analysis for that
project?

Response: There was a BCAA conducted for SBAOne when the
idea was first developed and the report demonstrated there
would be significant financial savings as a result of its
implementation. The BCAA is attached.

Question 8

How many staff are working solely on SBIC issues?

Response: 69 full-time employees and 1 part-time employee
who is retiring in November 2014 are working solely on SBIC
program issues.

Question 9

How many are working solely on issues other than SBICs
(please identify both the issues and the titles of the staff)?

Response: 5 full-time employees are working on solely SBIR/
STTR program issues. The titles are:

(1) Assistant Administrator, Office of Innovation
Technology
(2) Technology Policy Analyst
(3) Program Analyst
(4) Program Analyst
(5) Entrepreneur in Resident/Consultant.

Question 10

How many are working on both SBIC and other issues (please
provide an estimate of resource allocation to each)?

Response: 6 full-time employees work on SBIC, SBIR/STTR,
and Innovation programs. The titles and estimated allocation
for FY 2014 are:

(1) Associate Administrator - 40% SBIC, 40% SBIR/
STTR, 20% Other (e.g. Innovation);
(2) Deputy Associate Administrator - 40% SBIC, 40%
SBIR/STTR, 20% Other (e.g. Innovation);
(3) Special Advisor - 30% SBIC, 30% SBIR/STTR, 40%
Other (e.g. Innovation);
(4) Business Operations Officer - 70% SBIC, 20% SBIR/
STTR, 10% Other (e.g. Innovation);
(5) Program Analyst - 80% SBIC, 20% SBIR/STTR
(6) Program Assistant - 80% SBIC, 20% SBIR/STTR

Question 11

What is the travel budget allocated to the Director of
Program Development for minority outreach, women's outreach,
veteran's outreach, and outreach to underserved and low income
areas?

Response: THe FY2014 travel budget for the Office of
Innovation and Investment was $225,000. Of this amount, $11,000
was spent by the Program Development team in FY 2014 to do
outreach for minority, women's, veterans' and underserved and
low income areas. The Associate Administrator and the Deputy
Administrator also engage in outreach to these communities at
various meetings and conferences. Therefore, the amount spent
on travel related to such outreach is actually greater than
$11,000.

Question 12

Concerning the travel history and travel expenditures for
the Associate Administrator for the Office of Investment and
Innovation, please identify which travel expenditures were
solely in support and oversight of the SBIC program and which
were for the support of other programs. Please identify the
other programs and the related amounts.

Response: The Associate Administrator promotes all of the
programs managed by the Office Innovation and Investment at
meetings and conferences. During FY 2014, $18,000 of the OII
travel budget was spent for his travel discussing and
supporting the SBIC, SBIR/STTR and Innovation programs.

Question 13

Regarding the travel history and travel expenditures for
the Deputy Associate Administrator for the Office of Investment
and Innovation, please identify which travel expenditures were
solely in support and oversight of the SBIC program and which
were for the support of other programs. Please identify the
other programs and how much time and money was spent supporting
them.

Response: During FY 2014, $11,000 was spent for the Deputy
Associate Administrator's travel discussing and supporting the
SBIC, SBIR/STTR and Innovation programs. There is no sub
allocation in the travel budget by program or initiative.

Question 14

Please explain the SBA's view as to why the licensing
process has significantly slowed down and why the number of new
funds entering the SBIC licensing process has significantly
diminished.

Response: The licensing process has not slowed down. The
average processing time is 7 months which is generally
consistent with the prior years' time. The licensing process
depends on many factors. One of the major driving factors,
which is controlled by the applicant and not SBA, is the amount
of time it takes the applicant to provide all of the final
legal, partnerships, and other core documents to the SBA. Since
we do not ``stop the clock'' while waiting for documentation
from an applicant, that lag time is reflected in the estimated
7 months processing time. Thirty new SBICs were approved and
licensed in FY 2014. This is also consistent with the prior
year's approvals.

Question 15

Given that the licensing Standard Operating Procedure was
last updated in the 1980's and this Committee was promised over
a year ago that this would be updated, when will the licensing
procedure be updated?

Response: The new licensing SOP was updated and made
effective on August 6, 2014.

Question 16

The SBA issued a proposed rule on SBIC investments in 2013
and received only one comment letter from industry. Why is it
taking so long to issue the final rule and when will the final
rule be issued?

Response: The final rule was published in the Federal
Register on October 21, 2014. The 2013 proposed rule was
related to expanding passive investment exceptions in the SBIC
regulations. Though there was only one comment letter, it
identified several areas where SBICs could benefit from further
expansions for passive investment structures. In addition, the
letter identified the use of passive investment structures in
ways not intended by the proposed rule. SBA took time to
carefully consider the expansions suggested by the commenter
and also to consider any associated increase to program credit
risk.

--------------------

Question for the Record

Rep. Steve Chabot (OH-5)

Question 1

The Administration has previously been supportive of
raising this limit. Does the Administration still support
raising the family of funds limit? And will you work with me to
help pass an increase?

Response: The SBA is supportive of the family of funds
increase legislation which would increase the amount of
leverage by licensees under common control from $225 million to
$350 million. The family of fund increase, with the increase in
SBIC's authority to $4 billion, will well position the Agency
to ensure that high-growth small businesses across the country
have access to the capital they need to build their companies,
drive innovation and help grow the economy.

Question for the Record

Rep. Mick Mulvaney (SC-5)

Question 1

Last Congress, I sponsored the Subcontracting Transparency
and Reliability Act, which was passed out of this Committee and
included in the final version of the FY13 NDAA. This language
made it easier to crack down on deceptive large businesses
hiding behind small businesses, and simultaneously made it
easier for small businesses to team with other small businesses
to compete for federal contracts. Unfortunately, these changes
have not been implemented. I understand that during a
subcommittee hearing in July, we received testimony from small
businesses about how the failure of SBA to act means that they
are losing money and contracts. When is SBA going to act?

Response: The proposed rule is currently in the interagency
review stage of the rulemaking process and will be published
for public comment in the near future.

[all]
