- OVERSIGHT HEARING ON ``DOMESTIC OIL AND NATURAL GAS: ALASKAN RESOURCES, ACCESS AND INFRASTRUCTURE.''

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

DOMESTIC OIL AND NATURAL GAS:
ALASKAN RESOURCES,
ACCESS AND INFRASTRUCTURE

=======================================================================

OVERSIGHT HEARING

before the

SUBCOMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND
MINERAL RESOURCES

of the

COMMITTEE ON NATURAL RESOURCES
U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

Thursday, June 2, 2011

__________

Serial No. 112-38

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Natural Resources

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.fdsys.gov
or
Committee address: http://naturalresources.house.gov

_____

U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
66-73 PDF                 WASHINGTON : 2012
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800; DC
area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104  Mail: Stop IDCC, Washington, DC
20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON NATURAL RESOURCES

DOC HASTINGS, WA, Chairman
EDWARD J. MARKEY, MA, Ranking Democrat Member

Don Young, AK                        Dale E. Kildee, MI
John J. Duncan, Jr., TN              Peter A. DeFazio, OR
Louie Gohmert, TX                    Eni F.H. Faleomavaega, AS
Rob Bishop, UT                       Frank Pallone, Jr., NJ
Doug Lamborn, CO                     Grace F. Napolitano, CA
Robert J. Wittman, VA                Rush D. Holt, NJ
Paul C. Broun, GA                    Raul M. Grijalva, AZ
John Fleming, LA                     Madeleine Z. Bordallo, GU
Mike Coffman, CO                     Jim Costa, CA
Tom McClintock, CA                   Dan Boren, OK
Glenn Thompson, PA                   Gregorio Kilili Camacho Sablan,
Jeff Denham, CA                          CNMI
Dan Benishek, MI                     Martin Heinrich, NM
David Rivera, FL                     Ben Ray Lujan, NM
Jeff Duncan, SC                      John P. Sarbanes, MD
Scott R. Tipton, CO                  Betty Sutton, OH
Paul A. Gosar, AZ                    Niki Tsongas, MA
Raul R. Labrador, ID                 Pedro R. Pierluisi, PR
Kristi L. Noem, SD                   John Garamendi, CA
Steve Southerland II, FL             Colleen W. Hanabusa, HI
Bill Flores, TX                      Vacancy
Andy Harris, MD
Jeffrey M. Landry, LA
Charles J. ``Chuck'' Fleischmann,
TN
Jon Runyan, NJ
Bill Johnson, OH

Todd Young, Chief of Staff
Lisa Pittman, Chief Counsel
Jeffrey Duncan, Democrat Staff Director
David Watkins, Democrat Chief Counsel
------

SUBCOMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND MINERAL RESOURCES

DOUG LAMBORN, CO, Chairman
RUSH D. HOLT, NJ, Ranking Democrat Member

Louie Gohmert, TX                    Peter A. DeFazio, OR
Paul C. Broun, GA                    Madeleine Z. Bordallo, GU
John Fleming, LA                     Jim Costa, CA
Mike Coffman, CO                     Dan Boren, OK
Glenn Thompson, PA                   Gregorio Kilili Camacho Sablan,
Dan Benishek, MI                         CNMI
David Rivera, FL                     Martin Heinrich, NM
Jeff Duncan, SC                      John P. Sarbanes, MD
Paul A. Gosar, AZ                    Betty Sutton, OH
Bill Flores, TX                      Niki Tsongas, MA
Jeffrey M. Landry, LA                Vacancy
Charles J. ``Chuck'' Fleischmann,    Edward J. Markey, MA, ex officio
TN
Bill Johnson, OH
Doc Hastings, WA, ex officio
------

CONTENTS

----------
Page

Hearing held on Thursday, June 2, 2011...........................     1

Statement of Members:
Hastings, Hon. Doc, a Representative in Congress from the
State of Washington........................................    32
Prepared statement of....................................    33
Holt, Hon. Rush D., a Representative in Congress from the
State of New Jersey........................................     3
Prepared statement of....................................     4
Lamborn, Hon. Doug, a Representative in Congress from the
State of Colorado..........................................     1
Prepared statement of....................................     2

Statement of Witnesses:
Glenn, Richard, Executive Vice President of Lands and Natural
Resources, Arctic Slope Regional Corporation...............    15
Prepared statement of....................................    16
Lawrence, David T., Executive Vice President, Exploration and
Commercial, Shell Energy Resources Company.................    18
Prepared statement of....................................    19
Quarterman, Cynthia L., Administrator, Pipeline and Hazardous
Materials Safety Administration, U.S. Department of
Transportation.............................................    28
Prepared statement of....................................    29
Sullivan, Dan, Commissioner, Alaska Department of Natural
Resources..................................................     6
Prepared statement of....................................     7

OVERSIGHT HEARING ON ``DOMESTIC OIL AND NATURAL GAS: ALASKAN RESOURCES,
ACCESS AND INFRASTRUCTURE.''

----------

Thursday, June 2, 2011

U.S. House of Representatives

Subcommittee on Energy and Mineral Resources

Committee on Natural Resources

Washington, D.C.

----------

The Subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 10:07 a.m. in
Room 1334, Longworth House Office Building, Hon. Doug Lamborn,
[Chairman of the Subcommittee] presiding.
Present: Representatives Lamborn, Fleming, Rivera, Duncan
of South Carolina, Gosar, Flores, Landry, Johnson, Hastings,
Holt, and Sarbanes.
Also present: Representative Young.

STATEMENT OF HON. DOUG LAMBORN, A REPRESENTATIVE IN CONGRESS
FROM THE STATE OF COLORADO.

Mr. Lamborn. The Chairman notes the presence of a quorum,
which under Committee Rule 3[e] is two Members. The
Subcommittee on Energy and Mineral Resources is meeting today
for an oversight hearing to hear testimony on Domestic Oil and
Natural Gas: Alaskan Resources, Access, and Infrastructure.
Under Committee Rule 4[f], opening statements are limited
to the Chair and Ranking Member of the Subcommittee. I have
talked with staff for the Ranking Member and as soon as he gets
here, which will be any moment, he will be able to make his
opening statement, even if it is slightly out of order. So that
will be momentarily.
However, I ask unanimous consent to include any other
Members' opening statements in the hearing record, if submitted
to the clerk by close of business today. Hearing no objection,
so ordered.
I also ask unanimous consent that the gentleman from
Alaska, Mr. Young, a member of the full Natural Resources
Committee, be allowed to join us on the dais when he appears
and to participate in the hearing. Without objection, so
ordered.
Now I recognize myself for five minutes for an opening
statement. Today's hearing will focus on the tremendous
resources that are on- and offshore of Alaska and the critical
infrastructure that brings these resources to the U.S. market.
Alaska has been, and will continue to be, an integral part
of our nation's energy security. The opportunity and promise
that has always made Alaska a special place is particularly
true when it comes to energy. There is no doubt that Alaska
holds tremendous resources. The offshore of Alaska is estimated
to hold at least 27 billion barrels of oil and 132 trillion
cubic feet of natural gas. But that is just the start. Onshore
there are potentially an additional 14 billion barrels of oil
just waiting for development.
Currently, in Alaska alone, the oil and natural gas
industries support over 43,000 American jobs and comprises 16
percent of the State's wealth. Utilizing these resources will
help decrease our foreign dependence, create jobs, and keep
revenue here in the U.S., but accessing these resources is also
the main source of frustration.
One example has been development of the National Petroleum
Reserve Alaska, an area designated both in name and in status
as an area to provide oil and natural gas exploration, which
stymied by the inability of the Army Corps of Engineers and the
EPA to process a permit for the pipelines and roads necessary
to transport the petroleum out of the petroleum reserve. This
is a problem that the President should step in and untangle.
There are few more egregious examples of bureaucratic red tape,
stifling development of our domestic resources than the problem
facing oil and gas developers in the NPRA today.
But Alaska isn't just home to vast resources. It is also
home to tremendous achievements of engineering. The
Transatlantic Pipeline System, TAPS, is one of the great
engineering achievements of our nation. This 800-mile pipeline
system has resulted in 16 billion barrels of oil flowing from
the northern reaches of North America into the cars of the
western United States. At the same time, it has kept the money
flowing from American consumers into the American Treasury.
This is, in many ways, one of the most important reasons we
need to focus on how to ensure the pipeline remains viable and
continues to serve as one of the key components of Alaskan
energy infrastructure that serves the American people. Each of
those 16 billion barrels represents one small victory for
domestic development over foreign dependence. But at the same
time, every barrel of capacity in the TAPS that goes unused is
one more missed opportunity to reduce our dependence on foreign
sources of oil.
Witnesses before this Subcommittee have often said that we
don't have a lack of resources to curb our foreign dependence;
we have a lack of a clear policy. It can and should be the
policy of this government to develop the resources in our
National Petroleum Reserve quickly, efficiently, and
responsibly in order to reduce our foreign dependence, to
create jobs, and to keep our revenue here at home.
I want to thank all the witnesses again for being here
today and I look forward to hearing your testimony. I now
recognize the Ranking Member for five minutes for his opening
statement.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Lamborn follows:]

Statement of The Honorable Doug Lamborn, Chairman,
Subcommittee on Energy and Mineral Resources

Today's hearing will focus on the tremendous resources that are on
and offshore of Alaska and the critical infrastructure that brings
those resources to the U.S. market. Alaska has been and will continue
to be an integral part of our nation's energy security. The opportunity
and promise that has always made Alaska a special place, is
particularly true when it comes to energy.
There is no doubt that Alaska holds tremendous resources. The
offshore of Alaska is estimated to hold at least 27 billion barrels of
oil and 132 trillion cubic feet of natural gas. But that is just the
start, onshore there are potentially an additional 14 billion barrels
just waiting for development. Currently in Alaska alone, the oil and
natural gas industry supports over 43,000 American jobs and comprises
16% of the State's wealth. Utilizing these resources will help decrease
our foreign dependence, create jobs and keep revenue here in the U.S.
But accessing these resources is also the main source of frustration.
One example has been development of the National Petroleum Reserve
Alaska, an area designated both in name and in status as an area to
provide oil and natural gas exploration, which sits stymied by the
inability of the Army Corps of Engineers and the EPA to process a
permit for the pipelines and roads necessary to transport the petroleum
out of the petroleum reserve. This is a problem that the President
should step in and untangle. There are few more egregious examples of
bureaucratic red tape stifling development of our domestic resources
than the problem facing oil and gas developers in the NPRA today.
But Alaska isn't just home to vast resources; it is also home to
tremendous achievements of engineering. The Trans Alaska Pipeline
System, or TAPS, is one of the great engineering achievements of our
nation. This 800 mile pipeline system has resulted in 16 billion
barrels of oil flowing from the northern reaches of North America into
the cars of the Western United States, at the same time it has kept the
money flowing from American consumers into the American treasury. This
in many ways is one of the most important reasons we need to focus on
how to ensure the pipeline remains viable and continues to serve as one
of the key components of Alaskan energy infrastructure that serves the
American people.
Each of those 16 billion barrels represents one small victory for
domestic development over foreign dependence. But at the same time,
every barrel of capacity in the TAPS that goes unused, is one more
missed opportunity to reduce our dependence on foreign sources of oil.
Before this subcommittee it has often been said that we don't have
a lack of resources to curb our foreign dependence, we have a lack of
clear policy. It can and should be the policy of this government to
develop the resources in our National Petroleum Reserve, quickly,
efficiently, and responsibly in order to reduce our foreign dependence,
create jobs and keep our revenue here at home.
I want to thank all the witnesses for being here today and look
forward to hearing your testimony.
______

STATEMENT OF HON. RUSH HOLT, A REPRESENTATIVE IN CONGRESS FROM
THE STATE OF NEW JERSEY

Mr. Holt. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I thank the witnesses
for coming today for what is indeed an important hearing.
There is no question that petroleum is important to
Alaska's economy, to our national economy, not just for the
economy of producing, refining, and distributing the petroleum,
but for how dependent our economy is for the use of it. But we
also must look at the bigger picture and it is worth holding
this hearing about Alaska because Alaska really lays out in a
stark way all of the various issues that are at play here.
Alaska and the Arctic are on the front line, for example,
of the effects of global climate change. Alaska has warmed at
more than twice the rate of the rest of the United States in
the last 50 years with winters that are now on average 6
degrees Fahrenheit warmer. And as the Arctic regions warm one
of the risks is melting permafrost, which can undermine the
structural integrity of roads and pipelines and other
infrastructure.
As we examine oil and gas resources and development, we
should also be examining the effects that that development has
on our climate and the climate of the Arctic. We also should
examine the other effects that oil and gas development have on
the environment. This January crude oil was discovered leaking
into the basement of a pump station in part of the TransAlaska
pipeline and the source was a below-ground pipe encased in
concrete leading to Pump Station No. 1 near Prudhoe Bay. The
spill forced the shutdown of the pipeline and resulted in
spilling more than 13,000 gallons of oil.
This Committee has jurisdiction over the pipeline and we
need to ensure that the pipeline's operator, Alyeska, is taking
all the appropriate corrective actions to ensure that spills
don't happen.
But this recent spill is not the only one. We watched last
year as BP was unable to stop an oil spill in the Gulf for 87
days that ultimately spewed four million barrels of oil. And in
the spring of 2006, on the North Slope, BP had two other spills
from its pipelines, which together released more than 5,000
barrels. And an investigation found that the cause was BP's
complete and total failure to inspect properly and maintain its
pipelines to prevent corrosion.
Despite the challenges faced in maintaining an onshore
pipeline in Alaska, some are advocating for drilling in the
still relatively unknown waters of the Arctic Ocean. The
independent commission on the BP spill recommended that we
needed better scientific understanding of the Arctic
environment before moving forward with drilling offshore in
Alaska.
As we saw last year in the Gulf, we need to make sure that
the companies have the capability to actually contain and
respond to a spill, particularly in harsh environments such as
we are discussing here. Although big oil would like the public
to think that Democrats are against oil production, it is worth
noting that House Democrats have introduced legislation that
would require lease sales in the National Petroleum Reserve,
the NPR Alaska. At least once a year, these have been
introduced.
Building on that legislation, and even as U.S. oil
production is at its highest level in a decade, President Obama
recently announced in his weekly radio address that he would be
directing the Department of the Interior to conduct annual sale
leases at NPRA.
Now the Chairman talked about reducing our dependence on
foreign oil. It is a noble goal. We should work toward it, but
we have to understand that this country peaked in oil
production 40 years ago. You could drill from Asbury Park to
the Bering Straits and this country will not for the
foreseeable future ever again produce half as much oil as we
did. In fact, as far into the future as this wonderful Rockwell
painting is in the past, we will be using very little
petroleum.
So we have to bear that in mind as we find a way forward
for our country. And just as shale gas has undermined the
economics of North Slope natural gas, shale oil may do the same
for oil production in Alaska and off the coasts. The New York
Times reported oil companies have identified 20 new onshore oil
fields in the Lower 48 that could collectively increase the
nation's output by 25 percent for a while.
So with oil use down and U.S. oil production up, for the
moment, the prospect of additional fields to tap in areas once
thought to be spent we need to carefully examine the risks and
rewards in drilling in environmentally sensitive and rapidly
warming areas of Alaska.
I thank the Chair for calling this hearing.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Holt follows:]

Statement of The Honorable Rush D. Holt, Ranking Member,
Subcommittee on Energy and Mineral Resources

Thank you Mr. Chairman.
Alaska and the Arctic are on the front line for the effects of
global climate change. Alaska has warmed more than twice the rate of
the rest of the United States in the last 50 years, with winters that
are now on average over 6+F warmer. As the arctic regions warm, one of
the risks is melting permafrost, which can undermine the structural
integrity of roads, pipelines and other infrastructure. As we examine
oil and gas resources and development in Alaska, we also should be
examining the effects of that development on our climate in the Arctic
as well.
We also should examine the other effects of oil and gas development
on the Alaskan environment. This January, crude oil was discovered
leaking into the basement of a pump station that is part of the Trans-
Alaska Pipeline System (TAPS). The source was a below-ground pipe,
encased in concrete, leading into Pump Station number 1, near Prudhoe
Bay. The spill forced the shutdown of the pipeline and resulted in the
spillage of 13,314 gallons of oil. This Committee has jurisdiction over
TAPS, and we need to ensure that the pipeline's operator, Alyeska, is
taking all of the corrective actions needed to ensure that spills do
not happen in the future.
But that is not the only recent pipeline spill on the North Slope.
We all watched last year as BP was unable to stop an oil spill in the
Gulf for 87 days that ultimately spewed more than 4 million barrels of
oil. But in the spring and summer of 2006, on the North Slope, BP had 2
other spills from its pipelines, which together released more than
5,000 barrels of oil. An investigation found that the cause was BP's
complete and total failure to properly inspect and maintain its
pipelines to prevent corrosion.
Despite the challenges faced in maintaining an onshore pipeline in
Alaska, some are advocating for drilling in the still relatively
unknown waters of the Arctic Ocean. The independent Commission on the
BP spill recommended that we needed a better scientific understanding
of the Arctic environment as we move forward with drilling offshore in
Alaska. As we saw last year in the Gulf, we need to make sure that oil
companies have the capabilities to actually contain and respond to a
spill, especially when it comes to the harsh environments of frontier
regions like offshore in Alaska.
Although Big Oil would like the public to think Democrats are
against oil production, the House Democrats have introduced legislation
that would require lease sales in the National Petroleum Reserve--
Alaska (NPR-A) at least once a year. Building on that legislation and
even as U.S. oil production is at its highest level in nearly a decade,
President Obama recently announced in his weekly radio address that he
would be directing the Department of Interior to conduct annual lease
sales in the NPR-A, while also respecting sensitive areas there.
The NPR-A also has significant natural gas deposits--an estimated
53 trillion cubic feet according to the latest USGS assessment. But
there currently is no method of delivering that natural gas to market.
Congress has been working to facilitate the development of a natural
gas pipeline from the North Slope since 1976 and yet none has been
constructed. In fact, just a few weeks ago, BP and Conoco Phillips
announced that they were abandoning their proposal to build a 1,700
mile natural gas pipeline from the North Slope to U.S. markets.
Moreover, the Energy Information Administration has concluded that a
natural gas pipeline would likely not be economic for the next 20
years, especially given the recent discoveries of shale gas in the
Lower 48 states.
Just as shale gas has undermined the economics of North Slope
natural gas, shale oil may do the same for oil production in Alaska and
off her coasts. As reported last week in the New York Times, oil
companies have identified 20 new onshore oil fields in the Lower 48
states that could collectively increase the nation's oil output by 25
percent within a decade. With U.S. oil use down, U.S. oil production
up, and the prospect of additional fields to tap in areas once thought
to be spent, we need to carefully examine the risks and rewards of
drilling in environmentally sensitive and rapidly warming areas in
Alaska.
These are all important issues for this committee to examine and I
look forward to the testimony of our witnesses today.
______

Mr. Lamborn. All right. Thank you.
We will now hear from our witnesses. And I want to invite
The Honorable Dan Sullivan, Commissioner of the Alaska
Department of Natural Resources, Richard Glenn, Executive Vice
President of Lands and Natural Resources, the Arctic Slope
Regional Corporation, David T. Lawrence, Executive Vice
President, Exploration and Commercial of Shell Energy Resources
Company, and The Honorable Cynthia Quarterman, Administrator,
Pipeline and Hazardous Materials Safety Administration, U.S.
Department of Transportation.
Like all witnesses, your written testimony will appear in
full in the hearing record, so I ask that you keep your oral
statements to five minutes, as outlined in our invitation
letter to you and under Committee Rule 4[a].
Our microphones are not automatic, so you need to push the
button to make them work. I also want to explain how the timing
lights work. When you begin to speak, the clerk will start the
timer and a green light will appear. After four minutes, a
yellow light comes on. And then at five minutes a red light
comes on, and at that point I would ask that you finish the
sentence that you are working on and conclude.
Mr. Sullivan, you may begin.

STATEMENT OF DAN SULLIVAN, COMMISSIONER,
ALASKA DEPARTMENT OF NATURAL RESOURCES

Mr. Sullivan. Good morning Mr. Chairman and Representative
Holt. My name is Dan Sullivan. I am the Commissioner of the
Alaska Department of Natural Resources--DNR as we are known in
Alaska. We manage one of the largest portfolios of oil, gas,
minerals, renewables, land and water in the world.
I am a former Attorney General of the State of Alaska and
also a former Assistant Secretary of State that had
responsibilities over global energy, economic and finance
issues.
Mr. Chairman, our country faces very serious energy
security challenges and Alaska can and should be able to play a
significant role in partnership with the Federal Government in
helping our citizens address these challenges. Unfortunately,
right now that is not happening, and I would like to explain
that.
As you mentioned, Mr. Chairman, Alaska is home to one of
America's most vital components of energy infrastructure, TAPS,
and Congress played the key role in the rapid construction and
development of TAPS. Unfortunately, TAPS sits two-thirds empty
from its massive peak of 2.1 million barrels a day to about
620,000 barrels a day, and dropping. Working together, we are
confident that we can fix this situation and further promote
America's energy security.
First, as you mentioned, Mr. Chairman, the North Slope of
Alaska, both on- and offshore State and Federal lands, remains
a world-class hydrocarbon basin by any measure with billions of
conventional and unconventional oil and trillions of cubic feet
of natural gas.
Second, the State of Alaska is doing all it can to reverse
the TAPS throughput decline with a comprehensive strategy that
includes significant fiscal reform, permitting overall, new
infrastructure projects and increased access to state lands,
including state leases on the borders of ANWR.
And third, Alaska is one of the most environmentally
stringent places on earth to explore and produce hydrocarbons
and is the world's leader in developing technologies that have
dramatically reduced the footprint of exploration and
development activities. We are very proud of this record, Mr.
Chairman and my written testimony focuses on this extensively.
But we are missing a critical partner in the development of
Alaska's massive hydrocarbon resources and that partner is the
Federal Government. The Federal Government's policies in Alaska
have shifted from helping us protect the environment, which we
certainly support because we care deeply about our environment,
to proactively shutting down resource development. This is not
just rhetoric. If you look at pages 9 through 11 of my
testimony, I provide six specific examples in less than two
years where the Federal Government has made decisions that will
stall, kill, or delay resource development on state and Federal
lands in Alaska.
This anti-development posture is the cause of extreme
frustration and anger with the vast majority of Alaskans. The
state has done all it can, countless meetings, letters, public
comments, and yes, even suing our own Federal Government to
dissuade the Obama Administration from pursuing and continuing
such a course. Why? Because locking up Alaska's resources not
only hurts Alaskans, but it significantly undermines broader
American interests.
Rarely has there been a Federal policy that fails on so
many fronts. Jobs and economic growth, energy security, trade
and Federal budget deficits, national security are all
undermined when Americans are prevented from producing energy
from the largest resource basin in our country.
Ironically, this policy also undermines global
environmental protection because it drives resource development
overseas to places like Brazil, Kazakhstan, Uzbekistan, Russia,
Saudi Arabia. Mr. Chairman, I have been to all of those
countries and I can guarantee this Committee they don't have
nearly the stringent environmental standards or ability to
protect the environment that the State of Alaska does.
But my main purpose for traveling from Alaska today is not
to complain, but to redouble our efforts to achieve the Federal
partnership that we believe is so critical to Alaska and
America's energy security success.
In closing, I believe there are three important things
Congress can do. One is support the Alaska Governor Sean
Parnell's goal of a million barrels of oil a day through TAPS
within ten years and make that a national priority of the
Congress.
Second, to continue to work on permitting reform to
expedite and bring certainty to Federal permitting decisions.
And third, Congress should continue its vigilant oversight of
Federal agencies that make resource development decisions in
Alaska. As a former attorney general, I believe that some of
these decisions are made with little regard to national policy
set by Congress and Federal law and I think it is important to
keep close vigilance on that. Thank you very much.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Sullivan follows:]

Statement of Dan Sullivan, Commissioner,
Department of Natural Resources, State of Alaska

I. Introduction: America's Energy Challenge
Chairman Lamborn, Ranking Member Holt, and members of the House
Subcommittee on Energy and Mineral Resources, on behalf of Governor
Sean Parnell, the State of Alaska welcomes this opportunity to testify
to you about issues of such critical importance to Alaskans. I also
wish to express our eagerness to work with the U.S. Congress and the
Administration to see that Alaska can meet its potential to deliver to
the nation billions of barrels of domestically produced oil and
trillions of cubic feet of gas for the U.S. economy. More specifically,
we want to demonstrate to this committee and the rest of your
colleagues in the Congress the vital role Alaska can play in enhancing
America's long-term energy security, expanding American employment,
growing the economy, providing significant revenue to federal, state,
and local governments, and delivering billions of barrels of
domestically produced hydrocarbons to the U.S. marketplace.
Biographical Information
Before getting into substantive matters, I would like to briefly
mention my professional background as it pertains to this testimony. I
have been serving as commissioner of the Alaska Department of Natural
Resources (DNR), a state agency of over 1,100 personnel, since December
2010. Under the Alaska Constitution, my primary responsibility as the
DNR commissioner is to maximize the development of the state's
resources in a manner that furthers the public interest. DNR manages
one of the largest portfolios of oil, gas, minerals, land, and water
resources in the world, including approximately 100 million acres of
uplands, 60 million acres of tidelands, shore lands, and submerged
lands, and 40,000 miles of coastline.
Prior to my appointment as DNR commissioner, I served as the Alaska
Attorney General and as the U.S. Assistant Secretary of State for
Economic, Energy, and Business Affairs under Secretary of State
Condoleezza Rice. I am also a United States Marine, having served on
active duty and in the reserves as an infantry officer since 1993.
II. Alaska's North Slope Remains a World Class Hydrocarbon Basin
Alaska is one of the nation's most critical and prolific oil-
producing states. Even though production is only about one third of
what it was at its peak in 1989, Alaska's North Slope, both on and
offshore, remains a world-class hydrocarbon basin with extraordinary
potential. According to the U.S. Geological Survey (USGS), Alaska
accounts for over 30% of the nation's technically recoverable oil and
gas resources, with the North Slope estimated to hold approximately 40
billion barrels of technically recoverable conventional oil and 236
trillion cubic feet of natural gas.
Alaska's Outer Continental Shelf (OCS) constitutes an important
share of these totals, with an estimated potential for 27 billion
barrels of conventional oil and 132 trillion cubic feet of natural gas.
Studies have found that Alaska Beaufort and Chukchi Sea development
could result in about 700,000 barrels of oil per day for 40 years. A
February 2011 report by Northern Economics and the Institute of Social
and Economic Research at the University of Alaska states that
development of new oil and gas fields in the Beaufort and Chukchi seas
could result in an estimated annual average of 54,700 new jobs for 50
years. These direct and indirect jobs would be created both in Alaska
and the Lower 48. With $120/barrel oil, total government oil and gas
production from the OCS would be $312 billion.
Considerable reserves also exist onshore. A United States
Geological Survey (USGS) report in 1998 showed that the 1002 Area \1\
in the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge (ANWR) may have the highest
potential for an enormous oil field of conventional any place onshore
in the United States, with an estimated 10.4 billion barrels of crude
reserves. In 2008, the Energy Information Administration concluded that
in the mean ANWR oil resource case, oil production resulting from the
opening of ANWR could average about 780,000 barrels per day which is
roughly equal to the amount the United States imports from Venezuela
(827,000 bpd).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ ANWR covers approximately 19 million acres; the oil lies under
a portion of the coastal plain (1002 Area), which is about 1.55 million
acres. The 1002 Area has been designated by Congress as an ``area of
study'' to determine its environmental value and oil potential. Under
federal law, Congress' decision on whether to make the coastal plain a
wilderness area or whether to make it available for oil and gas
development was to be deferred until the Department of Interior
provided Congress with a recommendation. Close to 75% of Alaskans
support opening the 1002 Area for development.

---------------------------------------------------------------------------
In addition to conventional oil and gas reserves, Alaska's North
Slope contains massive quantities of unconventional resources: shale
oil and gas, heavy and viscous oil, and gas hydrates. The U.S.
Department of Energy has estimated that there are 36 billion barrels of
heavy oil on the North Slope. (No current estimates exist of Alaska's
shale oil and gas reserves.) Most of these unconventional resources are
located onshore near existing infrastructure. Energy companies are
beginning to investigate developing some of these resources in Alaska.
Despite the extraordinary production and massive hydrocarbon
potential, Alaska remains relatively underexplored compared to any
other prolific oil and gas region in North America. Only 500
exploration wells have been drilled within a 150,000-square-mile area
on the North Slope--an area that maintains the highest undiscovered
conventional oil and gas potential in Alaska. That calculates to three
wells per 1,000 square miles. As a comparison, 75,000 square miles
within the state of Wyoming, endowed with high oil and gas potential,
has more than 19,000 exploration wells, or about 250 wells per 1,000
square miles.
With this remarkable potential, Alaska can and should play a
pivotal role in helping our country meet its significant energy and
security challenges; reduce our reliance on foreign oil; provide
thousands of high paying jobs; reduce the nation's trade deficit; and
provide significant revenue to local, state, and federal governments.
III. Alaska Has a Strong Record of Responsibly Developing Resources
While Protecting Our Environment; We Are Also a Leader in
Environmental Research
Alaska has some of the most stringent environmental policies and
regulations in the world and we are a leader in research for sound,
responsible resource development. We love our state, not only for its
economic opportunities, but also for its natural beauty, and we are
very focused on protecting our environment.
The State of Alaska strongly believes that responsible resource
development and protecting the environment go hand in hand and we have
a strong record of upholding the Alaska Constitution's mandate that the
state pursue responsible resource development in a manner that
safeguards the environment.
Alaska's Robust Efforts to Protect the Environment and Wildlife
To ensure responsible resource development while protecting the
environment, the state has devised a comprehensive system that imposes
rigorous environmental protections. Before leasing any area to
developing, the state issues a comprehensive ``Best Interest Findings''
that explains in detail the potential impacts of oil and gas
development. A central component of the Best Interest Finding are the
mitigation measures. These measures protect wildlife, fish habitats and
populations, and protect subsistence and sport harvest activities
against undue interference through guidance for site selection and
implementation of drilling and related development facilities. Fuel
storage facilities and refueling are addressed with requirements for
secondary containment and protection of floodplains. Waste reduction
and proper waste disposal practices are required. Access to leased
areas is constructed to minimize adverse impacts.
What follows are just a few of the additional measures the state
requires before oil and gas development can proceed.

State agencies follow a rigorous scientific protocol
to ensure the right combination of snow depth and temperature
are met before allowing cross-tundra travel or construction of
ice roads. Such protections ensure that the tundra is not
degraded.

Before drilling wells, operators must get approval
from the state and explain how they will comply with strict
mitigation measures imposed by regulatory agencies; they must
demonstrate that their blow-out prevention equipment (BOP) is
up to the state's high standards; and they must get approval
for their oil-spill contingency plan.

The state encourages the unitization of leases that
overlie reservoirs to minimize the environmental impacts of
development.

Alaska law for oil discharge prevention and
contingency planning requires the plan holder to be able to
contain or control and clean up the realistic maximum oil
discharge within 72 hours.

Alaska is the only state or federal governmental
jurisdiction that regulates flow lines. Flow lines transport
three phase liquids from the well head to the processing
centers, which separate gas and water from crude oil. Flow
lines are viewed as having the greatest corrosion potential and
are therefore considered to be the highest risk.

Alaska mandates that operators use the best available
technology for oil discharge containment, storage, transfer,
and cleanup.

State agencies impose significant bonding
requirements.

Wildlife are closely monitored and protected. For
example, in March, after a petroleum worker notified the U.S.
Fish and Wildlife Service (USFWS) that a polar bear had emerged
from a den near their drill site, the operation was shut down
and all 50 employees evacuated in less than 12 hours.
Our efforts at protecting the environment and wildlife have been
successful. For example, when debating the development of TAPS, many
predicted that oil and gas development would decimate caribou herds.
These predictions have not come true. In fact, caribou numbers have
increased dramatically over the past thirty years. The Central Arctic
caribou herd, which occupies summer ranges surrounding Prudhoe Bay, has
grown from 5,000 in 1975 to over 66,000 today.
Even with a robust regulatory regime, the state continues to look
for ways to improve its regulatory oversight. To this end, the state is
engaged in a comprehensive gap analysis to better understand the
spectrum of state agency oversight; better understand the effectiveness
of authorities and enforcement over oil and gas operations; and to
identify gaps or redundancies in state oversight and determine if they
need to be filled or eliminated as appropriate.
Because of the efforts taken by federal, state, and local
governments and the energy industry, oil and gas development in Alaska
is conducted in a safe and responsible manner with standards that
exceed most other jurisdictions in the world.
Alaskan Innovations Minimize Environmental Impacts: The Shrinking
Footprint of Alaska Resource Development
In addition to the state's regulatory oversight, Alaska is a leader
in innovations that protect the environment. For example, extended
reach drilling, horizontal wells, multiple completions, and close-
surface well spacing were all invented and pioneered for use in Alaska.
These advances in drilling technology have greatly reduced the
footprint of modern exploration and development wells in Alaska, while
expanding their ability to stretch vertically and horizontally
underground.
More specifically, the first drill sites in the Prudhoe Bay field
were built in the 1970s and covered 65 acres of land to accommodate the
footprint of the drilling rigs of the day. By the time the first
production wells were drilled in the Kuparuk River field in the early
1980s, improvements in rig design and drilling techniques and the
materials used in the wells meant that the area of the drill sites
could be reduced by more than one-half; a 16-well drill site was
reduced to just 11 acres. In the 1990s, the Alpine field in the
Colville River Delta represents the next stage in drilling advancement.
From a drill site of only 13 acres, 54 wells have been drilled and the
extended reach of these wells can intercept an area eight miles across
and penetrate 50 square miles of the field.
Put simply, in just 30 years, surface footprint requirements have
been reduced from over 2 acres per well at Prudhoe Bay, to one quarter
(0.24) acre per well at Alpine.
Advances in technology have also allowed for minimal impact during
the exploration phase of development. For instance, onshore exploration
drilling occurs only in the winter. Heavy equipment is brought out to
remote sites on ice roads and the drilling rigs are assembled on ice
pads. Ice roads have been used on the North Slope for decades. When the
ice melts, there is no trace left of the pad. The only visible sign of
prior activity is an eight-by-eight foot well house that will remain on
location only because this well is part of a field under development
and will one day produce oil. In short, it is possible to explore for
oil on the North Slope and leave no visible footprint.
Substantial Studies Have Been Conducted Regarding Alaska OCS
Development
Despite the considerable energy security and economic benefits of
Alaska OCS development, some have suggested that before leasing
additional OCS acreage, more scientific studies need to be conducted.
We disagree.
As part of the North Slope Science Initiative (NSSI), there are
over 50 organizations and initiatives currently doing scientific work
in the Arctic. The NSSI is formally authorized by the Energy Policy Act
of 2005; its mission is to improve scientific and regulatory
understanding of terrestrial, aquatic, and marine ecosystems in
Alaska's North Slope region for consideration in the context of
resource development activities and climate change.
Since 1973, federal agencies have performed more than 5,000
environmental studies to better understand the Alaska OCS. Over the
past 30 years, the Department of the Interior (DOI) has funded nearly
$300 million for environmental studies in Alaska. And since 2000, it
has conducted 30-40 environmental studies each year, spending over $45
million.
Additionally, the National Academy of Sciences has produced three
Alaska OCS reports on environmental science which guide OCS activity.
Industry has also spent millions to better understand the Arctic
ecosystem; Shell alone spent over $40 million in the last several years
on environmental studies.
On this strong scientific basis, the Obama Administration's
Department of the Interior released a ``Survey of Available Data on OCS
Resources and Identification of Resource Gaps'' in 2009. In this
report, the DOI concluded: ``Overall, an adequate baseline of
information exists to address the environmental effects of the OCS oil
and gas program. . .in support of leasing decisions.'' Thus, according
to the current administration, sufficient studies have been conducted
to support oil and gas leasing.
IV. Co-Located With Alaska's Massive Hydrocarbon Basin Is One of
America's Most Important Energy Infrastructure Assets: TAPS
The Trans Alaska Pipeline, 11 pump stations, several hundred miles
of feeder pipelines, and the Valdez Marine Terminal constitute the
Trans-Alaska Pipeline System (TAPS). At 800 miles long, the Trans
Alaska Pipeline is one of the longest pipelines in the world; it
crosses more than 500 rivers and streams and three mountain ranges as
it carries Alaska's oil from Prudhoe Bay to Valdez.
The first oil entered the pipeline in June of 1977. Since that
time, TAPS has transported over 16.3 billion barrels of oil and natural
gas liquids for the U.S. domestic market. Oil and natural gas liquid
production through TAPS peaked at 2.2 million barrels per day in the
late 1980s, representing 25% of the U.S. domestic production. Since its
peak, however TAPS throughput has steadily declined. By 2003,
production was down to one million barrels a day. Today, TAPS
throughput averages about 630,000 barrels per day.
Congress Was Instrumental in the Development of TAPS
Spurred by global concern over the 1973 oil crisis (OPEC embargo)
and spiking energy prices that resulted in a severe U.S. and global
recession, the U.S. Congress was instrumental in the approval and rapid
development of TAPS. Congress approved construction of the pipeline
with the Trans Alaska Pipeline Authorization Act of 1973. The principle
focus of this Act is as relevant today as it was in 1973: ``the early
development and delivery of oil and gas from Alaska's North Slope to
domestic markets is in the national interest because of growing
domestic shortages and increasing dependence upon insecure foreign
sources.''
Underscoring the urgency of the country's precarious energy
security position, the Trans Alaska Pipeline Authorization Act also
halted all legal challenges to delay construction of the pipeline and
ensured that additional government studies would not be used to delay
construction.
TAPS Throughput Decline Raises a Host of Difficult Issues
The reduced flow of oil through TAPS has reached a point where the
pipeline is now approximately two-thirds empty. Continued throughput
decline raises a host of technical challenges due to the slower
velocity of oil in the pipeline, longer transit times, and the
resulting dramatic lowering of the temperature of oil during the winter
months. These challenges include wax buildup, frost heaves, and ice
crystals and ice plugs. The likelihood of these problems occurring
increases with lower throughput, and they can cause additional TAPS
shutdowns and oil leaks that could harm the environment. This past
January, TAPS was shut down for five days as the result of a leak at
Pump Station 1 that was contained in a building.
The State of Alaska is working with industry to ensure that we are
prepared to address these additional challenges in the near term as
TAPS throughput decline continues. But clearly, the most effective way
to address these technical challenges and the environmental risks that
they may entail is to increase TAPS throughput.
A Premature Shutdown of TAPS Would Significantly Undermine U.S.
National Security and Energy Security Interests and Would
Devastate the Alaskan Economy
The January 2011 shutdown of TAPS, during the heart of a cold
Alaskan winter, not only focused attention on the significant technical
challenges of decreased TAPS throughput, but also raised the specter of
a broader premature shutdown of TAPS. Such a shutdown would
significantly undermine U.S. national security and energy security
interests and would devastate the Alaskan economy.
A premature shutdown of TAPS would result in the stranding of
billions of barrels of domestic oil in America's largest hydrocarbon
basin. Oil prices would continue to soar. Thousands of jobs would be
lost. U.S. refineries would likely have to turn to foreign sources of
oil, as they did when TAPS shutdown in January, thereby increasing the
U.S. trade deficit and undermining American national and energy
security.
Even at today's throughput rates, TAPS supplies the US with more
than $24 billion of oil per year. If this amount of money was to be
spent importing oil, the US trade deficit would increase by nearly five
percent. Furthermore, the flow of oil from TAPS amounts to 53 percent
of the oil produced on the West Coast and supplies 28 percent of the
West Coast demand for crude oil. Interruptions in flow Pump Station No.
1 incident last winter had meaningful effects on the regional market.
Prices for crude oil on the West Coast immediately responded to the
shutdown as refineries scrambled for supplies of foreign oil.
A premature TAPS shutdown would also have a crushing impact on
Alaskans. It has been estimated that one third of the Alaska economy is
connected to the oil industry. The loss of North Slope oil production
would deprive state and local governments of billions of dollars in
annual revenue. Government services including education, public safety,
and health care would be slashed and infrastructure projects would be
significantly curtailed. Rural communities, particularly those that
have significantly benefitted from oil development such as the North
Slope Borough, would face a significant decrease in their standard of
living.
But continued TAPS throughput decline does not need to be Alaska's
or the country's destiny. The massive North Slope hydrocarbon resource
base remains available for development. What is needed to ensure a
reversal of this decline are state and federal policies that promote
increased investment, responsible resource development, and increased
job creation on the North Slope.
V. The State of Alaska Is Doing All It Can to Arrest the TAPS
Throughput Decline in Order to Achieve the Goal of One Million
Barrels of Oil per Day within 10 Years
The State of Alaska is pursuing several major policy initiatives to
arrest the TAPS throughput decline. The cornerstone of this effort is
Governor Parnell's recent proposal to the Alaska Legislature to
increase Alaska's global competitiveness by enacting significant tax
reform. Under Governor Parnell's plan, production taxes will be lowered
and the state will offer credits to incentivize additional drilling.
The state is in the process of enacting other reforms that will
attract more investment and, ultimately, increase oil production on the
North Slope and employment for Alaskans. For example, the Governor's
budget focuses on developing significant infrastructure projects to
build more roads to our abundant resources. We are also seeking to
reform our permitting system to enhance timeliness, predictability, and
efficiencies. The state is also holding lease sales on state lands
surrounding ANWR and in the OCS on state lands.
In the face of steadily declining production, Governor Parnell
recently announced an ambitious but critical goal for Alaska and the
country to increase TAPS throughput to one million barrels of oil
production per day within a decade. This ambitious goal will be
supported by an overall state strategy that seeks to:

Enhance Alaska's global competitiveness and
investment climate;

Ensure the permitting process is structured and
efficient in order to accelerate resource development;

Facilitate and incentivize the next phases of North
Slope development, including: outer continental shelf (OCS),
federal onshore lands, heavy and viscous oil, shale oil,
smaller pools of conventional oil, and gas;

Unlock Alaska's full resource development potential
by promoting constructive partnerships between the state and
key stakeholders to facilitate increased investment,
exploration, and production while protecting the state's
interests and safeguarding the environment;

Promote Alaska's resources and positive investment
climate to world markets.
The policies described above will significantly benefit Alaska, but
will also significantly benefit our fellow citizens in the Lower 48 as
they struggle with spiking oil and gas prices that affect their
livelihood and standard of living. Unfortunately, the executive branch
of the federal government does not have a similar focus. Indeed, as
detailed below, their focus has been to proactively shut down or delay
resource development throughout Alaska.
VI. Federal Decisions and Policies Have Sought to Proactively Shut Down
Resource Development in Alaska
The importance of federal land to the future of oil and gas
development in Alaska's Arctic must not be underestimated. Although 98
percent of all of the North Slope oil production to date has come from
state lands, the lion's share of the resource potential belongs to the
federal government--fully 88 percent of the undiscovered technically
recoverable conventional oil and 79 percent of the gas will be explored
for on land under federal jurisdiction. As discussed above, development
of these lands, in particular from the OCS, Arctic National Wildlife
Refuge, and National Petroleum Reserve--Alaska (NPR-A), could result in
production of well over a million barrels of oil a day.
Unfortunately, the federal government has consistently denied
access to these lands, made decisions that have added significant
delays to promising projects, and pursued policies that have chilled
the investment climate. More specifically, the federal government has
made a series of decisions that prevent or stall responsible
development of domestic energy in Alaska. We believe that the following
list will be of concern to members of this committee and your
colleagues in Congress:
NPR-A (A Region Specifically Set Aside for Oil Exploration and
Production)/CD-5 Critical Permit Denial. In 2010, the U.S. Army Corps
of Engineers (Corps) and the EPA and Fish and Wildlife Service derailed
ConocoPhillips (CP) development of CD-5, which is a field on the
eastern edge of the NPR-A. Once infrastructure is in place, CD-5 will
open satellite fields in the eastern NPR-A to development. The state,
CP, and Native communities worked with the Corps for years on the
project to ensure that responsible safeguards are in place to open this
field to development. In response to concerns raised by some
stakeholders, the project was modified to minimize environmental
impacts and the project garnered strong support from all stakeholders.
After years of collaboration, the permits were considered a foregone
conclusion. The first production from CD-5 was expected to start in
2012. Nevertheless, in February 2010, the Corps reversed course and
denied CP's permits to construct a drill pad, a pipeline/vehicle bridge
across the Nigliq Channel in the Colville River Delta, and access
roads. The Corps concluded that there are practicable alternatives to
the bridge, drill pad, and roads that would have fewer environmental
consequences but stakeholders, including the state, have provided
substantial evidence to the contrary. We continue to work hard on this
matter.
DOI's Wild Lands Designation. Another decision chilling the
investment climate in Alaska's NPR-A and beyond is the federal
government's new ``Wild Lands'' policy. Secretary Salazar recently
issued Secretarial Order 3310, which empowers the Bureau of Land
Management (BLM) to convert vast areas of Alaska, including the NPR-A,
into de-facto wilderness areas without Congressional oversight or
approval. State officials have heard from many resources companies who
have said if state lands receive Wild Lands designation they may not
continue to invest in Alaska.
OCS Permitting Delays Shutting Down Exploration Activities. The
greatest potential for significant oil and gas production lies in the
OCS. In recent years, Shell and other leading energy companies have
spent billions of dollars to acquire leases and explore the OCS. Shell
has also received approval for several exploration plans and has
acquired over 34 federal permits to drill exploration wells. Yet its
exploration plans have been repeatedly derailed; first by the 9th
Circuit Court of Appeals in 2008 and more recently by the DOI and the
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA).
ANWR Wilderness Designation. The USGS has demonstrated that perhaps
the greatest potential in America for an onshore elephant-size field is
in the 1002 Area of ANWR. Despite this potential, the federal
government has consistently refused to open the 1002 Area to
exploration. More recently, the U.S. Fish & Wildlife Service (USFWS) is
reviewing whether to designate the 1002 Area in ANWR as ``Wilderness,''
which would essentially lock-up ANWR from any oil and gas development.
In the Federal Register notice, the USFWS expressly prohibited the
public from filing comments related to oil and gas activity. The state
believes that such action conflicts with federal laws--under the
National Environmental Protection Act (NEPA) and the Alaska National
Interest Lands Conservation Act (ANILCA), the USFWS must consider the
benefits of oil and gas development before making a recommendation to
Congress on a Wilderness designation. We have made this view known to
the USFWS.
200,000 Square Miles of Critical Habitat Designated for Polar
Bears. The polar bear and its habitat are already well managed and
conserved by Alaska, international agreements, conservation programs,
and state and federal law. These laws and policies make the polar bear
one of the most protected species in the world. Its population has more
than doubled since oil production began on the North Slope.
Nonetheless, the USFWS recently designated nearly 200,000 acres of the
North Slope--which covers an area larger than the size of California--
as critical habitat for the polar bear. Never before has the USFWS
interpreted its authority to designate such a vast expanse of critical
habitat for a species. Worse, the USFWS acknowledges that the
designation will not provide significant additional conservation
measures for the polar bear and its habitat and that the primary
claimed threat to the species (loss of sea ice due to climate change)
will not be alleviated by this designation. Despite providing no
benefits, the critical habitat designation imposes another layer of
costly regulation on Alaska, its citizens, and its economy.
Point Thomson EIS Delay. ExxonMobil has committed to a Point
Thomson development plan to produce approximately 10,000 barrels of
natural gas condensate starting in 2014. The EIS, however, has not been
timely processed. As a result, the start-up date for the project has
been delayed from 2014 to 2015.
The Cumulative Impact of These Federal Decisions: Broad Based Policy
Failure
As this section demonstrates, in the past two years the federal
government has consistently sought to delay, shut down, or prevent
resource development in Alaska through its decisions and broad policy
mandates. Rarely has there been a federal policy that fails on so many
fronts:

Economic and job security--these policies have killed
hundreds of jobs in Alaska.

Trade deficit--shutting down resource development in
Alaska ensures that we import more oil from overseas.

Federal budget deficit--by denying Americans access
to their own lands to produce oil, the federal government is
foregoing billions in federal revenues, and instead Americans
are forced to help fill the treasuries of countries such as
Venezuela, Russia, and Saudi Arabia.

Energy security--foregoing and shutting down
development of Alaska's massive sources of domestic energy
undermines U.S. energy security.
It is also important to underscore that the current federal
administration's decisions and policies do not advance global
environmental protection. To the contrary, they do the opposite. When
oil and energy development in Alaska is shut down by our own
government, development for such resources is driven overseas to places
like Brazil, Russia, Iraq, Azerbaijan, and Saudi Arabia. Environmental
standards in these places are not nearly as strong or strictly enforced
as in Alaska, where stringent regulations are the hallmark of
hydrocarbon production on the North Slope.
VII. The State of Alaska Wants to Partner with the Federal Government
to Increase TAPS Throughput to One Million Barrels Within a
Decade to Help Reduce the Country's Import of Foreign Oil
The State of Alaska will continue to defend Alaska's interests by
trying to persuade the federal government to abandon its anti-
development policy in Alaska. Where persuasion fails, we will continue
to take other actions, including litigation when warranted. In so
doing, we strongly believe that we are also defending and promoting
broader American interests. All Americans should be concerned about
federal government policies that undermine U.S. interests across such a
broad spectrum of critical areas. In particular, the viability of TAPS
as a continuing critical component of our nation's energy security
infrastructure is an issue for all Americans. It is on this issue that
the federal government can play a critical role.
As noted above, the State of Alaska is doing all it can to make oil
production on state lands as globally competitive as possible. However,
the long-term viability of TAPS will primarily be determined by federal
politics and policies. The federal government's antidevelopment
policies throughout the North Slope chill the investment climate and
discourage companies from exploring and producing in Alaska. When Shell
cannot drill one exploratory well in the OCS after five years of
spending billions of dollars for leases and permits, ConocoPhillips
cannot get a permit, again after five years, to build a bridge across
the Colville River to access CD-5 in the NPR-A, and oil companies are
unable to conduct exploration drilling in ANWR, it is the federal
government that is denying access to abundant hydrocarbon resources
and, ultimately, jeopardizing the long-term viability of TAPS.
These are just a few examples of many where federal policies have
focused on discouraging--not encouraging--the billions of dollars of
investment needed to increase North Slope oil production. If we had a
federal government that welcomed exploration and development and
permitted operations in a timely and predictable manner, the economics
of filling TAPS would take care of itself.
The Federal Government Should Embrace the State of Alaska's Goal of
Increasing TAPS Throughput to 1 Million Barrels Per Day as a
National Policy
Our preferred approach is to have a federal government that joins
us in the mutually beneficial goal of responsible resource development
in Alaska. For this reason, Governor Parnell has redoubled the state's
efforts to gain federal cooperation on resource development issues.
As noted above on page 8, Governor Parnell recently announced an
ambitious but critical goal for Alaska and the country to increase the
Trans Alaska Pipeline System (TAPS) throughput to one million barrels
of oil production per day within a decade. On the same day, President
Obama announced his goal of reducing oil imports by one third by 2025.
The State of Alaska fully endorses President Obama's goal. Governor
Parnell reached out to President Obama expressing Alaska's support for
this important goal while at the same time asking the President to
support the state's goal to increase TAPS throughput. More
specifically, Governor Parnell respectfully requested that the
President direct his Secretaries of Interior and Energy, as well as the
EPA Administrator, to work with Alaska on refining a plan that will
enable Alaska and the rest of the country to achieve the goal
established by the President. More recently, Governor Parnell sent
another letter to President Obama requesting his assistance in bring
clarity, timeliness, and certainty to federal permitting. We recommend
that Congress make these goals a national priority as well.
In closing, the State of Alaska would welcome Congress's
involvement in ensuring that the federal government supports Alaska's
goal of one million barrels a day through TAPS within a decade. By
working together to champion such a goal, as well as the President's
goal of reducing oil imports by one third, we can demonstrate how state
and federal governments can come together to curb our dependence on
foreign oil and create a brighter, more secure future for Americans.
______

Mr. Lamborn. Thank you for your testimony.
Mr. Glenn, you may begin.

STATEMENT OF RICHARD GLENN, EXECUTIVE VICE PRESIDENT OF LANDS
AND NATURAL RESOURCES, ARCTIC SLOPE REGIONAL CORPORATION

Mr. Glenn. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Honorable Chairman,
Ranking Member Holt, thank you for the opportunity to appear
before you today.
I have more extensive written comments and I ask that they
be accepted. I will just give a brief overview of some of those
high points. And while I am speaking, I will be referring to a
chart that you see displayed off to my left here and that is a
chart that should become familiar to all of you by the end of
the day.
My name is Richard Glenn and I am the Executive Vice
President of Lands and Natural Resources for Arctic Slope
Regional Corporation.
Arctic Slope Regional Corporation is a creation of
Congress. It was created by the U.S. Government in an attempt
to avoid the Indian Reservation System that exists in the Lower
48 states. We are owned by the Inupiat Eskimo People of
Alaska's North Slope. My mother is an Inupiat Eskimo. I am a
hunter and a whaler from the community of Barrow and you cannot
see Russia from our front door, but I can see the Arctic Ocean.
Our communities, the eight communities of Alaska's North
Slope, are on the front lines of many of the issues that you
brought up this morning, Chairman and Ranking Member. We are
witnesses to global climate change. We are witnesses to the
development that is in our region, and yet our communities have
come to the conclusion that our people, our villages, our
subsistence culture depends on both a clean environment and the
development that exists in our region.
We formed our local government, the North Slope Borough to
a vigilant watcher of the development in our region and many of
the worries that existed about development in the Arctic were
expressed by our people 40 years ago when the Prudhoe Bay oil
fields were developed. And yet, because of our local
involvement and changes in technology, we have seen that the
animals that we were worried about and the environment that we
were concerned about has fared well.
There are more caribou now, more fish, more waterfowl than
before development started, and yet Northern Alaska is
America's energy province. The TransAlaska pipeline system is
the single artery that connects the rest of the country to this
province. Twenty-three million acres of petroleum reserve, the
coastal plain of the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge, Alaska's
bountiful OCS promise as well as dozens of oil fields are
connected to the country by this important link. In many ways
it defines access and infrastructure.
After a peak of two million barrels a day and today at
600,000 barrels a day, and dropping, as you see represented by
this curve, we are headed for an uncertain future. When you
look at that curve, what it says to you is a volume of oil
produced over time. But what it says to me is the history of
our people. The left side of the curve is the 1970s and just at
the end of the age when were putting men on the moon our
villages were in very hard scrabble conditions. And the peak of
the curve represents the efforts that we made to improve the
quality of life in our villages.
I am talking about a flushing toilet where before we had a
five-gallon bucket in the corner of the room. Reliable power
where before they had to turn off the power generation systems
at night. Construction of schools where before our parents had
to go thousands of miles away just to go high school. Things
like this were built in our communities by the presence of
industry in our region. Largely, without the help of any
Federal programs like you will find in tribal country elsewhere
in the United States. So that curve means something a lot
different to me than it means to the rest of you.
But as the curve shows, we are headed for a low point and
the low point beyond which the pipeline cannot safely transport
oil and gas. Meanwhile, prospects on the North Slope in the
neighborhood of the start of this pipeline lie fallow because
of wrong-minded policies that seem to obviate, deter, and block
efforts at reasonable production. The National Petroleum
Reserve (NPRA) is a good example--regardless of your views on
whether or not the coastal plain of ANWR should be explored and
developed for oil and gas. I think it should because Native-
owned lands are there and we want the chance to better
ourselves with that. We were told to use the NPRA as an
alternative rather than ANWR. Now when we try to develop ANWR,
we are told that national monument status, critical habitat
status, and potential wildlife swathes of special designation
block us for reasonable development of native-owned lands
there.
Mr. Chairman, our eyes are open. While the rest of the
world's were fixed on the events of the Gulf of Mexico, we
looked at the safety measures of the explorers in Alaska's OCS
and we were favorably impressed. We have come to the
conclusion, Mr. Chairman, that our communities will not survive
without development. Let me repeat that. Without development in
the Arctic, the Arctic Slope Native communities will not
survive. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Glenn follows:]

Statement of Richard Glenn, Executive Vice President of Lands and
Natural Resources, Arctic Slope Regional Corporation

Chairman Lamborn, Ranking Member Holt, and distinguished
Subcommittee members, thank you for allowing me an opportunity to
address this important issue.
My name is Richard Glenn. I am the Executive Vice President for
Lands and Natural Resources for Arctic Slope Regional Corporation
(ASRC), based in Barrow, Alaska. Arctic Slope Regional Corporation is
an Alaskan Native-owned regional corporation that was established
pursuant to the Alaska Native Claims Settlement Act of 1971 (ANCSA). It
is a private, for-profit corporation that is owned by the 11,000
Inupiat Eskimos from the villages of Point Hope, Point Lay, Wainwright,
Atqasuk, Barrow, Nuiqsut, Kaktovik, and Anaktuvuk Pass on Alaska's
North Slope.
Our villages are small and separated by great distance with no
roads connecting them. Barrow, my hometown, is a coastal community
located 340 miles north of the Arctic Circle. It is located in a region
of tundra plains, devoid of trees, with an average annual temperature
of around 10 degrees Fahrenheit. In Barrow, the ground is frozen to a
depth of about a thousand feet and our ocean is ice-covered for much of
the year. In our more remote villages, fuel can cost ten dollars or
more per gallon; milk--eleven dollars per gallon. Despite these
physical and current economic challenges, the Inupiat people have
endured. We have done so for centuries. We have demonstrated a close
relationship with both the land and sea in our region.
Our communities realize that our survival depends on a healthy
environment and upon resource development that exists in our region.
Safe, responsible oil and gas development is the only industry that has
remained in our region long enough to foster improvements to our remote
communities. More than forty years ago, when the Prudhoe Bay oilfields
were first being developed, our people were worried about the effects
on the environment and its wildlife. We formed our regional government
in part to exercise permitting control on the explorers and producers.
Now we can look back and see that fish, caribou and waterfowl were not
threatened by development-in fact they have increased in number.
Regarding environmental effects of oil and gas development, on and
offshore, no one has more at stake than the residents of the North
Slope.
Congress in 1971 passed the Alaska Native Claims Settlement Act in
an attempt to extinguish claims of aboriginal title by Alaska's Native
people. With ANCSA, Congress chose to create 12 land-based Alaska
Native Regional Corporations and more than 200 Alaska Native Village
Corporations, and gave each of them title to surface and/or subsurface
ownership of some of the land they claimed, as well as a cash
settlement for part of the remainder of lands each group claimed. With
these lands and cash settlements, the corporations were poised to
develop their resources and benefit their shareholders, the tribal
members of their region or village. My regional corporation, ASRC,
represents the Natives of Alaska's North Slope.
With approximately five million acres of surface and subsurface
estate conveyed to it under the terms of ANCSA, ASRC is the largest
private landowner on the North Slope. ASRC's lands contain a high
potential for oil, gas, coal and minerals, including lands that are
already producing oil. As stewards of the land, ASRC continuously
strives to balance management of Inupiat Eskimo cultural resources with
management of natural resources.
Alaska's North Slope is a national energy province. It covers 50
million acres of the northern portion of our state and hosts many well
known energy resource prospects and production areas including Prudhoe
Bay and nearby oil fields, the National Petroleum Reserve in Alaska
(NPR-A), the Coastal Plain of the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge and
many others. It is adjacent to both the Beaufort and Chukchi Seas,
which overlie the most prospective hydrocarbon basins of Alaska's Outer
Continental Shelf (OCS).
At its peak around 1990, northern Alaska produced up to a fifth of
the country's oil, sending more than two million barrels per day from
the prolific Prudhoe Bay, Kuparuk and nearby oilfields down the 800-
mile long Trans Alaska Pipeline System (TAPS) for marine shipment to
the West Coast. Today, TAPS remains the single conduit for development
of Alaska's resources; it defines access and infrastructure. And, the
resources of the North Slope have been developed without negatively
affecting the wildlife species such as fish, caribou or migrating
waterfowl.
Today, Alaska's production is at about a third of its peak (see
chart). Continued reduction in volume, or throughput, as the large
fields decline, threatens the integrity of the pipeline itself. At
lower flow rates, paraffins and water are more prone to settle out and
the oil cools more in transit due to its slow velocity. The result is
an increased risk of accelerated corrosion and freezing. Despite the
development of about a dozen other North Slope oil fields, none have
yet been able to compensate for the decline of the much larger Prudhoe
and Kuparuk fields. They have only lessened the steepness of the
decline.
Other nearby prospects for production or exploration lie fallow
today because there is a near shutdown of new onshore development. This
is due to a mixture of federal policy and land use decisions that have
chilled new exploration and development. A good example is the National
Petroleum Reserve in Alaska (NPR-A). The 23 million-acre NPR-A was
designated in 1923 by President Harding specifically for its
hydrocarbon potential due to the presence of naturally occurring oil
and gas seeps throughout the area. Today, further exploration of the
NPR-A is at risk by overlapping swaths of National Monument and
Critical Habitat status--in a petroleum reserve. When North Slope
leaders and others have advocated over the years for the exploration of
the Native-owned lands on Coastal Plain of the Arctic National Wildlife
Refuge, we have been told that the NPR-A exists for that kind of
activity. Now, at a time when we need additional development, even the
Native-owned lands in the NPR-A are being held off limits.
According to the USGS, the most significant prospects for
additional new production lie in Alaska's OCS region. It appears that
this Administration agrees that it is in the nation's interest that
Alaska's OCS should be explored and developed. With the production
decline of the larger onshore fields and few marginal discoveries to
replace them, the future of TAPS (and the economic future of both the
North Slope and the State of Alaska itself) depends on the development
of additional production from offshore prospects.
We believe that offshore exploration can be conducted safely. While
the rest of the world was fixed on the disaster in the Gulf of Mexico,
we were reviewing the leading exploration safety measures that the
Alaska OCS explorers have developed for the Arctic. We were favorably
impressed. In addition, we have seen the extra measures that explorers
have taken to avoid conflict with our subsistence hunters. They have
gone a long way to ease our concerns.
This hearing is timely. Our region, just last week, assembled our
leadership to discuss this very topic. We find that our community
survival depends on continued production from our region. Let me be
clear, without development in our region our communities will not
survive. Thank you again, Committee members, for allowing me to share
the views of the people of the North Slope regarding development of
Alaska's natural resources.
______

Mr. Lamborn. Thank you very much for your compelling
testimony. Mr. Lawrence.

STATEMENT OF DAVID T. LAWRENCE, EXECUTIVE VICE PRESIDENT--
EXPLORATION AND COMMERCIAL, SHELL ENERGY RESOURCES COMPANY

Mr. Lawrence. Mr. Chairman, members of the Subcommittee, I
appreciate the opportunity to speak to you today.
I have been asked to talk about Alaska's extraordinary
offshore oil and gas resource potential and how tapping these
resources could benefit the country.
The world needs oil and gas. It is widely recognized that
global demand for energy will double by 2050, and to meet it we
will need all forms of energy. Alaska's Outer Continental Shelf
holds world-class resources. Government experts say Alaska's
offshore holds at least 27 billion barrels of oil. It could be
much more. We won't know until we can actually explore with the
drill bit. We have been ready to do that since 2007. However,
we have been blocked by regulatory barriers.
Put simply, developing Alaska's OCS is imperative for U.S.
energy supplies, our economy, and our national security.
Credible studies project that peak production from Alaska's OCS
could top 1.4 million barrels of oil per day, more than the
2010 imports from Saudi Arabia. Reducing foreign imports has
immediate economic benefits. The balance of trade improves and
U.S. dollars stay here to fuel our own economy. Alaska's OCS
development will create an average of nearly 55,000 jobs per
year for generations. These are long-term, well-paying jobs,
both in Alaska and in the Lower 48. It will generate
conservatively, almost $200 billion in government revenue from
royalty and taxes. Perhaps most importantly, our offshore oil
will move through the TransAlaska Pipeline System or TAPS,
which for the last 30 years has delivered more than 17 billion
barrels of oil to terminals in Washington State and California.
TAPS is a major energy supply line to the Lower 48, and it
should continue to be so. It is now running at one-third of its
peak capacity. Unless more crude is developed in Alaska, TAPS
is at risk, meaning that a major energy supply artery to the
Lower 48 is at risk.
A generation of Americans worked to build TAPS and it
remains not only an economic engine, but a symbol of American
know-how and ingenuity. Without a reliable, new resource base,
TAPS future is uncertain at best. The TransAlaska Pipeline is a
national security asset we are counting on to deliver offshore
to the U.S. well into the future, and for that to happen we are
also counting on government to uphold its obligations to
leaseholders. Regulatory barriers that undermine the nation's
oil and gas leasing program should be of grave concern to
policymakers.
Consider the facts, at the government invitations Shell
participated in offshore lease sales in Alaska. We paid the
government more than $2 billion for those leases and invested
more than 1.5 billion additional dollars to prepare for an
exploratory program that meets and exceeds regulatory
requirements. But despite our most intense efforts, we have yet
to be able to drill a single well.
This is highly unusual. When the Federal Government holds a
sale, it is saying OCS exploration and development is desired.
If a company presents a plan that meets all regulatory
requirements that plan should be permitted. Unlike a
development and production program, exploration is a temporary,
short-term operation. Our initial Alaska wells will each take
approximately 30 days to complete. Data will be gathered and
the well will be permanently plugged and abandoned.
These are not complex wells. The much lower pressures
encountered in Alaska's shallow waters means the mechanical
barriers and Shell's design will have even greater safety
margins and much lower risk profiles than those in the deep
water Gulf. Still, Shell has assembled an unprecedented oil
spill response capability. There is no question the bar should
be high in the Arctic. We support high standards and a robust
permitting process. But the process must work and currently the
government's permitting and regulatory process is not equipped
to deliver.
These delays are frustrating and disappointing and they are
undermining our confidence in the American regulatory system.
And it is more than just exploratory drilling delay. Production
from the Chukchi Sea, for example, will be delivered to TAPS
through a pipeline across the National Petroleum Reserve, so
timely permitting for that is also crucial. Thousands of men
and women are counting on the jobs that will follow success and
local businesses are counting on the revenue and communities
are counting on the tax boost.
Certainly, this is an area that Congress needs to address.
Decisive action must be taken to bring these resources to bear
and ensure our country remains an attractive environment for
investment. It comes down to this, if policymakers want to
enable the development of our offshore resources, they must
support the regulatory process, fund and staff the agencies to
ensure the necessary permitting work in a competent and
efficient manner, require the regulatory process be clear and
streamlined and recognize that clear timelines are critical so
that companies can plan investment decisions accordingly. Thank
you and I look forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Lawrence follows:]

Statement of David Lawrence, Executive Vice President,
Exploration and Commercial, Shell

Introduction
Mr. Chairman and members of the Subcommittee, I appreciate the
opportunity to testify today. I would like to thank you for having this
hearing to examine the resource potential in the Alaska Outer
Continental Shelf (OCS) and why this is important to the future of the
Trans Alaska Pipeline System (TAPS) and the Nation's energy supply.
As Executive Vice President of Shell Exploration and Commercial, I
lead a team of professionals who identify, invest in and explore for
oil and gas resources around the world. The Arctic, including Alaska's
offshore, holds world-class resource volumes. That is why Shell has
invested in leases off the coast of Alaska.
Alaska can continue to play a major role in meeting the energy
needs of American consumers and American businesses, but achieving that
result requires action and political will. Developing these resources
will extend the life of TAPS, and also create thousands of jobs;
hundreds of billions in revenue for local, state and federal coffers;
reduce imports; and improve the balance of trade.
Shell has been prepared to explore in Alaska's OCS since 2007, but
regulatory and legal challenges have prevented us from drilling even a
single well. In the five years since first seeking to explore in
Alaska, Shell has drilled more than 400 exploration wells around the
world. I remain hopeful that the barriers to exploring in Alaska's OCS
will be addressed so that Shell can begin its exploration drilling in
2012.
Today I will discuss:

Global energy demand forecasts, and the fact that oil
and gas will play a critical role in meeting future energy
needs and in fueling the economy.

Alaska's OCS resource potential, and the benefits to
the nation of developing those resources.

Shell's proposed exploration program in Alaska and
the challenges that have blocked the program.

And finally, some recommendations for moving forward.
Global Energy Demand
The world must grapple with the reality that global energy demand
is projected to increase by roughly 50 percent over the next 20 years
and could double by 2050. As the global recession fades and economies
recover, demand will accelerate. A key driver will be strong economic
growth and a vast, emerging middle-class in the developing nations.
To address this demand, we will need all sources of energy--
hydrocarbons, alternatives, renewables and significant progress in
efficiency. Oil and gas will be the dominant energy source for decades.
Renewables and energy efficiency will play an ever-increasing role.
Shell is actively pursuing research and development into next
generation biofuels. We also have a wind business in North America and
Europe, for which I am responsible.
Future growth for alternative energy forms will be paced by the
speed of technological development, public and private investment
capacity, government policies, and the affordability of energy supply.
Still, it takes several decades to replace even one percent of
conventional energy with a renewable source. The effort to tip the
scale towards more renewable sources of energy is worthwhile but even
unprecedented growth in renewables would leave an enormous energy gap
that must be filled with oil and gas.
As we move to meet the world's energy needs, environmental
challenges must be met and policies kept in place to ensure responsible
energy development. We must recognize and provide the amount of energy
that will be required to allow our economy to grow; and do so in an
environmentally sustainable way.
Governments have a role to play in defining the policies that will
foster a viable, efficient and workable marketplace that allows
technology and innovation to move forward. Industry--and most
particularly the energy industry--has an important role to play as
well.
U.S. Oil and Gas Resource Potential
The President recently acknowledged that reducing dependence on
imports was a national policy imperative. We agree. The U.S. is
resource-rich in many ways, especially in oil and gas. Yet, the U.S.
imports more than 60 percent of its petroleum.
Consider the enormous costs created by importing oil. According to
the EIA:

Petroleum net imports will average 9.7 million
barrels per day 2011 and 10 million barrels per day in 2012,
comprising 50 percent and 52 percent of total consumption,
respectively.

Imports cost the U.S. more than $350 billion last
year.
I applaud the President for highlighting the need to reduce
imports. Producing more oil and gas in our own country is a ``win-win''
proposition. It provides real economic and security benefits. With
increased domestic production, less money is exported from the U.S.,
more money is invested here and federal revenues increase through
royalties and taxes. This can be done in a way that provides
appropriate environmental protections based on solid science and an
understanding of ecosystems and the impact of oil and gas activities on
them.
I offer an example from the OCS:
According to the U.S. government, 420 trillion cubic feet of
natural gas and more than 86 billion barrels of oil are yet to be
discovered on the OCS, including Alaska. To put that into perspective,
that is enough natural gas to heat 100 million homes for 60 years and
enough oil to fuel 85 million cars for 35 years.
The greatest offshore resource potential lies in four key areas:
the Gulf of Mexico, Alaska and the Atlantic and Pacific Coasts.

Gulf of Mexico--This has been the heartland of U.S.
offshore activity. The industry has been in the Gulf for more
than 60 years, producing more than 10 billion barrels of oil
and more than 73 trillion cubic feet of natural gas. Estimates
state there are at least 45 billion barrels of oil and more
than 233 trillion cubic feet of gas remaining.

Alaska OCS--World Class Potential--The Alaska
offshore likely holds some of the most prolific, undeveloped
conventional hydrocarbon basins in the world. Conservative
estimates from the Bureau of Ocean and Energy Management
Regulation and Enforcement (BOEMRE) place roughly 27 billion
barrels of oil and over 120 trillion cubic feet of gas in the
Alaska OCS.

Atlantic and Pacific Coasts - Assessments of these
areas have not been updated in decades, but the estimate is
that the Atlantic Coast holds 4 billion barrels of oil and 37
trillion cubic feet of gas and the Pacific Coast holds 10
billion barrels of oil and 18 trillion cubic feet of gas.
History of Alaska OCS
The world has long been aware of the Arctic's vast resources. In
total, more than 500 exploratory, production, and disposal wells have
been drilled in the Arctic waters of Alaska, Canada, Norway and Russia.
As a result of federal OCS lease sales in the 1980s and 1990s, more
than 35 wells have been safely drilled in the U.S. Beaufort and Chukchi
Seas.
Shell is proud of its offshore legacy in Alaska, having produced in
the state waters of Cook Inlet in Alaska for more than 30 years
beginning in 1964. In the late 1970s and mid 1980s, Shell drilled
exploration wells offshore in the Gulf of Alaska, St. George Basin and
the Bering Sea. In the late 1980s and early 1990s, Shell drilled
several exploration wells in the Beaufort Sea and later drilled four of
the five exploration wells ever drilled in the Chukchi Sea.
Although oil and gas were found, Shell chose not to proceed to
development. We plugged and abandoned those exploratory wells for
economic reasons--including the fact that, at that time, TAPS was
already running near capacity.
Since 2005, the federal government has held several more OCS lease
sales in Alaska. Shell participated in these lease sales and in fact,
is now the majority leaseholder in the Alaska offshore. Shell has paid
the federal treasury nearly $2.2 billion for ten-year leases in the
Beaufort and Chukchi Seas. Additionally, Shell has invested more than
$1.5 billion and six years preparing for an exploration drilling
program with unparalleled mitigation and safety measures. Shell's work
includes multiple years of 3D seismic data collection, first-of-its-
kind baseline science, shallow hazard surveys, geotechnical programs,
numerous social investment initiatives and hundreds of meetings with
North Slope residents.
The Benefits of Developing the Alaska Offshore
The benefits of developing Alaska's offshore oil and gas resources
are many--not only to Alaska, but also to the Lower 48. Development
would be an economic engine for decades to come.
The jobs growth and economic benefits of Alaska OCS exploration and
development are well understood. A study conducted in 2010 by Northern
Economics and the Institute for Social and Economic Research (ISER) at
the University of Alaska details the potential national benefits of
developing the oil and gas resources of the Alaska OCS:

An annual average of 54,700 new jobs would be created
and sustained through the year 2057, with 68,600 jobs created
throughout decades of production and 91,500 at peak employment;

A total of $145 billion in new payroll would be paid
to employees through the year 2057, including $63 billion to
employees in Alaska and $82 billion to employees in the rest of
the U.S.; and

A total of $193 billion in government revenue would
be generated through the year 2057, with $167 billion to the
federal government, $15 billion to the state of Alaska, $4
billion to local Alaska governments, and $6.5 billion to other
state governments.
Several important implications for national policy and domestic
supply are raised in the study including:

Alaska OCS development maximizes the value of
Alaska's and the nation's oil and gas resources by enhancing
both value and volume. Using TAPS' existing infrastructure,
which is currently operating far below capacity, would enhance
value by lowering transportation costs. Further, the new
expanded infrastructure needed to connect to TAPS would enable
development of satellite fields such as the National Petroleum
Reserve-Alaska (NPRA).

Alaska OCS development would extend the operating
life of TAPS and increase the viability of an Alaska gas
pipeline, due to greater certainty of the available gas
resource base to fill it.
To elaborate, Alaska's OCS likely has at least one-third more oil
than has been produced in Prudhoe Bay, moved through TAPS and used to
fuel the U.S. for the past 30 years. It is two-and-a-half times what
has been produced in the Gulf of Mexico since 1990.
An independent assessment of industry-wide development of Alaska's
Beaufort and Chukchi Sea OCS concluded that an average of about 700,000
barrels of oil per day would be produced for 40 years. This is
equivalent to our 2010 oil imports from Iraq (506,000 bbl/day) and
Russia (137,000 bbl/day) combined. This same study found that Alaska
OCS production would peak at 1.45 million barrels of oil per day in
2030 (and 2.1 billion cubic feet of gas per day in 2050). This is more
than our 2010 oil imports from some of our major importing nations,
e.g, Mexico (1.03 million bbl/day), Saudi Arabia (958,000 bbl/day),
Nigeria (996,000 bbl/day), or Venezuela (827,000 bbl/day).
Such production numbers, which could potentially eliminate the need
for imports from one of our largest foreign suppliers, is significant,
and even--more so in a world of increasing geopolitical instability.
Domestic energy production is critical for the security and
prosperity of the U.S. Money spent on domestic energy cycles in the
U.S. economy, increases domestic economic activity and jobs. Alaska OCS
activity will also help address our national debt, bringing in hundreds
of billions in federal revenues in taxes and royalties from oil and gas
production and the economic activity that is stimulated as a result.
A major benefit from Beaufort and Chukchi development would be the
long-term viability of TAPS. Since 1977, Alaska has supplied the U.S.
and its refineries with vast quantities of domestic oil via TAPS,
totaling roughly 17 billion barrels through 2010. The construction and
operation of the pipeline has also provided hundreds of thousands of
high paying jobs in Alaska and the nation, helping to lift America out
of one of its worst economic downturns. A generation of Americans
worked to build TAPS; and it remains not only an economic engine, but a
symbol of American know-how and ingenuity. Unfortunately, without a
reliable new resource base, TAPS' future is uncertain.
Production in Prudhoe Bay has fallen significantly in recent
decades. At its height, TAPS supplied the nation with 2.1 million
barrels of oil per day or about one-third of the nation's oil
production.
Today TAPS supplies only 600,000 barrels per day; about 11 percent
of our domestic supply. If the throughput in the pipeline continues to
decline and no new supplies are developed, TAPS will eventually be shut
down, cutting access to one of the largest sources of domestically
produced oil in the country. Our already increasing dependence on
imported oil will accelerate and the U.S. balance of payments and
federal revenues will both get worse.
A temporary shutdown of TAPS earlier in 2011 had an immediate
impact on crude prices, jeopardized the continuity of the U.S. West
Coast refinery infrastructure, and resulted in a spike in U.S. reliance
on Russian crude supplies. This could be a harbinger of things to come
unless we develop new resources in Alaska.
Fortunately, the U.S. has an opportunity to prevent this scenario
from reoccurring. According to Northern Economics and ISER at the
University of Alaska, if OCS oil is transported through TAPS, the
higher volume of throughput would reduce the TAPS tariff and would
extend the life of TAPS for decades. Doing so would require new
pipelines that connect offshore fields in Camden Bay and the Chukchi
Sea to TAPS. These projects would certainly rank among the largest
private sector construction projects in U.S. history.
It is clear that resource development, such as OCS oil and gas
production, is the first step in wealth creation. It has an enormous
economic multiplier effect. Jobs and revenues created by oil and gas
development reverberate throughout our economy, producing long-term
high paying jobs. It creates a need for domestic manufacturing
capabilities, steel production, transportation, infrastructure
development, electronics and high-tech components. Alaska OCS
development is a genuine long-term economic stimulus plan.
Finally, by exploring and developing our Alaska OCS resources, the
U.S. has an opportunity to reaffirm its global role as an Arctic
nation. It is no secret that the Arctic is becoming a critical location
from a geopolitical and strategic perspective. Arctic nations are
increasingly interested in international boundaries and opportunities
for resources and economic development.
Recently, Norway and Russia signed a maritime border delimitation
agreement that settled a long-standing seaward boundary dispute in the
Barents Sea. The stimulus for the agreement was mutual cooperation that
would allow the development of offshore Arctic oil and gas resources.
Elsewhere, Arctic nations are asserting their claims to continental
shelf borders in accordance with the United Nations Convention on the
Law of the Sea. For instance, we've recently seen reports that Denmark
will lay claim to the North Pole itself, as an extension of Greenland
territorial waters. Even nations outside the Arctic are positioning
themselves for Arctic resource development.
With continuing U.S. inactivity, our country risks falling even
further behind the rest of the world in developing its Arctic
resources. In Norway, Russia, Greenland and Canada, Arctic resources
are highly valued and new exploration is already underway. We have an
opportunity to develop our own Arctic resources and the infrastructure
appropriate to facilitate our presence in this valuable region.
Offshore Safety Standards
Before moving to a discussion of Shell's Alaska OCS exploration
program, it remains appropriate to acknowledge the Deepwater Horizon
incident in the Gulf of Mexico. The incident forced a re-examination of
offshore operations and led to new regulatory requirements that have
raised the bar on safety and led to substantial changes in the way the
industry operates. There is no question that the industry must be held
to the highest standards both for protecting the environment and
protecting the health and well-being of our workers and communities in
which we operate.
Let me highlight a few of the new regulatory requirements systems
adopted by the federal government and industry:

The Interim Final Drilling Safety Rule is focused on
minimizing the likelihood of an incident and addresses barriers
that should be in place to prevent a hazard. Preventing an
incident is a top priority.

Responding to an incident is now substantially
enhanced with new requirements for containment capability. The
Marine Well Containment Company (MWCC), which Shell initially
formed in partnership with three other oil and gas companies,
is designed to do just that. The MWCC is a stand-alone
organization committed to improving capability for containing a
potential underwater well control incident in the Gulf of
Mexico.

The industry announced that a new Center for Offshore
Safety will be created to promote the safety of offshore
operations and enhance the government's regulatory role. The
Center will provide an effective means for sharing best
practices. Members will be subject to independent, third-party
auditing and verification to ensure integrity. The Center will
operate around an existing safety framework known as RP75, or
``Recommended Practice for Development of a Safety and
Environmental Management Program for Offshore Operations and
Facilities.''

Industry has also significantly increased its
resources to respond to a major oil spill by adding vessels,
equipment and personnel. Significant research and development
is ongoing for oil spills in ice.

Shell recently announced it has taken the lead as
operator of the Subsea Well Response Project (SWRP) to be based
in Stavanger, Norway. Nine major oil and gas companies will
work pro-actively and collaboratively progressing development
of subsea well intervention and oil spill response equipment
that can be deployed swiftly to different regions in the world.
In addition to regulatory requirements, a company must foster and
promote safety relentlessly each day. At Shell we call this Goal Zero.
Everyone who works for us--both employee and contractor--is expected to
comply with the rules; intervene when anything looks unsafe; and
respect people, the environment and our neighbors. Compliance is not
optional.
We have personal safety systems and procedures with clear, firm
rules; simple ``do's and don'ts'' covering activities with the highest
potential safety risk, such as getting proper authorization before
disabling safety-critical equipment and protecting against falls when
working at heights.
We have process safety systems to ensure the safety and integrity
of our operations and assets. Process safety is also managed through a
variety of tools, such as well and facility design standards;
established ``operating envelopes'' not to be exceeded; maintenance and
inspection intervals for safety critical equipment; and an effective
Management of Change process.
Our approach also requires that all our drilling contractors
develop a Safety Case to demonstrate major risks are properly managed.
A Safety Case shows how we identify and assess the hazards on the rig;
how we establish barriers to prevent and control the hazards; and how
we assign the critical activities needed to maintain the integrity of
these barriers. Further, it guides the rig and crews in risk
management; and ensures staff competency, especially for those new to
the rig.
Shell's Alaska Exploration Program
Shell is planning an offshore oil and gas exploration program in
Alaska's OCS in 2012 during the three-month open water season. This
program could include drilling multiple wells in both the Beaufort and
Chukchi Seas, site clearance surveys and baseline science studies. It
is important to note that an exploration program, unlike a development
and production program, is a temporary, short-term operation. In the
Alaska OCS, an exploration well is anticipated to take approximately 30
days to complete, at which time the well will be permanently plugged
and abandoned and the site cleared. Shell's exploration program will
meet or exceed all applicable regulatory requirements for the
protection of health, safety and the environment.
Shell is committed to employing world-class technology and
experience to ensure a safe, environmentally responsible Arctic
exploration program--one that has the smallest possible footprint and
no negative impact on North Slope stakeholders or traditional
subsistence hunting activities. Aspects of the 2012 program have been
under evaluation by federal agencies since 2006. At every step, Shell
has worked with federal agencies, the State of Alaska, and local
communities to develop a program that achieves the highest technical,
operational and environmental standards.
My discussion here focuses on the following points:
1.  The currently available science regarding the Arctic is
extensive and more than adequate for an exploration program;
2.  The shallow water, low pressure Alaska OCS wells differ
significantly from Gulf of Mexico deepwater exploratory wells;
and
3.  The oil spill prevention, containment, mitigation and
response plans included in Shell's 2012 Arctic exploration plan
are robust and comprehensive.
Arctic Baseline Science
Some argue that there is insufficient scientific data regarding the
Arctic and, therefore, exploration in the Chukchi and Beaufort Seas
should not go forward. This is not accurate. In fact, the available
scientific data is more than adequate to identify and evaluate the
impacts of an exploration program that is, by definition, a short-term,
temporary operation.
Several thousand environmental, ecological, and socio-economic
studies applicable to oil and gas activities in the Arctic OCS have
been completed over the last 30 years. The categories of scientific
data available include: tides and ocean currents, weather (e.g., wind
and its effect on currents, precipitation), ice conditions, baseline
environmental data related to species found in the arctic (e.g.,
benthic, fish, birds, marine mammals, etc.), assessments regarding the
impacts of oil and gas exploration activities on those species, and,
specifically, information assessing the impacts of an oil spill on
those resources, in the highly unlikely event of an incident during
exploration drilling.
Since 1973, federal agencies have performed more than 5,000
environmental studies to better understand the Alaska OCS and coastal
environment, and document or predict the effects of offshore oil and
gas activities. The former Minerals Management Service Environmental
Studies Program spent more than $600 million (more than $1 billion in
inflation adjusted dollars) for studies under the guidance of the OCS
Scientific Committee, which advises the Secretary of Interior. About
half of these funds have been directed to Alaska.
The advancement of scientific knowledge will continue. This
expanded knowledge is critical because it informs government regulators
who must issue permits, it informs policymakers who must develop sound
energy and environmental policy and it informs our operational
decisions. In fact, Shell is contributing to advancing Arctic science
in several ways. Since returning to Alaska in 2005, Shell has spent $60
million engaging in an aggressive environmental studies program in the
Arctic offshore. Shell has worked in a collaborative manner with a wide
range of stakeholders, including industry partners, local, state, and
federal governments, universities, and non-government organizations to
share resources and facilitate the further development of our
understanding of the Arctic marine ecosystem.
Shell has also taken the lead in the development and implementation
of new technologies, including unmanned aerial systems, acoustic
recorders, and integrated ecosystem studies to advance capacities to
work in this challenging offshore environment. Shell fosters and funds
such diverse research as computer assisted identification of marine
mammal calls, greatly enhancing the capacity to utilize acoustic
sampling technologies, satellite tagging of whales and seals, ice and
weather forecasting and physical oceanography.
Recently, the North Slope Borough (NSB) and Shell entered into a
multi-year collaborative science agreement that will enable impacted
North Slope communities to build capacity for scientific research and
independent review of studies, exploration and development plans and
regulatory documents. The research program established under this
agreement will be guided by an Advisory Committee of representatives
from each of the coastal communities (Point Hope, Point Lay,
Wainwright, Barrow, Nuiqsut and Kaktovik), scientists from the NSB and
Shell, and independent scientists. This committee will be responsible
for identifying critical issues, setting investigative priorities, and
integrating traditional knowledge with science. The current agreement
is between the NSB and Shell, but it anticipates expansion of the
studies program through additional funds from third parties, which may
include either private or public sources.
If exploration leads to a commercial discovery, even more science
will be needed. Consistent with the Outer Continental Shelf Lands Act's
(OCSLA) multi-stage process, development and production activities will
build on the information gathered through the exploration stage. The
first development in the Arctic OCS will require the preparation of an
additional environmental impact statement. The issues to be addressed
in that document will be determined during a public scoping process.
Since 2006, Shell has spent almost $90 million pre-investing in data
acquisition, studies, and research and development that will support
environmentally sound offshore development. Information gathered during
these earlier OCSLA stages (including exploration) will form the basis
for that scoping process, as well as the identification of any issues
that may require additional research or study before informed decision
making.
This approach was recently validated in the final version of the
President's Oil Spill Commission report where it states, ``The need for
additional research should not be used as a de facto moratorium on
activity in the Arctic, but instead should be carried out with specific
timeframes in mind in order to inform the decision making process.''
Exploration in Alaska's OCS vs. Exploration in Deepwater Gulf of Mexico
The drilling conditions for Shell's proposed 2012 Alaska OCS
exploration program are typical of wells that have been safely drilled
for decades in shallow water around the world. The Alaska OCS wells are
in shallow waters and have much lower downhole pressure, which is
vastly different from the conditions found in the deep waters of the
Gulf of Mexico. This increases the safety margin.
The Deepwater Horizon was drilling the Macondo well in 5,000 feet
of water and down to a depth of 18,000 feet. The pressure encountered
in the Macondo well was about 15,000 psi based on mud weight at total
depth. The water depth, well depth and pressure make the Macondo well
and other deepwater Gulf of Mexico wells far more technically complex
than the shallow wells that will be drilled off the coast of Alaska.
In Alaska's Beaufort Sea, the wells will be in 150 feet of water or
less. The wells will be between 7,000 to 10,000 feet deep. We have
extensive reservoir pressure models based on previously drilled wells
in the Chukchi and Beaufort Seas that show the pressure at total depth
in our initial exploration wells will be no more than 6,000 psi, less
than one-third the pressure of Macondo.
With lower anticipated bottomhole pressure in the Alaska wells, all
of the mechanical barriers in Shell's well design have higher overall
safety margins between operating pressure and mechanical barrier design
pressures. Even if the riser from the drill rig to the blow-out
preventer on the seafloor was breeched, as it was in Macondo, the
weight of the drill mud in the downhole pipe would maintain well
control and prevent a blowout from happening. To reiterate, Shell's
2012 Arctic well program is exploratory. The well will not be converted
to a production well. It will be permanently plugged and abandoned per
federal regulations.
Oil Spill Prevention and Response
Oil spill prevention and response planning is a top priority.
Shell's Oil Discharge Prevention and Contingency Plan is robust. We
have invested in an unprecedented oil spill response capability to
support our drilling plans in the Beaufort and Chukchi Seas. Our spill
recovery equipment is state-of-the-art, widely acknowledged by experts
as proven and effective under cold-climate conditions and designed to
remove the worst-case discharge.
Specifically, Shell has developed a three-tier or layer system for
use in the Alaska OCS.
1.  The first tier is located on site, always less than an hour
from the drilling rig. It is a dedicated fleet of purpose-built
vessels and specialized oil containment equipment, which will
be on-site 24/7 before a drill bit ever touches the sea floor.
2.  The second tier is located to capture oil that might move
away from the drill rig.
3.  The third layer involves pre-staged shoreline protection.
This, along with the first two tiers involves extensive use of
both local residents and traditional knowledge.
Shell's oil spill response personnel routinely practice and conduct
spill response drills. The response system consists of dedicated oil
spill response assets including:

Offshore recovery vessels with skimmers and boom,

Near-shore barges with skimmer and boom,

Shallow water vessels with skimmers and boom,

Pre-identified protection strategies and equipment
for environmentally and culturally sensitive sites, and

Onshore oil spill response teams to deploy and
support the above.
These assets are staffed during operation around the clock with
trained crews provided by Alaska Clean Seas, Arctic Slope Regional
Corporation, and Ukpeagvik Inupiat Corporation.
Design Prevention, Containment and Spill Response
Shell has design standards and practices that have enabled us to
safely drill many deepwater and shallow water wells worldwide in a
variety of conditions, including the Arctic. Shell will rigorously
apply these standards in all well operations on the Alaska OCS. As
described above, the conditions of the well mean that prevention
through the mechanical barriers built into the design have a high
margin of safety.
The blow out preventers (BOP) that Shell will use have been
extensively maintained, inspected and tested by third party
specialists. The BOPs have been validated to comply with the original
equipment manufacturer specifications, in accordance with API Recommend
Practice No. 53. Shell's BOPs will have two sets of shear rams and
comply with all regulatory requirements.
We will also retain the ability to mechanically cap the well in the
unlikely event of a BOP breach. In fact, all existing Shell wells, in
deep water, around the globe, can be capped. The design and
construction of these wells allows them to withstand the pressure
build-up that results when the well is capped. If the blow-out
maintains mechanical integrity in the borehole and wellhead, a
``capping and containment'' operation would be employed. Mechanically
capping the well, for example with an additional pre-engineered BOP,
has the ability to reduce or even stop the flow, but still requires a
surface collection system. The benefit of this response methodology is
that it reduces or completely halts the flow of oil entering the water
column. This capping method was eventually proven successful in
terminating the well bore flow even at Macondo, and has been an
integral part of well control descriptions in industry's recently
approved permits in the deepwater Gulf of Mexico return to drilling.
In the extremely unlikely event that the wellhead integrity is
compromised and an uncontrolled flow occurs, we would employ a pre-
fabricated ``subsea collection'' system. This would consist of a
capping stack that would be located on top of the blowout preventor,
collecting fluids to a surface barge where gas, oil and water can be
separated prior to storage and disposal. Separated gas would be flared;
separated oil and water would be stored in tanks for subsequent
disposal offsite or flared.
Collecting the flowing fluids close to their source of origin
prevents or limits the flow of oil into ocean waters, and optimizes the
suite of surface oil spill response capabilities by engaging the
problem at its source. Surface oil spill response equipment would
remain on station in the immediate area. Given we will have two
functional drilling vessels in our 2012 exploration operations, each
drilling rig will act as the relief backup well drilling unit for the
other. Each can immediately stop operations and respond to drill any
ultimate relief well.
Oil in Ice
A significant amount of oil-in-ice research has been completed over
the last 30 years and more is underway. A four-year program known as
the Joint Industry Project (JIP), under the management of SINTEF
Norwegian Research Institute, was sponsored by six international oil
companies, including Shell, and involved a host of international
scientists including those from the Department of the Interior.
The purpose was to advance knowledge, tools and technologies for
oil spill response in ice-covered waters. The program looked at:

The fate and behavior of oil spilled in Arctic
conditions;

In-situ burning of oil in Arctic and ice-covered
waters;

Mechanical recovery of oil in Arctic and ice-covered
waters;

Use of chemical dispersants in Arctic and ice-covered
waters;

Monitoring and remote sensing of oil in and under
ice;

Preparation of a generic oil spill contingency plan;
and

Field experiments at Svalbard, Norway, in offshore
ice-covered waters.
In May 2009, the group spent two weeks in the pack ice in the
Norwegian Barents Sea to study the behavior of oil spills in Arctic
waters and to test various response options in realistic oil-in-ice
conditions. The tests proved that ice acts as a natural boom or
protective barrier to confine and reduce the spread of an oil spill and
to provide a longer window of opportunity in which clean-up
technologies can be used effectively. These tests are the most wide-
ranging research and development programs ever undertaken to evaluate
Arctic oil spills.
These real-world offshore tests marked the final stage in the
largest and most wide-ranging international research and development
program ever undertaken to enhance detailed understanding, to further
improve and develop spill-response technologies and to increase the
ability to react rapidly in the event of an accidental oil spill in
ice-covered conditions. The summary of that research showed that by
using a suite of available tools (all of which are part of Shell's
Alaska tool kit), including Arctic-tested booms and skimmers, and in-
situ burning and dispersants, the majority of oil could be cleaned up
in a variety of Arctic conditions; including broken ice and slush.
Shell is now leading industry efforts to perform another JIP to
continue advancing the technology and research for oil spill response
in ice.
Regulatory Challenges
Shell participated in several Alaska OCS lease sales at the
invitation of the federal government. Although the leases were issued
to Shell, the government's permitting and regulatory process has not
been equipped to deliver. As a result, Shell has been blocked from
drilling even a single exploration well.
Let me stress that this is highly unusual. The federal government's
decision to hold a sale is, in effect, a decision that OCS exploration
and development is desired. The federal government does years of in-
depth analyses before holding an OCS lease sale. Therefore, an
exploration or development plan that meets regulatory requirements is
permitted. In the case of Shell in Alaska, we have met and exceeded the
regulatory requirements and still have not been able to drill a well.
Each of our 414 leases in the Beaufort Sea and the Chukchi Sea has
a ten-year term. A lease will expire and return to the federal
government at the end of its term, if substantial steps to develop it
are not taken.
So, Shell is in a ``Catch-22.'' We have invested more than $3.5
billion in leases and in supporting infrastructure--equipment, support
vessels, baseline studies, and workforce training--in order to take the
first step to explore for oil and natural gas. We have assembled what
is arguably the most environmentally sensitive and thoroughly
responsible exploration plan in history. Yet, for reasons largely
beyond our control, permits have not been issued. Since our leases are
only valid for a limited time, we are keen to move forward.
A Robust Regulatory Process Is Critical
Let me be clear, Shell fully supports a robust permitting process.
Shell does not seek lower environmental standards for OCS activities or
a less exhaustive public permitting process. Such a process protects
people and the environment and ensures safe and responsible operations.
The bar is high in the Arctic, and it should be. Shell fully
understands and supports this. We are ready to proceed with an
exploration program that does precisely that.
But we need a regulatory framework that is clear; and a regulatory
process that is properly funded, efficient and robust. The process
should lead to timely decisions. Regardless of one's views on oil and
gas development, we can all agree that endless delays by our government
are wasteful to the taxpayer and should not be tolerated. Permitting
for oil and gas activity must be done thoroughly and to the letter of
the law. Without that, legal challenges are likely and can also act to
block a program.
In the absence of a sound regulatory system, confidence in the U.S.
offshore program is undermined. Where OCS leasing has occurred, the
government has done literally years of environmental analysis in
advance of the lease sale. It has invited companies to buy leases, and
it has accepted bonus bids from companies. In return, the government
bears responsibility to follow through. There is an expectation that
the government is prepared to do the regulatory work that allows for
exploration and development. If this is not the case; if the regulatory
system fails to work in support of the leasing program; policymakers
should be concerned.
Recommendations: How Do We Move Forward?
Now I would like to look forward--to where we go from here and what
policymakers should do.
There is no question that the federal government has a critical
role to play as a steward of our oceans. It also has a role to play in
supporting the OCS leasing program and the sustainable development of
our natural resources. What does this mean?

It means that federal permitting agencies must have
enough staff with appropriate expertise to execute the program,
or have the authority to contract with outside experts to do
the work. Lack of staff should be no excuse for delaying
permitting work.

It means that the government needs funds to do the
environmental studies, ecological characterization and baseline
science, that underpins the permitting of any oil and gas work
in OCS areas. Lack of funds should be no excuse.

It means that federal permitting agencies must
coordinate and streamline the permitting work. Multiple federal
agencies are now involved in issuing multiple federal permits
for a single offshore project. Duplication and inefficiency
means delay and waste. It should be identified and eliminated.

It means the regulatory process does not have open-
ended timeframes that leave permit applicants with no clear
understanding of the permit timeline. Rather, the regulatory
process should have a firm timeline for delivering permits and
clear milestones marking the path to their delivery.

It means that the statutes, the regulations and the
rules must be clear. It is unreasonable to expect anything
less. Only when the rules are clear can a permit applicant meet
them.
Fundamentally, it means that the government must respond in a
timely and competent manner. Where the government, as the landlord,
hands over a federal lease, it must also hand over the ``key'' to a
lessee proposing a responsible program.
The President and Members of Congress have called for a government-
wide review of burdensome regulations that hinder economic development.
I am hopeful that this will result in true reform. With this, we can
move forward with responsible development of our rich natural resources
such as those in Alaska.
Conclusion
Oil and gas will remain critical sources of energy for decades to
come. This is fact. Further, there are broad and sustained benefits in
developing our own domestic resources. By tapping our resources here,
we will create jobs, power the economy, put billions into dwindling
government coffers, provide energy security, reduce imports and reduce
our trade deficit. Keeping this economic value here at home, we can at
the same time move forward with the investments in the next generation
of technologies and energy solutions that will power the future.
Thank you. I am happy to answer any questions.
______

Mr. Lamborn. Thank you for your testimony. Ms. Quarterman.

STATEMENT OF HON. CYNTHIA QUARTERMAN, ADMINISTRATOR, PIPELINE
AND HAZARDOUS MATERIALS SAFETY ADMINISTRATION, U.S. DEPARTMENT
OF TRANSPORTATION

Ms. Quarterman. Good morning, Chairman Lamborn, Ranking
Member Holt, members of the Subcommittee. Thank you for the
opportunity to appear today to discuss the Pipeline and
Hazardous Materials Safety Administration's oversight of the
approximately 5,000-plus miles of energy pipeline in Alaska
under our jurisdiction.
Safety is the number one priority of Secretary LaHood,
myself and the employees of PHMSA and we are all strongly
committed to reducing the transportation risks to the public
and the environment.
PHMSA is responsible for establishing and enforcing safety
standards for the design, construction, operation, and
maintenance of the nation's pipeline transportation system. In
Alaska, PHMSA's authority includes oversight of the TransAlaska
Pipeline System, other North Slope and Cook Inlet pipelines, as
well as other energy-related facilities.
As critical as Alaska's oil and gas resources are to
supporting the nation's energy needs, PHMSA recognizes that its
role in ensuring these energy resources are transported safety
and efficiently is even more important. For this reason, PHMSA
has invested heavily in working with the State of Alaska and
operators to ensure the safety of both existing and proposed
interstate and intrastate pipelines.
Alaska is only one of two states that have not accepted
jurisdiction over its intrastate pipelines. Therefore, PHMSA is
responsible for enforcing its pipeline safety regulations on
the state's interstate and intrastate oil and natural gas
pipelines. While production facilities, including pipeline
upstream of the processing centers on the North Slope are
regulated by the State of Alaska and the Environmental
Protection Agency, PHMSA regulates the North Slope oil transit
lines downstream of the processing centers.
In addition, PHMSA also regulates the TransAlaska Pipeline
System, the Cook Inlet Pipelines, and local distribution
pipelines. PHMSA has six-person staff in Anchorage that
conducts comprehensive inspection and enforcement activities to
ensure that pipeline operators are complying with its pipeline
safety regulations.
PHMSA routinely coordinates with the Joint Pipeline Office,
the Alaska Department of Natural Resources, the Office of the
Federal Coordinator, and the Alaska Gas Development Corporation
to provide oversight and technical support that helps protect
the public and the environment and ensures operating
reliability. Additionally, PHMSA is fully engaged with the
Department of Natural Resources and other state agencies
responsible under the Alaska Gas Inducement Act to advance the
Alaska Gas Pipeline Project.
Mr. Chairman, ensuring the safety and reliability of the
nation's hazardous liquid and natural gas pipeline network is
an enormous responsibility. PHMSA looks forward to working with
Congress to address any issues you may have concerning the
pipelines, the agency's pipeline safety program, and the
regulation of gas and hazardous liquid pipelines in Alaska.
PHMSA very much appreciates the opportunity to report on our
oversight role on those pipelines. I look forward to any
questions the Committee may have. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Quarterman follows:]

Statement of Cynthia L. Quarterman, Administrator,
Pipeline and Hazardous Materials Safety Administration

I. Introduction
Chairman Lamborn, Ranking Member Holt, members of the Subcommittee,
thank you for the opportunity to appear today to discuss the Pipeline
and Hazardous Materials Safety Administration's (PHMSA) oversight of
America's 2.5-million-mile energy pipeline system. Safety is the number
one priority of Secretary Ray LaHood, myself, and the employees of
PHMSA and we are all strongly committed to reducing transportation
risks to the public and environment. Our Nation's reliance on the safe
and environmentally sound transportation of energy fuels and hazardous
materials is increasing. PHMSA's safety oversight of the pipeline
network that delivers these products is providing critical protections
for the American people.
PHMSA is responsible for establishing and enforcing safety
standards for the design, construction, operation, and maintenance of
the nation's pipeline transportation system. PHMSA's authority to
regulate pipelines includes oversight of the Trans Alaska Pipeline
System (TAPS), North Slope pipelines, certain pipelines in the Cook
Inlet area, Liquefied Natural Gas (or LNG) facilities, and the
distribution systems that deliver natural gas to homes, businesses, and
power plants. Alaska oil and gas resources are critical to the nation's
energy needs, and PHMSA recognizes its role in ensuring that this
energy is transported safely and efficiently. For this reason, PHMSA
has invested significant time and resources working with the State of
Alaska and operators to ensure the safety of both existing and proposed
interstate and intrastate pipelines, including the Trans Alaska
Pipeline System and Alaska natural gas pipeline projects. The support
of Congress is critical for the continued safe operation of oil and
natural gas pipelines in Alaska. PHMSA seeks to increase the safety of
Alaska's pipelines by providing the agency with additional staffing,
enhancing our ability to collect information and data from pipeline
operators, eliminating certain statutory limitations applicable to the
regulation of gathering lines, and providing for reimbursement of
expenses related to reviewing new pipeline projects.
II. PHMSA Coordination with the State of Alaska
PHMSA is an active member in the pipeline regulatory community in
Alaska. Alaska is only one of two states that have not accepted
jurisdiction over its intrastate pipelines, therefore PHMSA is
responsible for enforcing its Pipeline Safety Regulations on both
interstate and intrastate oil and natural gas pipelines in Alaska. The
State of Alaska and the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) regulate
the production facilities, including pipelines, upstream of the
processing centers on the North Slope. PHMSA regulates the North Slope
oil transit lines downstream of the processing centers, as well as the
Trans Alaska Pipeline System, the Cook Inlet pipelines, and local
distribution pipelines. PHMSA has a six-person staff in Anchorage that
conducts comprehensive inspection and enforcement activities to ensure
that pipeline operators are complying with its Pipeline Safety
Regulations. PHMSA routinely coordinates with:

The Joint Pipeline Office, a consortium of 12 Federal
and State Agencies;

The Petroleum Systems Integrity Office, which is part
of the Alaska Department of Natural Resources;

The Office of the Federal Coordinator for Alaska
Natural Gas Transportation Projects; and

The Alaska Gasline Development Corporation, which is
working to develop a plan for an in-state natural gas pipeline
project.
PHMSA also regularly provides Alaska state agencies with technical
support. For example, we recently collaborated with the Department of
Natural Resources on a special permit for a pipeline facility that
connects a new natural gas field on the Kenai Peninsula to a
transmission line that serves the Cook Inlet. The special permit allows
the pipeline operator to use advanced pipeline materials, but also
requires the operator to take additional safety measures beyond our
regulations to safeguard the pipeline's operation. In addition, a
senior PHMSA leadership and technical team, including myself, will be
traveling to Anchorage in the next few months to meet with State
officials on pipeline matters including the proposed interstate and
intrastate gas pipelines.
PHMSA is committed to achieving coordinated and effective oversight
of Alaska pipeline systems. We would like to achieve more coordinated
inter-agency inspections; the development of state-of-the art programs
designed to better manage the integrity risks associated with operating
pipeline systems in the unique conditions of Alaska; the development of
enhanced inspection protocols and training programs; and the execution
of cooperative agreements with other Federal and State agencies for the
purpose of achieving effective oversight.
III. PHMSA Oversight of the Trans Alaska Pipeline System and the North
Slope
PHMSA recognizes the importance of TAPS and the pipelines on the
North Slope, and is vigilant in overseeing those that are within our
jurisdiction. PHMSA works with the Joint Pipeline Office to ensure
oversight that helps protect the public and the environment, and
ensures operating reliability. Federal oversight is limited, however,
and PHMSA can only provide oversight and protections for
transportation-related pipelines under our jurisdiction.
Historically, gathering and low-stress lines in rural areas, such
as the BP Exploration Alaska (BPXA) pipelines that leaked in 2006, were
exempt from the Pipeline Safety Statutes and regulations. In the
absence of Federal oversight, Alaska had been regulating these
gathering lines and flow lines on the North Slope under State law. In
March 2006, approximately 5,000 barrels of crude oil were released from
BPXA's Western Operating Area pipeline. A smaller spill on the Eastern
Operating Area pipeline occurred in August 2006. Since the affected
BPXA pipeline was considered to be a transportation pipeline, PHMSA
issued a Corrective Action Order (CAO) in response to the spills
requiring BPXA to perform certain corrective measures. Ultimately,
PHMSA identified seven different violations of the CAO, each violation
involving BPXA's failure to timely complete either maintenance pigging
or in-line inspection of one of the pipelines. At the joint request of
DOT and EPA, the Department of Justice filed a complaint in the US
District Court for the District of Alaska in March 2009. We recently
reached a consent agreement that, once it is approved by the court,
will provide for heightened Federal oversight of BPXA's production
related pipelines in Prudhoe Bay and require BPXA to pay $25 million.
This accident highlighted the importance of PHMSA's enforcement program
and jurisdiction over the nation's pipelines.
PHMSA has made significant progress in regulating these lines. In
June 2008, PHMSA issued a final rule that established new safety
requirements for regulated rural hazardous liquid gathering lines. This
rule brought BPXA's and other low-stress pipelines that had been exempt
from PHMSA regulations under our jurisdiction. However, PHMSA still
does not have complete authority to regulate certain gathering lines in
rural areas. Removing the statutory exemption for gathering lines would
clarify the extent of PHMSA's jurisdiction and provide additional
safety for the nation's pipelines in rural areas. Even those lines that
we do have jurisdiction to regulate pose a challenge that requires
focused and dedicated resources. The integrity of TAPS is challenged by
the unique conditions in Alaska, the reduction in the volume of oil
transported, and the age of the pipeline. The continued safe operation
of TAPS will require technical ingenuity as well as ongoing monitoring
and attention.
A leak that occurred at Pump Station 1 in January highlights this
challenge. The leak appears to have been the result of internal
corrosion and occurred in a piece of pipe that could not be assessed
using in-line inspection tools. Following the discovery of that leak,
PHMSA and other federal and state agencies worked together to address
it and to prevent adverse environmental impact. PHMSA issued a Notice
of Proposed Safety Order to Alyeska in response to this accident that
proposed corrective measures that will help assure the future safe
operation of TAPS. One proposed requirement is for Alyeska to remove
all sections of pipe that cannot be assessed using in-line inspection
tools. We have been working with Alyeska to reach an agreement for the
resolution of this notice and other alleged violations of the pipeline
safety laws.
IV. PHMSA's Oversight of Alaska Natural Gas Pipeline Projects
The proposed Alaska interstate and intrastate natural gas pipeline
projects will tap into gas reserves on North Slope fields next to the
Beaufort Sea for transportation to markets in Alaska and the Lower 48
states. Both the State and Federal authorities will regulate these
proposed projects. PHMSA is fully engaged with the Department of
Natural Resources and other state agencies responsible under the Alaska
Gas Inducement Act (AGIA) to advance the Alaska Gas Pipeline Project.
We are also in regular contact with the Office of the Federal
Coordinator, the lead federal agency charged with facilitating the
federal review of the gas pipeline project, and our federal partners at
the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission and the Bureau of Land
Management. PHMSA conducts periodic meetings with TransCanada/Exxon
Mobil, the AGIA sanctioned operator of the proposed Alaska Gas Pipeline
Project, to review the technical requirements of the pipeline that will
incorporate unique design scenarios.
We are also aware of and fully engaged in the Alaska Stand Alone
Gas Pipeline Project pursued by the Alaska Gasline Development
Corporation to bring North Slope gas to the Fairbanks and Anchorage
areas. PHMSA has been coordinating with state authorities overseeing
the project and the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers and other federal
agencies to support the project.
For these proposed pipelines, PHMSA will need to conduct reviews of
design, material, construction, commissioning, and operation and
maintenance plans. These pipeline projects will incorporate novel
design concepts needed for the unique Arctic operating environment,
which will likely require special permits. These projects will be of
unprecedented size, and will require significant involvement from PHMSA
for oversight and planning. The costs associated with these activities
should be allocated to the beneficiary pipeline operators through
reimbursement and permit fees.
V. Conclusion
In closing, we look forward to working with Congress to address any
issues you may have concerning PHMSA's pipeline safety program and the
regulation of gas and hazardous liquid pipelines in Alaska. PHMSA very
much appreciates the opportunity to report on our oversight role of
these pipelines and the opportunities that exist to strengthen
oversight.
______

Mr. Lamborn. All right. Thank you for your testimony.
At this point, before we begin our questioning, I would
like to recognize the Chairman of the Full Committee,
Representative Doc Hastings of Washington State for a five-
minute opening statement.

STATEMENT OF HON. DOC HASTINGS, A REPRESENTATIVE IN CONGRESS
FROM THE STATE OF WASHINGTON

Mr. Hastings. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, and thank
you for your consideration. I apologize for coming in late, but
we have another hearing in our other hearing room on the
manmade drought in California and that has taken a lot of
interest and work in this Committee. Thank you for holding this
important hearing today on the vast energy resources continued
in our northern most state and the unique access and
infrastructure issues facing energy production in Alaska.
America might not have a single state with more abundant
energy resources than the offshore and onshore lands of Alaska.
The utilization of these resources is vital to moving America
forward to a future less dependent on foreign sources of
energy, at the same time creating hundreds of thousands of
American jobs.
Certainly, in any form of energy production there are
challenges that must be overcome. However, some of the greatest
challenges in Alaska seem to originate from our own government,
not the physical characteristics of the Arctic. In the 1970s,
the TransAlaska Pipeline System was build to transport up to
two million barrels of oil a day from Prudhoe to Valdez. TAPS
is now operating less than half that capacity, due to the
Federal Government's refusal to explore for more oil resources
to fill the pipeline in places like the National Petroleum
Reserve or the Beaufort or Chukchi Seas. Critical
infrastructure is needed to ensure TAPS remains open. Yet,
after years and years, the Administration isn't issuing the
necessary permits for the infrastructure to be installed.
If capacity isn't increased, the pipeline could shut down,
putting thousands of hard-working American workers out of work
and eliminating the valuable irreplaceable American asset. The
Obama Administration's effective moratorium on new offshore
drilling took the Chukchi and Beaufort Seas out of
consideration for the 2012/2017 lease plan. Together these
offshore areas contain potentially over 20 billion barrels of
oil and over a 100 trillion cubic feet of natural gas.
Now fortunately, this Committee has responded by passing
H.R. 1231, not only out of this Committee, but out of the
House, and it would require them to move forward with these
lease sales.
As gasoline prices continue to put a strain on the
pocketbooks of American families across the country, it would
be irresponsible for Congress to sit idly by and not act to
harness the resources in Alaska, and for that matter elsewhere
in America, to make us more energy secure. Alaska's energy
resources will play a vital role in America's ability to fuel
our economy, create American jobs, and lessen our dependence on
unstable foreign energy.
So thank you once again, Mr. Chairman, for the courtesy of
allowing me to testify at this very important hearing regarding
the vast resources that we have in Alaska. And with that, I
yield back my time.
[The prepared statement of Chairman Hastings follows:]

Statement of The Honorable Doc Hastings, Chairman,
House Committee on Natural Resources

I would like to thank Chairman Lamborn for holding this important
hearing today on the vast energy resources contained in our northern
most state and the unique access and infrastructure issues facing
energy production in Alaska. America might not have a single state that
richer in energy resources than the offshore and onshore lands of
Alaska. The utilization of those resources is vital to moving America
to a more energy independent future while creating hundreds of
thousands of American jobs.
Certainly, there are challenges in energy production that must be
overcome; however, some of the greatest challenges in producing energy
in Alaska seem to originate from our own government, not the physical
characteristics of the Arctic.
The Obama Administration's effective moratorium on new offshore
drilling took the Chukchi Beaufort Seas out of consideration for the
2012-2017 offshore lease plan. Together those offshore areas contain
over 20 billion barrels of oil and over 100 trillion cubic feet of
natural gas. Fortunately, H.R. 1231, passed out of this Committee and
the Full House of Representatives would require the Administration to
move forward with lease sales on those areas in the next five year
lease plan.
In the 1970's the Trans Alaska Pipeline System was built to
transport up to 2 million barrels per day from Prudhoe Bay to Valdez.
TAPS is now operating at less than half capacity due to the federal
government's refusal to explore for more oil resources in places like
the National Petroleum Reserve-Alaska, or the Beaufort or Chukchi Seas.
Critical infrastructure is needed to increase ensure TAPS remain open;
however the Administration isn't issuing the necessary permits for the
infrastructure to be installed. If capacity isn't increased, the
pipelines will eventually shutdown putting thousands of hardworking
American's out of work.
As gasoline prices continue to put a strain on the pocketbooks of
American families across the country, it would be irresponsible for
Congress to sit idly by and not address the resources we have to make
America more energy secure. Alaska's energy resources will play a vital
role in America's ability to fuel our economy, create American jobs and
lessen our dependence on unstable foreign energy.
I'm looking forward hearing testimony from today's witnesses and
asking them questions about the best way to access Alaska's untapped
energy resources.
______

Mr. Lamborn. All right. Thank you.
We will now begin questioning. Members are limited to five
minutes, but we may have additional rounds, although the time
may not permit that. So we will have a dialogue about that
later. I will now recognize myself for five minutes.
First of all, Mr. Glenn you live in the region that this
hearing focuses on. As you know, one of the primary concerns
surrounding oil and natural gas production in this area is that
it be done in an environmentally responsible manner. In your
testimony you briefly discussed the impact energy development
will have on wildlife.
Can you tell me, from your own experience, have the fish,
caribou and waterfowl been negatively impacted by energy
development on these lands?
Mr. Glenn. Not at all. The caribou, the freshwater fish and
the waterfowl teem across the entire Arctic Slope and it is
almost irrelevant whether there is industry presence there or
not because the impact on the animals is so benign. This is for
onshore development.
Regarding offshore development, we are home to many
populations of migrating sea mammals and what we have seen is
the voluntary efforts by industry to minimize their impacts to
that exploration, for example, is timed not to conflict with
migrating period for animals like the bowhead whale. And
importantly also, the explorers like Shell have offered to pull
back away from their exploration areas during the times of the
subsistence hunt because we are interested in these animals
welfare, not just for their own sake because our people and our
culture depend on them as well. And so we have not seen any
harmful effects on wildlife.
Mr. Lamborn. All right. Thank you.
Mr. Lawrence, in your testimony you discussed the leases
that your company holds in the Beaufort and Chukchi Seas for
which you have completed the exploration plan, invested
billions of dollars and are essentially ready to begin drilling
exploration wells, is this correct?
Mr. Lawrence. Yes, that is correct. We started a leasing
program and have picked up more than 415 leases. We have
invested $2.2 billion in that leasehold through time. And to
properly evaluate that leasehold, including environmental
studies, including what would be necessary for going forward
for development, and including all this response that we need
to safely do this program in Alaska we have invested an
additional $1.5 billion. So at this point, prior to drilling a
single well, we have invested almost $3.7 billion.
Mr. Lamborn. That is amazing. You go on to say that permits
have not been issued for these wells despite your having
completed all the required steps to obtain them. Has any reason
been given to your company as to why you have not been issued
permits for these leases?
Mr. Lawrence. We work closely with all the different
permitting agencies, and just to be clear, there are almost 35
different permits from different agencies that are required to
be able to drill in Alaska. The permits have been denied to be
given to us for a wide variety of reasons. Some of those
reasons include that the studies, that were done by the various
permitting agencies themselves, had not been deemed to be
complete.
Some of those things have been, for example, on the air
permits that there have been questions around such things as
where was the air to be measured. At what point did something
become a stationary source and so forth. In combination, what
you have is a number of different regulatory requirements that
each on its own we are very happy to comply with, and as I
stated in my testimony we happily would adhere to and often
exceed regulatory requirements. But in combination, makes an
almost impossible maze to work through to be able to obtain
these permits.
Mr. Lamborn. Thank you.
And Mr. Sullivan, can you make any recommendations for
streamlining this Federal permitting process for oil and gas
exploration and development without undermining environmental
protections?
Mr. Sullivan. Yes, sir, Mr. Chairman.
One of the things that we are working on from the state
perspective is doing exactly what you just mentioned, which is
streamlining, looking at efficiencies in our own state
permitting system. And we are doing that with a continued focus
of environmental protection, which as I mentioned, and mention
in my written testimony is a hallmark of the way resources are
developed on the North Slope of Alaska.
The President recently mentioned having a high-level
Federal coordination group with regard to expediting permitting
in Alaska with regard to oil and gas. We think that is a good
first step. What Mr. Lawrence mentioned about the overlapping
different jurisdictions is a problem. Governor Parnell
requested in a letter to President Obama that if there is a
high-level permitting coordination group at the Federal level,
that the State of Alaska be part of it because it is very
important with regard to the overlapping jurisdictions.
So whatever can be done to accelerate and bring certainty
to a system that is slow and has no certainty is what we think
is important.
Mr. Lamborn. Thank you all for your answers. I would now
like to recognize the Ranking Member of the Subcommittee,
Representative Holt of New Jersey.
Mr. Holt. Yes, thanks for those answers.
Mr. Sullivan, the Oil Spill Commission concluded in its
final report, and let me quote, ``Scientific understanding of
environmental conditions in sensitive environments such as the
Arctic is inadequate,'' and they go on to talk about the
effects, the impacts of oil spills.
The Commission continued, ``Good information exists only
for a few species in the Arctic, and even for those just for
certain times of the year or in certain areas. As a result, the
Commission recommends an immediate comprehensive Federal
research effort to provide a foundation of scientific
information on the Arctic with periodic review by the National
Academy of Sciences.'' Do you agree or disagree with that
recommendation?
Mr. Sullivan. Representative Holt, one of the things that
is mentioned in my testimony is the studies. If you look on
page 6.
Mr. Holt. Yes.
Mr. Sullivan. And there has been hundreds of millions of
dollars worth of studies. As a matter of fact, the Obama
Administration in 2009 mentioned----
Mr. Holt. So to my question, Mr. Sullivan, you are saying
you do not agree that there is poor scientific understanding.
Mr. Sullivan. As a matter of fact, Representative Holt, I
think that the USGS right now is undertaking an analysis of
what the studies are in the Arctic.
Mr. Holt. So you do not----
Mr. Sullivan. And my understanding of that----
Mr. Holt. I am not trying to badger you. I just want an
answer. Is the Commission way off? They are wrong. There is
adequate scientific understanding in your opinion?
Mr. Sullivan. We think there is adequate scientific
understanding to undertake exploration drilling.
Mr. Holt. OK. Mr. Lawrence, do you agree? Let me turn to--I
am sorry. I just have limited time. Mr. Lawrence, do you agree
with the recommendation made by the Spill Commission?
Mr. Lawrence. I have looked at the Presidential Commission
and actually had many discussions with the Commission as they
looked at that. And one of the things that they have stated is
that in many cases there is a baseline of studies that have
been done that would support that work and that continuing
exploration would add to that scientific base. So to build on
that, 5,000 studies to date, $500 million spent on that
research to date, $50 million spent on research to date by
Shell.
Mr. Holt. So do you or do you not agree with the
recommendation that an immediate, comprehensive Federal
research effort to provide a foundation, not supplemental, but
a foundation of scientific information on the Arctic should be
undertaken?
Mr. Lawrence. I believe that we have more than adequate
foundation to go forward with that.
Mr. Holt. OK. So you disagree. OK.
Mr. Sullivan, the Commission also really issued what would
have to be called a scathing indictment of the entire offshore
oil and gas industry when the Commission said that from 2004 to
2009, this is a quote. I hear some muttering from the other
side of the dais here. I am just quoting the Commission and I
am asking whether or not you agree with that.
``From 2004 to 2009, fatalities in the offshore oil and gas
industry were more than four times higher per person hours
worked in U.S. waters than in European waters, even though many
of the same companies operate in the same venues.'' Are there
recommendations made by the BP Commission that could improve
the safety of offshore drilling that should be undertaken
before we expand offshore drilling in Alaska?
Mr. Sullivan. Representative Holt, one of the things I
wanted to mention, we are always looking to increase safety and
analyze our regulatory----
Mr. Holt. But the question is, is this before or after the
deaths occur? I am asking should these be undertaken before we
do further drilling. Are you saying no?
Mr. Sullivan. I what I am saying is the record in Alaska is
quite strong. We have had 84 wells drilled in Federal waters
over the last three decades.
Mr. Holt. Yes, 84 is not so many, but OK.
Mr. Sullivan. But we have had dozens drilled in state
waters and we have a very, very strong safety and environmental
record in the State of Alaska. Are we always looking to
increase safety----
Mr. Holt. So these reforms, if undertaken, should be
undertaken after we expand the drilling in the offshore waters?
Mr. Sullivan. I am saying, sir, that we shouldn't further
delay development in Alaska.
Mr. Holt. OK. So it should not be done before we expand the
drilling? OK.
Mr. Sullivan. But as the same time, as I mentioned, it is
in my testimony, we are always looking for increase----
Mr. Holt. In the few seconds that I have remaining, let me
turn to Ms. Quarterman.
Did the lower throughput of oil in the TAPS have anything
to do with the January spill?
Ms. Quarterman. No, it did not.
Mr. Holt. Are there things that we should be doing that
would be as effective as increasing the flow in the pipeline to
prevent spills?
Ms. Quarterman. There are a number of challenges that are
being raised by the fact that the flow has decreased on the
pipeline. Some of the things we should be considering is how to
keep the pipeline sufficiently warm to continue it to operate.
As the pipeline cools down, water falls out which can cause ice
plugs.
Mr. Holt. Or in pipeline inspections, pigs and so forth. So
you are saying those could be done. They would be as effective
as increasing the throughput?
Ms. Quarterman. I think they are alternatives. Absolutely.
Mr. Holt. Thank you.
Mr. Lamborn. Thank you.
Now I would like to recognize the gentleman from Alaska,
Mr. Young, who is also Chairman of the Subcommittee on Indian
and Alaska Native Affairs.
Mr. Young. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And it is hard for a
person to sit by and listen to someone talk about something
they don't know about. And I want to thank the witnesses.
The gentleman, Mr. Holt, refers to a commission and Bill
Riley, a known environmental extremist on fossil fuel, who said
there should be no offshore drilling, period. Former Senator
Bob Graham from Florida agrees with that and, of course,
Frances Beinecke, Natural Resources Defense Council. I would
say it was not really a fair commission. I mean they were
prejudiced when they started and you know it.
Their report, and I have attacked it time and again is
false. I just want to make that record clear.
Mr. Sullivan, can you give me some specifics how they have
interfered in delaying development of oil in Alaska?
Mr. Sullivan. Yes, sir, Congressman Young. And I just want
to, just to clarify, I did want to make the point that in 2009
the Obama Administration itself stated quote, ``There is an
adequate baseline of information that exist to address the
environmental effects of OCS oil and gas programs.'' So that
was from this Administration.
I also want to just clarify----
Mr. Holt. Would you give us the date again, please?
Mr. Young. It is not your time.
Mr. Holt. I beg your pardon.
Mr. Young. Just remember that.
Mr. Sullivan. The spill in January did not spill one ounce
of oil on--there was a misstatement, 13,000 gallons. There was
not a drop of oil spilled on the land in January. It was all
contained in a small building. But to answer your question
further Congressman Young, on pages 9 through 11 of my
testimony we give specific examples of exactly specific
projects and then broader policy determinations by this
Administration that we think have had a chilling affect on the
significant amount of investment needed to increase production
to increase TAPS throughput. So I can give a few examples.
Mr. Young. If it is in your testimony, I don't need it. But
you have specifics in your testimony?
Mr. Sullivan. Absolutely. And that is not even going
through all of them, as a matter of fact.
Mr. Young. Mr. Glenn, thank you for your testimony too.
When you say your people will not be able to survive the way
they have been able to survive recently because of development,
what will happen? I mean what do you think is going to occur up
there?
Mr. Glenn. Sometimes I think the term ``village,''
``Alaskan native village'' does us an injustice. Today's
villages are modern, small cities. We have power plants, water
sewer plants, runways, roads. Things that need continued
maintenance. In the absence if this municipal infrastructure
that we built, we run the risk of responding to a fire, for
example, in a building like we used to by running home and
grabbing small fire extinguishers.
In the absence of snow removal, we run the risk of no more
ambulance visits to someone during a time of medical emergency.
And these are real world possibilities in the absence of
continued development in our region.
Mr. Young. So what they are doing is by non-acting and then
the government is really trying to extinguish a culture.
Mr. Glenn. A lot of people will fight Arctic development in
the name of saving----
Mr. Young. The culture.
Mr. Glenn. The culture of the native people there. If they
really want to help us, they should come try and live where we
live.
Mr. Young. I would like to see them move a honey bucket out
and dump it in a lagoon for a while. I think you might learn a
little bit, Mr. Holt.
Mr. Lawrence, can I ask you a question? When you weren't
issued a permit last year, who really stopped the permit. EPA
issued a permit, did they not?
Mr. Lawrence. We have had air permits that have been
remanded to the EPA and we are waiting on those air permits.
Mr. Young. But was it the appeal board that turned down the
decision of EPA?
Mr. Lawrence. Again, continue to study and not provide the
requisite decision.
Mr. Young. This is my concern. You know 30 agencies to get
permits from?
Mr. Lawrence. Thirty-five different permits. Yes.
Mr. Young. Gentlemen, that is our problem. We have agencies
doing this one. They don't want any oil development. And by the
way, if we don't do something about oil development in this
country, every man, woman, and child pays about $1100 a year in
taxes to the foreigners. We do have fossil fuels and it is what
makes our commerce run. It moves our trains, our planes, our
automobiles, and our trucks and our ships and nothing else
moves those things. And to have Obama sitting down and saying
we are going to go use windmills. We are going to stop nuclear
power when that is what runs our commerce and we have the oil
in Alaska. We have the oil offshore. China knows it. They are
going to drill. Russia knows it. They are going to drill.
Iceland knows it. They are going to drill. Greenland knows it.
They are going to drill. And we are sitting around in this
Congress doing nothing about developing our fossil fuels.
Mr. Chairman, it is time we started acting in this Congress
on an energy policy and fossil fuels. I am through.
Mr. Lamborn. Thank you.
Now I would like to recognize the gentleman from Maryland,
Mr. Sarbanes.
Mr. Sarbanes. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you all for
your testimony.
Obviously, I don't have the years of experience of
Congressman Young. I have only been here four years. But in the
four years of sitting in hearings like this one, looking at the
issue of oil and gas development I haven't seen any evidence
that the agencies that are charged with oversight of the
industry are against oil and gas development.
I think what they are for is oil and gas development that
is done in a safe way. That is done in a way that preserves the
environment. And frankly, is done in a way that means that that
resource over time is sustainable. Because if you don't do
these things safely and you have accidents with significant
consequences, it can then result in the industry being pushed
back. So it is in the industry's interest to make sure this is
done well on the front end.
Now Mr. Lawrence, I was actually encouraged by your
testimony because you said a number of times that you don't
resist the regulatory requirements that are being asked of the
industry and your corporation. Your concern is about whether
the permitting process happens in a timely way, whether there
is adequate coordination of the expectations of these different
agencies and so forth. That is a fair case to make because
sometimes the bureaucracy can be an impediment, but that
doesn't speak to the I think good intentions of the agencies in
terms of what they are trying to accomplish.
What it actually speaks to is we have to make sure that
there are sufficient resources available to these agencies to
be able to do these reviews in a way that is efficient, in a
way that is timely, and that is a concern I have, particularly
as these agencies try to regroup in the wake of what happened
last year, and in the wake of other information that has come
forward.
So I would hope, and I don't really have a question. But I
would hope that going forward you would be an advocate with
others in the industry for making sure that there are really
sufficient resources available there for these agencies to do
their job. I don't really have a question. But I thank you all
for your testimony and I yield back.
Mr. Lamborn. Thank you.
Mr. Fleming of Louisiana.
Mr. Fleming. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I would like to extend, first, on the remarks from Mr.
Young. It was mentioned here today that somehow we are at some
peak of oil production, energy production and nothing further
could be from the truth. If you look at the overall trend line,
oil production peaked in this country in 1972 at nine million
barrels of oil per day. We are down to six million barrels of
oil per day and dropping rapidly.
Off-shore we peaked in 2010 at 1.7 million barrels a day.
We are down to 1.59 million barrels a day and we will drop
another 200 to 250,000 barrels per day over the next year. And
then we see a graph there showing that the TransAlaska Pipeline
System peaked in the eighties at 2.2 million per day, which
represented at the time 25 percent of U.S. domestic production.
It is down to 630,000 barrels per day.
Now conventional wisdom has it that the reason why oil
production or really fossil fuel production is declining in
this country is because we are using it up. That it is gone.
That we have very little left. But the reality is that the USGS
has found in recent years that we have far more of these
entities, these God-given minerals than we ever thought we had
and new technologies are showing that we can find them and get
to them in ways that we never thought we could.
My own district, District 4 of Louisiana, we discovered the
Haynesville shale only five years ago and we now know that we
have more natural gas just in the Haynesville shale, in fact,
than the largest deposit in North America, the third largest
deposit in the entire world--and more then any other shale
developments that we are seeing. So the reality is we know
today that the United States has more coal, natural gas, and
oil than any country in the world, more than any country in the
world. The second to it is Russia and they are not even close,
far more than Saudi Arabia.
So the issue here today, ladies and gentlemen, is not that
we are using up these vital resources. We face a number of
issues, including the permitting process, hyperregulation,
extreme environmentalist positions, a whole cascade of
Administration members who say that they are quite happy to see
gasoline prices go up to $10 a gallon--like they have in
Europe--in order to advance a so-called green agenda, and in
order to make alternative fuels more competitive in the
marketplace. That is really impossible to do.
So it really seems to me that the problem is that we are
artificially constricting the production of fossil fuels
hydrocarbons and that is, in fact, what is causing our price
increases at the gasoline pump. Americans think that we are up
here working to get that down when, in fact, we are doing just
the opposite. We are slowing it down and we are hearing
wonderful witness testimonies here today that tell us exactly
why that is happening.
In fact, I will follow up with a question here. Mr.
Lawrence, in light of the recent deep water incident, could you
please elaborate on how your regulatory hurdles have grown just
since April 2010?
Mr. Lawrence. Yes. Thank you very much and appreciate the
opportunity to discuss. Following the deepwater Macondo
incident, we have taken on board the numerous recommendations
from the Commission to be able to operate safely. And in fact,
we had already implemented most of those and helped provide
insights into what those might look at.
We have had a significant challenge with our permitting
process. Just to give you an example, we have deferred almost
$700 million of investment as a result of the delays in
permitting that have come from that. That cost us almost 10,000
barrels a day. Last year almost 50,000 barrels a day going into
2011. We currently have five deepwater rigs. You know what the
rates of these things are, up to an all inclusive million
dollar a day type rate. We have only three of those deepwater
rigs working at this point in time and we have received three
permits with numerous others out for request.
So we are working off of five discoveries in the Gulf of
Mexico, ready to get those on, appraise them, develop them,
bring them onto production, and it is having a significant
impact on us in terms of not only our activity, the jobs that
we have, but also directly for the country in terms of
production and then revenue loss and lost investment.
Mr. Fleming. So I would submit then to you today that we
have plenty to go after. We have plenty of opportunities out
there in terms of our equipment, the personnel and so forth,
but it is the Administration's agenda that is really
constricting the production, not other issues that perhaps may
be discussed here today. Thank you.
Mr. Lamborn. Mr. Landry of Louisiana.
Mr. Landry. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
You know Mr. Glenn I want you to know that I always believe
the other side of the aisle lived in a Utopian world and I was
proven that yesterday when I sat in an Natural Resources
Committee and heard the wind farm industry tell us how they
can't put up windmills because the environmentalists are
blocking their windmills. So I don't know how they are going to
power their homes.
They don't like it when you are able to afford to put your
own toilet in your home. That is not enough for them. They want
to be able to pay for you to put your toilet. Then they want to
tell you what kind of toilet to put in your home. So understand
what you are dealing with. These people have driven gas prices
to almost record highs. They are fixing to wreck this economy
because they won't allow us to produce affordable energy, which
stems this economy just like Congressman Young says. They want
us to be more like Europe.
Every time I read the Wall Street Journal I don't want
anything to do with Europe's economy. I want you to be able to
drill over there. Wouldn't you say that you know how to protect
your home. This is actually both for Mr. Sullivan and Mr.
Glenn. You are both native Alaskans, I would guess. Wouldn't
you say that you know how to protect your home better than me?
Mr. Glenn. Yes. I have a real world example that helps to
illustrate the answer to that question. In the town where I
live is 340 miles north of the Arctic Circle. No roads go
there. We are only visited by aircraft and ships like barge
traffic. We have developed natural gas for our home local use.
It is a 12-mile pipeline that goes from the gas fields from my
town that keeps the lights on and the houses warm. I helped
drill those wells, Congressman. And I was part of the
exploration effort. I had to listen to the state and the
Federal regulations that protect our environment. So the short
answer is yes. We do protect our environment. We care about it.
Mr. Landry. And you know how to protect your home better
than I would, wouldn't you agree with that?
Mr. Glenn. I would hope so. Yes.
Mr. Sullivan. Congress Landry, I would agree that we live
in the state and most people live in Alaska because they love
the environment. Its pristine nature. We all get out there, use
it, so we are very focused, and that is way a big part of my
written testimony is focused exactly on what we do to protect
the environment. I recently signed what they call a best
interest finding for increased development on state land. It is
very, very detailed. Pages and pages of what you have to do if
an explorer runs into a den of bears or things like this and we
are very focused on it.
I think the key issue is that we think you can do both. You
can responsibly develop resources and protect the environment,
and we have a good record in Alaska doing that and it is not an
either or proposition.
Mr. Landry. I am for letting you protect your home. I want
you to know that. I want to ask two quick questions. One to Mr.
Lawrence.
Last year when the TAPS pipeline was shutdown because of a
slowed flow, coupled with the cold weather, where did the
refineries in California get their oil?
Mr. Lawrence. Thank you. So for that period of time, oil
came from Asia.
Mr. Landry. From Asia?
Mr. Lawrence. It did not come from Alaska as it normally
comes. Again, that throughput that went to the refineries was
shutdown and they needed to seek other sources.
Mr. Landry. So we have the ability to fuel our refineries
with our oil.
Mr. Lawrence. That is correct. The shutdown, again,
requires those--you don't want to shut those refineries down so
that oil then needs to come from elsewhere.
Mr. Landry. So that means that people who refused to let us
drill in Alaska, who refuse to let us put oil in the pipeline
basically promote us purchasing foreign oil, that is a correct
statement, is it not?
Mr. Lawrence. What I would say is that the Alaska pipeline
is absolutely essential to supplying our West Coast refineries
with American oil.
Mr. Landry. Mr. Lawrence, I hate to put you on the spot
because I love Shell. I think they do a great job in the Gulf
of Mexico. Thumbs up to you all and your safety record there,
but honestly, if that pipeline is not there that means that we
have to buy foreign oil for our West Coast refineries.
Mr. Lawrence. If the pipeline does supply oil from Alaska,
that oil will come from elsewhere and much of it will come from
foreign suppliers.
Mr. Landry. So that means that people who refuse to let us
fill that pipeline support us purchasing foreign oil? That is a
yes or no question.
Mr. Lawrence. Yes.
Mr. Landry. Thank you.
Dr. Fleming. [Presiding] The gentleman's time is up. Next
is Mr. Johnson.
Mr. Johnson. First of all, I want to thank the Chairman for
holding this hearing.
I have heard a lot of banter from the other side this
morning about how it must take congressional experience to see
that $4 a gallon for gas is hurting Americans and how America's
dependence on foreign sources of oil is a national security
issue. I think Americans get it and it doesn't take an American
that is sitting in the halls of Congress to get it. My
constituents in eastern and southeastern Ohio get it.
I don't see why my colleagues on the other side of the
aisle and the Obama Administration don't see the need for an
immediate national energy policy that is going to ensure
America's energy security. I am new. I am freshman, but I am a
loss for words on this Administration's security policy. Back
in my district in eastern and southeastern Ohio my constituents
are fed up with high gas prices. They have told me time and
time again that we need to produce more of America's energy
from our own natural resources. From the testimony that we have
heard from you folks today, we have heard how the Federal
Government is not only slowing down the production of an area
of land that is set aside specifically as a national strategic
reserve, but is also holding up permits to allow drilling in
the shallow water OCS off the Alaska coast.
As we have heard from Mr. Lawrence, Shell's proposed
drilling in Alaska's Beaufort and Chukchi Seas OCS is estimated
to produce an on average 700,000 barrels of oil a day for 40
years, 700,000 barrels a day is more than America imports from
Russia and Iraq per day combined. It is mind boggling to me and
my constituents that the Federal Government won't let the Shell
project go forward and reduce America's dependence on foreign
oil.
Because of the lack of oil and gas production in Alaska,
the TransAlaska Pipeline, as you know, or TAPS, as we have
heard this morning is in danger of shutting down to a lack of
volume. Without an increase in production, TAPS will shutdown
and America will become more dependent on foreign oil. We just
heard that in the question period from Mr. Landry. And folks I
submit to you that this simply cannot happen.
Finally, I would like to point out that Shell's story of
investing over a billion dollars into trying to drill in Alaska
is a poster child for why the other side's so-called Use it or
Lose It legislation is so misguided. Here we have a company
that is trying to use their lease, but because of the Federal
Government's broken permitting process they haven't been able
to start drilling. Instead, the other side's proposal would
place a tax on the company for the Federal Government's
incompetency. And this idea just defies logic. I do have some
questions.
Mr. Lawrence, do you think that the Federal Government in
the past have purposely slowed down Shell's drilling permits
because of a fundamental disagreement over whether drilling
should take place in Alaska's Beaufort or Chukchi Sea OCS or
because of a lack of competency by the agencies involved to
handle such a request for a permit.
Mr. Lawrence. Thank you. I think there are two things that
have fundamentally caused that delay. The first is the
coordination between the different agencies so that the right
hand knows what the left hand is doing and assures that we are
able to actually get timely delivery of those permits.
Mr. Johnson. That is the competency issue.
Mr. Lawrence. The second thing, and that is the
coordination issue. The second thing brought up, and I do think
it is quite important, is that these agencies are properly
resourced to ensure they can operate and go through these
permits in a timely manner. And I think that deserves support
to get that proper resource in addition to the coordination.
Mr. Johnson. I am glad you brought that up because I will
submit to you that they are more than adequately resourced. If
we look at the permitting process from just a few short years
ago, 300-and-some permits per year. The next year--after the
Obama Administration came in--100-and-something. We are down
into the double digits in terms of numbers of permits. They are
asking for an increase in budget authorization and 21,000
additional people to put in a robust permitting process to do
less than what they used to do three years ago, four years ago.
I don't understand that. So I appreciate your answer, Mr.
Lawrence, but I submit to you that they are resourced. They
simply are not doing what the American people are doing.
I apologize. I am out of my time. I yield back.
Dr. Fleming. The gentleman yields back. Next for five
minutes Mr. Duncan from South Carolina.
Mr. Duncan. Thank you Mr. Chairman and thank the panelists
for being here today.
If I get passionate about this issue it is because I am
passionate about American energy production. I may not be as
passionate as the gentleman from Alaska and the gentleman to my
left from Louisiana, but it is an issue that I have been
following for a long time, having served on the MMS, Outer
Continental Shelf Five-Year Planning Subcommittee and
understanding that areas that we were talking about back then
when I served on that committee were very, very limited, a
couple of grid squares in the western GOM and a little area off
the coast of Alaska is the only thing we could talk about for
future lease sales on the next five year plan, which I thought
back then was ludicrous but I know with the Administration is
not doing now with future lease sales. They don't have a five-
year plan for the future.
I am concerned about what we are going to do without future
lease sales in this country to open up these areas that
American people know the resources are there. They know that we
have them in this country. We are very, very blessed, yet the
Administration's policies are continuing to hamper our ability
to get out there and harvest the resources, whether it is any
hydrocarbon, whether it is oil or natural gas.
The folks watching back home need to realize that this
Administration has been very clear. Dr. Chu, the Secretary of
the Department of Energy said before he was ever elected that
he wanted to see America have European-styled gas prices. As
Mr. Landry mentioned a minute ago, folks that eight, nine, $10
a gallon gasoline. That is unsustainable. I look at this mural
here and we see planes and trains and automobiles and ships and
a city in the background and everything in that picture is run
on hydrocarbons. It is run on oil and natural gas, primarily in
that picture diesel fuel, which comes out of the ground and is
produced in the refining capacity process.
Anyway, America needs to know that this Administration is
standing in the way of us harvesting our own resources and
moving forward with American energy independence. But I know
how the folks in Alaska feel about drilling there. I met with
the former speaker of the house recently in my office from
Alaska and she said that a drilling bill passed in Alaska 51 to
1, 51 to 1. That tells me how Alaska feels about it. Your
testimony is very, very clear that the gentlemen that are from
Alaska.
We went to the White House this week and we met with
President Obama. And he looked at us and he said that he didn't
necessarily think we had a spending problem in this country. We
had a revenue problem and he talked about possibly raising
taxes on the higher income producers in this country. But you
know what, the second largest income producer for this nation,
second only to taxation, if you take borrowing, Mr. Chairman,
out of the equation, when we are borrowing 43 cents of every
dollar we spend.
If you take borrowing out, the second largest income
producer for this country is the revenues we get from oil and
natural gas royalties and lease sales, the second largest
revenue producer. If we want to increase revenue, Mr.
President, we need to increase American domestic energy
production and increase the revenue we get from the royalties
there.
And I looked at the graph that you provided and ANWR is the
size of my home state of South Carolina. The whole thing is a
national wildlife refuge. I can't imagine South Carolina, the
whole state being a national wildlife refuge. And then I
investigate where the oil and natural gas areas that we
possibly could drill and produce from, if ANWR is the size of
that wall right there and I put a postage stamp up there that
is what we are talking about, the negligible impact on the area
is something that we have to talk about.
So I will get off my soapbox and ask a question because Mr.
Lawrence you made a comment that I have been thinking about EPA
not issuing Shell Oil an air quality permit. And having gone to
an offshore production and drilling platform in the Gulf of
Mexico, both of them had flare gas. And I am assuming that the
air quality permit is dealing with that flare gas because I
don't remember seeing any other emissions that may have been
under an air quality permit the EPA would be involved in.
But in your comments you talk about that BOEMRE had
normally been the only agency that issue air quality permits,
if I read this correctly. Why is the EPA the agency involved
here?
Mr. Lawrence. Yes, you are correct. BOEMRE has
responsibility for those air quality permits in the central and
western Gulf of Mexico and has for years. They would look at
any emissions, for example, from drill ships in those areas. In
the Alaska jurisdiction, the EPA has been designated as having
that responsibility.
Mr. Duncan. For how long?
Mr. Lawrence. Since at least I have been going for a
permit. And what I would say is that the experience level with
working with those permits and the kind of issues that you face
with those permits is far less with the EPA than it is
elsewhere.
Having said that, what I look forward to is just to be able
to receive the permit, having met all those requirements and
having been able to deliver what we have said we would deliver
to be able to get those permits.
Mr. Duncan. Mr. Lawrence, I know you are going through a
permitting process with EPA and you are treading very lightly
because you don't want to impact that. I appreciate those
comments, but I am going to question this committee why the EPA
is involved in the Alaskan Sea, Beaufort and Chukchi and the
rest of them when BOEMRE does it everywhere else there is
offshore drilling. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Lamborn. Thank you. Now Mr. Rivera of Florida.
Mr. Rivera. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Just one question regarding the pipeline and what the
effect would be or the actual effect would be on the pipelines
should the flows continues to slow down because my staff has
told me that if it gets to a certain point it will have to be
dismantled, according to Federal law. How much would
dismantling the pipeline costs, how long would it take to
rebuild, how much would it cost to rebuild? Any reflections on
that?
Mr. Sullivan. Yes, sir. Congressman, just to address that
issue more broadly, we believe that the best way to ensure that
the pipeline doesn't shut down is to increase the TAPS
throughput. The best way to deal with the technical problems,
the best way to deal with potential spills is to actually
increase. As you go lower in through-put, we may see an
increase in these kinds of problems, regardless of technical
fixes. But there is a requirement, if it is shutdown, for the
actual pipeline to be dismantled and it would cost probably in
the billions of dollars and it would in some ways be, from our
perspective, an enormous wasted investment because we still
have the massive resource base to fill it and that is where we
believe the investment dollars should be focused on is the
responsible production to actually fill it.
Mr. Rivera. Anyone else? Any other comments?
I yield the rest of my time, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Lamborn. All right. Thank you.
At this point, I want to thank the witnesses for coming
today. You provided some illuminating and educational responses
and testimony to help us do our jobs better, hopefully. So
thank you for being here. And I would like to urge the
witnesses to answer any questions that Members may submit to
them in writing immediately afterwards.
And if there is no further business, the Subcommittee
stands adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 11:25 a.m., the Subcommittee was adjourned.]


