- IMPACTS OF THE BUREAU OF LAND MANAGEMENT'S HYDRAULIC FRACTURING RULE ON INDIAN TRIBAL ENERGY DEVELOPMENT

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

IMPACTS OF THE BUREAU OF LAND MANAGEMENT'S HYDRAULIC FRACTURING RULE

ON INDIAN TRIBAL ENERGY DEVELOPMENT
=======================================================================

OVERSIGHT HEARING

before the

SUBCOMMITTEE ON INDIAN AND

ALASKA NATIVE AFFAIRS

of the

COMMITTEE ON NATURAL RESOURCES

U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

Thursday, April 19, 2012

__________

Serial No. 112-106

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Natural Resources

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.fdsys.gov
or
Committee address: http://naturalresources.house.gov

U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
73-938                    WASHINGTON : 2013
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800; DC
area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104  Mail: Stop IDCC, Washington, DC
20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON NATURAL RESOURCES

DOC HASTINGS, WA, Chairman
EDWARD J. MARKEY, MA, Ranking Democrat Member

Don Young, AK                        Dale E. Kildee, MI
John J. Duncan, Jr., TN              Peter A. DeFazio, OR
Louie Gohmert, TX                    Eni F.H. Faleomavaega, AS
Rob Bishop, UT                       Frank Pallone, Jr., NJ
Doug Lamborn, CO                     Grace F. Napolitano, CA
Robert J. Wittman, VA                Rush D. Holt, NJ
Paul C. Broun, GA                    Raul M. Grijalva, AZ
John Fleming, LA                     Madeleine Z. Bordallo, GU
Mike Coffman, CO                     Jim Costa, CA
Tom McClintock, CA                   Dan Boren, OK
Glenn Thompson, PA                   Gregorio Kilili Camacho Sablan,
Jeff Denham, CA                          CNMI
Dan Benishek, MI                     Martin Heinrich, NM
David Rivera, FL                     Ben Ray Lujan, NM
Jeff Duncan, SC                      Betty Sutton, OH
Scott R. Tipton, CO                  Niki Tsongas, MA
Paul A. Gosar, AZ                    Pedro R. Pierluisi, PR
Raul R. Labrador, ID                 John Garamendi, CA
Kristi L. Noem, SD                   Colleen W. Hanabusa, HI
Steve Southerland II, FL             Paul Tonko, NY
Bill Flores, TX                      Vacancy
Andy Harris, MD
Jeffrey M. Landry, LA
Jon Runyan, NJ
Bill Johnson, OH
Mark Amodei, NV

Todd Young, Chief of Staff
Lisa Pittman, Chief Counsel
Jeffrey Duncan, Democrat Staff Director
David Watkins, Democrat Chief Counsel
------

SUBCOMMITTEE ON INDIAN AND ALASKA NATIVE AFFAIRS

DON YOUNG, AK, Chairman
DAN BOREN, OK, Ranking Democrat Member

Tom McClintock, CA                   Dale E. Kildee, MI
Jeff Denham, CA                      Eni F.H. Faleomavaega, AS
Dan Benishek, MI                     Ben Ray Lujan, NM
Paul A. Gosar, AZ                    Colleen W. Hanabusa, HI
Raul R. Labrador, ID                 Edward J. Markey, MA, ex officio
Kristi L. Noem, SD
Doc Hastings, WA, ex officio

------

CONTENTS

----------
Page

Hearing held on Thursday, April 19, 2012.........................     1

Statement of Members:
Boren, Hon. Dan, a Representative in Congress from the State
of Oklahoma................................................     4
Prepared statement of....................................     5
``Hydraulic Fracturing on Public Lands: Tribal
Consultation Sessions, Agenda'' submitted for the
record.................................................    14
Lamborn, Hon. Doug, a Representative in Congress from the
State of Colorado..........................................    45
Prepared statement of....................................    46
Markey, Hon. Edward J., a Representative in Congress from the
Commonwealth of Massachusetts..............................     6
Prepared statement of....................................     7
Young, Hon. Don, the Representative in Congress for the State
of Alaska..................................................     1
Prepared statement of....................................     3

Statement of Witnesses:
Cuch, Hon. Irene C., Chairwoman, Ute Tribal Business Council,
Ute Indian Tribe of the Uintah and Ouray Reservation.......    28
Prepared statement of....................................    30
DeCoteau, Larry, District 4 Tribal Council Representative,
Turtle Mountain Band of Chippewa Indians...................    55
Prepared statement of....................................    56
Groen, Wilson, President and CEO, Navajo Nation Oil and Gas
Company....................................................    63
Prepared statement of....................................    64
Hall, Hon. Tex G., Chairman, Mandan, Hidatsa and Arikara
Nation of the Fort Berthold Reservation....................    20
Prepared statement of....................................    22
Martel, Hon. Wesley, Co-Chairman, Eastern Shoshone Tribe,
Wild River Reservation.....................................    51
Prepared statement of....................................    53
Olguin, Hon. James M. ``Mike,'' Vice Chair, Southern Ute
Indian Tribal Council, Southern Ute Indian Tribe...........    40
Prepared statement of....................................    42
Russell, Hon. Scott, Vice President, Rocky Mountain Region,
National Congress of American Indians......................    57
Prepared statement of....................................    59
National Congress of American Indians Resolution #ECWS-
12-005 submitted for the record........................    61
Show, Hon. T.J., Chairman, Blackfeet Tribal Business Council,
Blackfeet Nation...........................................    35
Prepared statement of....................................    36
Spisak, Tim, Deputy Assistant Director, Minerals and Realty
Management, Bureau of Land Management, U.S. Department of
the Interior...............................................     8
Prepared statement of....................................    10

OVERSIGHT HEARING ON THE IMPACTS OF THE BUREAU OF LAND MANAGEMENT'S
HYDRAULIC FRACTURING RULE ON INDIAN TRIBAL ENERGY DEVELOPMENT.

----------

Thursday, April 19, 2012

U.S. House of Representatives

Subcommittee on Indian and Alaska Native Affairs

Committee on Natural Resources

Washington, D.C.

----------

The Subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 11:04 a.m., in
Room 1324, Longworth House Office Building, Hon. Don Young
[Chairman of the Subcommittee] presiding.
Present: Representatives Young, Boren, Kildee, and Markey.
Also Present: Representative Lamborn.
Mr. Young. The Committee will come to order. The Chairman
notes the presence of a quorum, which under Rule 3 is two
Members. The Subcommittee on Indian and Alaska Native Affairs
is meeting today to hear testimony on ``The Impacts of the
Bureau of Land Management's Hydraulic Fracturing Rule on Indian
Tribal Energy Development.''
Under Committee Rule 4(f), opening statements are limited
to myself and the Ranking Member of the Subcommittee, and we
hope to hear from the witnesses quickly.
However, I ask unanimous consent to include any other
Members' opening statements that are submitted to the Clerk by
close of business today.
Hearing no objection, so ordered.
Mr. Young. I also ask unanimous consent that the gentleman
from Colorado, Mr. Lamborn, be allowed to join us on the dais
when he shows up and participate in the hearing.
Without any objection, so ordered.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. DON YOUNG, A REPRESENTATIVE IN CONGRESS
FROM THE STATE OF ALASKA

Mr. Young. Today's hearing was scheduled in response to
violations of the Department of the Interior's tribal
consultation policy instituted by Secretary Ken Salazar.
Pursuant to this policy, an agency within the Department
must undertake comprehensive and meaningful consultation with
tribal leaders whenever the agency proposes a rule or takes any
action that affects the lands, rights or interests of the
tribes they represent.
The policy was not scribbled on the back of an envelope. It
was not a suggestion or an aspiration.
It is a formal policy established by the Secretarial Order
following a lengthy ``consultation on consultation,'' which was
launched by President Obama in 2009 when he issued the White
House Memorandum on Tribal Consultation. It expands on the
Executive Order issued in 2000 by President Bill Clinton.
To develop the trial consultation policy, more than 200
Federal officials participated in regional consultation
sessions in seven cities with 300 tribal representatives.
Based on these extensive meetings, a draft consultation
policy was given to the tribes for their review and comment in
January 2011.
At that time, Secretary Salazar said ``We must have a
policy that embodies the best consultation practices available,
responds to the needs of tribal leaders to be more engaged in
policy development and promotes more responsible decision
making on issues affecting American Indians and Alaskan
Natives.''
When the final policy was installed on December 1, 2011,
the Secretary noted that ``The new framework institutionalizes
meaningful consultation so that tribal leaders are at the table
and engaged when it comes to the matters that affect them.''
Indeed, the significance of the consultation policy was
such that it was a central feature of the third White House
Trial Nations Conference, where President Obama remarked ``You
have an Administration that understands the challenges that you
face, and most importantly, you have a President that's got
your back.''
Unfortunately, in light of the testimony I reviewed prior
to this hearing, I have to say that while the Department of the
Interior earns an ``A'' for promises to consult with tribes, it
gets an ``F'' for promises actually kept.
For while tribes were told they would have a seat at the
table with Federal agencies, the Bureau of Land Management
excluded them from the process of drafting a rule with a
potentially devastating impact on their sovereignty and
economies.
Tribes were not afforded an opportunity to provide input or
even time to analyze the draft rule. In fact, it is my
understanding that this rule may be at OMB today for a final
review, again, without tribal leaders at the table.
The draft rule concerns a common well stimulation technique
used by the oil and gas industry known as ``hydraulic
fracturing.''
The rule will impose duplicative paperwork, red tape,
additional delays and costs beyond what tribes and oil and gas
operators already endure when Indian land is developed for oil
and gas production.
It is a rule that wrongly treats lands held in Trust for
the exclusive use and benefit of Indians as public land.
This is not a minor issue. It is a violation of tribal
sovereignty. In terms of dollars alone, the rule will be
dramatic because the fossil fuel industry in Indian Country
cold rival that of Indian gaming.
A number of Indian reservations suffer jobless rates, as we
all know, from 50 to 80 percent. Oil and gas leasing can make a
positive dent in these horrible numbers.
New jobs, especially year round, high wage jobs available
in the oil and gas industry, can and will have a dramatic
effect on reducing unemployment and poverty on Indian
reservations.
If the BLM rule goes in effect, kiss those tribal jobs
goodbye. Many reservations are checkerboarded, so oil and gas
operators can move a few feet across the reservation boundary
line to private and state lands where the rules do not apply,
thanks to the Department of the Interior, while non-Indian land
owners will prosper, the tribes will lose, again.
This would be nothing less than another breach of the
United States' Trust responsibility to Indians.
I look forward to our witnesses today, and I can say one
thing, this is what I have been trying to do in this Committee
with the Ranking Member, trying to straighten out this
gobbledy-gook, saying this is self determination, and have our
country put rules in that do not affect other lands.
This is wrong, it is inappropriate, and we hope to solve
this problem.
With that, I recognize the Ranking Member for five minutes
for any statement he may have.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Young follows:]

Statement of The Honorable Don Young, Chairman,
Subcommittee on Indian and Alaska Native Affairs

Today's hearing was scheduled in response to a violation of the
Department of the Interior's tribal consultation policy instituted by
Secretary Ken Salazar.
Pursuant to this policy, an agency within the Department must
undertake comprehensive, meaningful consultation with tribal leaders
whenever the agency proposes a rule or takes any action that affects
the lands, rights, or interests of the tribes they represent.
The policy was not scribbled on the back of an envelope. It is not
a suggestion or an aspiration.
It is a formal policy established by Secretarial Order following a
lengthy ``consultation on consultation,'' which was launched after
President Obama in 2009 issued a White House Memorandum on Tribal
Consultation. It expands on an Executive Order issued in 2000 by
President Bill Clinton.
To develop the tribal consultation policy, more than 200 federal
officials participated in regional consultation sessions in seven
cities with 300 tribal representatives. Based on these extensive
meetings, a draft consultation policy was given to tribes for their
review and comment in January 2011. At the time, Secretary Salazar
said, ``We must have a policy that embodies the best consultation
practices available, responds to the needs of Tribal leaders to be more
engaged in policy development and promotes more responsible decision-
making on issues affecting American Indians and Alaska Natives.''
When the final policy was installed on December 1, 2011, the
Secretary noted that, ``The new framework institutionalizes meaningful
consultation so that tribal leaders are at the table and engaged when
it comes to the matters that affect them.''
Indeed, the significance of the consultation policy was such that
it was a central feature of the third White House Tribal Nations
Conference, where President Obama remarked, ``You have an
administration that understands the challenges that you face and most
importantly you have a president that's got your back.''
Unfortunately, in light of the testimony I reviewed prior to this
hearing, I have to say that while the Department of the Interior earns
an ``A'' for its promises to consult with tribes, it gets an ``F'' for
promises actually kept.
For while tribes were told they would have a seat at the table with
federal agencies, the Bureau of Land Management excluded them from the
process of drafting a rule with a potentially devastating impact on
their sovereignty, and their economies. Tribes were not afforded an
opportunity to provide input on, let alone the time to analyze, the
draft rule. In fact, it is my understanding this rule may be at OMB
today for a final review--again, without tribal leaders at the table.
The draft rule concerns a common well stimulation technique used by
the oil and gas industry known as hydraulic fracturing. The rule will
impose duplicative paperwork, red tape, and additional delays and costs
beyond what tribes and oil and gas operators already endure when Indian
land is developed for oil and gas production. It is a rule that wrongly
treats land held in trust for the exclusive use and benefit of Indians
as public land.
This is not a minor issue. It is a violation of tribal sovereignty.
In terms of dollars alone, the rule will be dramatic because the fossil
fuel industry in Indian Country could rival that of Indian gaming.
A number of Indian reservations suffer jobless rates ranging from
50 to 80 percent. Oil and gas leasing can make a positive dent in these
horrible numbers. New jobs--especially year-round, high wage jobs
available in the oil and gas industry--can and will have a dramatic
effect on reducing unemployment and poverty on Indian reservations.
But if the BLM rule goes into effect, kiss these tribal jobs good-
bye. Many reservations are checkerboarded, so oil and gas operators can
move a few feet across the reservation boundary line to private and
state lands where the rule will not apply. Thanks to the Department of
the Interior, while non-Indian landowners will prosper, the tribes will
lose.
This would be nothing less than another breach of the United
States' trust responsibility to Indians.
I look forward to hearing the testimony of tribal leaders today to
discuss the impact of the draft rule, and what steps we can take to
address it.
______

STATEMENT OF THE HON. DAN BOREN, A REPRESENTATIVE IN CONGRESS
FROM THE STATE OF OKLAHOMA

Mr. Boren. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. First, let me thank our
witnesses that are here today to discuss the topic of hydraulic
fracturing and the Bureau of Land Management's consultation
process.
I look forward to hearing all of their testimonies.
There is no doubt that the United States is in great need
of natural gas reserves that are spread across this nation. It
is a cleaner, cheaper fuel source that can fulfill our energy
needs for the next 100 years and beyond.
Advances in hydraulic fracturing technologies have opened
up development capabilities while minimizing the impact on
surrounding lands.
This technology has spread to our tribal neighbors,
enabling them to fight high levels of unemployment and poverty
with energy development.
Recently, the Bureau of Land Management held a series of
meetings with tribes about hydraulic fracturing and possible
regulation.
Chairman Young and I wrote a letter dated February 8 that
expressed our concern over the process and requested more
information.
As we stated, I strongly believe that placing additional
undue barriers for tribal energy development is unwise, it is
also counterproductive.
Because of the nature of the Government to Government
relationship, we must be especially cautious to consider the
tribal land rights in all decision making.
It is our duty to provide assistance in sharing best
practices, but we must be careful about impeding on sovereign
rights.
After reviewing the documents provided by the BLM per the
Chairman and my request, I became deeply concerned that tribes
had little to no input in the regulatory process.
As stated in Secretary Salazar's Executive Order No. 3317,
and I quote, ``Consultation is a process that aims to create
effective collaboration with Indian tribes and to inform
Federal decision makers.''
We are here today to ensure that the Government has created
effective collaboration. If, as I suspect, the BLM has not made
the effort to involve tribes to the extent necessary, we must
open a dialogue today between tribes and the Administration to
begin a cooperative review of hydraulic fracturing before any
rulemaking proceeds.
From the written testimonies, it is clear that no two
tribes have had a similar experience when it comes to energy
development. Thus, we must ensure that the consultation process
is extensive enough to address the individual needs before
moving forward.
Again, I look forward to learning more about the BLM's
process from both the Department's perspective and those of the
tribes.
Again, I would like to thank our witnesses, and I look
forward to hearing from each and every one of you on this
important issue.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Boren follows:]

Statement of The Honorable Dan Boren, Ranking Member,
Subcommittee on Indian and Alaska Native Affairs

Thank you Mr. Chairman. First let me thank our witnesses that are
here today to discuss the topic of hydraulic fracturing and the Bureau
of Land Management's consultation process. I look forward to hearing
your testimonies.
There is no doubt that the United States is in great need of the
natural gas reserves that are spread across the nation. It is a
cleaner, cheaper fuel source that can fulfill our energy needs for the
next hundred years and beyond.
Advances in hydraulic fracturing technologies have opened up
development capabilities while minimizing the impact on surrounding
lands. This technology has spread to our tribal neighbors, enabling
them to fight high levels of unemployment and poverty with energy
development.
Recently, the Bureau of Land Management held a series of meetings
with tribes about hydraulic fracturing and possible regulation.
Chairman Young and I wrote a letter dated February 8th that expressed
our concern over the process and requested more information. As we
stated, I strongly believe that placing additional undue barriers for
tribal energy development is unwise and counterproductive.
Because of the nature of the government to government relationship,
we must be especially cautious to consider the tribal land rights in
all decision making. It is our duty to provide assistance in sharing
best practices but we must be careful about impeding on sovereign
rights.
After reviewing the documents provided by the BLM per the Chairman
and my request, I became deeply concerned that tribes had little to no
input in the regulatory process. As stated in Secretary Salazar's
Executive Order Number 3317, ``Consultation is a process that aims to
create effective collaboration with Indian tribes and to inform Federal
decision-makers.''
We are here today to ensure that tribes believe the government has
created effective collaboration. If, as I suspect, the BLM has not made
the effort to involve tribes to the extent necessary, we must open a
dialogue today between tribes and the administration to begin a
cooperative review of hydraulic fracturing before any rulemaking
proceeds.
From the written testimonies, it is clear that no two tribes have
had a similar experience when it comes to energy development. Thus, we
must ensure the consultation process is extensive enough to address the
individual needs before moving forward.
I look forward to learning more about the BLM's process from both
the Department's perspective and those of the tribes. Again, I'd like
to thank our witnesses here today and I look forward to learning more
about this important issue. I yield back.
______

Mr. Young. I thank my Ranking Member and thank him for
being on time today. I deeply appreciate that.
[Laughter.]
Mr. Young. Anyway, the first panel we have now is Tim
Spisak, Deputy Assistant Director----
Mr. Markey. Would it be possible for me to make an opening
statement?
Mr. Young. No. I am kidding. Go ahead.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. EDWARD MARKEY, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF MASSACHUSETTS

Mr. Markey. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, very much. I would
like to welcome the tribal leaders joining us today.
Advances in horizontal drilling and hydraulic fracturing
are dramatically reshaping America's energy equation, shale
formations that once seemed impossible to tap and now yielding
oil and natural gas, helping to reduce imports and creating a
competitive advantage for U.S. manufacturing and chemical
industries.
Some of these newly accessible shale formations are below
tribal lands, including parts of the enormous Bakken shale in
North Dakota and Montana.
Oil and gas development is already benefitting parts of
Indian Country, and development of tribal shale resources will
provide further economic opportunities.
The development of these resources does have risks though.
Hydraulic fracturing requires large amounts of water, a serious
challenge in arid parts of the country.
The process can create air and water pollution that puts
drinking water and public health at risk. In fact, today, we
will hear from Shoshone Co-Chairman Wes Martel about the
contamination of the groundwater supply for the Town of
Pavilion, Wyoming.
The EPA has detected benzine, methane, and synthetic
chemicals consistent with hydraulic fracturing fluids in the
town's aquifer.
Although the investigation is still ongoing, the loss of
Pavilion's drinking water supply should raise concern for all.
As we can see from Pavilion's experience and from the
report that Congressman Holt and I issued documenting drilling
violations on Federal lands, the status quo is not working.
We found that over a 13 year period, starting in the 1990s,
335 oil and gas companies committed more than 2,000 violations
that endangered health, safety and environment.
For all of these violations, they were fined just $273,000.
That is an average of only $135 per violation.
Companies were drilling without adequate cement to protect
water sources, without blow out preventers that would halt
catastrophic spills, and in at least one case, a company dumped
fluids directly from the rig into a nearby river.
Rules that govern oil and natural gas production on public
and tribal lands have not been updated since 1982.
Furthermore, hydraulic fracturing was exempted from key
parts of seven major Federal environmental laws designed to
protect public health, air and water by the oil companies back
in the 2005 Energy Policy Act.
Even as that legislation tried to promote tribal energy
self determination through the Indian Energy Title, it
undermined the protections from pollution from hydraulic
fracturing.
To ensure adequate protections are in place for hydraulic
fracturing, which now occurs on 90 percent of wells drilled on
public and tribal land, the Bureau of Land Management is
working to update these rules.
Examining the current best practices, BLM is striving to
ensure that hydraulic fracturing can be done safely and
economically.
Given its Treaty obligations and Trust responsibility, the
United States must consult with tribes on a Government to
Government basis when developing Federal policies with tribal
implications.
President Obama has underscored the importance of tribal
consultation. Tribes must be at the table for any new
regulatory proposal that affects their lands, including any
plans BLM is proposing for hydraulic fracturing operations.
At the same time, Federal regulations of energy and
resource development on Indian lands is tied closely with the
Federal Trust responsibility.
I know the tribes have the best interest of their people in
mind when engaging in energy development on their lands.
The Federal Government's Trust responsibility also requires
that we ensure basic protections are in place in order to meet
our obligations.
I hope today's hearing can foster the cooperation between
tribes and the Federal Government that will lead to energy
development that supports Indian economic development and
protects the health of tribal people and their lands.
Mr. Chairman, I thank you for the courtesy of allowing me
to make an opening statement, and I yield back.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Markey follows:]

Statement of The Honorable Edward J. Markey, Ranking Member,
Committee on Natural Resources

Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I'd like to welcome the tribal leaders
joining us today.
Advances in horizontal drilling and hydraulic fracturing are
dramatically reshaping America's energy equation. Shale formations that
once seemed impossible to tap are now yielding oil and natural gas,
helping to reduce imports and creating a competitive advantage for the
U.S. manufacturing and chemical industries.
Some of these newly accessible shale formations are below tribal
lands, including parts of the enormous Bakken Shale in North Dakota and
Montana. Oil and gas development is already benefiting parts of Indian
country, and development of tribal shale resources will provide further
economic opportunities.
The development of these resources does have risks though.
Hydraulic fracturing requires large amounts of water, a serious
challenge in arid parts of the country. The process can create air and
water pollution that puts drinking water and public health at risk. In
fact today we will hear from Eastern Shoshone Co-Chairman Wes Martel
about the contamination of the groundwater supply for Wind River
Reservation town of Pavillion, Wyoming. The EPA has detected benzene,
methane and synthetic chemicals consistent with hydraulic fracturing
fluids in the town's aquifer. Although the investigation is still
ongoing, the loss of Pavillion's drinking water supply should raise
concerns for all.
As we can see from Pavillion's experience and from the report that
Congressman Holt and I issued documenting drilling violations on
federal lands, the status quo is not working. We found that over a 13-
year period starting in the 1990s, 335 oil and gas companies committed
more than 2,000 violations that endangered health, safety and the
environment. For all of these violations they were fined just $273,875.
That's an average of only $135 per violation. Companies were drilling
without adequate cement to protect water sources, without blow-out
preventers that would halt catastrophic spills and, in at least one
case, a company dumped fluids directly from the rig into a nearby
river.
Rules that govern oil and natural gas production on public and
tribal lands have not been updated since 1982. Furthermore, hydraulic
fracturing was exempted from key parts of 7 major federal environmental
laws designed to protect public health, air and water by the oil
companies' Republican allies in the 2005 Energy Policy Act. Even as
that legislation tried to promote Tribal energy self-determination
through the Indian energy title, it undermined protections for all
Americans from pollution from hydraulic fracturing. To ensure adequate
protections are in place for hydraulic fracturing, which now occurs on
90 percent of wells drilled on public and Tribal land, the Bureau of
Land Management is working to update their rules. Examining the current
best practices, BLM is striving to ensure that hydraulic fracturing can
be done safely and economically.
Given its treaty obligations and trust responsibility, the United
States must consult with tribes on a government-to-government basis
when developing federal policies with tribal implications. President
Obama has underscored the importance of tribal consultation. Tribes
must be at the table for any new regulatory proposal that affects their
lands, including any plans BLM is proposing for hydraulic fracturing
operations.
But at the same time, federal regulation of energy and resource
development on Indian lands is tied closely with the federal trust
responsibility. I know that tribes have the best interests of their
people in mind when engaging in energy development on their lands. The
federal government's trust responsibility also requires that we ensure
basic protections are in place in order to meet our obligations. I hope
today's hearing can foster the cooperation between tribes and the
federal government that will lead to energy development that supports
Indian economic development and protects the health of tribal people
and their lands.
I look forward to the testimony of our witnesses today and I yield
back.
______

Mr. Young. The gentleman is welcome.
At this time, we will draw our first witness, Mr. Tim
Spisak, Deputy Assistant Director, Minerals and Realty
Management, Bureau of Land Management.
You are up.

STATEMENT OF TIM SPISAK, DEPUTY ASSISTANT DIRECTOR, MINERALS
AND REALTY MANAGEMENT, BUREAU OF LAND MANAGEMENT

Mr. Spisak. Mr. Chairman and members of the Subcommittee,
thank you for the opportunity to discuss the Bureau of Land
Management's development of hydraulic fracturing rules and
their application on Federal, tribal, and individual Indian
Trust lands.
The BLM administers over 245 million surface acres and
approximately 700 million acres of onshore Federal mineral
estates.
Together with the Bureau of Indian Affairs, we also provide
permitting and oversight services on approximately 56 million
acres of Indian Trust minerals.
The development of the energy resources from BLM managed
lands will continue to play a critical role in meeting the
nation's energy needs and fueling our economy.
In Fiscal Year 2011, onshore Federal oil and gas royalties
exceeded $2.7 billion, approximately half of which was paid
directly to the states in which the production occurred.
Tribal oil and gas royalties exceeded $400 million with 100
percent of those revenues paid to the tribes and individual
Indians owning the land.
Oil and gas production from shale formations scattered
across the United States has grown considerably and is expected
to continue in the coming decades.
Factors contributing to this success include technological
advances in hydraulic fracturing when combined with horizontal
drilling.
This rise in production and advances in technology are
dramatically evident on the Fort Berthold Indian Reservation,
for example, which lies in the heart of the Bakken oil and gas
region in North Dakota.
At Fort Berthold, applications for permits to drill have
increased from zero in 2007 to 175 last year.
Royalty payments from production from Trust minerals has
increased from $4.5 million in 2009 to approximately $117
million this last year.
At Fort Berthold earlier this month, Secretary Salazar
unveiled initiatives to expedite safe and responsible leasing
and development of domestic energy resources on public and
Indian Trust lands.
As part of the BLM's ongoing efforts to ensure efficient
processing of oil and gas permit applications on both Indian
Trust and public lands, the agency will implement a new
automated tracking system across the Bureau that could reduce
the review time for permit applications by two-thirds.
This initiative comes as part of the Department's efforts
to continually meet increased demands for oil and gas
development on public and Indian lands across the country.
The BLM estimates that approximately 90 percent of the
wells drilled on public and Indian lands are stimulated by
hydraulic fracturing techniques.
The increasing use of hydraulic fracturing has raised
concerns about the potential impacts on water availability and
quality, particularly with respect to the chemical composition
of fracturing fluids in the methods used.
The BLM recognizes that some but not all states have taken
action to address hydraulic fracturing in their own
regulations.
The BLM's proposed rulemaking is intended to provide
consistent protection of the important Federal and Indian
resource values that may be affected by the use of hydraulic
fracturing.
The BLM's draft rule contains three key provisions;
disclosure of the chemicals used in hydraulic fracturing
operations with appropriate protections for trade secrets;
assurance of well bore integrity to minimize the risk of
fracturing fluids leaking into nearby aquifers; and water
management requirements to apply to the fluids that flow back
to the surface directly after hydraulic fracturing has taken
place.
The development of this hydraulic fracturing rule will
include tribal consultation of the Department's consultation
policy. This policy emphasizes trust, respect, and shared
responsibility by providing tribal governments an expanded role
to inform the Federal policy that impacts Indian lands.
In January 2012, the BLM conducted a series of meetings in
the West where there was significant development of Indian and
oil and gas resources.
Nearly 180 tribal leaders were invited to attend these
meetings held in Tulsa, Billings, Montana, Salt Lake City, and
Farmington, New Mexico.
As the agency continues to consult with tribal leaders
throughout this rulemaking process, responses from these
representatives will inform our actions and define the scope of
acceptable hydraulic fracturing rule options.
Mr. Chairman, thank you for the opportunity to testify. I
would be happy to answer any questions that you might have at
this time.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Spisak follows:]

Statement of Tim Spisak, Deputy Assistant Director, Minerals and Realty
Management, Bureau of Land Management, U.S. Department of the Interior

Mr. Chairman and Members of the Subcommittee, thank you for the
opportunity to discuss the Bureau of Land Management's (BLM)
development of hydraulic fracturing rules and their application on
Federal, Tribal, and individual Indian Trust lands.
The BLM, an agency of the U.S. Department of the Interior
(Department), is responsible for protecting the resources and managing
the uses of our nation's public lands, which are located primarily in
12 western states, including Alaska. The BLM administers more land--
over 245 million surface acres--than any other Federal agency. The BLM
manages approximately 700 million acres of onshore Federal mineral
estate throughout the Nation, including the subsurface estate overlain
by properties of other Federal agencies such as the Department of
Defense and the U.S. Forest Service. The BLM, together with the Bureau
of Indian Affairs (BIA), also provides permitting and oversight
services under the Indian Mineral Leasing Act of 1938 on approximately
56 million acres of land held in trust by the federal government on
behalf of tribes and individual Indian owners. The BLM works closely
with surface management agencies, including the BIA and Tribal
governments, in the management of the subsurface mineral estate. We are
mindful of the agency's responsibility for stewardship of public land
resources and the public and Indian trust oil and gas assets that
generate substantial revenue for the U.S. Treasury, the states, and
Tribal governments and individuals.
Background
The Obama administration is committed to promoting safe,
responsible, and environmentally sustainable domestic oil and gas
production as part of a broad energy strategy that will protect
consumers, human health, and the environment, and reduce our dependence
on foreign oil. Secretary Salazar has made clear that as we move toward
the new energy frontier, the development of conventional energy
resources from BLM-managed lands will continue to play a critical role
in meeting the Nation's energy needs and fueling our Nation's economy.
In Fiscal Year (FY) 2011, onshore Federal oil and gas royalties
exceeded $2.7 billion, approximately half of which were paid directly
to states in which the development occurred. In FY 2011, Tribal oil and
gas royalties exceeded $400 million with 100% of those revenues paid to
the tribes and individual Indians owners of the land on which the
development occurred.
The BLM is working diligently to fulfill its part in securing
America's energy future. Combined onshore oil production from public
and Indian lands has increased every year since 2008. Production of oil
from Indian lands has increased by more than 95% since 2008. Production
of gas from public and Indian lands has remained nearly stable despite
increasing industry interest in development of natural gas on private
lands in the eastern United States. In 2011, conventional energy
development from public and Indian lands produced 14 percent of the
Nation's natural gas, and 6 percent of its domestically-produced oil.
Gas production from shale formations scattered across the United
States has grown from a negligible amount just a few years ago to
represent a significant share of the total U.S. natural gas production,
and this share is expected to increase further in the coming decades.
There has also been a significant and growing increase in oil
production from shale formations. Significant factors contributing to
these increases include technological advances in hydraulic fracturing
and horizontal drilling.
One example of this rise in production and advances in technology
is dramatically evident on the Fort Berthold Indian Reservation which
lies in the heart of the Bakken oil and gas region in North Dakota. At
Fort Berthold, applications for permit to drill have increased from
zero in 2007 to 175 in 2011. Royalty payments from production from
trust minerals have increased from $4.5 million in 2009 to
approximately $117 million last year. The BLM works closely with the
BIA to help ensure that drilling and oil and gas production activities
on Fort Berthold are permitted efficiently and conducted in a safe and
responsible manner. BIA completes NEPA compliance, cultural and
biological surveys, and development of surface mitigation measures.
Notably, on April 3, 2012, at Fort Berthold, Secretary Salazar
unveiled initiatives to expedite safe and responsible leasing and
development of domestic energy resources on U.S. public and Indian
trust lands. As part of the BLM's ongoing efforts to ensure efficient
processing of oil and gas permit applications on both Indian trust and
public lands, the agency will implement a new automated tracking system
across the Bureau that could reduce the review period for drilling
permits by up to two-thirds. The new system will track permit
applications through the entire review process, quickly flagging
missing or incomplete information, and greatly reducing the back-and-
forth between the BLM and industry applicants, which is currently
needed to ensure that applications processed by the BLM are complete.
This initiative comes as part of the Department's efforts to
continually meet increased demands for oil and gas development on
public and Indian lands across the country.
Hydraulic Fracturing Technology
Recent technology and operational improvements in extracting
hydrocarbon resources, particularly shale gas, have increased oil and
gas drilling activities nationally and led to significantly higher
natural gas production estimates for the coming decades. Hydraulic
Fracturing, or ``fracking,'' is a common technique that has been used
in oil and gas production operations for decades. Fracking involves the
injection of fluid under high pressure to create or enlarge fractures
in the rocks containing oil and gas so that the fluids can flow more
freely into the well bore and thus increase production. However, the
increasing use of hydraulic fracturing has raised concerns about the
potential impacts on water availability and quality, including concerns
about the chemical composition of fluids used in fracturing.
The number of wells on BLM-managed public lands and on Indian
lands, as well as on private lands, that are stimulated by hydraulic
fracturing techniques has increased steadily in recent years as oil and
gas producers are developing geologic formations that are less
permeable than those drilled in the past. The BLM estimates that
approximately 90 percent of the wells drilled on public and Indian
lands are stimulated by hydraulic fracturing techniques.
Hydraulic Fracturing Rulemaking
In November 2010, Secretary Salazar hosted a forum, including major
stakeholders, on hydraulic fracturing on public and Indian lands to
examine best practices to ensure that natural gas on public and Indian
lands is developed in a safe and environmentally sustainable manner.
Subsequently, the BLM hosted a series of regional public meetings in
North Dakota, Arkansas, and Colorado--states that have experienced
significant increases in oil and natural gas development on Federal and
Indian lands--to discuss the use of hydraulic fracturing on the
Nation's public lands.
During the Secretary's forum and the BLM's public meetings, members
of the public expressed a strong interest in obtaining more information
about hydraulic fracturing operations being conducted on public and
Tribal lands. Questions about the composition of the fluids that are
being used were highlighted frequently as were concerns about these
fluids potentially leaking into aquifers or causing spills on the
surface. Additionally, the BLM recognized through review of its rules
that existing regulations on well stimulation operations on public and
Indian lands (last updated in 1982) needed to be updated to reflect
significant technological advances in hydraulic fracturing in recent
years and the tremendous increase in its use.
The BLM recognizes that some, but not all, states have recently
taken action to address hydraulic fracturing in their own regulations.
The BLM's proposed rulemaking is not intended to duplicate various
state or any applicable Federal requirements, but rather to provide
consistent protection of the important Federal and Indian resource
values that may be affected by the use of hydraulic fracturing.
Although the proposed rule is currently under OMB review and is subject
to an ongoing deliberative interagency review process, the BLM expects
to propose a rule with three key provisions:

Disclosure of the chemicals used in hydraulic
fracturing operations, with appropriate protections for trade
secrets. The agency is evaluating how best to provide this
information to the public and has been in touch with
organizations, including the Ground Water Protection Council
and the Interstate Oil and Gas Compact Commission, that run the
website FracFocus.org.

Assurance of wellbore integrity. The BLM is looking
at wellbore integrity as a means to minimize the risk of
fracturing fluids or other contaminants leaking into nearby
aquifers.

Water management requirements that would apply to the
fluids that flow back to the surface after hydraulic fracturing
has taken place. This is frequently referred to as
``flowback.''
Tribal Outreach and Next Steps for the Consultation Process
In January 2012, the BLM began initial outreach, communication, and
information-sharing with Tribal communities on the proposed rule. The
agency conducted a series of meetings in the oil and gas producing
regions of the West where there is significant development of Indian
oil and gas resources. Nearly 180 Tribal leaders from all Tribes that
are currently receiving oil and gas royalties and all Tribes that may
have had ancestral surface use were invited to attend these meetings,
which were held in Tulsa, Oklahoma; Billings, Montana; Salt Lake City,
Utah; and Farmington, New Mexico.
In these initial meetings Tribal representatives were given a draft
of the hydraulic fracturing rule to serve as a basis for discussion and
substantive dialogue about the hydraulic fracturing rulemaking process.
The BLM asked the Tribal leaders for their views on how a hydraulic
fracturing rule proposal might affect Indian activities, practices, or
beliefs if it were to be applied to particular locations on Indian and
public lands. A variety of issues were discussed, including
applicability of Tribal laws, validating water sources, Inspection and
Enforcement, wellbore integrity, and water management, among others.
The development of this hydraulic fracturing rule will include
proactive Tribal consultation under the Department's newly-formalized
Tribal Consultation Policy. This policy, announced on December 1, 2011,
emphasizes trust, respect and shared responsibility in providing Tribal
governments an expanded role in informing Federal policy that impacts
Indian lands. Under this policy, consultation is an open, transparent,
and deliberative process.
The agency will continue to consult with Tribal leaders throughout
the rulemaking process. Responses from Tribal representatives will
inform the agency's actions in defining the scope of acceptable
hydraulic fracturing rule options.
Conclusion
The BLM will continue to encourage responsible energy development
on public and Indian trust lands and ensure a fair return for the use
of these resources. Following internal Administration review and
continuing Tribal consultations, a draft rule incorporating the
feedback received will be released to the public as part of a formal
comment period. At that time, the BLM will be pleased to receive
detailed feedback from industry, state, local, and Tribal governments,
individual citizens and all other interested parties. Consultation with
Tribes will continue throughout this process. I am glad to answer any
questions you may have.
______

Mr. Young. Thank you, sir. Mr. Boren?
Mr. Boren. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I have a couple of
questions. First question right off the bat, since ``Indian
lands'' is excluded from the definition of ``public lands'' in
the Federal Land Policy and Management Act of 1976, what gives
the BLM authority to regulate Indian lands? What gives you all
the right to do that?
Mr. Spisak. The Department follows the Indian Mineral
Leasing Act of 1938 and the regulations that were promulgated
from that.
In 25 CFR Subsection 225.4 is where that authority from the
Indian development is covered by the BLM processes for permit
application approvals.
Mr. Boren. Let's just assume that you are right, that you
do have the ability to do that. I want to talk a little bit
about the collaboration, what you all have been doing.
In their testimonies, many of the tribes claim that the BLM
meetings were purely informational. After reviewing the
information that was made available at the meetings, I am going
to have to agree that the content did not really seem
consultative.
Can you describe how these meetings were collaborative in
nature? Were copies of the proposed rulemaking's made available
at every meeting? What were some of the tribal concerns about
this specific rulemaking, and how were they addressed?
Mr. Spisak. That is a lot. Let me start with the meetings
themselves. We held the four. We tried to mirror each meeting
to be the same. They started out with primarily what was
hydraulic fracturing, kind of a 101 of what it is, because we
understood that may be different, tribes may not have the same
level of understanding.
Then we had----
Mr. Boren. I think the BLM may not have a level of
understanding. I think the tribes know a little bit more. They
have been pretty proactive, but go ahead.
Mr. Spisak. We also had a presentation from EPA at some of
them. They were not able to attend at all of them. We had an
engineer talking about the process and how it applied
specifically in that particular region.
Then we had a session where we provided the reg text to the
folks that were there, and went through the individual pieces
and what they meant.
This is the first time to my knowledge where we actually
provided reg text prior to it being published in a Federal
Register Notice.
We wanted to make it clear that this was just the start of
the tribal consultation process, and we did not believe that it
was in and of itself the single time that we expected the
consultation to----
Mr. Boren. I actually have a copy of the meeting agenda. I
do not see any time blocked off for review or to discuss the
regulations.
In your testimony you said ``Tribes were given a draft of
the rulemaking process to serve as a basis for discussion and
substantive dialogue.''
When during the meeting did the substantive dialogue about
the specific rulemaking's occur?
Mr. Spisak. It was the last part of the meeting where we
talked about--where we handed out the reg text. I was actually
at two of the meetings. I understood the other two were held
the same way.
We stepped through the reg text and had a discussion about
that in particular.
Mr. Boren. I ask unanimous consent to put this in the
record.
Mr. Young. Without objection, so ordered.

[The meeting agenda submitted for the record by Mr. Boren
follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 73938.001

------

Mr. Boren. Has feedback from consultation sessions with the
tribes been incorporated into some of these draft regulations?
When you all visited, have you taken some of their input?
Where are we on this time line? Can you kind of go through
the time line of after this process has happened and when you
see these draft regulations actually being more formalized?
Mr. Spisak. Sure. They were transmitted over to the OMB in
the middle of February. There has been some back and forth with
OMB and other agencies on the regs.
It is undergoing changes as we speak based on input that we
received from the tribes as well as Executive Order 12866
meetings that OMB has been conducting over the last month or
so.
Those are where virtually anybody can call in for 30
minutes and provide comments and concerns that they have
regarding the particular piece in question, and this would be
the reg text that had been provided to the tribes in January.
Mr. Boren. OK. Mr. Chairman, I am running out of time. I
yield back. I am looking forward to the testimony from the
tribes to see if there really was consultation here. Thank you.
Mr. Young. I thank the gentleman. If he wishes to ask more
questions in the second round, fine.
Mr. Kildee?
Mr. Kildee. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you for having
this hearing.
I always look at matters like this at a balance of economic
development on Indian land and the unique sovereignty of Indian
land.
You mentioned a law passed in 1938. When we read the
Constitution and it says ``Congress shall have the power to
regulate commerce with foreign nations and among the several
states, and with the Indian tribes,'' it talks about the
sovereignty of Indian land.
Are we in any way impinging upon that sovereignty? You
mentioned the Act of 1938. Were Indians part of the discussions
or negotiations when that Act was passed? Was this just done by
people here in Washington?
Mr. Spisak. I have no idea, sir.
Mr. Young. You were not born then?
Mr. Kildee. I was born by nine years that time. I am 82
years old.
Mr. Young. I was talking to him.
Mr. Kildee. I was on the Committee, I think.
[Laughter.]
Mr. Young. And we will miss you.
Mr. Kildee. I am wondering, there are several principles
involved here. It is real sovereignty. When they wrote here,
our founding fathers, to regulate commerce with foreign nations
and with the several states and Indian tribes, that says
``foreign nations,'' that does not mean we grant sovereignty to
France. We recognize the sovereignty, right?
Mr. Spisak. Yes.
Mr. Kildee. The Indians, John Marshall tells us, have
retained sovereignty. It is not something we gave them. They
had it long before the Europeans landed here.
How sensitive were those involved in the writing of the
1938 law to the principle of Indian sovereignty? I want to do
what is right and helpful to the Indians, but we cannot just
treat them as a piece of land.
They are sovereign nations with sovereign lands with all
the attendant rights of sovereign nations.
I am just wondering if there was any discussion at all or
has there been any current discussion about the unique status
of sovereign land?
Mr. Spisak. Well, I would not say specifically, but I know
the Department of the Interior has a Trust responsibility for
the development of the Indian mineral estate along with the
Indians and the tribes, and we take that responsibility
seriously, and that is why the regulation as it is currently
drafted would cover public lands and Indian mineral estates,
because of that Trust responsibility that is part of the
authority under the Secretary of the Interior.
Mr. Kildee. I would like to do some more information
seeking myself. You can provide more.
I really want to do what is right for the Indians under our
Constitution and among their sovereignty, which they had long
before the Constitution was written.
If there is any information of how that sensitivity is in
play when things like this are developed, I would be very
appreciative.
Mr. Spisak. I understand.
Mr. Kildee. The Indians are certainly capable of
determining what is a good use of their land, and they should
at least be at the table as an equal, sovereign to sovereign
relationship.
I would like to see how sensitive the Department is to that
sovereign to sovereign relationship.
Mr. Spisak. I would say BLM agrees with that 100 percent.
Many of the tribes have become very sophisticated in their
development of their own resources, and we want to work with
them in that area.
Mr. Kildee. Very good. I appreciate that, and any further
information you can get for us.
I have been in Congress now 36 years. I was founder of the
Native American Caucus, although my ancestors came from
Ireland. I just feel we have to be very careful when we think
we are doing something very good, but we might also be
impinging upon something that is not cognizant of their rights
of sovereign.
Anything you can do to supply more information will be
appreciated.
Mr. Chairman, again, I appreciate your calling this
hearing.
Mr. Young. I thank the gentleman. With all due respect to
the BLM, and this is not meant for you, they manage Native
lands in Trust. In my estimate, they mis-spent, mis-used and
frankly were very corrupt in the $27 billion, I think, they
took from the Natives in their leasing practices.
We had a legal court case that settled for $3.5 billion.
I am not really fond of the BLM managing American Indian
lands.
Mr. Spisak, you are a career officer and I realize that. I
think one of the things that bothers me here today is we have
some very distinguished American Indian leaders in this room,
and you are a career officer.
Mr. Spisak. Yes, sir.
Mr. Young. Mr. Salazar decided not to appear or even a
political appointee. I read your testimony. This hearing is
about consultation.
When did the initial draft of this proposed rule begin?
Mr. Spisak. Secretary Salazar had a listening session as it
were in November 2010, where we brought in various people
interested to start a discussion about hydraulic fracturing.
At that point, he had conveyed an interest in doing that.
BLM then followed up with a series of listening sessions in
April of 2011 that brought in more public interest.
We tried to engage the tribes to sit on the panels, and we
were successful, I think, in a couple of the states, but the
drafting of the rules--we did not get a clear go ahead until
after that time that we started looking at putting together reg
text, as it were, for hydraulic fracturing.
It was probably last Spring/Summer when it started.
Mr. Young. You mentioned that Secretary Salazar hosted a
forum including major stockholders on hydraulic fracking on
public and Indian lands. I have a copy of the Interior meeting
advisory regarding that hearing.
I do not see a single tribe leader listed as a participant.
Not one. In fact, I do not even see the Bureau of Indian
Affairs. I see Carol Browner. That is a winner. She was the
President's radical environmental advisor.
I do not see the Natural Resources Defense Council. I see
Trout Unlimited. I do not see any Natives. This is sovereign
land.
I have heard this, Mr. Kildee, and I love you for bringing
it up. We still treat these lands as ours. That is wrong. It is
just not this Administration. I am upset with this
Administration because they say, ``I have your back.''
We have had three big Native conferences, all political.
That is all it is. If we can get enough support, and I am going
to be around a while, I know that makes some of you quite
unhappy. I am going to be around a while, unfortunately, Mr.
Boren is not going to be with me, but maybe he can help me.
We are going to pass the American Indian Empowerment Act
which gives them the right of sovereignty and self
determination.
An 1938 Act, Mr. Kildee, with all due respect, they were
not at the table. The American Indians were considered then--do
not take offense--as inferior. That was the truth.
We get into this modern society, this equal rights and
everything else, and we, the Congress of the United States,
will not give them their just dues as sovereign nations.
Remember this, Carol Browner, Natural Resources Defense
Council, and Trout Unlimited. That is a real winning group.
By the way, after that, did the Department invite on
November 30, 2010 any of the Native tribes and who were they?
Mr. Spisak. I do not recall----
Mr. Young. They were not invited.
Mr. Spisak. I know we did not start engaging--the BLM did
not start engaging the tribes until the April listening
sessions. I know there was one up in North Dakota, Bismarck, I
believe, and I think there was quite a bit of tribal
participation there.
The Little Rock, Arkansas one, there was not a lot of
tribal----
Mr. Young. They were not invited and they still invited
environmental groups and Carol Browner. This was about
fracking. As a sovereign nation, they have a right to make that
decision, not you, not under a law that is so old, I was nine
years old at that time, too. I remember a lot of things in
those days. That was during the Depression. I hate to say that,
it embarrasses me.
Anyway, by the way, let's go back to the Government. Did
the BLM consult with the Bureau of Indian Affairs?
Mr. Spisak. We have engaged them. I think we can say BLM is
learning how to do this consultation. When I say that, I see
your reaction, but the policy came out in December. We are
trying to be more open in how we are providing information.
I think we can say there were some things that we certainly
could have done better and we are----
Mr. Young. It is not you, personally. I am trying to be
nice and it is difficult sometimes.
Mr. Spisak. I appreciate that.
Mr. Young. You are part of the problem. It is just not BLM.
This Administration, every Administration. I keep saying it.
This is the problem. We have Secretary Salazar, who happens
to be a friend of mine. He is up here. Then you have the Park
Service. Then you have Fish and Wildlife. Then you have the
BLM. Then you have Minerals and Management, whatever they call
it nowadays.
At the very bottom is BIA. They were not even invited. This
is why, with all due respect to my good friends, we are screwed
up. Either we change that pecking order or we pass our bill
that gives them the right to do what they wish to do on their
land.
Remember as I said in my opening statement, you have a
checkerboard agreement, and you pass these regulations under
what you have now, here is a square, part of the reservation,
the oil companies are not going to go there. They will go next
door.
Where is the Indian tribe? With 80 percent unemployment and
no money, no way to take care of themselves. That is not fair.
I am just saying this is our fault, not your fault.
Congress has to act to create sovereign self determined tribes.
If we do that, we are in good shape. If we do not do it, shame
on us.
This has been going on--I have been here 40 years. I have
watched this, oh, we are going to take care of you. That is the
problem. When someone tells you they are going to take care of
you, be careful. Check your shoes and your shorts because you
are going to lose both of them.
My time is up. Do you have any more questions?
Mr. Boren. One more, Mr. Chairman. Thank you. We have a
letter here from NCAI, they had written a letter to Secretary
Salazar. They go through the towns again, Tulsa, Oklahoma, just
outside my District, Billings, Montana, Salt Lake, Farmington,
New Mexico.
Many of the tribal leaders did not know about these events
until after they occurred.
From what I have been told, you talked about the reg text
being available--from what I have been told, only one of these
meetings the actual text was passed out. I am not sure if that
is correct.
Were they passed out at all four?
Mr. Spisak. Yes, sir. All four.
Mr. Boren. All four. But they were at the end of the
meeting.
Mr. Spisak. At the end of the meeting. It was not here is
the text, we will see you later. It was here is the text, let's
talk about it.
Mr. Boren. You believe there was proper consultation?
Mr. Spisak. I believe we initiated consultation.
Mr. Boren. Initiated consultation. I am not going to say
anything. Never mind. I will not say it.
The other question I have or the only comment I have is you
know, when you have consultation--I have heard from so many
tribes that have gone through--whether it is the BLM, you name
the agency. These agencies come in and they say OK, we are
going to have consultation.
They take a tribal chief, a Governor, a chairman, and they
put them in a room and they make them watch a slide show for
five minutes and they say thanks a lot.
We hear that over and over and over again. When you go back
to the folks within the BLM, let them know consultation is not
five minutes. It is not ten minutes. It is listening. That is
the biggest thing--politicians have a real hard time using
that.
The most important thing we can do in Indian Country is to
listen. For all the agencies, not just you all, but everyone
else that is thinking about drafting regulations, let's go to
Indian Country first, not to some of these other folks that
have nothing to do with it, that do not understand hydraulic
fracturing.
Hydraulic fracturing has been around for decades. It did
not just happen in the last couple of years because of shale.
I have been around this industry for a long, long time.
There have been literally over a million wells drilled without
a problem. For some reason, there are a lot of groups that are
searching for a problem because we have some people getting
jobs in Indian Country and great things are happening.
Anyway, I look forward to the next panel. Mr. Chairman, I
yield back.
Mr. Young. Mr. Kildee?
Mr. Kildee. Just one follow up. Having been a teacher most
of my life, a politician probably more, but knowledge is power.
When you have any consultation with people and at the end of
the meeting you pass out something and say here's some further
information, you have to share that knowledge.
I really think there is a culture in much of the Executive
Branch of Government, including the BLM, a culture of where
they treat the Indians as if they are not equals at that table.
In my 36 years here in Congress, I have been fighting that.
It is still here. You were thrown into that culture. That
culture has taken years to build. We are trying to change that.
We recognize that sovereignty is really sovereignty.
I went over to a resignation party of Kim Teehee who used
to work for me in the Native American Caucus. There has been
some improvement over there, but I think there is an idea that
this sovereignty is not quite like other sovereignty.
The Constitution is very clear. I think to have a meeting
and then toward the end of a meeting say oh, you might want to
do this reading on your plane ride home, you should share that
information from the beginning. Treat them as the equals they
are.
Again, it is the culture that exists in the Executive
Branch of Government, and the BIA and BLM. I think you have an
opportunity to try to change that culture.
The three of us here, we have tried to change that culture.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Young. Thank you, sir. Like I say, this is a long haul
because it is a bureaucracy.
Mr. Spisak, you also mentioned Pavilion, Wyoming and the
EPA. They hailed a study they made in Pavilion as exclusive
proof, EPA, and those that oppose fracking. By the way, those
that oppose fracking oppose any type of drilling, any type of
development of energy.
They do not understand like the Ranking Member said, this
has happened for a long while.
After the Congress and the media and oil and gas industry
and the State of Wyoming and other people started looking at
it, the agency's study was flawed. It was flawed. In fact, they
are coming back now with some additional studies.
I will say one of our biggest concerns, if you really want
to do something good for fracking to meet everybody's
requirement, think about this a moment, not just Native lands
and not somebody else's land.
There is technology to reuse the water. That is one of our
biggest problems. Some company is already doing it. I think
that is a justifiable requirement, reusing the water, not just
dumping the water. Water is going to be our scarcest commodity
in the future.
You might want to look at that. The technology is there.
Some companies are using it. Some are not. It is cheaper to not
reuse the water. It does reduce the cost of fuels and it is
still worthwhile for everybody. That is something you might
want to look at instead of just saying no, it is damaging, it
is hurting everybody, the world is coming to an end.
I can tell you, in fact, we are fracking in Alaska now.
Every one of those wells were put in as new pipe or new
concrete, new ceilings. There is no chance of losing or having
any contamination. That would solve some of our problems, too.
I appreciate your testimony, Mr. Spisak. Congratulations on
your career work.
I still think that the Secretary should have had his tail
down here.
Mr. Spisak. Thank you.
Irene Cuch, Chairwoman, Ute Indian Tribe Business Council.
T.J. Show, Chairman, Blackfeet Tribal Business Council. Mike
Olguin, Vice Chair, Southern Ute Indian Tribal Council, and Red
Tipped Arrow Hall, Chairman of the MHA Nation--Three Affiliated
Tribes.
Thank you. I am going to reverse this order a little bit.
Tex, you are going to be up first.

STATEMENT OF TEX ``RED TIPPED ARROW'' HALL, CHAIRMAN, MHA
NATION--THREE AFFILIATED TRIBES

Mr. Hall. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, members of the
Committee. For the record, my name is Tex Red Tipped Arrow
Hall, Chairman of the Mandan, Hidatsa and Arikara Nation on
Fort Berthold Reservation in Western North Dakota.
I want to just summarize so there is more time for
questions and answers later. I will summarize a little bit
about the development and then I will give about five or six
recommendations that we have as a tribe.
We are in the middle of the Bakken. USGS says 4.3 billion
recoverable barrels. We know it will probably be double. We do
have about 275 producing wells on Trust land, and about 450
total, including fee on Fort Berthold, without one incident of
any problems with hydrofracking.
I want to also mention that hydrofracking is a method that
is needed to break the shale. It is about a million gallons of
water, sand and some chemicals that are used to break the
shale.
We have deep water wells a mile deep, and then we do a
horizontal lateral. You can either do a short lateral half a
mile or you can do a mile long lateral. You can do a multi-
stage frack.
Companies are not required to disclose the ingredients. We
are in favor of requiring companies to disclose.
However, we are not in favor of requiring a rule that we
never had any consultation whatsoever.
We are in the middle of the Bakken. It is the biggest oil
place in the U.S. Bakken is not in Farmington. It is not in
Billings. It is not wherever else.
I thought he was going to stay here, too. It is the first
time I saw anybody from BLM and he left out the door.
You know, I do not appreciate that. We did the math. If
they require another permit, if ``they,'' BLM, requires another
permit, that will be an additional delay.
We have been a guinea pig. We have gone through boxes and
boxes of leases that the BIA could not sift through. We have
sifted through it. We got additional staff. We got through
that.
Now the Communitization Agreements were backed up by BLM at
Dickinson. We thought we had a good Director. The Director is
gone. There is no Director in Dickinson at BLM.
We have never had any discussion about what this guy was
talking about to you guys. He never talked to me once. March
26, there was nobody of any kind of authority that came out to
meet with tribes on March 26. It is like they are afraid to
talk to tribes.
You know these lands are Indian lands for the Mandan,
Hidatsa and Arikara. These are our lands. They are not BLM's
lands. These are not public lands.
Our 1851 Fort Laramie Treaty, that is why I was hoping he
would listen, maybe he will read our testimony, that Treaty is
set aside for the use of our Indian people. It is not set aside
for BLM. The Treaty is supposed to be the supreme law of the
land, Representative Kildee, is that not right?
What happened to this thing? This thing has gotten out of
control. If it is not EPA, not it is BLM.
Anyway, getting back to the economics. It would cost us
$10,000 a day for over 100 wells, that is $132 million it will
cost Fort Berthold.
We are 75 percent of all the oil and gas and royalty
production in the U.S. right now. That is why I am talking the
way I am. That is why I do not like it when they do not listen
and they get up and ignore us. That is disrespectful. It should
be unlawful. He should be reprimanded.
Anyway, getting back to this consultation. Does BLM have a
public lands' responsibility or a Trust responsibility? He said
he had a Trust responsibility. If he did, he would have to
follow the Executive Order, and he admitted to it. I listened
closely. ``Initial consultation'' I think is what he said.
There are various steps. We have objected from day one. We
have not heard back from him or Secretary Salazar on our
objections of what this would cost Fort Berthold. They haven't
said nothing to us, but I have heard through the newspapers
that we have been consulted. That is a bunch of baloney.
BLM is not a friend of the Bakken, I can tell you that.
They are here to destroy the Bakken. The Bakken is a good thing
for the United States. It is a good thing for MHA Nation.
This Executive Order, if he does have a Trust
responsibility, he needs to follow his own Secretary Salazar's
Executive Order.
A tribe should have the authority to object like we did,
then you have to sit down with them, do not have them go to
Farmington or Billings or whatever city.
If you look at the information, it is all about public
lands. The tribes were an afterthought. Again, he admitted to
it on the agenda.
Over and over, he has admitted to their own blunders,
finally, after your hearing, Chairman Young. It took your
hearing for us to get that out of BLM. Otherwise, they were not
going to disclose that.
Second, on the authority, I do not believe they have the
authority. We have researched the Federal Lands Management and
Policy Act, Ranking Member Boren, as you indicated, 1976 on.
There is no authority. That is why they keep putting us as
public lands.
Now our permits at Fort Berthold, people from New York,
people from Pennsylvania can make public comment on a permit or
maybe a hydraulic fracking permit.
We are going to get people that are not even from North
Dakota, going to all object to energy development, and we are
soon going to be in Alaska. We are going to be number two,
Chairman Young.
My recommendation is that they withdraw this fool hearted
rule that they never consulted after he admitted to it today,
and go back and give a year or two years, I would recommend two
years, to get the consultation right. If they do not get the
consultation right, I do not know how we can sit down at the
table with BLM or any other Federal agency and have meaningful
dialogue.
We will know what they say on paper and what they actually
do are two different things.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Hall follows:]

Statement of The Honorable Tex G. Hall, Chairman,
Mandan, Hidatsa and Arikara Nation of the Fort Berthold Reservation

Good morning Chairman Young, Ranking Member Boren and Members of
the Subcommittee. My name is Tex Hall. I am the Chairman of the Mandan,
Hidatsa and Arikara Nation (MHA Nation). I am honored to present this
testimony on the BLM's proposed regulation of hydraulic fracturing.
I. Introduction
Every time I turn around the MHA Nation must overcome yet another
barrier to Indian energy development. Today's barrier is the BLM's
proposed regulation of hydraulic fracturing used in the development of
oil and gas resources. The BLM proposes to require an additional review
and approval loop in what the Subcommittee has already found to be an
overburdened regulatory process for developing Indian energy resources.
Over the last four years, MHA Nation and the Reservation have been
in the middle of the most active oil and gas play in the United States.
The Fort Berthold Reservation is located in the heart of the Bakken
Formation, which is the largest continuous oil accumulation in the
lower 48 states. In 2008, the United States Geological Survey estimated
that the Bakken Formation contains between 3 billion and 4.3 billion
barrels of oil.
MHA Nation is actively promoting the development of our energy
resources. This country has an energy problem and we want to be a part
of the solution! Our resources provide us with a substantial
opportunity to ensure that our members have good jobs, can heat their
homes and provide for their families. Our resources also add to this
Nation's domestic energy supplies. Our goal is to continue to develop
our resources in a responsible manner that will maintain our homelands
and provide long-term economic security for our Reservation
communities.
Since energy development began on the Reservation we have struggled
with the federal bureaucracy for every single oil and gas permit. We
now have about 250 wells in production and the MHA Nation and Fort
Berthold Allottees have earned about $182 million in oil and gas
royalties. In addition, we have 905 vendors providing services directly
to the oil and gas industry. Each of those vendors employs between 4
and 24 people. Based on an average employment of 12 jobs per company,
that is in excess of 10,000 jobs.
In 2012, we expect more wells to be drilled on the Reservation than
were drilled in the first four years combined. In 2013, we expect
another 300 wells to be drilled. This energy development will result in
hundreds of millions in royalty payments and economic activity. The
BLM's proposed regulations stand in the way of that energy and economic
development and will limit energy and economic development on the Fort
Berthold Reservation.
It is important to note at the outset, that the BLM developed its
regulations, which will have a tremendous impact on the development of
Indian energy resources, without anything close to meaningful tribal
consultation. This violates the Department's four month old ``Policy on
Consultation with Indian Tribes'' (December 2011). What BLM has done to
date, does not even come close to the ``strong, meaningful role for
tribal governments at all stages of federal decision-making on Indian
policy'' that the Department of the Interior promised when it announced
its new tribal consultation policy. Press Release, Department of the
Interior, ``Secretary Salazar Kicks Off White House Tribal Nations
Conference at Department of the Interior'' (Dec. 2, 2011).
My testimony examines BLM's failure to comply with the Department's
tribal consultation policy and sets out the requirements for
consultation. In addition, I will discuss some of the problems with the
proposed regulations and the impact the proposed regulations will have
on energy development on the Fort Berthold Reservation.
II. BLM Must Withdraw the Proposed Regulation Until Meaningful Tribal
Consultation has Occurred
The Bureau of Land Management (BLM) is developing a regulation for
hydraulic fracturing activities that will have significant impacts the
oil and gas resources being development on the Fort Berthold
Reservation. Our industry partners report that BLM's proposed
regulations may add so much delay, uncertainty and cost to the oil and
gas permitting process that they may be forced to pull their drilling
rigs off the Reservation. These rigs would likely end up developing oil
and gas resources just over the Reservation boundary on state and
private lands.
Since BLM has not fulfilled the Department's and the
Administration's requirements for consultation with Indian tribes, BLM
must withdraw the draft hydraulic fracturing regulations from the
Office of Management and Budget (OMB) or should exclude the application
of these regulations to any permits on Indian lands until proper and
meaningful consultation with tribes can occur. In addition, the
Department's Tribal Governance Officer (TGO), the Assistant Secretary
for Indian Affairs and BLM should work with tribes to develop an
appropriate consultation protocol and timeline for the development of
any regulations that may be needed for this issue.
Tribal consultation requirements are not just a formality. Tribal
consultation is based on the long-standing government-to-government
treaty relationship between Indian tribes and the federal government.
This relationship requires consultation with tribal governments when
federal actions will affect Indian resources. The purpose of
consultation is to allow the two governments to engage in collaborative
decision-making, promote tribal self-determination, and avoid costly
mistakes. Tribal consultation is also an exercise of the federal
government's trust responsibility to Indian tribes.
The Department of the Interior's Policy on Consultation with Indian
Tribes (Tribal Consultation Policy) requires that the BLM structure a
consultation process to allow ``timely input'' from tribes and which
will enable BLM to work with tribes as ``collaborative partners.''
Tribal Consultation Policy Sec. VII.E.2. The policy states that,
``[c]onsultation is a deliberative process that aims to create
effective collaboration and informed Federal decision-making.
Consultation is built upon government-to-government exchange of
information and promotes enhanced communication that emphasizes trust,
respect, and shared responsibility.'' Id. Sec. II.
Because of the severe impacts the proposed regulation will have on
the MHA Nation's and other tribe's resources, BLM is required to follow
the ``Stages of Consultation'' set out in the Department's Tribal
Consultation Policy in the development of any hydraulic fracturing
regulations. These stages include an ``Initial Planning Stage,'' a
``Proposal Development Stage,'' and an ``Implementation of Final
Federal Action Stage.''
As described in detail below, BLM has only begun to meet the
requirements of the Initial Planning Stage even though BLM already
submitted its draft regulations for review by OMB--generally the last
step before publication in the Federal Register. BLM's tribal
consultation actions to date consist of four January 2012 Regional
Tribal Consultation meetings and a few follow up meetings with
individual tribes. This is not what the Department's tribal
consultation policy requires. This is just the beginning of tribal
consultation. At this stage, BLM should not have draft regulations
pending at OMB.
In addition, I believe that BLM must take proactive steps to
correct its failure to comply with the Department's Tribal Consultation
Policy and its federal trust obligations. This is particularly needed
because BLM has already provided the draft hydraulic fracturing
regulations to OMB. BLM's actions to date have given me and other
tribes the impression that tribal input is not desired or only
minimally needed even though there is strong evidence that the proposed
regulations will cost the MHA Nation and the surrounding community a
sizable number of jobs and money.
I ask that the Department enlist its TGO to monitor BLM's actions
as it develops an appropriate consultation protocol and restarts tribal
consultation. Throughout the consultation process, the Department's
policy directs the TGO to facilitate government-to-government
consultation, to implement a reporting system to ensure that
consultation efforts are documented and reported to the Secretary, and
to fulfill other TGO obligations under the Department's policy. Tribal
Consultation Policy Sec. VII.B.1(a)-(g).
In this case, the resulting consultation protocol should clarify
that BLM is prepared to: (1) withdraw the draft regulations from OMB or
excluded permits on Indian lands from the proposed regulations, (2)
work with tribes to develop a consultation timeline, (3) engage tribes
in the Initial Planning Stage and the other two stages of consultation,
and (4) generally set out the steps that BLM will follow to comply with
the Department's Tribal Consultation Policy and other consultation
requirements.
A. Initial Planning Stage
During the Initial Planning Stage, BLM is directed to involve
tribes ``as early as possible'' and provide enough information to
enable tribes to fully engage and assist in the development of
regulations that will affect tribal resources. Tribal Consultation
Policy Sec. VII.E.1. This early stage should be informative as BLM
identifies and describes the issue it believes needs regulation and it
must also include a meaningful dialogue in which BLM considers tribal
views on the issue, the need for regulation and, most importantly,
alternatives for addressing the issue. Based on my review of BLM's
actions to date, BLM has only begun to comply with the requirements of
the Initial Planning Stage of the Department's Tribal Consultation
Policy.
As an initial matter, the April and November 2011 Regional Public
Forums in Bismarck, North Dakota, Little Rock, Arkansas, Denver,
Colorado, and Washington, D.C. were not part of the tribal consultation
process--as BLM asserted in meetings with tribes. These meetings were
advertised to the general public, were not directed to tribal leaders,
and were purely informational. These are not tribal consultation
sessions on a government-to-government basis, do not provide
opportunities for tribes to discuss their concerns and propose
solutions, and should not be represented by BLM as part of the tribal
consultation process.
The January 2012 Regional Tribal Consultations in Tulsa, Oklahoma,
Billings, Montana, Salt Lake City, Utah; and Farmington, New Mexico
could be considered a beginning to tribal consultation, but on their
own, they do not fulfill the Department's Tribal Consultation Policy.
These meetings were purely informational. The BLM made no attempt at
these meetings to involve tribes in determining the scope of the issue,
offer tribes an opportunity to participate in drafting the regulations,
or engage tribes in a discussion of alternatives to federal regulation.
BLM's failure to involve tribes early in the regulation development
process violates basic tribal consultation principles. For example,
Executive Order No. 13175 requires that agencies, ``consult with tribal
officials as to the need for Federal standards and any alternatives
that would limit the scope of Federal standards or otherwise preserve
the prerogatives and authority of Indian tribes.'' Exec. Order No.
13175 Sec. 3(c)(3) (Nov. 9, 2000). BLM never consulted with tribes on
the need for hydraulic fracturing regulations, on the staffing and
other steps which would be required to implement those regulations on
Indian lands, or on preservation of tribes' authority to regulate the
issue themselves. By not involving tribes, BLM has developed a
regulation that is likely to limit energy development on the Fort
Berthold Reservation and cost us needed governmental revenues.
Based on these actions and according to the Department's own Tribal
Consultation Policy, BLM is still in the Initial Planning Stage of
tribal consultation. Consequently, BLM's draft regulations needs to be
withdrawn from OMB or permits on Indian lands should be excluded from
the regulation until BLM has complied with the policy. Allowing the
draft regulation to be published in the Federal Register before initial
consultation stages are completed would violate the Administration's
and the Department's tribal consultation policies and leave tribes and
the federal government with a costly new set of federal requirements
that they are unprepared to implement.
B. Proposal Development Stage
Without fully initiating or completing the Initial Planning Stage,
BLM is attempting to skip ahead and quickly complete the Proposal
Development Stage with little to no tribal involvement. Contrary to
BLM's actions, the Department's Tribal Consultation Policy requires BLM
to work with tribes at the beginning of the Proposal Development Stage
to establish a timeline for the consultation process. The Tribal
Consultation Policy also requires BLM to work with tribes as
``collaborative partners.'' This collaboration is critical because
tribes are already facing regulatory requirements that the federal
government is not capable of implementing in a timely manner.
First, at the start of the Proposal Development Stage, BLM is
required to work with tribes to develop an appropriate schedule for the
consultation. This is necessary in order to allow tribal officials and
staff the time to analyze the issues and prepare meaningful ideas. The
Tribal Consultation Policy specifically states that:
The Bureau or Office shall develop a process. . .that maximizes
the opportunity for timely input by Indian Tribes and is
consistent with both Tribal and Bureau or Office schedules. The
Bureau or Office will solicit the views of affected Indian
Tribes regarding the process timeline to consult on a
Departmental Action with Tribal Implications. The Bureau or
Office should work with Indian Tribes to structure a process,
to the extent feasible, that considers specific Indian Tribal
structures, traditional needs, and schedules of the Indian
Tribes. The Bureau or Office should make all reasonable efforts
to comply with the expressed views of the affected Indian
Tribes regarding the process timeline at this Stage, taking
into account the level of impact, the scope, and the complexity
of the issues involved in the Departmental Action with Tribal
Implications, along with the other factors driving the
schedule. The process will be open and transparent. . ..
Tribal Consultation Policy Sec. VII.E.2. BLM has not developed the
required consultation process or timeline with tribes.
Hydraulic fracturing and the potential impact of the proposed
regulations on tribal resources, Indian energy and economic development
are significant--especially in areas of high demand for oil and gas
resources like the Fort Berthold Reservation. A regulation of this
magnitude requires a more extensive timeline and process to fully
engage tribes in the development of draft regulations. To comply with
the Department's Tribal Consultation Policy during the Proposal
Development Stage, BLM needs to develop a consultation timeline with
tribes that takes into account the level of impact, the scope, and the
complexity of the issues involved. To date, this has not happened.
Second, the Proposal Development Stage requires that BLM work with
tribes as collaborative partners. While the January 2012 Regional
Tribal Consultations included disclosure of the Department's proposed
action, BLM did not involve the MHA Nation or other tribes as
collaborative partners or engage tribes in a meaningful dialogue about
the substance of the regulations. These meetings were merely
informational.
For example, BLM arrived at two of the four meetings with draft
regulations already completed. Given our government-to-government
relationship, and our first-hand knowledge of the industry, BLM should
not present tribes with completed regulations at this stage, rather BLM
should work with tribes to develop the regulations from the ground up.
We know what works on our Reservations, BLM does not. BLM also did not
engage tribes in a meaningful dialogue about the substance of the
regulations. Of course, this would have been difficult as tribes were
not provided an opportunity to review the regulations ahead of the
meeting.
Moreover, soon after the January 2012 Regional Tribal
Consultations, BLM submitted its draft regulation to OMB for review.
OMB review is typically the last step before publication of a draft
regulation in the Federal Register. BLM's actions foreclosed meaningful
consultation and did not provide any opportunity for collaboration with
tribes on how to accomplish federal goals in the most efficient and
cost effective manner.
After extensive efforts to contact BLM, the MHA Nation and a few
tribes met with BLM in Washington, D.C. on March 26, 2012, to discuss
the lack of tribal consultation and finally provide some feedback to
BLM on the draft regulations. This meeting represented the first time
that BLM and tribes were prepared to have a dialogue on the draft
regulations. Unfortunately, because of BLM's actions to date, the
majority of the meeting was spent discussing the lack of tribal
consultation. Towards the end of the meeting, there was a little time
for tribes to provide some comments on the details of the draft
regulations, but there was no substantive exchange of information, no
development of the required consultation timeline, and no discussion of
ideas and concerns about the practical problems that these regulations
present.
The Department's Tribal Consultation Policy also requires that
tribal consultation be conducted with Departmental officials who are
knowledgeable about the matters at hand, are authorized to speak for
the Department, and can exercise delegated authority in the disposition
and implementation of an agency action. Tribal Consultation Policy
Sec. II. In contrast, BLM officials who attended the March 26th meeting
made clear throughout the meeting that they could only listen to tribal
suggestions, could not provide any responses during the meeting, and
would need to discuss any responses with their superiors. Similarly,
BLM's suggestion that tribes meet with their local Field Offices for
consultation does not comply with the Department's Tribal Consultation
Policy since BLM has made no indication that the local Field Offices
are authorized to speak for the Department or exercise delegated
authority. BLM ``Dear Tribal Leader'' letter (Dec. 9, 2011).
Finally, it is not the responsibility of the MHA Nation or other
tribes to seek out meetings to discuss the contents of a draft
regulation. The BLM is required to comply, with the Department's Tribal
Consultation Policy on its own initiative when proposing to develop
regulations that will affect tribal resources.
C. Implementation of Final Federal Action Stage
The Department's Tribal Consultation Policy includes a third stage
regarding a post-consultation review process. While this third stage is
not mandatory, its inclusion in the Department's Tribal Consultation
Policy suggests that these efforts are encouraged, support the federal
trust responsibility, and would result in more effective Departmental
actions and regulations. If BLM eventually decides that a hydraulic
fracturing regulation that includes Indian lands is needed, BLM should
include an Implementation of Final Federal Action Stage in its
consultation process.
Given the complexity of hydraulic fracturing, the fact that
multiple agencies are already involved in the on-reservation drilling
permit approval process, the magnitude of potential impacts to tribes
and the need for adequate BLM staff to oversee any regulatory process,
post-consultation review and training is likely to be needed. As you
know, BLM already lacks the staff necessary to implement its current
regulatory scheme in a timely manner, and these new regulations will
simple add to that backlog, unless proper planning, with full tribal
involvement, is undertaken
D. Summary
BLM skipped most of the Initial Planning Stage of the Department's
Tribal Consultation Policy and is not complying with the requirements
of the Proposal Development Stage. Consequently, BLM must withdraw the
draft hydraulic fracturing regulations from OMB or should exclude the
application of these regulations to any permits on Indian lands until
proper and meaningful consultation with tribes can occur. Also, the
Department's TGO, the Assistant Secretary for Indian Affairs and BLM
should work with tribes to develop an appropriate consultation protocol
and timeline for consultation on the development of any hydraulic
fracturing regulation. This is a basic level of consultation and it is
needed here to avoid impacts on the Reservation economy.
In sum, BLM must restart its consultation process to properly
engage tribes. If BLM does not take these steps, BLM's proposed
regulations on hydraulic fracturing would be developed in violation of
the Department's four-month old Tribal Consultation Policy. This policy
was developed, in part, to ensure early planning, involvement of
tribes, and avoidance of negative impacts. BLM's consultation to date
is nothing like the meaningful role in federal decision-making promised
to tribes when the consultation policy was announced.
III. Problems with the Proposed Regulation and Impacts on Energy
Development
After many years of economic hardship, the MHA Nation and its
members are finally seeing improved economic conditions due to the oil
and gas development on the Reservation. BLM's proposed regulation of
hydraulic fracturing activities would disproportionately impact the MHA
Nation and its members due to our reliance on oil and gas development
for economic growth and sustainability.
Time is of the essence. I ask that the Subcommittee and Congress
take any actions that are available to prevent BLM from implementing
its proposed regulations in order to save domestic energy production
and desperately needed jobs and economic opportunity in Indian Country.
I have already testified before the House Committee on Appropriations'
Subcommittee on Interior, Environment and Related Agencies that
Congress should prohibit federal dollars from being used to implement
the proposed hydraulic fracturing regulations until a number of
prerequisites are met. These prerequisites are:

As described above, the BLM needs to follow the
Department's own tribal consultation policy;

The Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) must
complete its study on hydraulic fracturing that the full House
Appropriations Committee requested in its FY 2010 budget report
and Indian tribes must be given an opportunity to review and
respond to EPA's study;

BLM needs to develop a staffing and implementation
plan to ensure that its review and approval of hydraulic
fracturing plans will not add to the already unreasonable
delays that tribes face in trying to get oil and gas permits
approved on Indian lands;

BLM should be required to request and receive the
funding necessary to fill staff positions, and to complete the
hiring and training of those individuals, before it is allowed
to implement these types of new regulations;

BLM should be required to demonstrate that it has an
adequate process in place to ensure that there is no
duplication of existing requirements for on-reservation permits
to drill; and,

BLM should develop an implementation plan that will
phase in hydraulic fracturing requirements over time, as the
federal agencies and the oil and gas industry working on our
reservations become familiar with these new demands.
These are common sense requirements for the development of any
federal regulation. Rather than follow this logical procedure, BLM
officials have stated that they developed the proposed regulations in
response to ``public outcry.'' I ask that the federal government, and
the MHA Nation's federal trustee, follow a more deliberative and
substantive process, like the one outlined above, in developing
regulations that will have economic consequences on the MHA Nation. In
the remainder of my testimony, I will highlight a variety of problems
with the BLM's proposed hydraulic fracturing regulations.
First, I can find no authority for the BLM to regulate activities
on Indian lands, including hydraulic fracturing. Although the BLM has
jurisdiction to regulate activities on ``public lands,'' Indian lands
are not public lands. Indian reservation lands are set aside and
reserved for the exclusive use and benefit of Indian tribes. Neither
the Federal Land Policy and Management Act of 1976 nor the Department
of the Interior's Departmental Manuel provide BLM with direct or
delegated authority over Indian lands.
If the BLM has somehow assumed authority over Indian lands, the BLM
may not, consistent with the trust responsibility, apply public
interest standards to Indian lands. In contrast to oil and gas
development on public lands, royalties and taxes from oil and gas
production on tribal and allotted lands on the Reservation are a
significant source of revenue for our tribal government and income for
allottees on the Reservation. Adding additional burdens for the
development of oil and gas on the Reservation could chill production
and force operators to shift investment away from our Reservation to
state and private lands where the regulatory burden is less onerous.
The Tribe requests that the Subcommittee and Congress pass legislation
that would prevent Indian lands from being swept into laws and policies
for public lands.
Second, I am not aware of any incidents on tribal lands, or for
that matter public lands, that would precipitate federal regulation.
While federal regulation of shallow gas wells in Wyoming and
Pennsylvania may be justified to protect ground water, I see no such
justification for deep horizontal wells like those that are drilled on
the Fort Berthold Reservation. The wells drilled on our Reservation and
the hydraulic fracturing activities take place far below the water
table. Without proof that these rules are necessary to protect against
an identified threat to the environment, deep well fracing on the
Reservation should be exempt from the additional regulatory burdens
that the proposed BLM regulations would impose.
Of course, I am also greatly concerned about the environmental
health of the Fort Berthold Reservation. The MHA Nation cannot just
pick up and move to another reservation if our lands or waters are
spoiled. This is my home and I work every day to ensure that we
maintain our natural resources for many generations to come. All I ask
is that any regulation be based on sound science, as opposed to public
outcry, and developed consistent with the federal trust responsibility
as opposed to public interest standards.
Third, the BLM already lacks the staff to keep up with existing
permitting requirements, let alone a new and complicated one. It
already takes 5 to 20 times longer to get an oil and gas permit on
Indian lands. On the Fort Berthold Reservation, we just got done
clearing the backlog of Communitization Agreements when we lost the
Director of our BLM Field Office. Now, Communitization Agreements are
starting to pile up again while the BLM is proposing to create
additional work for its short-staffed offices.
Fourth, oil and gas operators seeking permits for oil and gas
activities on Indian lands already undergo an extensive environmental
review process. BLM has not explained what its proposed hydraulic
fracturing regulations will add to this process. The process is already
lengthy, time consuming and costly. These delays and costs are one of
the primary reasons why oil and gas developers look just over the
Reservation boundary for cheaper and quicker development opportunities
on private lands. We need to remove road blocks to Indian energy
development, not increase them.
Fifth, as noted above, federal studies of hydraulic fracturing
activities are still ongoing. The EPA and other federal agencies are
currently conducting scientific studies on hydraulic fracturing. BLM's
proposed regulations are premature in advance of the EPA study, and BLM
has offered no justification for proceeding with this new regulation
without the benefit of these studies.
Sixth, economic impacts on the MHA Nation will be significant. The
MHA Nation has been using revenues from oil and gas development to
successfully reduce its governmental debt and provide the physical and
governmental infrastructure to support economic development. If the
BLM's new hydraulic fracturing regulations create a disincentive for
companies to develop energy on the Reservation, the MHA Nation would
suffer a disproportionately greater impact than others.
For example, based on an 18% tribal royalty rate, a single oil and
gas well provides our tribal government with more that $2 million per
year in revenues to fund government functions. Multiply this by 100 or
200 wells producing tribally owned minerals and the numbers are
staggering. While we do not have this many wells producing from
tribally owned minerals yet, these kinds of numbers are not far off.
The MHA Nation will not receive these revenues if companies are forced
to pull drilling rigs off the Reservation for cheaper and more certain
development opportunities on state and private lands.
IV. Conclusion
I want to thank Chairman Young, Ranking Member Boren and the
members of the Subcommittee for the opportunity to testify on the BLM's
proposed hydraulic fracturing regulations. Unlike the public lands that
are clearly within BLM's authority to regulate, the application of the
regulations to Indian lands will have a direct effect on the MHA
Nation's revenues, our ability to invest in the future, and the
services we are able to provide our members and future generations. The
MHA Nation stands ready to work with the Subcommittee and the BLM to
find an appropriate resolution.
At the appropriate time, I would be happy to answer any questions
you may have. Thank you.
______

Mr. Young. I want to thank you for your comments. Do you
have to leave? It is the reason I picked you up. If you do not
have to leave, you can sit there and wait. It is up to you.
Which one do you want to do?
Mr. Hall. I will wait for a little while.
Mr. Young. OK. Good. Next is Irene.
Good to see you again, Irene.

STATEMENT OF IRENE CUCH, CHAIRWOMAN,
UTE INDIAN TRIBE BUSINESS COUNCIL

Ms. Cuch. Same here. ``Maiku'' means ``Greetings'' in Ute.
Good morning, Chairman Young, Ranking Member Boren and members
of the Subcommittee.
My name is Irene Cuch. I am the Chairwoman of the Ute
Indian Tribe. Also, at this time I would like to introduce
Manuel Myore, who is our Energy and Minerals Department
Director. Manuel? Our oil and gas land man, and Ronnie Wilson,
our Ute Tribal attorney.
I thank you for the opportunity to testify on the Bureau of
Land Management's proposed fracking rule.
I am very concerned about the impact the rule will have on
energy development on my reservation. My concern with the BLM
rule should not be confused with lack of concern for the
environment, water, or the health of the tribal members.
The reservation is my home, and the tribe knows the value
of protecting our natural resources.
As I have explained in prior testimony to the Subcommittee,
the tribe is a major oil and gas producer. We produce about
45,000 barrels of oil a day and about 900 million cubic feet of
gas per day.
The tribe relies on these resources as a primary source of
funding for our tribal government. We govern and provide
services on the second largest reservation in the United
States.
Despite our progress, the tribe's ability to fully benefit
from its resources is limited by the Federal agencies
overseeing oil and gas development on the reservation.
The companies who operate on the reservation tell the tribe
that the Federal oil and gas permitting process is their single
biggest risk factor.
The BLM's proposed fracking rule will increase these risks
and further limits the tribe's revenues. It would be impossible
for me to tell you about all the problems with BLM's proposed
rule in five minutes.
I will focus on some of the most important problems. First,
Indian lands are not public lands. Our reservation is for the
exclusive use and benefit of the Ute Indian tribe.
The BLM's role in overseeing permitting on the reservation
should be in fulfillment of its Trust responsibility to the
tribe and no one else.
Instead, the BLM developed a public interest rule and wants
to apply it to my reservation.
At a meeting in Washington, D.C., BLM officials told tribes
that they developed the rule in a response to public outcry.
BLM should not apply public interest standards to Indian lands.
Congress already passed a law telling BLM not to do this.
BLM's organic act, the Federal Land Policy and Management Act
of 1976, defines what are public lands and excludes Indian
lands from this definition.
This make sense when you think about it. We live on our
lands. BLM rules might make sense for public lands but not the
tribe lands.
We have bills to pay. We rely on our oil and gas resources
to fund our government, provide services to members, and invest
in our economy.
Second, the tribe has been in the oil and gas business for
a long time, and I have not heard of any incidents that would
require new Federal regulations for the wells on my
reservation.
Third, as I have testified before, the Federal agencies
overseeing permitting already have too much to do and not
enough staff.
On our reservation, there is a backlog of hundreds of
permits. The additional delay caused by BLM's fracking rule
will have a big economic impact on the tribe.
Currently, a single drilling rig completes about 20 wells a
year on the reservation. If permitting becomes unreliable,
companies will move their rigs off the reservation for state
and private lands.
The loss to the tribe from a single rig leaving the
reservation is about $16 million over a 12-month period.
To summarize other problems with the rule, it seems like
BLM developed it without talking to anyone involved in the oil
and gas development process. Many of the BLM's requirements
simply will not work.
I can tell you this, BLM never discussed its rule with my
tribe. They should have. The tribe is a major domestic energy
producer. We own our own energy company and we oversee
development of the reservation with our own energy and minerals
department.
In fact, the Department's own policy requires that BLM
consult with the tribe on actions affecting our resources. Just
four months ago, the Department said its new tribal
consultation policy would provide a strong meaningful role for
tribal governments at all stages of Federal decision making on
Indian policy.
The BLM did no such thing. By the time BLM invited tribes
to a meeting, the whole purpose of the meeting was to tell the
tribes what BLM had already decided to do.
BLM needs to postpone its rule and restart its consultation
with tribes.
I would like to thank you for the opportunity to present
this testimony on behalf of the Ute Indian Tribe. Thank you.
Again, I would just like to repeat what Chairman Tex Hall
just said about Mr. Spisak, that he left the room. He should
have stayed here, I believe.
Congressman Kildee, he did say listening is part of the
consultation, and he should have stayed here to listen to us.
Thank you again.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Cuch follows:]

Statement of Irene C. Cuch, Chairwoman, Ute Tribal Business Committee,
Ute Indian Tribe of the Uintah and Ouray Reservation

Chairman Young, Ranking Member Boren, and Members of the
Subcommittee on Indian and Alaska Native Affairs, my name is Irene
Cuch. I am the Chairwoman of the Ute Tribal Business Committee for the
Ute Indian Tribe of the Uintah and Ouray Reservation (Tribe). The Ute
Indian Tribe consists of three Ute Bands: the Uintah, the Whiteriver
and the Uncompahgre. Our Reservation is located in northeastern Utah.
Thank you for the opportunity to provide this testimony on the Bureau
of Land Management's (BLM) proposed hydraulic fracturing (fracing) rule
and the impact it will have on energy development in Indian Country.
My testimony will focus on problems with the BLM's fracing rule,
BLM's failure to conduct meaningful tribal consultation, and some
solutions to these issues. Although I have many concerns with the BLM's
fracing rule, this should not be confused with a lack of concern for
the environment, water, or the health of the Tribe's members. The Tribe
is interested in not duplicating existing regulations and creating an
efficient permitting process that will allow us to conduct business on
the Reservation. The Reservation is our home and we know the value of
protecting our natural resources.
I. Energy Development of the Ute Indian Tribe
Energy development has long been an important part of the Tribe's
Reservation economy. Production of oil and gas began on the Reservation
in the 1940's. Over the past 70 years, production has been ongoing and
went through periods of expansion. Today, the Tribe is a major oil and
gas producer. The Tribe leases about 400,000 acres for oil and gas
development. We have about 7,000 wells that produce 45,000 barrels of
oil a day. We also produce about 900 million cubic feet of gas per day.
And, we have plans for expansion. The Tribe is currently in process of
opening up an additional 150,000 acres to mineral leases on the
Reservation with an $80 million investment dedicated to exploration.
The Tribe relies on its oil and gas development as the primary
source of funding for our tribal government and the services we
provide. We use these revenues to govern and provide services on the
second largest reservation in the United States. Our Reservation covers
more than 4.5 million acres and we have 3,175 members living on the
Reservation.
Our tribal government provides services to our members and manages
the Reservation through 60 tribal departments and agencies including
land, fish and wildlife management, housing, education, emergency
medical services, public safety, and energy and minerals management.
The Tribe is also a major employer and engine for economic growth in
northeastern Utah. Tribal businesses include a bowling alley, a
supermarket, gas stations, a feedlot, an information technology
company, a manufacturing plant, Ute Oil Field Water Services, and Ute
Energy. Our governmental programs and tribal enterprises employ 450
people, 75% of whom are tribal members. Each year the Tribe generates
tens of millions of dollars in economic activity in northeastern Utah.
The Tribe takes an active role in the development of its resources
as a majority owner of Ute Energy which has an annual capital budget of
$216 million. In addition to numerous oil and gas wells, Ute Energy
teamed with the Anadarko Petroleum Corporation to establish and jointly
own the Chipeta gas processing and delivery plant in the Uintah Basin.
The Tribe recently approved plans for Ute Energy to become a publically
traded company. This investment will allow us to expand our energy
development and increase revenues.
Despite our progress, the Tribe's ability to fully benefit from its
resources is limited by the federal agencies overseeing oil and gas
development on the Reservation. As the oil and gas companies who
operate on the Tribe's Reservation often tell the Tribe, the federal
oil and gas permitting and regulatory process is the single biggest
risk factor to operations on the Reservation. Add the BLM's proposed
hydraulic fracturing regulations increase the risks dramatically. This
process is primarily managed by the Department of the Interior (DOI).
II. General Problems with BLM's Proposed Hydraulic Fracturing Rule
The BLM is developing new regulations, which I understand are under
review by the Office of Management and Budget (OMB), for hydraulic
fracturing activities used in the oil and gas development process on
``public lands.'' We are concerned with the process by which BLM is
developing its regulations as well as the impact it will have on the
significant oil and gas industry on our Reservation. On its face, there
are a variety of problems with BLM's fracing rule.
First, the BLM incorrectly considers Indian lands to be public
lands and plans to apply its fracing regulations to Indian lands.
Indian lands are not public lands. Indian lands are for the exclusive
use and benefit of Indian tribes. BLM's oversight of activities on our
lands should be in fulfillment of the federal trust responsibility to
the Tribe. BLM should not apply public interest standards to our lands.
The Tribe requests that the Subcommittee develop and Congress pass
legislation that would prevent Indian lands from being swept into laws
and policies for public lands.
The fracing rule, as currently written, will reduce the benefits
that the Tribe is able to realize from its lands. The fracing rule will
increase costs to operators, slow development of Reservation lands, and
introduce additional uncertainty in the permitting process that will
lead to reduced oil and gas development on our Reservation. This may be
acceptable for oil and gas development on public lands, but not on the
Tribe's lands. The Tribe relies on its oil and gas development to fund
its government, provide services to members, and invest in the regional
economy.
Second, we know of no incidents on tribal lands that would
necessitate federal regulation of fracing. According to the draft
regulations the BLM provided at a meeting in Salt Lake City, Utah, the
BLM plans to look at three key issues pertaining to the fracing
process: wellbore integrity, disclosure, and flowback water. For each
of these three areas, there has never been a fracing related problem on
our Reservation.
Third, the proposed rule would require prior approval from the BLM
for all well stimulation activities, not just fracing of oil and gas
wells. This additional time required for BLM staff to review a proposed
fracing job only adds to delays oil and gas companies on the
Reservation face--delays that have economic consequences. Requiring BLM
approval for fracing adds to the burden of an already short-staffed BLM
Field Office. At our BLM Field Office there is already a backlog of
application for permits to drill (APD). Adding an additional burden on
BLM staff will only worsen the problem.
Fourth, oil and gas operators seeking permits to drill on Indian
already undergo an extensive environmental review process before they
can begin drilling activities. This process has become lengthy, time
consuming and costly, so much so that there is a backlog of hundreds of
APD's that have not been acted upon by our local BLM Field Office.
An oil and gas permit is already subject to approval processes by
the BLM, the Bureau of Indian Affairs, the Utah Division of Oil and Gas
and the Tribe's Energy and Minerals Department. New Clean Air Act
restrictions may be on the horizon for activities on the Reservation,
and new United States Fish and Wildlife Service sage grouse
conservation requirements are pending. Further, hookless cactus
mitigation requirements applicable to the Tribe's lands become more
restrictive daily. When operating on the Reservation, our industry
partners are also subject to review under the National Environmental
Policy Act and BLM's Federal Lands Policy and Management Act planning
rules. Adding to these hurdles and requirements by requiring additional
approval of fracing plans will in no way improve an already over-
regulated process.
Fifth, delays in the oil and gas permit approval process are
already causing energy companies to limit their activities on the
Tribe's lands. Companies operating on the Reservation cite the federal
approval process as the single biggest risk to their business
activities, and additional delays will cause oil and gas operators to
leave the Tribe's lands for state and private lands. Each delayed
approval for drilling activities, each drilling rig that must leave the
Tribe's lands due to uncertainty or inactivity, each limitation on oil
and gas production on the Tribe's lands, reduces the Tribe's revenues
from oil and gas development.
The additional delays that will be caused by the BLM's fracing rule
will have an astronomical economic impact on the Tribe. For example, a
company operating single drilling rig can drill approximately 20 wells
per year. If that drilling rig were to leave the Reservation because of
delays in obtaining permits, the economic loss to the Tribe will be
approximately $16.2 million over a twelve-month period.
In addition, some companies could operate three drilling rigs on
the Reservation and drill approximately 60 wells per year. If those
drilling rigs leave the Reservation or are limited in the number of
wells they can drill, the economic loss to the Tribe will be
approximately $48.7 million over a twelve-month period. This data is
illustrative of only a single company's drilling program; the figures
become more daunting when you multiply the figures by the many
companies operating on the Reservation.
Finally, BLM's fracing rule is premature ahead of Environmental
Protection Agency (EPA), and other federal agencies, ongoing scientific
studies on fracing. BLM has offered no justification for proceeding
with this new regulation without the benefit of these studies. Without
clear demonstration of a problem with the fracing process, specifically
the type of fracing done on our Reservation, and any other information
that may come from these studies, the BLM regulation is putting the
cart before the horse.
III. Specific Problems with BLM's Proposed Hydraulic Fracturing Rule
First, the BLM's hydraulic fracing rule requires ``pre-fracing
disclosure.'' The fracing rule, as drafted, requires operators to
provide BLM with detailed information regarding anticipated fracing
operations at least 30 days in advance of the proposed fracing job. The
information required by BLM includes identification of all additives to
be used in fracing and the complete chemical makeup of the overall
fracing fluid mixture, as well as other detailed information. The
``plan'' is subject to approval by the authorized officer.
Requiring ``pre-fracing disclosure'' is impractical and will
ultimately be ineffective. The fracing rule would require operators to
estimate the types and amounts of chemicals to be used at a time when
that information may not be known or when that information may change
due to conditions the operator obtains from subsurface conditions. In
addition, the plan that the operator submits to the BLM for approval
may change over the course of time due to scheduling conflicts and
other factors thus forcing the operator to use a different service
provider which results in the use of a different set of product
additives. Moreover, fracing treatments are often continuously adjusted
and revised as the well is drilled and more information is gathered
about well-specific conditions.
As a result, the information that is supplied to the BLM prior to
fracing a well may well become stale as conditions change. Thus, the
information supplied to the BLM will be of no practical use, yet
causing the operator to devote substantial resources to gathering and
providing this information to the BLM. This is simply not practical.
Second, the BLM's fracing rule requires disclosure of ``chemical
concentrations.'' The BLM fracing rule requires the disclosure of the
percentage by mass of each chemical contained in the fracing fluid.
However, providing the exact concentration of an ingredient in the
fracing fluid used at a specific well site would be very difficult and
burdensome because it would require sampling and extensive laboratory
testing of the fluid used at each well.
In contrast, state governments that require the disclosure of
fracing fluids only require the maximum concentrations of chemicals.
This also helps to prevent the disclosure of the chemical formulas or
particular additive products, which companies consider proprietary
information. The Tribe is concerned that rather than disclosing
confidential competitive information, services providers simply will
not operate on tribal land or alternatively, the very best products
will not be used for oil and gas recovery on tribal land.
Third, the BLM fracing rule requires disclosure of more than just
``intentionally added ingredients.'' The BLM's fracing rule, as
currently written, requires the disclosure of all ingredients in a
fracing fluid mixture. State governments which have adopted a fracing
rule only require the disclosure of ingredients intentionally added to
a base fluid and does not extend to chemicals that may be incidentally
present in fracing fluids as a result of chemical reactions or
impurities in the base fluid. Both Texas and Colorado have adopted this
approach.
Fourth, the BLM fracing rule requires an operator to provide the
``chemical composition of flowback'' as part of its plan for well
stimulation operations. This requirement is inherently unworkable. It
would, in effect, mandate that operators sample and analyze the
flowback fluid from a well to determine its chemical makeup at a time
when the flowback has not even been generated and would therefore be
impossible to analyze.
Finally, the BLM fracing rule requires ``compliance
certification.'' The BLM fracing rule requires operators to certify
that they are in compliance not only with applicable federal law but
also state and local law concerning fracing. This would effectively
make state and local law applicable to Indian lands. The BLM cannot by
regulation make state and local law applicable to Indian lands without
a specific act of Congress. The Tribe maintains its own laws and,
pursuant to its federal trust responsibility, the BLM should instead be
encouraging tribal regulation of oil and gas activities on tribal
lands, rather than threatening tribes with state and local
jurisdiction.
IV. Failure of BLM to Fulfill Tribal Consultation Policies
After barely beginning to consult with tribal governments, I
understand that OMB is already reviewing BLM's draft fracing rule. This
rule will have a substantial impact on energy development on Indian
lands and BLM must fulfill tribal consultation policies. To date, BLM
has not complied with Executive Order No. 13175 on Consultation and
Coordination with Indian Tribal Governments, the Department of the
Interior's Policy on Consultation with Indian Tribes (Tribal
Consultation Policy), and its December 1, 2011, affirmation of those
policies in Secretarial Order No. 3317. BLM's actions do not uphold its
obligations under the federal trust responsibility and do not fulfill
the Department's long-standing and ongoing commitment to consult with
Indian tribes.
The Department's tribal consultation policy states that tribal
``[c]onsultation is a deliberative process that aims to create
effective collaboration and informed Federal decision-making [and,
that]. . .[c]onsultation is built upon government-to-government
exchange of information and promotes enhanced communication that
emphasizes trust, respect, and shared responsibility.'' Department of
the Interior Policy on Consultation with Indian Tribes at Sec. II. In
contrast, BLM has only held four informational meetings on the proposed
fracing rule and already has a draft rule pending at the OMB for
publication in the Federal Register.
In addition, BLM never developed a protocol or timeline for tribal
consultation, did not include tribal input in its draft regulations,
did not engage tribes in a discussion about the need for a rule, and
did not engage tribes in a discussion about alternatives that would
limit the scope of Federal standards or otherwise preserve the
prerogatives and authority of Indian tribes. Because of the impacts the
proposed fracing rule will have on tribal resources, BLM is required to
follow the ``Stages of Consultation'' set out in the Department's
Policy on Consultation with Indian Tribes in the development of any
fracing rule. These stages include an ``Initial Planning Stage,'' a
``Proposal Development Stage,'' and an ``Implementation of Final
Federal Action Stage.''
On March 26, 2012, a few tribes met with BLM in Washington, D.C. to
attempt to resolve our concerns regarding BLM's failure to meaningfully
consult with tribes. BLM rejected our concerns. BLM stated that its
past actions and its willingness to meet with tribes if tribes so
request fulfills the Department's tribal consultation policies. These
actions completely fail to provide tribes with effective consultation
as required by the Administration's and the Department's consultation
policies.
If corrective active is not taken, the BLM's actions will fail to
fulfill a Departmental policy that was announced only four months ago.
In December 2011, the Department announced that its new Tribal
Consultation Policy would provide, ``a strong, meaningful role for
tribal governments at all stages of federal decision-making on Indian
policy.'' Press Release, Department of the Interior, ``Secretary
Salazar Kicks Off White House Tribal Nations Conference at Department
of the Interior'' (Dec. 2, 2011). BLM has not afforded tribes the
meaningful role described in this announcement in the development of
its fracing rule.
To ensure that the proposed rule will be developed according to
tribal consultation policies, I ask that the Subcommittee seek the help
of the Assistant Secretary for Indian Affairs in this matter. The
Assistant Secretary could work with the BLM to: (1) develop a
consultation protocol that will comply with the Department's Tribal
Consultation Policy, and (2) determine how the proposed rule should
apply in Indian Country if at all, in light of the federal trust
responsibility, the federal policy to promote economic development and
tribal self-sufficiency, and other concerns unique to Indian Country.
I also ask that the Subcommittee inquire about involving the
Department's Tribal Governance Officer (TGO) to monitor BLM's actions
as it develops an appropriate consultation protocol. This protocol
should clarify that BLM has withdrawn the draft regulations from OMB or
excluded Indian lands from the proposed rule, is ready to engage tribes
in the Initial Planning Stage and the other two stages of consultation,
and generally set out the steps that BLM will follow to comply with the
Department's Tribal Consultation Policy, including working with tribes
to develop a consultation timeline.
The Department's TGO can assist and monitor BLM's efforts to
develop this protocol. The Department's Tribal Consultation Policy
directs TGO's to facilitate government-to-government consultation, to
implement a reporting system to ensure that consultation efforts are
documented and reported to the Secretary, and to fulfill other TGO
obligations under the Department's policy. Tribal Consultation Policy
Sec. VII.B.1(a)-(g).
Fortunately, the BLM still has the opportunity to correct its
violation of the policy and take steps to fully engage tribes in
consultation. The Tribe is willing to work with the Department, its
TGO, the BLM, and the Assistant Secretary for Indian Affairs to develop
an appropriate tribal consultation protocol to consider issues related
to fracing.
V. Conclusion
I would like to thank Chairman Young, Ranking Member Boren and
members of the Subcommittee for the opportunity to present this
testimony on behalf of the Ute Indian Tribe. The Tribe stands ready to
work with the Subcommittee to find common and practical ground
concerning the proposed fracing rule and to eliminate the barriers to
tribal resource development that this rule would create. The current
barriers, and the promulgation of any new barriers, have a direct
effect on the Tribe's revenues, our ability to invest in the future,
and the services we are able to provide our members, our children and
grandchildren.
Towaok (Thank You)
______

Mr. Young. Tex and Irene, do not be too hard on Mr. Spisak.
He is a lackey and came down here at the direction. Who should
have been sitting there was Mr. Salazar or somebody higher up.
They are following the lead.
Look who the witnesses were they had. They had Trout
Unlimited and Carol Browner and the Defense League.
He is just fulfilling his job. I am not defending him. I am
just saying who we should be talking to and you should be
talking to is the Secretary. He chose not to show up. Remember
the President said they had your back. I would again check that
out.
He is just a hired hand, you know.
Mr. T.J. Show, Blackfeet Tribal Business Council.

STATEMENT OF T.J. SHOW, CHAIRMAN,
BLACKFEET TRIBAL BUSINESS COUNCIL

Mr. Show. Good morning, Chairman Young and members of the
Subcommittee. My name is T.J. Show. I am the Chairman of the
Blackfeet Nation of Montana.
I am honored to be here and thank you for conducting
today's hearing and your interest in issues that affect energy
development in Indian Country.
In presenting my testimony today, I want to honor the
memory of Corporal Antonio Burnside, ``Many Hides,'' a young
Blackfeet warrior who was just recently killed in the line of
duty in Afghanistan. Thank you.
The Blackfeet Reservation is a 1.5 million acre reservation
established by a Treaty within the United States in 1855.
Unemployment on the reservation reaches 70 to 80 percent.
The reservation is dependent on development of oil and gas
to improve economic conditions for our people.
Presently, we have significant exploration activities
underway by a number of companies.
Today, I would like to address three primary concerns we
have about the proposed BLM fracking rule.
Number one, the lack of meaningful consultation with
tribes, meeting the Department of the Interior policy on
consultation with the tribes.
Number two, the disregard for tribal sovereignty by
treating Indian lands like general public lands, and requiring
compliance with state and local laws.
Number three, the unworkable and unrealistic provisions
that have the potential for impacting the reservation's
development.
I attended BLM's informational meeting in Billings, Montana
on January 12, 2012. BLM stated the session was informal only
and was not a formal consultation. The presentation generally
discussed hydraulic fracturing, but did not include a
presentation of the proposed rule, and the BLM did not solicit
any tribal comments on the rule.
These discussions fall short in compliance with the
Interior's consultation Order No. 3317, that communication will
be open and transparent without compromising the rights of
Indian tribes or the Government to Government consultation
process.
Unfortunately, the BLM chose to develop a rule without
participation and chose to forward the proposed rule for final
adoption without regard to Order No. 3317.
BLM officials state the rule was developed to respond to
public outcry regarding use of hydraulic fracturing for East
Coast development of public lands.
However, we do not consider our reservation lands public
lands. On tribal lands, the tribes have ownership and control
of the minerals subject to the Trust obligation of the United
States.
BLM's proposed rules to address public outcry for
activities on public lands overreaches its goal and infringes
on tribal sovereignty.
The proposed rule mandates that development of activities
comply with state and local laws, imposing state and local law
on tribes is in conflict with the existing law governing
jurisdiction on the reservations.
Presently, we struggle with the delayed BLM approval of
APDs, which has routinely taken three to 18 months. The
proposed rule adds to the already lengthy BLM review process.
The delays and the burden of the rules makes the reservation
development less attractive and our neighboring fee land owners
will benefit long before we do.
The BLM proposed rule appears to raise three distinct
concerns with hydraulic fracking. Disclosure of chemical
additives for well stimulation, well bore integrity, and water
management.
The Blackfeet Tribe has already implemented measures to
address these concerns. The Blackfeet Tribe presently requires
oil companies to number one, disclose all chemicals utilized
for fracking. Number two, has contracted with BLM for an
inspector for well bore integrity, and finally, number three,
exploring methods for on-site water treatment for reuse.
Based on our experience with the development at the
Blackfeet Tribe, we have several recommendations.
Withdraw the BLM rule and develop a separate Indian Country
rule that considers the unique issues on Indian reservations.
An Indian Country rule can balance the need for development
with responsible regulation consistent with tribal sovereignty.
Any rule should be integrated with existing application and
approval process so not to add any additional delays or
burdens.
Standards for acceptable hydraulic fracking need to be
developed. Disclosure is only part of the answer. Standards are
required to approve or disapprove fracking activity once
disclosure is made.
The development of baseline water quality data for
groundwater is essential. Impacts can only be assessed with
existing water quality data for comparison. Sufficient
resources to the BLM and BIA are absolutely necessary for
efficient implementation of the rule including enforcement.
Finally, an one stop shop would streamline the review
process and approval process of necessary applications and
permits at the Blackfeet.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Show follows:]

Statement of T.J. Show, Chairman,
Blackfeet Tribal Business Council, Blackfeet Nation

Good Morning Chairman Young and honorable members of the House
Resources Subcommittee on Indian and Alaska Natives, my name is T. J.
Show and I am the Chairman of the Blackfeet Nation of Montana. I am
honored to be here and thank you for conducting today's hearing and
your interest in issues that affect energy development in Indian
Country.
The Blackfeet Reservation, located along the Rocky Mountain Front
in Northwest Montana, shares a border with Canada, is adjacent to the
Glacier National Park and is inhabited by approximately 9,000 members
of the total 18,000 plus Blackfeet Tribal members. The Blackfeet
Reservation was established by a Treaty with the United States in 1855
and today consists of 1.5 million acres. The Blackfeet homeland is
known for its pristine mountain ranges, clear mountain lakes and
streams, abundant wildlife and wide open country. The Tribe has a long-
standing record of responsible stewardship evidenced by the existence
of tribal laws to regulate, manage and protect land, natural resources
and wildlife.
The Blackfeet Tribe, like numerous other large land-based Tribes,
suffers from an unemployment rate that reaches 70 to 80 percent, a lack
of on-Reservation economic development opportunities, an extreme
shortage of housing, sub-standard governmental buildings and
overwhelmed medical facilities. The Blackfeet Tribal government, like
many other tribal governments, is frustrated with the continued
reduction of federal funds available to fulfill treaty obligations for
essential services. Thus, the Blackfeet Council has determined that
development of the large pools of oil and natural gas that on the
Blackfeet reservation, in a responsible manner, is the most viable
option to improve the Reservation economy, to provide jobs to Tribal
members, to provide necessary services on the Reservation, and to bring
some measure of improvement to the standard of living of Blackfeet
tribal members.
Status of Blackfeet Development
The Blackfeet Reservation has a lengthy history of oil and gas
development that extends back to the 1930's. The 1950's and a brief
period in the early 1980's marked the heyday of production on the
Reservation. However, as oil fields aged and market forces have
affected development, new oil and gas production has been at a
standstill since the mid-1980's. However, interest in oil and gas
development has greatly increased, and beginning in 2008, the Blackfeet
Tribe has negotiated Indian Mineral Development Agreements with various
oil and gas companies, as authorized by the Indian Mineral Development
Act of 1983. Consistent with the intent of the Indian Mineral
Development Act, the Tribe exercised its sovereign authority over the
Blackfeet mineral resources to establish the terms and parameters for
exploration and development. The IMDA's were all reviewed and approved
by the Bureau of Indian Affairs.
The Tribe is now attempting to implement the IMDA's through the
negotiation of mineral leases and commencement of mineral exploration
by the companies. However, progress has been extremely slow and
burdensome as the Tribe and the producers attempt to comply with the
requirements of the BIA and BLM for access rights to exploration sites,
changing environmental requirements, permits to drill and lease
approvals. Often the federal mandates are duplicative and the federal
agencies have been largely unable to review and approve documents in a
timely manner. For Blackfeet, the local BIA agency is responsible for
leases, while the Regional Office in Billings, over 350 miles away, is
responsible for IMDA issues. Permitting and development issues are
handled by the regional BLM office 150 miles from the reservation.
Approvals of required documents for Blackfeet development can take from
6 months to two years under the present processes. Exploration and
development on the Blackfeet reservation is expensive, time-consuming
and lagging behind nearby off-reservation development.
The Blackfeet Tribe is concerned that BLM's proposed rule on
Hydraulic Fracturing, if adopted, will create additional burdens to an
already burdensome process that will likely delay and possibly prevent
beneficial development of Blackfeet oil resources. To be clear,
hydraulic fracturing is necessary to fully explore and maximize oil
development on the Blackfeet Reservation. At the same time, the Tribe
has a responsibility to its Tribal members and other Reservation
residents to insure that hydraulic fracturing activities on the
Reservation are conducted in a safe and environmentally sound manner.
However, the Tribe is not willing to allow the imposition of rules by
the Federal Government that are promulgated without the Tribe's full
participation, and that do not take into account the unique issues of
development on the Blackfeet Reservation.
Lack of Meaningful Consultation
On December 1st of 2011, the Department of Interior adopted Order
No. 3317, the Department of the Interior Policy on Consultation with
Indian Tribes to acknowledge that the provisions for conducting
consultation complies with Executive Order 13175, Consultation and
Coordination with Indian Tribal Governments. Tribes welcomed the
consultation policy as a positive effort to enhance government to
government relationships and to involve Tribes in a meaningful and
transparent manner in the creation of federal policy. However, just
months later, the BLM developed a rule that seriously impacts Indian
Country energy development without regard to the consultation process.
Recently, I was invited by the Bureau of Land Management to
participate in discussions regarding the process of hydraulic
fracturing well stimulation for oil development. I attended the
scheduled discussion in Billings, Montana on January 12, 2012. BLM
representations, from the outset of the day-long presentation, stated
the session was informational only and was not a formal consultation.
While the presentation generally discussed issues related to hydraulic
fracturing, it did not include an overview of the proposed rule on
hydraulic fracturing, and BLM representatives did not solicit any
Tribal comments on issues relating to regulation of well stimulation.
While the BLM discussed the hydraulic fracturing processing with
Tribes, these discussions fall short of compliance with the mandates of
Order No. 3317 that ``Communication will be open and transparent
without compromising the rights of Indian tribes or the government-to-
government consultation process'' Unfortunately, the BLM choose to
develop a rule without Tribal participation, in apparent response to
issues outside Indian Country, and chose to forward the proposed rule
toward final adoption without regard to Order No. 3317.
The Proposed Rule's impact on Tribal Sovereignty
Blackfeet Tribal representatives participated in a discussion with
BLM officials specifically regarding the proposed hydraulic fracturing
rule on March 23, 2012. BLM officials stated the rule was developed to
respond to public outcry regarding the use of hydraulic fracturing for
east coast development of public lands. However, we do not consider our
reservation lands public lands. The considerations that the Federal
Government must take into account for development on federal lands in
furtherance of its responsibility to the general public do not apply on
Indian lands. Tribal lands are governed by the Tribes pursuant to
``inherent powers of a limited sovereignty which have never been
extinguished,'' derived from their sovereign existence predating
European settlement of the United States. On Tribal lands, the Tribes
have ownership and control of the minerals subject to the trust
obligations of the United States. The policy considerations for
development of Tribal lands are made by the Tribes in the best interest
of their Tribal members. BLM's proposed rule to address public outcry
for activities on public lands overreaches its goal and infringes on
tribal sovereign authority to make decisions concerning development on
reservation lands.
As discussed above, the Tribe has entered into Indian Mineral
Development Agreements, consistent with its sovereign authority to
govern oil and gas development, that specifically address the
development and production relationship between the Tribe and oil
companies.
The additional requirements of the proposed rule may impact a
company's ability to comply with negotiated timeframes for exploration
and well construction in an IMDA.
The proposed rule also mandates that development activities comply
with all applicable federal laws, rules and regulations and ``state and
local laws, rules, and regulations.'' Imposing state and local law on
Tribes clearly infringes on tribal sovereignty and could empower an
unfriendly local government to adopt regulations that curtail or
complicate Tribal oil development. The State of Montana has no
jurisdiction over Tribal lands, and the Tribe is unwilling to accept a
mandate that on-reservation activities comply with local or State
regulations.
In addition to the delay concerns with duplicative requirements,
the proposed rule requires BLM to make a formal decision before well
stimulation operations. 43 CFR Part 4 allows any interested party to
appeal a BLM decision. The rule authorizes BLM to render a formal
decision although no standards were included in the rule for approval
or disapproval of hydraulic fracturing proposals. Thus, the door opens
for entities in conflict with tribal development, regardless of
affiliation with the Tribe, to file an appeal of the approval. Without
standards for approval of the various hydraulic fracturing activities,
the determination of whether a proposed well stimulation activity is
acceptable will be determined by either an administrative decision-
maker or a federal court. Further, an appeal, if pursued through the
various administrative stages can take years to resolve before
proceeding in Federal Court. This open-ended opportunity for interested
parties to appeal creates a mechanism to thwart development of
Blackfeet resources, empowers either an administrative body or the
Court to determine acceptable practices for hydraulic fracturing, and
more importantly, infringes on Tribal sovereignty. Such a process may
be appropriate for development on federal lands, but not on Indian
lands.
Burdensome Requirements of New Rule
Presently, operators must submit an application for a permit to
drill (``APD'') before any drilling activity commences. The APD
describes the proposed drilling plan. The proposed rule then requires
submission of a Notice of Intent Sundry (``NOI'') to the BLM for any
and all well stimulation activities at least 30 days before the
commencement of well stimulation operations. In most instances, the
chemical composition for the fracturing activity is not finally
determined until data is collected from the well. To stop the on-going
exploration activity and submit the NOI for approval 30 days prior to
the fracturing activity will disrupt the exploration process.
Presently, we struggle with the delayed BLM approval of APDs which
has routinely taken from three months to 18 months. Adding twice the
paperwork, with new requirements, for review and approval will
certainly increase the delay time as well as increase the overall costs
for BLM. Additionally, and most importantly, the proposed rule provides
no standards to approve or disapprove well stimulation activities as no
guidance is provided for acceptable or unacceptable well stimulation,
chemical/additive usage, or chemical mass compositions. The rule makes
no reference to current industry standards and instead appears to
disregard them.
Hydraulic fracturing well stimulation is currently under debate in
many forums across the country. A major concern exists regarding the
chemical additives utilized by the industry for fracturing activities
and I understand BLM's proposed rule is to facilitate disclosure of
additives utilized for well stimulation operations. However, the rule
does not address how the BLM will react to the chemical disclosures
other than to grant approval or disapproval of activities. A public
disclosure of specific chemicals utilized presently occurs in numerous
jurisdictions but little information exists as to appropriate action
following disclosure.
BLM's proposed rule goes beyond requiring the disclosure of
additives to requiring a report on the complete chemical makeup of the
stimulation. Prior to stimulation operations, the operator must submit
the mass composition of the chemical and water combination for the
entire stimulation to the BLM for approval. Two specific concerns exist
with this requirement. First, no standards are provided to determine
acceptable or unacceptable chemicals or in what quantities or an
acceptable total chemical makeup of the stimulation activity (including
fresh water). Second, I understand that stimulation activities often
change depending on geologic conditions, weather and temperature, that
are often unpredictable and outside the control of the operator. I am
concerned that operations would shut down each time a change in the
stimulation process occurs to comply with the additional reporting and
approval process which would prevent expeditious exploration and likely
delay moving from oil exploration to productive development. For
example, if it rains, snows, or temperatures drop below freezing during
well stimulation activities, the chemical composition of the fracturing
fluids would likely change and, under the rule, the operation would
have to stop and a new report for approval of the changed fluid
submitted for approval. Blackfeet Country is subject to extreme climate
changes that will likely cause changes in stimulation process
especially when stimulating previously drilled wells. This provision of
the rule appears drafted to intentionally stop hydraulic well
fracturing activity.
These additional requirements will increase costs of development
and decrease proceeds from oil development to tribal members and
Tribes. Further, these additional requirements will render reservation
development less attractive and open doors for our neighboring fee land
owners to realize the financial benefits of oil development long before
we do.
Current Blackfeet Practices
The BLM proposed rule appears to raise three distinct concerns with
hydraulic fracturing well stimulation; disclosure of chemical additives
for well stimulation, well-bore integrity (to insure protection of the
aquifer) and water management. The Blackfeet Tribe already seriously
considered these concerns and implemented measures to address them to
our satisfaction. First, we have reached an agreement with our industry
partners for full disclosure of chemicals/additives utilized for well
stimulation. As required by the BLM in Montana, these chemicals are
also disclosed to the State. Thus, the Tribe, the owner of the land and
governing authority over all lands within the Blackfeet reservation is
informed about the chemicals used for well stimulation. The Tribal Oil
and Gas Department is now reviewing industry standards to determine
acceptable types of hydraulic fracturing well stimulation.
Secondly, the Blackfeet Tribe has entered into a contract with the
BLM for the training and employment of a tribal member to serve as a
petroleum engineer technician that inspects all well construction
activity to insure well bore integrity. Thus, we are assured that we
are monitoring the construction of well casings to comply with industry
standards for the protection of the aquifer.
Finally, the Blackfeet Tribe is proposing a water management scheme
that will treat water recovered from hydraulic fracturing activities
on-site utilizing a mobile water treatment process that will treat
water for re-use.
These efforts reflect how seriously the Blackfeet Tribe considers
these matters. We will continue to address them as a matter of Tribal
law and regulation. Any federal regulations must take into account the
Tribe's role in these matters, and its on-going effort to address them,
and not supplant them.
Instead of applying a rule to Indian country that is intended to
address a set of very different situations on public lands, I am
hopeful that through Tribal and federal collaboration and cooperation,
a different alternative is considered. In that spirit, I believe there
are sound alternatives to the proposed rule.
Recommendations
1.  An alternative hydraulic fracturing rule to the proposed
BLM rule should be developed to apply to Indian Country
exploration and development that considers the unique issues on
Indian reservations. This rule should be promulgated in
compliance with Interior's Order No. 3317 in collaboration with
the Bureau of Indian Affairs. An alternative rule could balance
the interests of Tribal oil and gas development with protection
of pristine Tribal lands and water and avoid infringement on
tribal sovereignty. Tribes must be trusted with decision-making
authority over their lands and allowed to be at the forefront
of the development of any rules or regulations that impact,
affect or involve their homelands. Upon completion of a rule
applicable to Indian Country, Tribes could be allowed to
undertake regulatory activities through compacting or
contracting. In addition to this alternative rule, Tribes
should be provided financial resources to develop capacity for
effective regulation. The proposed BLM rule necessitates
additional funds to the BLM and BIA for implementation. Thus,
it should not be considered unrealistic that Tribes, instead of
the BLM, should be funded to carry out regulatory activities on
Indian lands.
2.  Standards for acceptable hydraulic fracturing well
stimulation should be developed with consideration of the
varying types of geology, chemical compositions of water,
location of wells, probability of success at stimulation and
industry practices.
3.  This rule, consistent with public concerns, is generated
due to a lack of knowledge regarding impacts of hydraulic
fracturing of groundwater. However, impacts can only be
assessed with existing water quality data for comparison. Thus,
the development of baseline water quality data for groundwater
is essential.
4.  If a rule on hydraulic fracturing, similar to the proposed
rule, is adopted, sufficient resources to the BLM and BIA are
absolutely necessary for efficient implementation of the rule
including enforcement.
5.  Finally, implementation of a ``one-stop shop'' comprised of
representatives of the various agencies with approval authority
over exploration and development activities housed on the
Blackfeet Reservation would streamline the review and approval
process of the required applications, permits and sundry
notices required for Blackfeet oil exploration and development.
A one-stop shop would demonstrate a clear commitment to
realistic development for the Blackfeet Reservation.
Conclusion
I would like to again thank the Committee for conducting this
hearing regarding BLM's proposed rule on hydraulic fracturing and for
consideration of my testimony. In conclusion, the Blackfeet Nation
hopes to proceed with responsible oil and gas exploration and
development while remaining always mindful of environmental protection.
Further, we are not proposing the hydraulic fracturing occur without
regulation. However, BLM's proposed rule is not the appropriate rule
for Indian Country development and will likely prevent development of
reservation fossil fuels.
______

Mr. Young. Thank you, T.J.
Mike, you are up.

STATEMENT OF MIKE OLGUIN, VICE CHAIR,
SOUTHERN UTE INDIAN TRIBAL COUNCIL

Mr. Olguin. Good morning, Chairman Young, Ranking Member
Boren, and members of the Subcommittee.
I am Michael Olguin, the Vice Chairman of the Southern Ute
Indian Tribe. I am honored to appear before you today on behalf
of my tribe, my people, and Tribal Council, to provide
testimony regarding the Bureau of Land Management's proposed
regulation on fracking in tribal energy development.
Thank you, Chairman Young, for holding a hearing at this
critical time on this important issue.
Unfortunately, we do not believe that BLM has engaged in
effective tribal consultation on its proposed rules.
At Southern Ute, we have a long history of energy
development, and have used fracking for many decades. If BLM
had worked with us and other energy tribes to develop the
proposed rules, we believe the draft rules would be much
better.
Instead, we were asked to consult and then handed rules
that had already been drafted.
Despite BLM's failure to effectively consult with us, we
hope that the agency will consider the comments made by tribal
leaders here today.
Thank you for providing us this opportunity.
We are extremely concerned that the agency's proposed
fracking rules will add more hurdles to energy development on
tribal lands.
We fear that additional requirements when piled on top of
the existing bureaucracy will only cause more and more
operators to move away from tribal lands and onto state and
private lands, which are not subject to such procedures.
If developers leave tribal lands, Indian Country loses
economic potential, and ultimately domestic energy production
suffers.
As I mentioned, our tribe has used fracking over several
decades to develop our mineral resources. Hopefully, these
techniques will continue to help us develop new opportunities
for decades to come.
Given our long history and experience in energy
development, we respect and understand the concerns of fracking
that the BLM's proposed rules seek to address.
Our Tribal Council has always sought to balance the
economic benefits of our development with the environmental,
health and safety concerns of our people and community.
Like many other tribes, we have already taken a number of
steps to address these issues as they relate to fracking. For
example, we support full disclosure of chemicals used in the
fracking process. The tribe also participates in domestic water
well testing programs.
In addition, we were instrumental in requiring that wells
in the San Juan Basin are cemented to the surface, which
protects groundwater by improving well integrity.
These and other best management practices provide
protection without being unduly burdensome.
We continue to urge BLM to ensure that any rules drafted by
the agency be cost effective and consistent with best
practices.
Unfortunately, as currently drafted, the BLM's proposed
rules do not meet these objectives.
Certain requirements proposed by the BLM are simply
impractical. It is nearly impossible for an operator to submit
an accurate detailed frack design 30 days prior to a fracking
operation as opposed by the draft rules.
Typically, the details of such a proposal depends upon
information learned as the well is drilled.
Also, the rules would require the operators run cement bond
logs on each and every well. This requirement will result in
significant expense but little additional benefit.
The BLM already receives well completion reports that
reflect the success of well integrity measures, like cementing
the well to the surface which is already required.
Beyond the substance of the proposed rules, we must
emphasize our concern about BLM's ability to implement them.
BLM does not have adequate staff to process additional
duties in a timely fashion. In fact, existing staff may not be
qualified to do so at all.
We already deal with agencies within the Department of the
Interior that are under staffed, under funded, and under
qualified. Adding more Federal regulators to the mix will not
help things.
Given these issues, our primary concern over BLM's proposed
fracking regulations is the effect those rules would have on
energy development on Indian lands.
As you know, because of the nature of Indian lands, our
activities are already subject to a maze of Federal approvals.
Adding more hoops to the existing requirements will only
further impede tribal economic and mineral development.
We have already seen operators move on to state and private
lands, where unlike tribal land, the numerous and burdensome
Federal requirements do not apply.
Operators will find the path of least resistance and once
they leave, they may never return to tribal lands.
The additional requirements proposed by the BLM will only
make tribal energy development more challenging while imposing
new restrictions that are either unnecessary or ineffective.
In closing, we believe that the status quo for addressing
frack issues is working at Southern Ute. Had BLM asked us about
it, we would have told them that. What is not working are the
ongoing delays caused by all Federal agencies we have to deal
with.
Thank you, Chairman Young and Committee.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Olguin follows:]

Statement of The Honorable James M. ``Mike'' Olguin, Vice Chairman,
Southern Ute Indian Tribal Council, Southern Ute Indian Tribe

I. Introduction
Chairman Young, Ranking Member Boren and members of the
subcommittee, I am Mike Olguin, the Vice Chairman of the Southern Ute
Indian Tribe. I am honored to appear before you to provide testimony
regarding Indian energy development. The leaders of my Tribe are glad
that you have convened this oversight hearing to evaluate potential
impacts on Indian energy development likely to result from the Bureau
of Land Management's (``BLM'') proposed rules regulating hydraulic
fracturing undertaken in the development of Indian oil and gas
resources. We have serious concerns regarding the BLM's approach to
this matter, and we appreciate the opportunity to share those concerns
with you today.
II. Background
The Southern Ute Indian Reservation consists of approximately
700,000 acres of land located in southwestern Colorado in the Four
Corners Region of the United States. Our Reservation is part of the
northern San Juan Basin, an area with that has seen widespread oil and
gas development over a period of more than 60 years. The land ownership
pattern within our Reservation is complex and includes tribal trust
lands, allotted lands, non-Indian patented lands, federal lands, and
state lands. In many situations, non-Indian mineral estates are
adjacent to tribal mineral estates. This land ownership pattern is very
significant and magnifies the impact of differences in federal
regulation of Indian lands from the absence of regulation on
neighboring non-Indian lands. Added regulatory burdens to the
development of tribal minerals discourage development on Indian lands
and provide a direct incentive to operators to lease and drill on
offsetting non-Indian lands because of the associated cost savings. The
revenues we receive from natural gas development on our Reservation are
our tribe's economic lifeblood. For decades, we have worked with
industry to ensure that oil and gas development occurs in an
environmentally responsible manner on our lands.
Hydraulic fracturing involves the underground injection of fluid
and proppants under high pressure in order to propagate and maintain
fractures and enhance the movement and recovery of oil and gas.
Hydraulic fracturing is necessary for the continued development of both
conventional and coalbed methane resources on our lands. Thousands of
wells on our Reservation have been stimulated through hydraulic
fracturing. Preliminary studies also indicate that there are
significant recoverable reserves associated with shale formations
underlying our Reservation that will require hydraulic fracturing in
order to be produced.
Over the course of the extensive history of hydraulic fracturing on
our Reservation, there have been no documented cases of adverse
environmental impacts resulting from such well stimulation. It should
be noted that the hydrocarbon bearing zones on our Reservation are
located at depths much greater (2,500 to 8,000 feet below surface) than
useable water aquifers (typically 100 to 300 feet below surface).
Further, the hydrocarbon bearing zones are separated from useable
aquifers by thick strata with low permeability. Even with those natural
safeguards in place, our tribe has led the effort, with cooperation
from the BLM, to ensure that oil and gas development activities do not
adversely affect groundwater resources. Significantly, we have insisted
upon regular Bradenhead testing of well integrity and have required
cementing of well casings to surface.
In recent years, oil and gas companies have been able to recover
oil and gas resources throughout the country from shales and tight
formations previously considered unproductive. This recovery has been
spurred by technological advances in horizontal drilling in association
with hydraulic fracturing stimulation. The significant expansion of
this activity into geographic areas not previously subject to oil and
gas development has fostered debate regarding the environmental effects
of hydraulic fracturing. These concerns have, in turn, led the
Department of the Interior and the BLM to develop a response intended
to ensure the public that, through government oversight and regulation,
hydraulic fracturing occurring on federal and Indian leased lands will
be undertaken in an environmentally safe and prudent manner.
III. The Process of Consultation with Affected Indian Tribes Has Been
Inadequate.
In mid-December of last year, BLM's Assistant Director for Minerals
and Realty Management Michael D. Nedd sent a letter inviting our tribe
and other tribes to engage in government-to-government consultation
regarding BLM's intent to develop regulations governing hydraulic
fracturing on federal and Indian lands. We welcomed this initial
invitation for early consultation. On January 19, 2011, a substantial
contingent of our Tribe's staff, including representatives from our
Energy Department, Natural Resources Department, and Environmental
Programs Division, attended a BLM information session in Farmington,
New Mexico, where representatives from the BLM provided basic
information about hydraulic fracturing and asked for tribal input
regarding the shape that any such regulations might take. We again
congratulated BLM on this seemingly fresh approach to visiting with
Tribes at the formative stages of regulation development. We also
delivered at that time written comments from our Chairman Jimmy R.
Newton, Jr. that addressed three principal matters: (1) suggestions for
process; (2) a summary of the importance of hydraulic fracturing to the
Tribe; and (3) a summary of potential environmental concerns and
protection measures associated with hydraulic fracturing.
In commenting on the process going forward, Chairman Newton's
letter specifically urged that ``the consultation process include not
only an opportunity to comment on proposed BLM regulations but
consultation on the formulation of proposed regulations.'' Chairman
Newton further suggested that ``BLM circulate discussion drafts of
possible regulations for review and comment before any proposed
regulations are issued.'' Only recently have we learned that our
concept of meaningful consultation has been shortchanged by the BLM. It
is now our understanding that, notwithstanding our requests and
suggestions, BLM proceeded to develop draft proposed regulations in
isolation and submitted those draft regulations to the Office of
Management and Budget for publication approval in the Federal Register
as proposed regulations under the Administrative Procedures Act. We
have not seen the text of the draft proposed regulations but we were
provided with a summary sheet of their terms. Approximately ten days
ago, we submitted written comments to the BLM expressing our deep
concerns with many of the substantive proposals contained in those
draft regulations.
Although we genuinely appreciated BLM's initial approach to
consultation, we are not satisfied with this process as it is
unfolding. It is vital that Congress and the Administration realize
that every extra regulatory step, every extra required report, and
every extra approval imposed by the Government on operators in Indian
Country increases the costs of operating in Indian Country and
decreases the competitive opportunity for Indian tribes to attract
energy development dollars to our lands. That critical sensitivity is
lost in the approach that is reflected in BLM's summary of its proposed
regulations. More fundamentally, however, as to process, this is
another example of the federal trustee's train leaving the station
before Indian Country has had a chance to buy a ticket.
IV. The Tribe's Substantive Comments Would Improve the Quality of the
Draft Regulations and Reduce Adverse Economic Impacts in Indian
Country.
Chairman Newton's preliminary correspondence in January and written
comments to the BLM in April stressed that any new regulations
associated with hydraulic fracturing be cost effective and consistent
with best available industry practices. The current set of draft
regulations being reviewed by OMB does not meet those threshold
objectives. A number of the proposals are impractical, expensive and
will needlessly drive operators off of Indian lands.
For example, one of BLM's draft proposals would require a minimum
30-day advance notice and BLM approval of frac design before an
operator could initiate well stimulation. Specific frac design does not
occur until a well has been drilled and specific data regarding the
target formation have been obtained, so it generally cannot be provided
in advance of drilling. Once drilling has been completed, frac design
proceeds quickly and fracturing operations begin as soon as possible in
order to utilize equipment efficiently and minimize ongoing surface and
wildlife disturbance. Even assuming that BLM has the personnel
qualified to review and approve frac design, which is highly
questionable, the approval process would cause substantial delays to an
already time-sensitive process. Although a notice filing might be
appropriate, an operator's ability to conduct hydraulic fracturing
should not be contingent upon additional approvals beyond the
Application for Permit to Drill (``APD'').
Another example is reflected in BLM's suggestion that operators be
required to provide cement bond logs (``CBLs'') for all wells. Our
experience indicates that requiring cement to the surface of well
casing is a more cost effective approach to ensuring well integrity
than universally requiring CBLs. CBLs are just one of a variety of
additional tests or monitoring conditions that can be pulled from a hat
and imposed upon operators by the BLM with little consideration for the
cost or benefit to be obtained. In fact, even in the absence of
approved regulations, we are increasingly seeing BLM add detailed
conditions related to hydraulic fracturing as part of the APD approval
process for standard wells under the guise of NEPA compliance. One
recent condition called for microseismic monitoring during frac
operations, which could add several hundred thousand dollars to the
cost of well completion and stimulation while generating little or no
useful information.
In raising these concerns, we are mindful of the important role
that BLM plays in reviewing and processing oil and gas development
activities on Indian lands. We, too, are actively involved in that
review and we are protective of the environment. In the interest of
safety and environmental protection, our Tribe has been a long-time
supporter of operator disclosure of substances contained in frac
fluids, and we will continue to participate in domestic water well
testing and data collection. We are compelled, however, to express our
concern that the steps being proposed by BLM to regulate hydraulic
fracturing on our lands have been developed with little regard for
practical considerations or the adverse financial impact that such
regulations will have upon Indian tribes.
Conclusion
In conclusion, I am honored to appear before you today on behalf of
the Southern Ute Indian Tribe. We hope that our comments will assist
you in your important work on behalf of Indian Country. We look forward
to continuing our work with the Subcommittee on this and other
important matters.
At this point, I would be happy to answer any questions you may
have.
______

Mr. Young. I thank you. I want to thank the panel. Before I
turn this over to Mr. Boren for a few minutes, I would like to
suggest one thing.
I think the BLM is being heard in this room right now.
There is someone in this room that will report back to the
Secretary, I am confident. Look at your neighbor. You might
want to find out what he is doing in the room. There is
somebody in this room, believe me. I have been in this business
a long time.
There is a little contradictory statement in both your
testimonies. Some of you have said this. You are not public
lands. That 1938 law and they interpret it as such, we will
repeal that law. That will solve that.
The second one, if you have not commented on our bill, it
puts you back in charge. Apparently, the Southern Ute is doing
the job as they should, you require that.
Mr. Olguin. Right.
Mr. Young. Each one of the tribes can require your
regulations. I think you do a better job. This is an attempt
again to keep you economically dependent on a side of beef and
a blanket. That is what this is all about.
Again, this is what we have to do. You are not public land.
You are private land. You are a sovereign nation. It is hard
for people to understand.
We do not tell France what to do. We do not tell Saudi
Arabia what to do or Nigeria what to do or Venezuela what to
do.
Here we are as a nation saying you are independent, you are
sovereign, but you are going to do what we tell you to do.
This fracking thing is not new. It has been done. This is a
charade by those that do not want any fossil fuels developed,
and they do not want you to progress.
With those little comments, Mr. Boren, would you like to be
Chairman again for a few seconds? I will give you the gavel and
I will transfer this over to you.
You can ask Mr. Lamborn if he would like to ask some
questions.
Mr. Boren [presiding]. Mr. Lamborn, would you like to ask
any questions?
Mr. Lamborn. Thank you, both of you, for having this
hearing and for allowing me to sit at the dais here with you.
If I could make a very brief opening statement and then
maybe ask a question or two.
Mr. Boren. Without objection.
Mr. Lamborn. I would love that.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. DOUG LAMBORN, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM COLORADO

Mr. Lamborn. I welcome everyone who has come today,
including the person from Colorado, the Ute Tribe. Thank you
for being here.
I appreciate your and Mr. Young's long commitment to tribal
issues and specifically the focus that you have given on the
important issue of energy and energy development on tribal
lands.
The development of our resources is a priority for all
Americans. Our nation's resources have helped us win world
wars, strengthen the economy and employ millions of Americans.
Unfortunately, too often, the development of these
important resources has been hindered on Federal lands by
burdensome and unreliable policies of the Federal Government,
and nowhere is this hindrance more offensive than on tribal
lands that the Federal Government holds in Trust.
The mismanagement of these lands and that Trust has a
tragic history in our nation. I am glad we are finally
beginning to take steps to correct that.
The fracking rule now being put forward by the Department
will in my opinion continue this historic mismanagement by
putting tribal lands at a clear disadvantage compared to
private lands next door.
I want to add my voice to those here today concerned that
the tribal consultation on this rule and other rules under
development by this Administration has failed to be fair,
transparent, and adequate.
With that, Mr. Chairman, I yield back, and when you have
questions, I will have one or two.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Lamborn follows:]

Statement of The Honorable Doug Lamborn, a Representative
in Congress from the State of Colorado

Thank you Mr. Chairman, and Ranking Member Boren for allowing me to
participate here today. I appreciate your long commitment to tribal
issues and specifically your focus on the important issue of energy and
energy development on tribal lands.
The development of our resources is a priority for all Americans,
our nation's resources have helped us win world wars, strengthen our
economy and employ millions of Americans. Unfortunately, too often the
development of those resources is hindered on federal lands by
burdensome and unreliable policies of the federal government. Nowhere
is this hindrance more offensive than on tribal lands that the federal
government holds in trust. The mismanagement of these lands and that
trust has a tragic history in our nation. Too often cheating or keeping
tribal citizens from their resources, the benefits of the development
of those resources, or simply pushing tribes deeper into poverty by
preventing the development.
The fracturing rule being put forward by the Department will in my
opinion continue this historic mismanagement by putting tribal lands at
a clear disadvantage to the private lands next door. I want to add my
voice to those here today concerned that the tribal consultation on
this rule and other rules under development by this Administration has
failed to be fair, transparent and adequate.
That said, I have a number of questions, and limited time, so I
would ask that you answer quickly for me, Mr. Spisak.
1.  In your opinion who should be responsible for determining
whether an Indian tribe should permit mineral development on
their lands, the specific Indian tribe and their leadership or
the federal government?
2.  It's my understanding that BLM provided a draft rule to the
tribes in January. Secretary Salazar and Director Abbey have
both testified before this committee that the draft rule has
since changed. OMB is currently is reviewing it. Is OMB
reviewing the same draft rule as the tribes were given and have
tribes been consulted on the proposal that went to OMB?
3.  Has the BLM performed an analysis of the economic and jobs
impact of the proposed rule on Indian tribes and their ability
to develop on their lands? Specifically, will this rule result
in increased jobs, revenue and opportunity for tribes or will
this hinder the development on tribal lands?
4.  Would the Department support revisions to the rule to
provide for a tribal opt-in? In other words, the hydraulic
fracturing rule will not have any effect on tribal lands unless
a tribe expressly chooses to accept it on its lands. Is this
something in the name of tribal sovereignty the Department can
support?
______

Mr. Boren. Mr. Kildee, would you like to ask some
questions?
Mr. Kildee. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Again, I am grateful
for the fact of having this hearing.
Mr. Hall mentioned a Treaty of 1857, was it.
Mr. Hall. 1851.
Mr. Kildee. You know, there are several parts of the
Constitution that we should read. I read the part about the
sovereignty of the Indian lands.
Also, this Constitution says ``This Constitution and the
laws of the United States which shall be made in pursuance
thereof, and all treaties made or shall be made under the
authority of the United States shall be the supreme law of the
land.''
No meeting in 1938, meeting in some hotel some place, where
you were handed something on the way out and by the way, here
is something you might want to read on the plane on the way
home.
It says it shall be the supreme law of the land, all
treaties shall be the supreme law of the land. It does not say
Treaty of France or Germany. All treaties, including that
Treaty of 1851, supreme law of the land, which guaranteed your
sovereignty.
To be called to a meeting and being treated as someone less
than equal in my mind is insulting, besides being illegal.
On fracking, I do not know a great deal about fracking, but
I know a great deal about sovereignty. You had to know that, as
you have seen it chip by chip taken away from you.
Let me say this, they will probably never come at you with
a meat axe and take a big chunk, but they will come and take a
slice here and a slice here and a slice here of your
sovereignty. Do not let them use a paring knife to take a
little bit of your sovereignty. You have to fight.
Not just the fracking, anything that interferes with your
right, sovereignty that is guaranteed, not granted, guaranteed
by this Constitution.
To my mind, this is a constitutional question. The
importance of sovereignty, you have to win on both these
issues, you have to win on your input as equals at any
conference, as equals. Let the Indians in, right, and then hand
them something on the way out to read.
I just respect all of you. I am leaving Congress this year
after 36 years. I hope I will leave somewhat of a legacy of
protecting Indian sovereignty.
I will leave it at that. The most precious thing you have,
do not ever trade it for anything else. We will give you this,
we will be a little flexible here if you just kind of shed a
little bit of your sovereignty. Do not give any of it up, and
you have it.
I respect all four of you for your demand that your
sovereignty be respected.
Thank you very much.
Mr. Boren. Thank you, Mr. Kildee. Just for scheduling
purposes, we are getting word that we are going to have votes
probably within 10 to 15 minutes. 12:45. We have a little bit
more time. I was wrong.
I will yield to you, Mr. Lamborn, for any questions you may
have.
Mr. Lamborn. Thank you. I want to publicly say before I ask
my question that I have two Members on this Subcommittee, Mr.
Kildee and Mr. Boren, who are leaving Congress. I am going to
miss them.
They have a high reputation. I have worked with them on
different things, especially Mr. Boren on energy issues.
You will be missed.
Mr. Olguin, thank you for coming here from Colorado. I have
long been impressed by the Southern Ute Tribe and the
professional way that resources have been managed and finances
have been done in such an exemplary model, a true model for the
entire country.
I commend you for what your tribe has done, the people, and
how they have benefitted from that.
I was in the Colorado Legislature. We would hear every so
often OK, no problems here, they are on top of everything. That
was always refreshing.
Mr. Olguin. Thank you.
Mr. Lamborn. When it comes to energy and in particular the
proposed rule by BLM on fracking and how that might affect
energy production, and I have looked at your testimony, but can
you summarize for us, and maybe you have already done this,
forgive me if I am covering old territory here, but can you
summarize how that could be a concern in that it might limit
production of energy?
Mr. Olguin. The rules and the regs, we just find that it is
an unnecessary burden, particularly when it comes to the cost,
for example, requiring bond logs as an example. It is not
necessary in every case, but if the rules require it, it is
going to be costly, and that cost will pass on to the tribes.
We also look when rules come in, it will force companies to
move, to find those areas where it is the path of least
resistance. We are a checkerboard reservation, an example
Chairman Young described is our description.
They will move across a line and develop a mineral. That
has a potential to also impact us particularly from the
standpoint of drainage.
We have a lot of concerns of the impacts the rule will
have, not only for us but even the economy of the region. We
are on the state line in the Four Corners. A lot of our service
providers do come from Farmington, New Mexico, and that
economy, the local economy around the Four Corners area is
affected by what happens with us.
We feel that these rules just plainly interfere with our
own operators, because we do have operations on the reservation
as well that are managed by the Southern Ute Tribe, Red Willow
Production Company.
I feel that we have a very strong track record of being
responsible in our development, and we just find this
interference is just plainly unacceptable.
Mr. Lamborn. Do you feel the proposed rule, if the final
rule is anything like the proposed rule, will negatively impact
your tribe and the economic development of your tribe?
Mr. Olguin. Yes, we do.
Mr. Lamborn. Thank you very much. Mr. Chairman, I yield
back.
Mr. Boren. Thank you. The real Chairman is here now, but I
have a few questions. I have a couple of questions and then we
will go back to the real Chairman.
Irene, let me ask you, you have been on this dais several
times. You have talked about the great things going on with the
Southern Ute Tribe and what all has happened, all the economic
development.
Has there been a problem on your reservation which would
precipitate to have some kind of Federal regulation? Have you
had some environmental disaster or something like that?
Ms. Cuch. I believe to answer your question, not really.
Mr. Boren. OK. We just heard testimony again from the BLM
in which they discussed consulting the tribe on these issues.
There was a particular point in your testimony that directly
disagrees with this.
You state and I quote ``The BLM never developed a time line
for tribal consultation, did not include tribal input in its
draft regulations, did not engage tribes in the discussion for
the need for the rule, and did not engage tribes in a
discussion about the alternatives that would limit the scope of
Federal standards or otherwise preserve the prerogatives and
authority of Indian tribes.''
With all that in mind and what the BLM said today, what is
your reaction to that testimony of BLM today? Do not laugh.
Ms. Cuch. My reaction is that they said they consulted with
us, but I know there was one that was in Salt Lake City, but
all of that was just a discussion, there was nothing like a
consultation. We did have----
Mr. Boren. I asked for your opinion. What is your opinion?
Ms. Cuch. My opinion is no, it was never clear.
Mr. Boren. OK. Finally, Tex had to leave. Let me ask you
all this, is it 45,000 barrels of oil, did you say, a day?
Ms. Cuch. Yes.
Mr. Boren. What have you all done, and I would like to hear
the other panelists, what have you all done with this revenue?
Health care? What kind of investments have you made because
there is oil and gas development within your boundaries?
Ms. Cuch. We usually use our revenues mostly to help to run
the tribal government. It is major income. It is used to run
our tribal government.
Mr. Boren. If this development was impeded, there could be
a loss of jobs, loss of services, and everything else.
Ms. Cuch. That is correct.
Mr. Boren. Chairman Show, could you tell us what oil and
gas development means to you? What kind of revenues, how it
impacts you?
Mr. Show. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. You know, the Blackfeet
Tribe just recently in the last couple of years started
developing IMDAs to help prosper our tribe.
With the funds, even just the signing bonus, the tribe was
able to basically get itself out of debt that we had previously
incurred.
Also, just two weeks ago, we opened a tribal store, a $7
million tribal store that employs 56 tribal members, and prior
to that, there was only one game in town for 10,000 people that
live on the reservation. There was only one store in town. Now,
with the competition, our people are actually getting cheaper
groceries and things like that.
We do have money set aside from this for economic
development. Maybe a hotel. We do already have a casino. That
is what we are doing with it. We are not trying to let our
tribal government eat it up the best we can.
Mr. Boren. Thank you. Mike, what are some nuggets that you
could share with us about the development, economic
development, jobs, that sort of thing, that results from this
oil and gas revenue?
Mr. Olguin. First off, I would like to state that with our
wealth that has been created, 90 percent of our wealth has been
through oil and gas development. That in itself has created an
AAA rating, which is how many times than the U.S. Government.
Along that line, we are able to issue bonds. We are able to
sustain a Government, an enterprise, and even an investment
component of our tribe. We have actually gone off reservation
and invested in other oil and gas development companies in the
Gulf of Mexico.
We own buildings in different parts of the nation. We are
getting ready to develop in Oceanside, California. We are in
New Mexico with real estate.
We have private equities, plus the biggest advantage here
is we are able to pay a dividend to our membership, that is
actually putting them well above the poverty level, and putting
them into higher than the median income of people across the
nation.
The oil and gas has created a lot of opportunities for us
as a tribe.
Mr. Boren. Thank you. Let me just finish on this, Mr.
Chairman, and say these are real people. These are jobs. We
talk about gaming in Indian Country. I have been supportive of
gaming.
When we are trying to diversify, when we are trying to get
people involved in all sorts of other things, whether it is
building a grocery store, whether it is health care, what have
you, if we impose these Federal regulations without real
consultation, we are talking about taking away jobs, taking
away livelihoods, in the middle of a terrible recession.
I am very proud that you have been able to hold this
hearing today and we are getting to the bottom of this and
figuring out that the BLM is out to lunch.
Mr. Young [presiding]. It is 12:30.
Mr. Kildee?
Mr. Kildee. No, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Young. I am going to excuse this panel. I am going to
tell you what we are going to do. We have read your testimony
and heard from you. We thank you.
We have some steps we are going to try to take with this
so-called proposed regulation down at OMB right now, trying to
expedite it. We are going to try to stop it through the
Appropriations process until there is proper consultation.
I personally will tell you that if I have not heard from
you, look at the Empowerment Act, so you would have control of
it.
This idea that you are relying on the Federal Government to
give you the OK, to pat you on the head and say well, now you
cannot do it, you know, it just frosts me every time I think
about it.
I want to thank each one of you. We would appreciate some
comments on our legislation. We will try to take care of this
problem because they did not consult with you. You did not have
a chance to say no, this will not work. That is not
consultation, handing you a set of regulations is the wrong way
to go.
With that, you are excused.
We have the next panel, please. Wesley Martel, Council Vice
Chairman, Shoshone Business Council. Larry DeCoteau, Tribal
Council Representative, Turtle Mountain Band of Chippewa
Indians.
Scott Russell, Vice President of National Congress of
American Indians, and Wilson Groen, President and CEO of Navajo
Nation Oil and Gas Company.
Wesley, you are up first. I think everybody knows the
rules. We are about ready to have a vote, so we will try to get
this panel done and ask question so you all do not have to sit
around here for another two hours.
Wesley, you are up first.

STATEMENT OF WESLEY MARTEL, COUNCIL VICE CHAIRMAN, SHOSHONE
BUSINESS COUNCIL

Mr. Martel. Good morning, Mr. Chairman, members of the
Committee. My name is Wes Martel, Co-Chairman of the Eastern
Shoshone Business Council, and on behalf of the two Councils,
the Eastern Shoshone and Northern Arapaho for Wind River, I
thank you for this opportunity.
The Wind River Reservation is located in West Central
Wyoming with over 2.2 million acres of land. We have been in
the oil and gas business since 1891.
In 1979, several tribal members undertook an investigation
of our oil and gas fields whereby we were able to prove that
all of the major oil and gas companies and independents
operating on our reservation were stealing from us and not
paying correct amounts in values.
We pointed this out to the State of Wyoming and soon all of
the Western States began auditing after they learned what was
transpiring and recovered billions of dollars in the early
1980s based on what they initially learned from Wind River.
Congress' answer to these egregious transgressions was the
Federal Oil and Gas Royalty Management Act of 1982, which
established the system as we know it today.
Minerals Management Service was created to oversee
production accounting and royalty auditing and the Bureau of
Land Management was delegated the responsibility of subsurface
inspection and enforcement as it pertains to Federal policy and
statutes.
Of course, the Bureau of Indian Affairs plays a role in
regards to land records, lease agreements, and surface
environmental obligations.
In 1983, I and ten others representing tribes, industry,
states and the Federal Government were appointed by Interior
Secretary James Watt to the Advisory Committee on Minerals
Accountability, to promulgate regulations for FOGRMA.
Thirty years later, we are still waiting for these
regulations to be fully implemented.
I have been around a while, Mr. Chairman, but I was not
around in 1938 when we talked about the original Act.
Section 202 of FOGRMA authorizes tribes to enter into
cooperative agreements with the Federal Government to assume
the duties of the MMS to perform production accounting and
royalty auditing functions.
This is a role that we had been undertaking at Wind River
for the past 25 years.
This section of FOGRMA also allows tribes to undertake the
inspection and enforcement duties associated with BLM's
responsibility as relates to monitoring, enforcement and
protection.
Unfortunately, this is an area where Congress and the
Department of the Interior have not provided the technical and
financial resources to allow for tribes to assume this
important function.
In 1982, Congress adopted the IMDA to allow tribes to enter
into alternative types of agreements. These leases are an
important part of allowing tribes to obtain technical and
administrative capabilities while maximizing return on non-
renewable resources.
These standard BIA leases place tribes in a predicament
whereby other jurisdictions are allowed to intrude on tribal
accessible valuation, which diminishes return to tribes and
inhibits abilities to improve and upgrade governmental
programs, services, and infrastructure.
Triple taxation is the norm on many reservations, which
inhibits the economic life of producing fields.
Based on the United States Supreme Court decision in the
Cotton Petroleum case on the Jicarilla Apache Reservation, the
state and counties are able to tax a non-Indian energy company
doing business when a tribe signs a standard BIA lease.
Mr. Chairman, I must ask you, would you do business on an
Indian reservation if you had to pay twice the tax you would
off the reservation?
I really think if Congress is going to help us with mineral
development, you need to fix this double taxation problem and
get rid of this disincentive.
Recently, Wind River was brought into the national
spotlight based on citizen complaints in the East Central
portion of the reservation, where residents felt their health
and water resources were being adversely affected by oil and
gas activity.
For several years, the initial complaints fell on deaf ears
as they were labeled trouble makers and malcontents.
However, in 2010 and 2011, under Superfund authority, the
EPA drilled two monitoring wells near the homes of these
residents and determined that groundwater in the aquifer
contained compounds likely associated with gas production
practices including hydraulic fracturing.
This was the first report by the EPA to link hydraulic
fracturing to possible water pollution.
Upon release of this information, rather than a methodical
calculated level headed type of inquiry being undertaken, all
hell broke loose.
Some folks came unglued along with industry
representatives, assailing EPA for scientifically questionable
practices, critical mistakes and misjudgments, and
contaminating its own monitoring wells.
This is the exact opposite of what we expected. There was a
total lack of objectivity regarding the findings of the single
Federal agency that undertook this volatile issue and attempted
to make their best technical judgment.
Issues such as well bore integrity and inspection and other
compliance must be undertaken by an authority with some
regulatory power.
The content of fracking solutions must be made public so we
know what is being put into the ground and how to deal with it.
Perhaps it is important for you to understand that the
Shoshone and the Arapaho are far more in favor of mineral
extraction than we are opposed to it. It is a critical source
of our government's income and certainly creates many good
jobs.
The main goal should not be how quickly we can get permits
approved but how do we support safe and responsible
development.
The rule as proposed could slow development but for those
tribes who want to protect water and land from contamination,
there are provisions in the proposed rule that will allow for
transparency, assessment, and monitoring to minimize
degradation.
Our worry at Wind River is that the BLM has shown that they
cannot bring about compliance with existing policies and
statutes. How are they going to enforce a whole new set of
rules that require additional oversight, report review, and
monitoring?
We believe a more enhanced regulatory role for the tribes
is part of this answer.
The lack of meaningful consultation with tribes by the BLM
has eliminated discussions that should have addressed assisting
tribes in becoming self regulating through Section 202 of
FOGRMA.
Inserting additional language into Indian Mineral
Development Act agreements would provide clear information
regarding drilling practices and procedures and assisting
tribes in becoming stewards of their own resources.
I thank you for the time allocated, and I would be happy to
answer any questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Martel follows:]

Statement of Wes Martel, Co-Chairman,
Eastern Shoshone Tribe--Wind River Reservation

Introduction
Good morning, Mr. Chairman and members of this Committee. My name
is Wes Martel, Co-Chairman for the Eastern Shoshone Business Council.
On behalf of the Eastern Shoshone Business Council and the Northern
Arapaho Business Council, I thank you for this opportunity..
The Wind River Indian Reservation is located in west-central
Wyoming with over 2.2 million acres of land where we have been in the
oil and gas business since 1891. In 1979, several tribal members
undertook an investigation of our oil and gas fields whereby we were
able to prove that all of the major oil and gas companies and the
independents operating on our Reservation were stealing from us and not
paying correct amounts and values. We pointed this out to the State of
Wyoming and soon all of the western states began auditing after they
learned what was transpiring and recovered billions of dollars in the
early 1980's based on what they initially learned from Wind River.
The Federal Oil and Gas Royalty Management Act of 1982
Congress' answer to these egregious transgressions was the Federal
Oil and Gas Royalty Management Act of 1982 (FOGRMA) which established
the system as we know it today. Minerals Management Service (MMS) was
created, (now Office of Natural Resource Revenue (ONRR)), to oversee
production accounting and royalty auditing. The Bureau of Land
Management (BLM) was delegated the responsibility of the subsurface
inspection and enforcement as it pertains to Federal policy and
statutes and the Bureau of Indian Affairs (BIA) plays a role in regards
to land records, lease agreements and surface environmental
obligations. In 1983, I and 10 others representing Tribes, industry,
states and the Federal government were appointed by Interior Secretary
James Watt to the Advisory Committee on Minerals Accountability (ACMA)
to promulgate regulations for FOGRMA. Thirty years later we are still
waiting for these regulations to be fully implemented.
FOGRMA Section 202--Cooperative Agreements
Section 202 of FOGRMA authorizes Tribes to enter into Cooperative
Agreements to assume the duties of the MMS/ONRR to perform production
accounting and royalty auditing functions. This is a role that we have
been undertaking at Wind River for over 25 years. This Section also
allows Tribes to undertake the inspection and enforcement duties
associated with BLM's responsibility as it relates to monitoring,
enforcement and protection. Unfortunately, this is an area where
Congress and the Department of Interior (DOI) have not provided the
technical and financial resources to allow for Tribes to assume this
function.
Indian Minerals Development Act of 1982 (IMDA)
In 1982 Congress adopted the IMDA to allow Tribes to enter into
alternative types of agreements other than the Standard BIA Lease.
Partnerships, joint ventures, operating agreements and other types of
business agreements were envisioned as a way to allow tribes to attain
technical and administrative capabilities while maximizing return on
non-renewable resources. 31 years later most agreements being signed
are still a form of Standard BIA Lease where minimum royalties are
realized, no renegotiation terms are present and for the most part
Tribes have been unable to develop comprehensive Energy Departments.
These Standard BIA Lease places Tribes in a predicament whereby
other jurisdictions are allowed to intrude on tribal assessable
valuation which diminishes return to tribes and inhibits ability to
improve and upgrade governmental programs, services and infrastructure!
Triple taxation is the norm on many Reservations which inhibits the
economic life of producing fields. Based on a U.S. Supreme Court
decision in the Cotton Petroleum case on the Jicarilla Apache
Reservation the state and counties are able to tax a non-Indian Energy
Company when a Tribe signs a Standard BIA Lease. Mr. Chairman I have to
ask, would you do business on an Indian reservation if you had to pay
twice the tax you would off the reservation? I really think if the
Congress is going to help us with mineral development that you need to
fix this double taxation problem and get rid of this disincentive.
Bureau of Land Management's Hydraulic Fracturing Rule's Impact on
Indian Tribal Energy Development
Recently, Wind River was brought into the national spotlight, based
on citizen complaints, in the east-central portion of the Reservation
where residents felt that their health and water resources were being
adversely affected by oil and gas activity. For several years their
initial complaints fell on deaf ears as they were labeled trouble
makers and malcontents. However, in 2010 and 2011, under Superfund
authority, the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) drilled two
monitoring wells near the homes of these residents and determined that
ground water in the aquifer contained compounds ``likely associated
with gas production practices, including hydraulic fracturing.'' This
was the first report by the EPA to link hydraulic fracking to possible
water pollution.
Upon release of this information, rather than a methodical,
calculated, level-headed type of inquiry being undertaken, all hell
broke loose! Some folks came unglued, along with industry
representatives, assailing EPA for ``scientifically questionable
practices'', ``critical mistakes and misjudgments'' and contaminating
its own monitoring wells. This was the exact opposite of what was
expected. There was a total lack of objectivity regarding the findings
of the single Federal agency that undertook this volatile issue and
attempted to make their best technical judgment. Issues such as well-
bore integrity, inspection and other compliance must be undertaken by
an authority with some regulatory power. The content of fracking
solutions must be made public so we know what is being put into the
ground and how to deal with it.
BLM--from Enforcer to Facilitator
Perhaps it is important for you to understand that the Shoshone and
Arapaho are far more in favor of mineral extraction than we are opposed
to it. It is a critical source of our government's income and certainly
creates good paying jobs. The main goal should not be how quickly we
can get permits approved but how do we support safe and responsible
development. The rules as proposed could slow development but for those
Tribes who want to protect water and land from contamination there are
provisions in the proposed rules that will allow for transparency,
assessment, evaluation and monitoring to minimize degradation. Our
worry at Wind River is that BLM has shown that they cannot bring about
compliance with existing policies and statutes. How are they going to
enforce a whole new set of rules that requires additional oversight,
report review and monitoring? We believe a more enhanced regulatory
role for the Tribes is part of the answer.
Conclusion
The lack of meaningful consultation with Tribes by the BLM has
eliminated discussions that should have addressed assisting Tribes in
becoming self-regulating through Section 202 of FOGRMA, inserting
additional language into IMDA's that would provide clear information
regarding drilling practices and procedures and assist Tribes in
becoming stewards of their own resources. Helping Tribes to acquire the
technical and administrative capacity would uphold tribal sovereignty
and treaty rights and allow Tribes to take their rightful place in
contributing to the energy security of this country. In our spiritual
lodges and ceremonies water is deemed a ``sacred gift from the
Creator'' requiring great care and respect. While jobs and revenue are
important, for most Indian people there are things far more important
than money. We cannot forsake the blood and bones of our ancestors by
desecrating the ``Water of Life''
I thank you for the time allocated and would be happy to answer any
questions.
______

Mr. Young. Thank you, Wesley.
Larry, you are up.

STATEMENT OF LARRY DeCOTEAU, TRIBAL COUNCIL REPRESENTATIVE,
DISTRICT 4, TURTLE MOUNTAIN BAND OF CHIPPEWA INDIANS

Mr. DeCoteau. Thank you for having me here. My name is
Larry DeCoteau. I am Tribal Council Representative from Turtle
Mountain Band of Chippewa up in North Dakota.
We are in the North Central portion of it, right on the
edge of the Bakken Range, that Mr. Hall was talking about. They
are right in the middle of it.
We are the only tribe in this nation who will not allow
fracking on our land at this particular time, basically because
we have one aquifer that supplies our water.
As this gentleman was saying, Mr. Martel, he said there is
possible contamination within their wells, their test wells,
this and that.
At this time, we have no intention of allowing this to come
onto our tribal lands. We are looking into the new practice
they have, that the Blackfeet are doing some of that, green
fracking. If that comes about, we will be more than happy to
look at it again. I am not sure.
The reason for it is all these chemicals that are put into
these. They do not give you an idea what is in there, and we
have no intention of allowing it to put that kind of pollution
into our territory.
We could use the economic boost. There is no getting around
it. We have 70 percent unemployment like most Northern Plains
tribes. There is genuine unemployment.
A gentleman up there talked about a depression in this
United States at eight percent. We have a genuine depression in
Indian Country. We could use the money. We could use the
economic boost.
At this particular time, we have no intention of allowing
it. An oil company came up to us and offered us $5 million a
couple of months. It looked great. We could have used the
money. There is no doubt about it.
We told them to put it in their pocket, put it back in your
pocket, we do not want to look at it right now. In the future,
I can see all these other tribes, they have been through all of
this before, and we are right on the edge, so it is a real big
deal to us. It is going to come eventually.
We are going to get into the service portion of it. We are
going to supply sand. We are going to supply fracking tanks,
this and that.
This oil is great for Indian Country. It is one of the
greatest things that has happened other than the casinos,
because of economic development.
Again, there are many things you put upon the tribes,
regulations, rules and regulations of this and that, again.
We live in Roulette County, and if that state decides or
Roulette County decides to frack, they are going to drill right
underneath our aquifer and we are not going to be able to stop
this thing.
The only way to stop it is to beat them at the voting
polls. We have 60 percent of the vote in Roulette County, the
Native people do, and if we have to, we are going to go out and
eliminate those people, I mean voting wise.
That is our point on this issue here. Again, EPA and other
Federal regulatory groups, they have to be in there. I realize
every Federal organization is under staffed. You can see that
in the oil country.
In the western part of the state in North Dakota, there is
no way they can look at all them wells. There is no way in the
world with the staff they have.
It is like the gold booms of the 1800s in California. Our
state has doubled. The cities have doubled out there,
Williston, Bismarck, Dickinson.
You have to look at your infrastructure and everything
else, but regulations are very important. Do not put
regulations on the Native people that you do not put on the
rest of the country.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. DeCoteau follows:]

Statement of Larry DeCoteau, District Four Tribal Council
Representative, Turtle Mountain Band of Chippewa Indians

Honorable Members of the Subcommittee on Indian and Alaska Native
Affairs,
My Name is Larry DeCoteau and I am the District Four Representative
for the Turtle Mountain Band of Chippewa Indians. This is my first term
on the council and I am honored to be here today. On behalf of my
entire tribe I thank you for the opportunity to be here today to
provide testimony on this important and dynamic issue. Turtle Mountain,
as you may know, recently voted to ban hydraulic fracturing on our
reservation. To date, I am under the understanding that we are the only
tribe in the country to ban fracturing on its reservation. The fact
that we unanimously voted to do so is much less important that why we
decided to ban fracking. We, as elected officials of the Tribe, have a
duty to know everything involved in the fracking process, we need to
know the impact of fracking on our lands; everything from the
environmental impact, the potential for the process to harm our water,
the chemicals used in the process and the ratios of those chemicals
used, the manpower needed for fracking and the ability of the oil
companies to ensure those individuals respect our people and honor our
ways. Fracking, as it's currently being done in the western part of the
state of North Dakota is not a process that interests us at Turtle
Mountain.
We will allow hydraulic fracking on our reservation when and if it
can be proven to us that it can be done with zero impact on our water,
with full disclosure of any chemicals used and the amounts of each
chemical being used. We will allow fracking on our reservation when we
can institute a detailed set of laws that ensure the process is safe,
respectful of our people and culture and does not harm the environment.
We will decide when that has been proven to us, not the federal
government. We do not need rules and regulations proposed by the Bureau
of Land Management. We do not need yet another federal bureaucracy
dictating to us what rules we have to play by, and worse, dictating to
us when and where fracking can take place. We are a sovereign nation,
fully capable of writing our own laws and then enforcing them.
A huge consideration when we banned fracking on our reservation was
the fact that we did not yet have laws that dictated the process and
ensured the safe-keeping our precious land and natural resources. The
federal government dictated to us, through a now infamous, one-sided
and shameful treaty, where we would live, we do not need more
directives from the federal government. What we need from the federal
government is less rules and more respect for our sovereignty. Many,
many of our ancestors fought for and died for our sovereignty, I ask
you to please respect that fact and let each tribe decide what
appropriate rules and regulations are right for them, for their people,
for their culture.
Turtle Mountain people know our land best, we know our resources,
we know what methods of mining and drilling we are comfortable with,
and we are best suited to make the decisions that impact our land and
our people. We respectfully request that the Bureau of Land Management
not adopt rules and regulations impacting Indian lands and leave that
duty to the those best suited to make the decisions that impact the
lands and the people they were elected to represent: The Tribes.
______

Mr. Young. I thank you.
Scott?

STATEMENT OF SCOTT RUSSELL, VICE PRESIDENT,
NATIONAL CONGRESS OF AMERICAN INDIANS

Mr. Russell. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Chairman Young,
Ranking Member Boren and members of the Committee, thank you
for having this hearing today and inviting the National
Congress of American Indians to testify.
As you mentioned earlier, I am Area Vice President for the
Rocky Mountain Region and I am also the Secretary of the Crow
Nation.
[Speaks in Crow language.]
Mr. Russell. I thank you, I addressed you in my own
language, Crow language.
The National Congress of American Indians' concerns are
echoing what has been said today, and that is basically proper
consultation.
The Department of the Interior has a responsibility to
consult with Indian tribes to ensure meaningful and timely
input by tribal officials in the development of regulatory
policies that have tribal implications.
This is Executive Order 13175, and it is also the Trust
responsibility of the Federal Government.
Consultation on regulations is also required by the IMDA,
the Indian Minerals Development Act. The hydraulic fracturing
regulations affect us directly as they apply only to Federal
lands and tribal lands.
The BLM did hold some meetings with tribal leaders, but it
clearly was not consultation. The regulations were drafted
before tribes met with BLM and then submitted to OMB before the
due date for tribal comments last week. We did not have any
input into these regulations much less meaningful and timely
input.
In addition, I believe that the BLM has understated the
impact of these regulations. BLM focuses on the disclosure
requirements, and that does not sound like a big problem, but
under these regulations, every drilling plan and every minor
change to a drilling plan triggers another set of documentation
and approvals by the Department of the Interior.
Federal requirements create a nightmare for tribes. As it
is, we have to go through 49 steps just to drill.
The Federal Government does not have the funding or the
staff to do all this. The oil and gas producers have millions
of dollars worth of equipment and employees in the field, and
creating multiple new requirements for Federal review and
approval will drive them away. This has already happened.
My tribe, the Crow Nation, hold the fourth largest coal
reserve in the whole United States. We have nine billion tons
of coal. We have oil. We have gas on our reservation.
Hydraulic fracturing offers the potential for significantly
expanded production.
The Crow Reservation has over two million acres of
subsurface in Trust. It is checkerboarded, as you mentioned
earlier.
If the costs and burdens are too high, the producers can
avoid the tribal lands and drill on the private lands right
next door. We will get shut out of the biggest oil boom in the
history of the United States, perhaps billions of dollars.
I cannot over emphasize what kind of revenue that could do
for our tribe. We are still very hopeful maybe some of those
veins might be under our reservation.
In addition to the economic effect to many tribes,
including the Crow Nation, we have concerns about the
environmental impacts of hydraulic fracturing. It is happening
all over Indian Country and upstream on Indian reservations.
We want to know more about it. We are not against it. We
just want to know more.
I am here on behalf of many tribes under NCAI and the
environmental concerns are important to all of us.
Will these regulations provide enough protection? There are
many questions still to be answered.
One sign of a lack of consultation on these regulations is
they give no consideration at all to tribal regulations on
hydraulic fracturing processes. Indian tribes should be able to
opt out of the BLM regulations and instead institute tribal
government regulatory methods.
Finally, I would like to note that tribal lands are not
public lands. Tribal lands are under the jurisdiction of
sovereign tribal governments and for the benefit of our own
tribes and tribal members.
However, BLM continues to treat tribal lands like public
land. This extends to the burden of the application for a
permit to drill.
Mr. Chairman, I mentioned these drills in the previous
testimony when I sat before this Committee, and it is a
travesty of the system.
Why do we have to pay $6,500 just to drill on an Indian
reservation when you can take one step off the reservation and
drill for $400? Companies are literally avoiding reservations
because of this.
The fee only applies to public lands. Tribal lands should
be exempted from APD fees. APD fees are known to deter
investment in tribal oil and gas and it slows down much needed
economic development.
I do not have to tell you how much of an unemployment rate
we have. It is something we are not proud of. It is reality. We
have to be allowed to help our own people.
In conclusion, I thank you for the opportunity today to
testify on this important issue.
We urge Congress to continue its oversight of the BLM
hydraulic fracturing regulations and the more general issue of
consultation with tribes. We have great confidence that this
issue with the BLM can be worked out in a beneficial way to
tribes and the Federal Government, if truly meaningful
consultation takes place in the near future.
Thank you again, and I will be happy to answer any
questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Russell follows:]

Statement of Scott Russell, Secretary of the Crow Tribe,
NCAI Board Member, Area Vice President

Introduction
I'd like to thank the House subcommittee for Indian and Alaska
Native Affairs for holding this important hearing at such a crucial
time and inviting NCAI to testify. I am the Area Vice President for the
Rocky Mountain Region for NCAI and the Secretary of the Crow Tribe in
Montana.
The National Congress of American Indians (NCAI) is the oldest and
largest national organization of American Indian and Alaska Native
tribal governments. Since 1944, tribal governments have gathered as a
representative congress through NCAI to deliberate issues of critical
importance to tribal governments.
Indian tribes control significant areas of land that contain oil &
gas that could be accessed by hydraulic fracturing. BLM regulation and
related activities that affect tribal lands must be guided by
meaningful consultation with tribal governments. Tribal interests are
distinct from the public interest and are sovereign nations, furthering
the need for meaningful consultation between the BLM and tribal
governments.
NCAI recently passed a resolution seeking meaningful consultation
with the Bureau of Land Management regarding new hydraulic fracturing
regulations. The resolution also asserts that the BLM regulations for
hydraulic fracturing on public lands should not apply to Indian lands.
The resolution is attached to this testimony for inclusion in the
record.
The BLM is required to conduct meaningful consultation with tribal
governments to develop new regulations.
NCAI's concerns are focused on consultation. The Department of
Interior has a responsibility to consult with Indian tribes to ``ensure
meaningful and timely input by tribal officials in the development of
regulatory policies that have tribal implications.'' This is Executive
Order 13175, and it is also a trust responsibility of the federal
government. The hydraulic fracturing regulations affect us directly, as
they apply only to federal lands and tribal lands. We are directly
affected and we have not been consulted.
The BLM did hold some meetings with tribal leaders. I went to the
meeting in Salt Lake City. But it clearly wasn't consultation. The
regulations were drafted before we met with BLM, and then submitted to
the Office of Management & Budget before the due date for tribal
comments last week. We didn't have any input into the regulations, much
less ``meaningful and timely input.'' Tribal leaders were handed a copy
of the draft regulations and told that it was purely an informational
meeting.
In the DOI's own words, the consultation policy is necessary to,
``detail early tribal involvement in the design of a process
implicating tribal interests,'' and to, ``honor the government to
government relationship.'' BLM has not followed the consultation policy
and risks creating burdensome regulations that further restrict tribes
from using their lands to benefit tribal members.
In addition, I believe that the BLM understated the impact of these
regulations. In all of the summaries, BLM focuses on the disclosure
requirements, and that doesn't sound like a big problem. But if you
read more deeply into the draft regulations, you will see that they are
significantly more burdensome and will substantially impact tribal
development. In particular, every drilling plan and every minor change
to a drilling plan triggers another set of documentation and approvals
by the Department of Interior. Federal approval is a nightmare scenario
for Indian tribes. The federal government does not have the funding or
the staff to do this process efficiently. Oil & gas producers have
millions of dollars worth of equipment and employees in the field with
the meter running, and creating multiple new requirements for federal
review and approval will drive them away because the costs are too
high.
My tribe, the Crow Tribe, is directly affected. We have oil & gas
on our reservation in Montana, and hydraulic fracturing offers the
potential for significantly expanded production in the future. In fact,
these regulations affect tribes more than anyone else. BLM manages 700
million acres of subsurface, so oil producers will put up with some
extra expenses and burdens to get access to federal lands. The Crow
Reservation has only 2 million acres of subsurface in trust, and it is
checkerboarded. If the costs and burdens are too high, the producers
can avoid the tribal lands and drill on the private lands right next
door. We will get shut out of the biggest oil boom in the history of
the United States, perhaps billions of dollars. I cannot overemphasize
what that kind of revenue could do for our Tribe.
In addition to the economic affect, many tribes, including the Crow
Tribe, have concerns about the environmental impacts of hydraulic
fracturing. It is happening all over the country, near Indian
reservations and upstream from Indian reservations. We want to know
more about it. Will these regulations provide enough protection? I am
here on behalf of the many member tribes of NCAI, and the environmental
concerns are important to all of us.
Impact on Tribal Sovereignty and Regulation
The Executive Order on Tribal Consultation has another important
feature. It requires that:
When undertaking to formulate and implement policies that have
tribal implications, agencies shall:
1.  encourage Indian tribes to develop their own policies to
achieve program objectives;
2.  where possible, defer to Indian tribes to establish
standards; and
3.  in determining whether to establish Federal standards,
consult with tribal officials as to the need for Federal
standards and any alternatives that would limit the scope of
Federal standards or otherwise preserve the prerogatives and
authority of Indian tribes.
One sign of the lack on consultation on these regulations is that
they give no consideration at all to tribal regulation of hydraulic
fracturing processes. We believe that there are more efficient and
effective ways to do disclosure of hydraulic fracturing chemicals and
processes, and that tribes are already engaged in this regulation. The
Indian Mineral Development Act of 1982 clearly envisioned a role for
tribes in regulating mineral production through the use of mineral
agreements. We believe that an Indian tribe should be able to opt out
of the BLM regulations, and instead institute tribal government
regulatory methods.
Tribal Lands are not public lands.
Though tribal lands are held in trust by the federal government,
they are not public. Tribal lands are under the jurisdiction of
sovereign tribal governments and are for the benefit of tribal members.
However, BLM continues to treat tribal lands like public land by trying
to regulate oil and gas development on tribal lands.
This incorrect treatment of tribal lands as public lands extends to
the burden of the Application for Permit to Drill (APD) fees. The BLM
APD fees only apply to public lands and therefore, tribal lands should
be exempted from APD fees. APD fees are known to deter investment in
tribal oil and gas, slowing down much needed economic development.
Tribes would like to work with the BLM to develop regulations for
hydraulic fracturing that are specific to Indian lands.
Regulation that is generated in consultation with tribes can become
not only less burdensome but a constructive tool to guide tribal
processes. The BIA has recently conducted extensive consultation to
generate new surface leasing regulations specifically for Indian lands.
These regulations are likely to not only improve the economic
development opportunities on tribal lands but also preserve the
environment by further enabling renewable energy development.
BLM hydraulic fracturing regulations, when promulgated specifically
for tribes and in consultation with tribes also have the opportunity to
strike this balance. Currently, the lack of consultation almost ensures
that the resulting regulation will further burden tribal economies and
the process has dishonored the nation to nation relationship between
the federal government and tribes.
Conclusion
Thank you for the opportunity today to testify on this important
issue, and for your consideration of the views of the National Congress
of American Indians. We urge Congress to continue its oversight of the
BLM Hydraulic Fracturing regulations and the more general issue of
consultation with Indian tribes. We have great confidence that this
issue with the BLM can be worked out in a beneficial way for tribes and
the federal government, if truly meaningful consultation takes place in
the near future.
______

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 73938.002

.eps[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 73938.003

.eps__

Mr. Young. Thank you, Scott.
Wilson?

STATEMENT OF WILSON GROEN, PRESIDENT AND CEO, NAVAJO NATION OIL
AND GAS COMPANY

Mr. Groen. Good morning/afternoon, Chairman Young, Ranking
Member Boren, Congressman Kildee. It is a pleasure to speak in
front of you again.
I am Wilson Groen, President and CEO of the Navajo Nation
Oil and Gas Company. The Navajo Oil and Gas Company is
chartered under Section 17 and is wholly owned by the Navajo
Nation, so it is a Federally chartered corporation.
I have given written statements for the Committee and I
will not go into a lot of detail on that.
I do again appreciate the opportunity to be here. Many of
the speakers prior to me have covered the same issues that I am
concerned about. I do not believe the Navajo Nation has
formally given a response as yet, but I know in speaking with
some of their staff, they have very similar concerns.
The big concerns are sovereignty, the overreach of this,
and the lack of consultation. That is really the heart of the
whole thing.
Navajo Oil and Gas is a very successful for profit
corporation. We are 90 percent staffed by Navajo Nation
members.
We take the protection of the resources of the Nation very
seriously. That is not only from a corporate point of view, but
for the Navajo people and with almost all Native American
people that I am aware of, it is a very culturally sensitive
issue.
We take that responsibility likewise very seriously.
Our mission statement is to maximize the resources for the
benefit of the Navajo people with respect for Mother Earth.
Again, we take this very seriously.
The fracking regulations that are being talked about, it
has to be done in the best interest and with proper
consultation. We keep coming back to that.
The tribal oil and gas producers, as mentioned, not only
here, but if not on the Nation, with these regs, with the taxes
and other issues, they will move off and do their development
off the Nation's lands.
For Navajo Oil and Gas, we very specifically have a new
resource, the shale that is developing in the Four Corners
area. It is significant. Is it developed like the Bakken at
this point? No. Does it have the potential? Yes. It has huge
potential.
We need to know how to develop. We are evaluating these
processes and procedures, what is the most applicable way.
Again, it is being done in a very proactive, best
management practices.
As was mentioned earlier, we as a company and the Nation as
part of their permitting procedures--when we run casing in a
well, all those types of things are taken into account.
In my experience, I cannot recall ever a situation in which
there has been contamination of a water zone that is a result
of the fracking process.
Has there been well bore integrity breakdown? Yes. That is
one of the reasons that we now instigate the practice of
cementing to the surface. Again, we want to focus on best
practices to allow these fracking procedures to proceed on
safely and without the undue and unnecessary regulatory burden
that the current rules are proposing.
Again, I basically support all of the comments that have
been made by all the various tribes here earlier.
I look forward to any other additional comments. I may add
one additional thing. One of the overall issues with this is
still the same issue as the February hearings, releasing some
of the chains and letting the Native Americans develop their
resources.
I appreciate this Committee's support of 415(3) and the
amendments that are put before it.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Groen follows:]

Statement of Wilson Groen, President & Chief Executive Officer,
Navajo Nation Oil and Gas Company

Introduction
Good afternoon Chairman Young, Ranking Member Boren, and members of
this distinguished Subcommittee.
My name is Wilson Groen and I am the President and Chief Executive
Officer of the Navajo Nation Oil and Gas Company (NNOGC), a company
wholly-owned by the Navajo Nation (the Nation). NNOGC is active in oil
and gas exploration and production on and off Navajo lands, owns and
operates a crude oil pipeline, and is a retail and wholesale
distributor of refined petroleum products. I had the privilege of
appearing before you in February of this year to discuss Chairman
Young's ``Native American Energy Act'' (H.R. 3973), and urge you to
bring that bill to a markup in the full Committee on Resources.
Thank you for the opportunity to appear today to discuss the Bureau
of Land Management's (BLM) proposed hydraulic fracturing regulation
that will provide additional and unnecessary regulatory burdens on
energy producers in Indian Country.
NNOGC's mission statement is particularly appropriate considering
the theme of this oversight hearing. It is NNOGC's mission to
``Maximize resources for the benefit of the Navajo Nation with respect
for Mother Earth.'' I can assure the Subcommittee that NNOGC approaches
its mission and its operations with utter seriousness.
Background of the NNOGC
In 1992, the Navajo Nation Energy Policy (Energy Policy) was issued
by the Nation after much discussion and input from energy experts,
environmentalists, economic development specialists, lawyers, and
political leaders of the Nation. The Energy Policy observed that the
Nation was resource rich, but that it was neither obtaining proper
value for its minerals nor, more importantly, participating in the
energy industry as a business owner. For example, the standard oil and
gas leases issued by the Bureau of Indian Affairs (BIA) relegated the
Nation to the role as passive lessor, and that needed to be changed.
NNOGC was established in 1993 and is a direct outgrowth of the
Energy Policy. The Nation's objective was to launch a tribal
corporation to engage in oil and gas production as an integrated, for-
profit business entity to maximize the value of the Nation's energy
resources for the benefit of the Navajo people.
NNOGC has acquired and now operates an 87-mile crude oil pipeline,
acquired and is continuing to acquire significant oil and gas working
interests in the Greater Aneth, Utah, oil fields, and expanded its
retail and wholesale business. Just last week, NNOGC entered an option
to purchase 10 percent of Resolute Energy Corporation's interest in the
Aneth Field, the largest oil producer in the State of Utah.
While NNOGC is still in a robust growth mode, it has returned
significant royalty payments, taxes, right-of-way payments, lease
payments, scholarships and other contributions to the Nation and host
communities. Much of the Nation's resources used to provide employment
and services to the Navajo people derives from NNOGC's operations.
NNOGC's Oil and Gas Activities
Since 2005, oil and gas production on Navajo lands in southeastern
Utah has increased and the Nation is consequently witnessing an
increase in oil and gas royalty revenues. It is critical to the
continued growth of the Nation's economy to continue oil and gas
resource development on Navajo lands.
NNOGC, often with industry partners, is also leasing and developing
tracts of land on and near the Navajo Reservation. NNOGC has obtained
rights to 150,000 acres of land within the Nation to develop coal bed
methane, oil and conventional gas resources. NNOGC is also exploring
the feasibility of developing helium reserves on the Navajo
Reservation. NNOGC has recently partnered with another company to
develop oil and gas reserves in Montana.
As the Committee will surely appreciate, these activities
contribute not only to the Nation's self-sufficiency, but also to the
energy security of the United States.
NNOGC Comments on the BLM's Proposed Rule
NNOGC is a corporation wholly-owned by the Nation, and is a
significant producer of oil and natural gas from Nation lands. With the
largest reservation and tribal population in the U.S., NNOGC's energy-
related activities represent a major source of revenues to the Nation
and significant employment and income opportunities to Navajo people.
Tribal oil and gas producers and their private sector partners
around the country, including the Southern Ute Indian Tribe, the Ute
Tribe of the Uintah and Ouray Reservation, the Mandan Hidatsa and
Arikara Nation, and the Blackfeet Nation, make prudent use hydraulic
fracturing and believe the practice necessary for the future
development of their mineral resources. NNOGC agrees with these
sentiments, particularly with respect to the anticipated development of
recently-acquired lands and mineral resources.
Should the department proceed with a rule regulating the practice
of hydraulic fracturing, NNOGC strongly suggests it be guided by the
following principles and considerations.
The expressed justification for the rule is to ``protect the larger
public's interest in the public domain,'' and as Indian lands cannot
remotely be considered ``public lands,'' the rule should not apply to
Indian lands in the first instance.
Nevertheless, if the department decides to proceed with a rule and
intends the rule to have application to activities on Indian lands, the
rule should not include reference to state and local rules or
jurisdiction over activities and persons on Indian tribal lands, see
e.g., 25 CFR 1.4.
Departmental officials have cited environmental protection, and
specifically water quality measures, as justifying the need for a
Federal rule to regulate activities related to hydraulic fracturing.
The reality is that best management practices have been successfully
developed in the oil and gas industry relating to the hydraulic
fracturing process, the construction and monitoring of wells and
wellbore integrity, groundwater sampling and protection, and others,
all of which minimize the types of environmental degradation that is at
the heart of the argument for a Federal rule.
Unlike all other landowners in the U.S., Indian tribes and their
development corporations such as NNOGC face unique hurdles in their
efforts to identify and develop conventional energy resources. These
hurdles include significant delays in securing Federal approvals for
land leasing and related permitting, an untimely Federal appraisal
process, fees for applications for permits to drill and other Federal
fees, NEPA compliance, and other challenges which, taken together,
result in under-investment in energy resource development on tribal
lands.
A Federal rule relating to hydraulic fracturing will result in
additional and extraordinary delays in getting tribal projects moving
because the need for new BLM approvals will likely foster appeals that
could take the Interior Board of Land Appeals a year or more to decide.
Imposing a new, burdensome rule on tribal energy producers and
their partners is contrary to the essential thrust of Indian energy
bills now pending in the House of Representatives and the Senate that
are intended to remove unreasonable, uneconomic, or anachronistic
barriers to more vigorous energy production on Indian lands and to
promote tribal self-determination and self-sufficiency. The BLM's
proposed regulation will place additional burdens on an already over-
regulated industry and will harm Indian tribes, their members and
surrounding communities, many of which depend on energy production to
drive the regional economies.
To-date, the BLM has held four regional meetings to discuss a draft
rule informally shared with tribes earlier this year. I am reliably
informed that a second draft rule has been developed but has not been
circulated to any tribes. Given there is a second draft rule extant,
and as various Indian tribes, the National Congress of American
Indians, the Council of Energy Resource Tribes, industry groups, and
Members of Congress have already noted in correspondence to you, the
breadth and depth of BLM outreach and consultation with Indian Country
has been insufficient given the potential impact the rule could have on
tribal energy resources and economic development.
In lieu of the proposed rule's current trajectory, NNOGC has urged
the department to undertake a more vigorous consultation with the
tribal community consistent with President Obama's public commitments
and Secretarial Order 3317, in which Secretary Salazar announced a
policy of ``enhanced communication'' when it comes to decisions that
impact Indian tribes and their members.
Conclusion
In conclusion, I want to thank Chairman Young and Ranking Member
Boren for their leadership in holding this oversight hearing.
If, as we suspect, the BLM insists on promulgating the proposed
rule, we urge the Subcommittee to consider legislative action that will
respect tribal regulatory authority and encourage the continued
development of energy resources on Indian lands.
At this juncture, I would be happy to answer any questions you
have.
______

Mr. Young. I thank you. We are going to have a couple of
questions.
Were any of you consulted by the BLM?
[No response.]
Mr. Young. That ought to be an answer in itself. That was
what this hearing was about, and about the so-called
``regulations.''
Mr. Boren?
Mr. Boren. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Just really a comment
and then a quick question, one for Larry here.
Even though I am a big proponent of oil and gas
development, I think when we are talking about sovereignty and
tribes having the ability to say we want to do what we want to
do on our land, I deeply respect the fact that you have made
the decision not to do that.
I thank you for being here, even though as I said, I am a
proponent of energy development. It is up to the tribes to make
that decision. Thank you for being here.
For Mr. Martel, the EPA study that was done, I think
without going into it because we have to go vote, there were
two test wells that were drilled. Many of the folks involved
with that study are saying those wells may have compromised the
data. A lot of the methane and some of the other things that
were discovered during those test wells, they actually
naturally occur.
That was a very shallow well that was drilled, so the test
wells, we are talking about less than 1,000 feet deep.
When most people think of shale wells, they think of a
14,000 foot well that is done with fracking and it is done
horizontally.
These were traditional wells that were not even horizontal.
They were very shallow.
A lot of times, there is naturally occurring methane. There
is naturally occurring chemicals that are also used in the
fracking process.
I think that study has been put on hold. We have to be very
careful about how we say this is chapter and verse, this is
what we are going to take and say this is how we are going to
take this and we are going to regulate fracking.
I appreciate your testimony and your balanced way of
letting us know about what you all are doing to develop your
resources.
This is my comment. We have to go vote. I will yield back.
Mr. Young. Mr. Kildee?
Mr. Kildee. Just to thank the witnesses for your testimony.
You are here today protecting the rights of your Nation and the
rights of your citizens, a very important thing.
I am going to be leaving Congress but I hope that the rest
of the years that God gives me that I can continue to work with
you to protect your sovereignty. God bless all of you. Thank
you.
Mr. Young. Thank you. One other question. The thing I do
not understand and again we have to go back and review these
laws, you are not public land. They passed public land
requirements on public land.
If they want to have those in public land, that is a
different story, although I may not agree with them.
You have a right to make your own decisions. Larry, you
told the oil companies to get lost right now. If an oil company
comes to any one of you three and say they want to drill, you
can sit down your own regulations, can you not?
Mr. DeCoteau. Absolutely.
Mr. Young. That is what we should be doing. If you make
them too prohibitive, they will go someplace else. You do not
need the Federal Government telling you what you can and cannot
do.
What is this $6,000 in taxes? What is that? Scott, you
brought that up.
Mr. Russell. Those are the APD fees.
Mr. Young. APD. Thank God we have what, 27 letters in the
alphabet. I am glad we have that. What is an ``APD?''
Mr. Russell. That is an application for the permit to drill
that was imposed by the BLM.
What is crazy about this is the money does not even go
locally, it goes back into the general fund for the Treasury,
and it does not help local communities.
Mr. Young. That does not make sense. We can probably change
that. That is something that does not make sense to me. Right
next door, they do not apply that, do they?
Mr. Russell. No, they do not. One step off the reservation,
they pay only $400. That is why companies are staying away.
Mr. Young. If you have the sovereign right to those lands,
you could charge what you want for the permits. You should not
have to have BLM collecting the money and putting it back in
the general Treasury.
Mr. Russell. Exactly.
Mr. Young. This is a quagmire right now. We have to get it
straightened out to try to make sure you guys fulfill your
obligations to your constituents, your tribal members.
When I first started this job here a while back, I am
amazed that you have been able to do anything. You are not
encouraged to do it. You are told you cannot do it because.
EPA will be here next. They are already there. I am
surprised the Corps is not there, come to think about it.
One other thing, Navajo Tribe, do they reuse or do you
require they reuse the water in fracking?
Mr. Groen. Currently, we have to either recycle or properly
dispose of the water, depending on what is in it. The Navajo
Nation has very extensive departments, water, environmental
protection, historical preservation, fish and wildlife,
minerals.
They have existed for tens of years, so it is not just a
new function that is there, and they look very carefully at it,
and we do submit when we drill wells and so on water--any
indications of water that has been found, and if a well is
abandoned or plugged, we offer it back to the Nation as a water
resource if it is potentially usable.
Mr. Young. All right. I would like to ask a favor of all
the panel members that have appeared before us, if you have
some suggestions about this problem and how it can be solved
other than just eliminating the BLM, we want to hear it. We are
going to try to stop this set of regulations. I do not think
they are fair. Again, you are not public lands. You are
sovereign lands.
We will do everything we can. I do think you have the
ability to be responsible. I think that is your responsibility,
to make sure you do not hurt your land. You said you would not,
and make sure that happens.
With that, and I do excuse you, and this Committee is
adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 1:01 p.m., the Subcommittee was adjourned.]


