- OVERSIGHT FIELD HEARING TITLED ``ALASKA'S SOVEREIGNTY IN PERIL: THE NATIONAL OCEAN POLICY'S GOAL TO FEDERALIZE ALASKA.''

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

ALASKA'S SOVEREIGNTY IN PERIL: THE NATIONAL OCEAN POLICY'S GOAL TO
FEDERALIZE ALASKA

=======================================================================

OVERSIGHT FIELD HEARING

before the

SUBCOMMITTEE ON FISHERIES, WILDLIFE,
OCEANS AND INSULAR AFFAIRS

of the

COMMITTEE ON NATURAL RESOURCES
U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

Tuesday, April 3, 2012, in Anchorage, Alaska

__________

Serial No. 112-105

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Natural Resources

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.fdsys.gov
or
Committee address: http://naturalresources.house.gov

_____

U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE

73-693 PDF                WASHINGTON : 2013
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800; DC
area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104  Mail: Stop IDCC, Washington, DC
20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON NATURAL RESOURCES

DOC HASTINGS, WA, Chairman
EDWARD J. MARKEY, MA, Ranking Democrat Member

Don Young, AK                        Dale E. Kildee, MI
John J. Duncan, Jr., TN              Peter A. DeFazio, OR
Louie Gohmert, TX                    Eni F.H. Faleomavaega, AS
Rob Bishop, UT                       Frank Pallone, Jr., NJ
Doug Lamborn, CO                     Grace F. Napolitano, CA
Robert J. Wittman, VA                Rush D. Holt, NJ
Paul C. Broun, GA                    Raul M. Grijalva, AZ
John Fleming, LA                     Madeleine Z. Bordallo, GU
Mike Coffman, CO                     Jim Costa, CA
Tom McClintock, CA                   Dan Boren, OK
Glenn Thompson, PA                   Gregorio Kilili Camacho Sablan,
Jeff Denham, CA                          CNMI
Dan Benishek, MI                     Martin Heinrich, NM
David Rivera, FL                     Ben Ray Lujan, NM
Jeff Duncan, SC                      Betty Sutton, OH
Scott R. Tipton, CO                  Niki Tsongas, MA
Paul A. Gosar, AZ                    Pedro R. Pierluisi, PR
Raul R. Labrador, ID                 John Garamendi, CA
Kristi L. Noem, SD                   Colleen W. Hanabusa, HI
Steve Southerland II, FL             Paul Tonko, NY
Bill Flores, TX                      Vacancy
Andy Harris, MD
Jeffrey M. Landry, LA
Jon Runyan, NJ
Bill Johnson, OH
Mark Amodei, NV

Todd Young, Chief of Staff
Lisa Pittman, Chief Counsel
Jeffrey Duncan, Democrat Staff Director
David Watkins, Democrat Chief Counsel
------

SUBCOMMITTEE ON FISHERIES, WILDLIFE, OCEANS
AND INSULAR AFFAIRS

JOHN FLEMING, LA, Chairman
GREGORIO KILILI CAMACHO SABLAN, CNMI, Ranking Democrat Member

Don Young, AK                        Eni F.H. Faleomavaega, AS
Robert J. Wittman, VA                Frank Pallone, Jr., NJ
Jeff Duncan, SC                      Madeleine Z. Bordallo, GU
Steve Southerland, II, FL            Pedro R. Pierluisi, PR
Bill Flores, TX                      Colleen W. Hanabusa, HI
Andy Harris, MD                      Vacancy
Jeffrey M. Landry, LA                Edward J. Markey, MA, ex officio
Jon Runyan, NJ
Doc Hastings, WA, ex officio

------

CONTENTS

----------
Page

Hearing held on Tuesday, April 3, 2012...........................     1

Statement of Members:
Murkowski, Hon. Lisa, a U.S. Senator from the State of Alaska     4
Prepared statement of....................................     5
Young, Hon. Don, the Representative in Congress for the State
of Alaska..................................................     1
Prepared statement of....................................     3

Statement of Witnesses:
Farrell, Dr. John W., Executive Director, U.S. Arctic
Research Commission........................................    42
Prepared statement of....................................    44
Joule, Hon. Reggie, Member, Alaska House of Representatives..    12
Prepared statement of....................................    13
Madsen, Stephanie, Executive Director, At-sea Processors
Association, on behalf of the United Fishermen of Alaska...    22
Prepared statement of....................................    24
Moriarty, Kara, Executive Director, Alaska Oil and Gas
Association................................................    33
Prepared statement of....................................    35
Parady, Fred, Executive Director, Alaska Miners Association..    37
Prepared statement of....................................    38
Rogers, Rick, Executive Director, Resource Development
Council for Alaska.........................................    17
Prepared statement of....................................    19
Sturgeon, John, Director, Alaska Forest Association..........    40
Prepared statement of....................................    41
Vincent-Lang, Douglas S., Acting Director, Division of
Wildlife Conservation, Alaska Department of Fish and Game..     7
Prepared statement of....................................     9

Additional materials supplied:
Alaska Federation of Natives, Letter submitted for the record    51

OVERSIGHT FIELD HEARING TITLED ``ALASKA'S SOVEREIGNTY IN PERIL: THE
NATIONAL OCEAN POLICY'S GOAL TO FEDERALIZE ALASKA.''

----------

Tuesday, April 3, 2012

U.S. House of Representatives

Subcommittee on Fisheries, Wildlife, Oceans and Insular Affairs

Committee on Natural Resources

Anchorage, Alaska

----------

The Subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 10:09 a.m., in
the Assembly Chambers of the Z.J. Loussac Library-Main Branch,
3600 Denali Street, Anchorage, Alaska, Hon. Don Young
presiding.
Present: Representative Young.
Also Present: Senator Lisa Murkowski.
Mr. Young. The Subcommittee will come to order. Good
morning. Today the Subcommittee on Fisheries, Wildlife, Oceans
and Insular Affairs will conduct an oversight hearing entitled
Alaska's Sovereignty in Peril: The National Ocean Policy's Goal
to Federalize Alaska.
Before I begin, I'd ask that Senator Murkowski be allowed
to join the Subcommittee on the dais and participate in the
hearing. Hearing no objection, so ordered.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. DON YOUNG, A REPRESENTATIVE IN CONGRESS
FROM THE STATE OF ALASKA

Mr. Young. I'd like to welcome our witnesses here today.
You know, in four separate Congresses, legislation was
introduced to create a National Ocean Policy. Most recently,
the legislation is known as BOB, Big Ocean Bill. Congress is
not active in this bill due to serious concerns about the scope
of the legislation. Now, without statutory authorization, the
Administration has decided to create a new vague regulatory
bureaucracy through an Executive Order.
The Executive Order creates a new National Ocean Policy and
a complicated bureaucratic scheme, which includes: a 27-member
National Ocean Council; an 18-member Governance Coordinating
Committee; 10 National Policies; 9 Regional Planning Bodies--
each involving as many as 27 Federal agencies as well as states
and tribes; 9 National Priority Objectives; 9 Strategic Action
Plans; 7 National Goals for Coastal Marine Spatial Planning;
and 12 Guiding Principles for Coastal Marine Spatial Planning.
Are you confused yet?
I've been confused ever since they introduced this. I hope
you have a diagram. Think of what I said: 27 members, 18
members, 10 National Policies, 9 Regional Planning Bodies, 27
Federal agencies, 9 National Priority Objectives, 9 Strategic
Action Plans. That means you've got too much in the pot when
you're creating this soup.
The Coastal Marine Spatial Planning Initiative is the most
troubling. This initiative requires the establishment of nine
Regional Planning Bodies, each made up of as many as 27 Federal
agencies, which each will create Marine and Coastal Zone
Planning. All Federal agencies will be required to follow these
plans when making decisions on permits or when authorizing
activities. These plans will reach far inland and affect all
forms of resource development and add a new layer of decision-
makers. This will create even more uncertainty for businesses
that we want to invest in Alaska.
This goes not only in the ocean; it goes far inland.
Despite the Administration's claims that it will be the most
transparent ever, this Federal environmental overlay is being
developed and implemented with no direct stakeholder involved.
Nowhere in the United States will the effect of a National
Ocean Policy be felt, as I said before, to as great an extent
as in Alaska. The reach of this ocean policy will stretch
throughout the entire State and affect almost all activity
required by Federal permit.
As we will hear from our witnesses today, the State's
economic viability is a direct result of our ability to use our
natural resources. Any new Federal initiative that affects our
ability to use these natural resources will cost us jobs and
take away our statehood.
The Administration claims that this whole National Ocean
Policy is nothing more than an attempt to coordinate Federal
agencies and make better permitting decisions. Forgive me if
I'm a little suspicious when the government through the
Executive Order decides to create a new bureaucracy that will
help us plan where activities can and cannot take place in our
waters and inlets.
This effort for zoning authority in the State of Alaska
using criteria and new policy goals will not be helpful. In
fact, this effort will take place whether the State of Alaska
wants it to and makes me even more suspicious of the Federal
Government.
Alaska has the most productive fisheries in the U.S. and
possibly the world. The North Pacific Fishery Management
Council has allowed the fishermen themselves to be part of the
process to participate in the government interpretation of the
science used to create the management plan.
Almost 6 percent of the seafood produced in U.S. waters
comes from Alaska, but now the Federal Government is proposing
a new overlay that will second-guess the North Pacific Council
system and will require them to use new criteria--criteria that
are not included in the Magnuson-Stevens Act. We have well-
managed oil and gas industries and mining industry. We manage
our wildlife to allow ourselves a subsistence harvest and for
sport hunting in a manner that allows for an incredible number
and diversity of animals.
We do not need the Federal Government coming in and telling
us that we now have to change our management and regulatory
system to work within a zoning plan based on new criteria and
developed by bureaucrats behind closed doors in Washington,
D.C.
The National Ocean Policy is a bad idea. It will create
more uncertainty for businesses and will limit job growth. It
will also compound potential litigation by groups that oppose
human activities. What makes matters worse, the Administration
refuses to tell Congress how much money will be diverted from
other uses to fund the new policy.
The Federal budget is already tight. Taking money from
existing research and management to fund some poorly designed
national initiative that will hinder economic growth of Alaska
is just wrong. This is not the first oversight hearing that's
being held on the National Ocean Policy, and it will not be the
last.
I want everybody to understand. We will continue this
policy of hearing why this has been put forth by Executive
Order. I look forward to hearing the witnesses today and
hearing about the National Ocean Policy and how it will affect
our activities.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Young follows:]

Statement of The Honorable Don Young,
a Representative in Congress from the State of Alaska

In four separate Congresses, legislation was introduced to create a
national ocean policy. Most recently the legislation was known as BOB--
the Big Ocean Bill. Congress has not acted on these bills due to
serious concerns about the scope of the legislation.
Now, without statutory authorization, this Administration has
decided to create a new, vague, regulatory bureaucracy through an
Executive Order.
The Executive Order creates a new National Ocean Policy and a
complicated bureaucratic scheme which includes: a 27-member National
Ocean Council; an 18-member Governance Coordinating Committee; 10
National Policies; 9 Regional Planning Bodies--each involving as many
as 27 Federal agencies as well as states and tribes; 9 National
Priority Objectives; 9 Strategic Action Plans; 7 National Goals for
Coastal Marine Spatial Planning; and 12 Guiding Principles for Coastal
Marine Spatial Planning. Are you confused yet?
The ``Coastal and Marine Spatial Planning'' initiative is the most
troubling. This initiative requires the establishment of 9 Regional
Planning Bodies--each made up of as many as 27 Federal agencies--which
will each create marine and coastal zoning plans. All Federal agencies
will be required to follow these plans when making decisions on permits
or when authorizing activities. These plans will reach far inland and
add a new layer of decision-makers. This will create even more
uncertainty for businesses that want to invest in Alaska.
And despite the Administration's claims that it will be the most
transparent ever, this new federal environmental overlay is being
developed and implemented with no direct stakeholder involvement.
Nowhere in the United States will the effects of the National Ocean
Policy be felt to the extent that it will in Alaska. The reach of this
``ocean'' policy will stretch throughout the entire state and affect
almost any activity that requires a federal permit. As we will hear
from our witnesses today, the State's economic vitality is a direct
result of our ability to use our natural resources. Any new federal
initiative that affects our ability to use these natural resources will
cost jobs.
The Administration claims that this whole National Ocean policy is
nothing more than an attempt to coordinate federal agencies and make
better permitting decisions. Forgive me if I am a little suspicious
when the Federal government--through an Executive Order--decides to
create a new bureaucracy that will ``help'' us plan where activities
can or cannot take place in our waters and inland. This effort to
``zone'' a majority of the State of Alaska using new criteria and new
policy goals will not be helpful. The fact that this effort will take
place whether the State of Alaska wants it to or not makes me even more
suspicious.
Alaska has the most productive fisheries in the U.S. and possibly
the world. The North Pacific Fishery Management Council has allowed the
fishermen themselves to be a part of the process--to participate in the
development and interpretation of the science used to create the
management plans. Almost 60% of the seafood produced in U.S. waters
comes from Alaska. But now the federal government is proposing a new
overlay that will second guess the North Pacific Council system and
will require that they meet some new criteria--criteria that are NOT
included in the Magnuson-Stevens Act.
Our forests are productive despite the federal government and
environmental litigants' efforts to stop that industry. We have a well-
managed oil and gas industry and mining industry. And we manage our
wildlife to allow for subsistence harvest and for sport hunting in a
manner that has allowed for an incredible number and diversity of
animals. We do not need the Federal government coming in and telling us
that we now have to change our management and regulatory systems to
work within a new zoning plan based on new criteria developed by
bureaucrats behind closed doors in Washington, D.C.
This National Ocean Policy is a bad idea. It will create more
uncertainty for businesses and will limit job growth. It will also
compound the potential for litigation by groups that oppose human
activities. To make matters worse, the Administration refuses to tell
Congress how much money it will be diverting from other uses to fund
this new Policy. The Federal budget is already tight. Taking money from
existing research and management missions to fund some poorly-designed
national initiative that will hinder economic growth in Alaska is just
wrong.
This is not the first oversight hearing we have held on the
National Ocean Policy and this will not be the last.
I look forward to hearing from today's witnesses and hearing how
the National Ocean Policy will affect their activities.
______

Mr. Young. With that, I recognize Senator Murkowski and
hear any statement. By the way, I do believe this is the first
time we've ever had a Senator from Alaska and a Congressman
from Alaska sitting on the same panel and having the House hold
the Chair. I do thank you, Senator, for being here.
Senator Lisa.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. LISA MURKOWSKI,
A U.S. SENATOR FROM THE STATE OF ALASKA

Senator Murkowski. Thank you. Thank you, Congressman Young,
not only for doing this oversight hearing in Anchorage today on
the National Ocean Policy, but for allowing me to join you in
this effort. I do recognize that it is somewhat unusual and I
am actually happy that we're able to do this.
I appreciate the opportunity to be here to dive into some
of the anticipated effects of the nine National Ocean Policy
initiatives, including the Coastal Marine Spatial Planning. I
share the concerns that you have outlined. When you outlined
the number of entities that are involved, it kind of reminded
me of the partridge in a pear tree. We might be able to sing
that one together.
I do believe that the concerns that have been expressed by
a number of industries, state and local governments, I think we
recognize this is yet another attempt by the executive branch
to tell us how we can and how we cannot use our oceans and our
coast. In the FY12 budget request from the President, I worked
to ensure that the Coastal Marine Spatial Planning funding
request was zeroed out. I'm glad the President got the message
and did not request CMSP funding. But I do worry that the
Administration will continue to work and to move forward with
all aspects of the National Ocean Policy.
Back in January the National Ocean Council released a draft
National Ocean Policy Implementation Plan identifying an
exhaustive list of milestones, many for 2012/2014 completion. I
think some of these milestones are pretty ambitious.
For example, within the Ecosystem Base Management Policy,
which I think there are 20 milestones, one of them is to
develop national guidelines and best practices for ecosystem-
based management implementation based on engagement of the
nonFederal partners and stakeholders. Another is to establish a
process for adaptive resource management.
I commend the resource management bodies here in the Alaska
region, like the North Pacific Fishery Management Council for
proactively developing and integrating ecosystem-oriented
management approaches into their decision-making process.
However, I do not support national guidelines that dictate
standards for ocean management. These one size fits all
standards rarely work for Alaska.
National Ocean Policy milestones would require tremendous
coordination and as you point out, Mr. Chairman, they would be
very costly. And you have to ask yourself: To what end? We need
more science and baseline information in order to effectively
incorporate ecosystem-based management and decision-making, but
arbitrary milestones in the draft National Ocean Policy
Implementation Plan will drain resources from foundational
science and core Federal programs.
The National Ocean Policy will be expensive and we
recognize that. As you point out, there's no dedicated funds
for agencies to follow through with commitments that are
identified in the draft Implementation Plan. In Washington,
we've been hearing from agencies that the Administration's
National Ocean Policy initiatives will be absorbed by existing
programs, but the agencies have not provided us with any
indication of what work will need to be set aside as a
tradeoff. We simply can't make that expansion without
offsetting it somewhere else.
Now, just one final comment on CMSP for a second. The
President's budget calls for expanding the Regional Ocean
Partnership Grants by half a million dollars. Regional Ocean
Partnerships have been formed in regions of the country where
they feel that there is a need for some coordination above and
beyond what existing management bodies can provide on their
own.
Regional Ocean Partnerships were a way for those regions to
continue to move forward with that type of work without
imposing CMSP and the associated Regional Planning Bodies on
everyone. I was disappointed to learn that this year the
Regional Ocean Partnership competitive grants support
activities that contribute to achieving the priorities
identified by Regional Ocean Partnerships while also advancing
National Ocean Policy priorities, including national CMSP
framework. I think this program is clearly being used to
advance the Administration's CMSP initiative despite the fact
that Congress has zeroed out CMSP funding.
These are just a couple of the concerns that I have, in
addition to what you have, Congressman. I look forward to the
testimony that we will hear and an opportunity for ongoing
discussion about this proposed national policy.
[The prepared statement of Senator Murkowski follows:]

Statement of The Honorable Lisa Murkowski,
a U.S. Senator from the State of Alaska

I would like to thank my good friend, Congressman Young, for
calling this oversight field hearing on the National Ocean Policy and
allowing me to join you on the panel. I appreciate the opportunity to
be here in Alaska to dive into some of the anticipated affects of the
nine National Ocean Policy initiatives, including Coastal and Marine
Spatial Planning (or CMSP). You know as a member of the Senate
Appropriations CJS Subcommittee, I worked to defund FY 2012 spending
for CMSP, and I was pleased to see that the President's budget request
left that budget line item at zero for FY 2013. Congressman Young,
despite the message Congress sent in pulling funds for CMSP, I see many
indications that the administration continues to move forward will all
aspects of NOP.
In January, The National Ocean Council released a draft National
Ocean Policy (NOP) implementation plan identifying an exhaustive list
of milestones, many for 2012-2014 completion. Some of these milestones
are pretty ambitious. For example, within the Ecosystem-based
Management policy objective, there are 20 milestones. One of them is to
develop national guidelines and best practices for EBM implementation
based on engagement of non-Federal partners and stakeholders. Another
is to establish a process for adaptive resource management.
I support ecosystem-oriented decision making, and commend resource
management bodies in the Alaska region like the North Pacific Fishery
Management Council for proactively developing and integrating
ecosystem-oriented management approaches into their decision making
process. However, I do not support the concept of issuing national
guidelines dictating standards for EBM, these one-size-fits all
standards rarely work for Alaska
These two milestones alone, both targeted for 2013, would require
tremendous coordination and would be very costly. And I have to ask to
what end? We need more science and baseline information in order to
effectively incorporate ecosystem based management in decision making--
ironically, arbitrary milestones in the draft NOP implementation plan
will drain resources from foundational science and core federal
programs. EBM is just one of nine priority policy objectives, each with
action items and milestones in the draft NOP implementation plan.
NOP will be expensive, and there are no dedicated funds for
agencies to follow through with commitments identified in the draft
implementation plan. In budget hearings in Washington, we've been
hearing from agencies that the administration's NOP initiatives will be
absorbed by existing programs, yet agencies have not provided us any
indication of what work will need to be set aside as a tradeoff.
I'd like to return to CMSP for a minute. The President's Budget
calls for expanding the Regional Ocean Partnership grants by $0.5
million. Regional Ocean Partnerships have formed in regions of the
country where they feel there's a need for some coordination above and
beyond what existing management bodies can provide on their own.
Regional Ocean Partnerships were a way for those regions to continue to
move forward with that type of work without imposing CMSP and the
associated Regional Planning Bodies on everyone right now. I was
disappointed to learn that this year, Regional Ocean Partnership
competitive grants support activities that contribute to achieving the
priorities identified by Regional Ocean Partnerships while also
advancing NOP priorities including the national CMSP Framework. This is
an unacceptable end run around Congress to implement CMPS. This program
is clearly being used to advance the administration's CMSP initiative.
Eligibility standards for ROPs under the grant program require only
that applicants be a government, institution of higher learning, or
non-profit or for-profit organization that may receive and expend
federal funds. Yet, the administration's definition of CMSP includes
identifying areas most suitable for various types or classes of
activities.
There is no guarantee Regional Ocean Partnerships are the
appropriate body to be making recommendations or dictating what can and
cannot happen in waters off Alaska or along the Alaska coastline, and
they certainly would not have the authority.
Congressman Young, these are just a few of my concerns about NOP,
and I look forward to learning more through the testimony we receive
today about Alaskan's concerns over NOP and CMSP, and how the
organizations represented here today think the NOP priority initiatives
will affect them.
______

Mr. Young. Thank you, Senator.
Mr. Young. Without objection, I'm going to submit for the
record a letter from Governor Parnell and a synopsis of this
bill dated July 2nd, 2011, an additional letter from Governor
Parnell on October 3rd, 2011, and we have other correspondence
from the State and how they think this is a bad idea.
[The documents submitted for the record have been retained
in the Committee's official files.]
Mr. Young. I mentioned the confusion. This is the map we're
looking at right here, ladies and gentlemen. I know you may not
be able to see it, but this is how confusing this thing is.
This is by Executive Order 13547, and it goes on, nine
priorities, objectives, 27 members here, 10 national policies
and I can go on down the line. This is an example of what
they're proposing.
There will be nothing ever achieved in this state when we
lose our statehood. That sounds kind of alarming, but the
utilization of our resources--this will be and has been the
State of Alaska. We became a state for our socioeconomic well-
being by utilization of our resources. As a state, this takes
that right away.
With that, we call up our first panel. Mr. Doug Vincent-
Lang, Acting Director of Division of Wildlife Conservation,
Alaska Department of Fish and Game. We have The Honorable
Reggie Joule, a Member of the House of Representatives, Mr.
Rick Rogers, Executive Director, Resource Development Council
for Alaska, and I believe Ms. Madsen, National Committee Chair,
United Fishermen of Alaska.
I think you all know this. I'm pretty lenient as far as
time goes, but you're actually supposed to take five minutes.
When the panel is finished, we'll ask questions.
Mr. Lang, you're first.

STATEMENT OF DOUG VINCENT-LANG, ACTING DIRECTOR,
DIVISION OF WILDLIFE CONSERVATION, ALASKA DEPARTMENT OF FISH
AND GAME

Mr. Vincent-Lang. Good morning Representative Young,
Senator Murkowski. Thanks for coming to Alaska to hear all the
testimony on Ocean Policy. My name for the record is Doug
Vincent-Lang. I'm testifying on behalf of the State of Alaska.
Let me begin by stating that Alaska has a strong interest
in assuring the continued health and productivity of its marine
and coastal resources. We rely on these areas for commercial
fisheries, subsistence uses, recreation, transportation,
shipping, and a multitude of other uses. Marine and coastal
resources are vital to our economy, supporting a vibrant
fishing industry that produces almost $6 billion in economic
activity in our State Annually, accounts for approximately 60
percent of the nation's seafood production, and is our largest
private sector employer.
Coastal and marine areas also provide abundant development
opportunities, such as offshore oil and gas, renewable energy,
shipping and tourism. With over 44,000 miles of shoreline, more
mileage than the other eight proposed planning areas combined--
and an expansive EEZ, Alaska's interest in the ocean and
coastal resources cannot be overstated.
The implementation of the President's National Ocean Policy
institutes a new Federal framework to govern our marine and
coastal activities. Upon inspection, it Federalizes decision
process regarding marine and coastal activities and embeds
authority into regional governance boards dominated by Federal
agencies and Federal decision processes.
Alaska's marine and coastal resources and their uses are
already tightly regulated by a vast and diverse array of
Federal, state and local authorities. This existing oversight
has a proven track record and is fully capable of ensuring the
long-term health and viability of our marine and coastal
resources. We do not believe additional Federal regulatory
oversight is needed and we oppose creation of additional
Federal bureaucracy and regulation and view it as an
unnecessary threat to our sovereignty.
We also do not support the use of this process for zoning
or alternatively for regulated marine use planning purposes.
Instead, we support achieving efficiency by relying on the
effective proven resources processes and authorities that are
already in place. Any establishment of further authority should
be through direct congressional action.
Congress has a keen awareness of the current multi-
jurisdictional structure and respect for the traditional role
of states in managing our marine and coastal resources.
Jurisdiction and management decisions for marine waters and
submerged lands and responsibility for marine and coastal
activities and ecosystems is divided between the states and the
Federal Government.
Alaska's jurisdiction includes wetlands, uplands, tidal and
submerged lands and extends out three nautical miles to the
territorial limit. Within these areas, Alaska manages and
leases lands and, with Federal and local agencies, permits and
restricts activities that could impact the environment. Alaska
and the Federal Government each have respective sovereign
responsibilities and authorities to maintain healthy, resilient
and sustainable marine and coastal resources.
Any adopted program must recognize and respect Alaska's
jurisdiction and sovereign authorities. Coastal states must be
recognized as equal partners with sovereign jurisdictions and
authorities and not relegated to stakeholder status in any
planning effort. Any new policies affecting coastal areas must
be developed and implemented from the ground up, not from the
top down as currently proposed.
The best policies are those that are local, not made by
bureaucrats over 3,000 miles away. We believe state-driven
efforts are best suited to addressing these stakes in Alaska,
not new Federal programs. Alaska's experience and record
demonstrates that a strong state model can be very effective
when implemented responsibly and therefore national policies
must recognize the need for state-based decision-making.
Our record of sustainable management of Alaska's marine and
coastal resources has led to national and international
recognition of Alaska as a leader in these fields. A prime
example is fisheries management, which is shared between the
Alaska Board of Fisheries and the North Pacific Fishery
Management Council.
Rather than develop an implementation of new regulatory
programs, a better focus would be in investment Arctic
research, monitoring and infrastructure. In short, we need more
resources, not more rules to ensure conservation of our coastal
and marine resources. It is unfortunate that the new planning
effort is draining agency resources at a time when core agency
functions are struggling for funding due to declining Federal
budgets.
We prefer to see the Federal Government use its resources
on the many needs in the Arctic and to focus on the much needed
and research and monitoring rather than expending resources on
an unnecessary and duplicative planning effort.
Finally, to ensure an effective outcome, it is critically
important that any planning effort have clearly defined,
expected outcomes, an appropriate timeline, and provides both
the states and users of marine and coastal resources with the
primary authority to develop ocean and coastal policies.
Despite numerous requests by the State to provide such
specifics, they have yet to be provided.
The health and management of our marine and coastal
resources is simply too critical to engage in a process that
does not provide meaningful dialogue opportunities to address
stated concerns.
In closing, this policy is simply not ready for
implementation. Until requested details are provided,
especially with respect to governments and regulated use, the
State cannot support this effort as currently described. We
urge Congress to directly involve itself in this process and
for the National Ocean Council to delay implementation of this
policy to allow more meaningful dialogue to address State and
other affected users concerns.
I thank you for the opportunity to present these remarks on
behalf of Governor Parnell and the State.
Mr. Young. Thank you, Mr. Lang.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Vincent-Lang follows:]

Statement of Douglas S. Vincent-Lang, Acting Director,
Division of Wildlife Conservation, Alaska Department of Fish and Game

Good morning Mr. Chair, members of the committee. My name is Doug
Vincent-Lang. I am the Acting Director of the Division of Wildlife
Conservation of the Alaska Department of Fish and Game. Today I am
testifying on behalf of the State of Alaska.
Let me begin by stating that Alaska has a strong interest in
assuring the continued health and productivity of its marine and
coastal resources. We rely on these areas for commercial and sport
fisheries, subsistence uses, recreation, transportation, shipping, and
a multitude of other uses. Marine and coastal resources are vital to
our economy, supporting a vibrant fishing industry that produces almost
six billion dollars in economic activity in our state annually,
accounts for approximately 60 percent of the nation's seafood
production, and is our largest private sector employer. Coastal and
marine areas also provide abundant development opportunities, such as;
offshore oil and gas, renewable energy, shipping, and tourism. The
Alaska Outer Continental Shelf (OCS) is a large area, roughly the size
of Texas and California combined, and is largely untapped as a natural
resource. This area holds an estimated 27 billion barrels of oil and
132 trillion cubic feet of natural gas, and is a key to our nation's
energy security. With 44,500 miles of shoreline--more mileage than the
other eight proposed planning areas combined--and an expansive
Exclusive Economic Zone, Alaska's interest in managing ocean and
coastal resources cannot be overstated.
The implementation of the President's National Ocean Policy appears
to be focused on developing a new federal regulatory framework to
govern marine and coastal activities. Upon inspection, it appears to
federalize decision processes regarding marine and coastal activities
and to embed authority into regional governance boards dominated by
federal agencies and federal decision processes. What is most troubling
is that this governance overlays state lands and waters and directly
threatens our sovereign authorities.
Alaska's marine and coastal resources and their uses are already
tightly regulated by a vast and diverse array of federal, state, and
local authorities. This existing oversight has a proven track record
and is fully capable of ensuring the long-term health and viability our
marine and coastal resources. We do not believe additional federal
regulatory oversight is needed and we oppose creation of additional
federal bureaucracy and regulation and view this as an unnecessary
threat to our sovgerinity. We also do not support use of this process
for zoning or regulated marine use planning purposes. Instead, we
support achieving efficiency by relying on the effective proven
processes and authorities that are already in place.
The State is not aware of a single law granting the President
authority to amend or supplement existing statutes with a new National
Ocean Council to be guided by the conservation principles of Executive
Order 13537 while controlling the decisions of federal agencies and
seeking to limit resource development to certain designated ocean or
coastal zones. On its face, the Executive Order does not cite any
federal statute as a source of such authority. If the Executive Order
is based on existing authority the legal cite(s) should be provided.
Otherwise, the authority to proceed should be through Congressional
action. We urge that before imposing any new regulations, policies or
strategies the federal executive branch seek express and clear
authority for such changes through the passage of a bill by Congress.
Congress has a keen awareness of the current multi-jurisdictional
structure and respect for the traditional role of states in managing
their marine and coastal resources.
Congress has already ``occupied the field'' of management of the
nation's coastal and ocean resources with the many laws now in place.
In so doing Congress has already decided what laws and requirements
apply to coastal and ocean development and what policies and criteria
federal agencies should use to decide whether to grant a permit for a
particular project. Overlaying the President's national ocean policy on
top of the existing statutory and regulatory framework creates
uncertainty and conflict, both of which are problematic if the goal is
to encourage economic development, jobs, and certainty in permitting.
Section 5(b) of the Executive Order says that ``executive
departments', agencies' or office's decisions and actions affecting the
oceans and coasts. . .will be guided by the stewardship principles and
national priority objectives set forth in the Final Recommendations''.
As such, the Executive Order mandates that agencies follow the
President's policies and objectives when making decisions. This
mandatory language is followed by language in the Executive Order that
says ``to the extent consistent with applicable law'' but what does
that mean? This raises the question as to whether a permitting agency
deciding whether to grant a permit needs to follow the policy of the
regional ocean plan or the direction of Congress in the Outer
Continental Shelf Lands Act which sets out a policy with Congressional
direction to promote development and to work with States and local
communities in making permitting and leasing decisions on a case by
case basis. Specifically, how would a permitting agency with that
Congressional statutory framework fit that framework with the
President's Executive Order which says the policy federal agencies
should be following are the stewardship principles designed to protect
oceans and bolster conservation, (Section 1 of Executive Order) and to
follow the guidance of the National Ocean Council (Section 1 of the
Executive Order) not Congress, or States or local communities or
stakeholders.
If the Executive Order did not mandate federal agencies to follow
the direction and policy, if it said federal agencies ``may'' apply the
policies and principles of the Executive Order if the action they are
contemplating is not already covered by an act of Congress, and if the
Executive Order said federal agencies must continue to give deference
to, and cooperate and coordinate with states, local communities, and
stakeholders as set out in current laws and regulations, then the
Executive Order avoids conflict and uncertainty in federal decision-
making. But it does not say that. It uses mandatory language and while
it contains some catch all language ``consistent with applicable law'',
the language is not enough to save the Executive Order from becoming
authoritative and stipulative.
Given this, how would any member of the public or industry
supportive of a permit or development know if the federal agency made
its decision based on the policy and requirements in statute or those
set out in the Executive Order, or how much weight it gave to specific
factors in its decision making process? If an entity does not know
which factors were relied on and to what degree, then federal agencies
can just follow the principles of the Executive Order and give lip
service to the actual laws and regulations that are on the books now.
And states and companies looking to invest and create jobs are going to
be concerned at a minimum that it is uncertain what factors will be
brought to bear on their project.
The federal government should also be required to follow the
procedures of the Administrative Procedure Act which require federal
agencies to follow rules and provide an opportunity for the public to
comment, the Regulatory Flexibility Act which requires an estimate of
the impacts on businesses from federal agency action, and the National
Environmental Policy Act, which requires studies and analysis of any
major federal action, which a new national ocean policy certainly
qualifies for. (Since a timber sale for 10 acres qualifies.) All these
protections should apply to this federal action in this Executive Order
because it imposes a new national ocean policy which is significant
action.
Jurisdiction and management decisions for marine waters and
submerged lands and responsibility for marine and coastal activities
and ecosystems is divided between the states and the federal
government. Alaska's jurisdiction includes uplands, wetlands, tide and
submerged lands and extends out three nautical miles to the territorial
limit. Within these areas, Alaska manages and leases lands, and with
federal and local agencies, permits or restricts activities on them
that could impact the environment. Alaska shares a common
responsibility with the federal government to maintain healthy,
resilient, and sustainable marine and coastal resources. Any adopted
program must recognize and respect Alaska's jurisdiction and sovereign
authorities.
State government is in a good position to evaluate how proposed
national marine and coastal policies will work, or not work, in
different ecosystems and communities around the state. With a state as
large and diverse as Alaska, it will be critically important to capture
the experience and knowledge of the state in developing and
implementing marine and coastal policies. We encourage that these
policies be developed from the ground up, and not top down as is
currently proposed. Durable, reliable, and implementable national
policies require an understanding of local issues and a public process
sufficient to ensure local support.
There are already numerous successful partnerships in Alaska among
federal, state, and local governments, tribes, organizations, and
concerned citizens. National policies should recognize and build upon
these existing partnerships and avoid supplanting them with management
or direction coming from outside the state. The best decisions are
those that are local, not made by bureaucrats 3,000 miles away. We
believe state driven efforts like those of the Northern Waters Task
Force are best suited to addressing the issues facing Alaska, not new
federal programs.
Alaska's experience and record demonstrates that a strong state
model can be very effective when implemented responsibly and,
therefore, national policies must recognize the need for state-based
decision-making. Our record of sustainable management of Alaska's
marine and coastal resources has led to national and international
recognition of Alaska as a leader in these fields. A prime example is
fisheries management which is shared between the Alaska Board of
Fisheries and the North Pacific Fisheries Management Council. The
management of fisheries by these bodies is perhaps the best in the
world. In Alaska, significant progress has been made to strengthen and
enhance marine research, coastal and marine observing, and habitat
protection.
Rather than development and implementation of new regulatory
programs, a better focus would be investment in Arctic research,
monitoring, and infrastructure. In short, we need more resources, not
more rules, to ensure conservation of our coastal and marine resources.
This effort is draining agency resources at a time when core agency
functions are struggling for funding due to declining federal budgets.
We would prefer to see the federal government focus its resources on
the many needs in the Arctic and to focus on much needed fisheries
research rather than expending resources on an unnecessary and
duplicative planning effort.
Needed infrastructure include aids to navigation, new polar-class
icebreakers, ports in the Bering Sea and the Arctic Ocean, and forward
basing for the U.S. Coast Guard (USCG) and Air National Guard aircraft.
We also encourage the development of safe, secure, and reliable
shipping regimes envisioned by the U.S. Arctic Policy.
A national commitment to provide adequate and sustained funding for
Arctic research and infrastructure is also needed. Alaska would benefit
greatly from access to high resolution mapping and imagery. For
example, much of Alaska's coastline lacks complete navigational and
bathymetric data. Resources are also needed to increase our knowledge
of ocean acidification and the effects of climate change on the marine
environment and fish stocks, for stock assessments, and improved
observing and monitoring of oceans conditions. We endorse the Sustained
Arctic Observing Network and urge full U.S. participation.
We also strongly recommend allocation of resources for enforcement
and monitoring, especially full funding for the USCG to fulfill its
responsibilities in international boundary enforcement and emerging
responsibilities in the Arctic. The USCG's ``High Latitudes'' study and
recommendations need to be released by the administration and key
infrastructure recommendations presented to Congress for funding.
Alaska is unique among states in that we share maritime boundaries with
multiple foreign nations and manage fish stocks and marine mammals that
migrate across international boundaries.
From an international perspective, implementation of marine and
coastal policy must recognize that different legal regimes, with their
associated freedoms, rights and duties, apply in different maritime
zones of foreign countries. Due to our shared boundaries with Canada
and Russia in the Arctic this is a very important issue. For example,
activities in the adjacent Canadian Beaufort Sea currently operate
under the jurisdiction of the Arctic Waters Pollution Prevention Act.
While we do not have a specific proposal to endorse at this time, we
encourage discussion of an Arctic high-seas fisheries agreement.
Rather than direct implementation of the provisions of an
international treaty through executive order, we urge the Senate to
ratify the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea. Once
ratified, this treaty will allow the U.S. to claim jurisdiction over
the offshore continental shelf beyond the 200-mile limit. As a result,
U.S. boundaries could grow into areas that may hold large deposits of
oil, natural gas, and other resources. Russia, Canada, Denmark, and
Norway already have claims to Arctic territory and the U.S. needs a
seat at the table to protect its interests.
Finally, to ensure an effective outcome, it is important that any
planning effort have clearly defined expected outcomes, an appropriate
timeline, and provides both the states and the users of marine and
coastal resources with primary authority to develop ocean and coastal
policies. Despite numerous requests by the state to provide such
specifics, they have yet to be provided. The health and management of
our marine and coastal resources is simply too critical to engage in a
process that does not provide clear policy direction and a meaningful
avenue for both state and public input and support. Also, the process,
including all decision processes, must be locally driven and not vested
in federal bureaucrats in Washington DC. Coastal states must be
recognized as equal partners with sovereign jurisdictions and
authorities, not relegated to stakeholder status in marine and coastal
policy development and implementation.
In closing, while well-intentioned, this policy is simply not ready
for implementation. Until requested details are provided, especially
with respect to governance and regulated use, the State cannot support
this effort as currently proposed. We urge the National Ocean Council
to delay implementation of this policy and to have more meaningful
dialogue to address state and other affected users concerns.
Thank you for the opportunity to speak with you today.
______

Mr. Young. Mr. Reggie Joule.

STATEMENT OF HON. REGGIE JOULE, MEMBER,
ALASKA HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

Mr. Joule. Thank you, Congressman Young, Senator Murkowski.
For the record my name is Reggie Joule. I represent House
District 40. I have represented this district for the last 16
years. My district stretches from the Canadian border on the
northern and eastern coast down to Shishmaref. Within that
district lies Prudhoe Bay, ANWR, the Red Dog Mine and countless
unfounded other mineral and oil and gas resources.
The coastline of my district sits squarely on the Beaufort
and Chukchi Sea, an area which for thousands of years has
supported and provided for the Inupiat people and their food
sources. It is this same area that holds potentially vast
amounts of oil and gas.
Today everything seems to be happening at an accelerated
rate. Ten years ago we were talking about the likelihood of
drilling. This summer that's going to happen. There are new
possibilities that are being discussed with northern shipping,
mineral extraction, off-shore commercial fishing and tourism.
With this in mind, in 2010 the Alaska Legislature formed
the Northern Waters Task Force and that's what I'm here to talk
about today, those recommendations. This task force was made up
of State legislators, leaders from Alaska communities and
representatives of the State and Federal agencies. We held
meetings in Juneau, Anchorage, Barrow, Wainwright, Kotzebue,
Nome, Wales, Bethel and Unalaska. We had experts from the
universities and military, nongovernmental organizations, the
oil and gas industry and dozens of State and Federal agencies.
Additionally, and for me when we went to some of these
communities, most of them, we heard from people who live in
those communities. The message that they gave was pretty
uniform and ended up being one of our top priorities that came
out of the Northern Waters Task Force, and that was that
communications was going to be a key in all of this and that
local communities need to be included in the discussions, in
the planning, the timing, and the decision-making of all of
these things that are happening because if something goes awry,
it is they who will pay the price.
We focused on issues of Arctic governance, oil and gas
development, marine transportation, Arctic infrastructure,
Arctic fisheries and Arctic research. I've already highlighted
one of our top recommendations and that was communications.
One of the other recommendations that we came up with was
the establishment of an Arctic Policy Commission. Now, we put
together a resolution which passed the House of Representatives
and is currently sitting in the Senate Finance Committee. This
Commission, this Arctic Policy Commission, would be made up of
stakeholders from across Alaska, from the Legislature to the
Administration, the Federal Government, oil and gas industry,
tribes, municipalities, corporations and a broad array of
Alaskans.
A couple other recommendations that we made that are
already in play, the Law of the Sea Treaty. We passed that
resolution a year ago. The Senate just passed--and the House
just passed the resolution for ice breakers and forward base
landing for the United States Coast Guard. So you will have
those in front of you. One you do; one is coming.
We need to pay attention to international agreements,
shipping, fisheries, oil and gas and other transboundary
issues. There's the search and rescue agreement that's already
been made.
But in closing, Mr. Chairman, one of the things I think
that we need to do as a recommendation from the Northern Waters
Task Force is the Arctic Council. In 2013 Canada will take the
chair. Two years after that the United States will take the
chair of the Arctic Council. We have an opportunity, I believe,
for North America to make a great impact with the Arctic
Council.
There's much to look forward to. There's many challenges.
We have one time to do this right, with the right research,
with the right kinds of communications with the people that we
serve, we can put our best foot forward. You have the rest of
my written testimony in hand. Thank you for the opportunity to
come here and we have forwarded the full report to both of your
offices. Thank you.
Mr. Young. Thank you, Mr. Joule.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Joule follows:]

Statement of The Honorable Reggie Joule, State Representative,
Alaska State Legislature, Chair of the Alaska Northern Waters Task
Force

SUMMARY OF THE MAIN FINDINGS OF THE ALASKA NORTHERN WATERS TASK FORCE
The United States is an Arctic Nation because of Alaska.
Diminishing sea ice and the intensifying worldwide race for natural
resources has rapidly increased international interest in the Arctic.
Arctic Nations are anticipating the development of northern shipping
routes, mineral extraction, oil and gas exploration, commercial
fisheries, and tourism. For Alaska, the economic benefits over the long
term could be substantial. But how will we confront the challenges and
opportunities awaiting us in the Arctic while also providing for
sustainable communities and protecting the environment?
In 2010, the Alaska State Legislature established the Alaska
Northern Waters Task Force (ANWTF) to identify opportunities to
increase the state's engagement with these issues. The task force is
comprised of state legislators, leaders from Alaskan communities, and
representatives of key state and federal agencies. The task force held
twelve hearings in Juneau, Anchorage, Barrow, Wainwright, Kotzebue,
Nome, Wales, Bethel, and Unalaska. Over 65 experts from universities,
U.S. military, non-governmental organizations, and dozens of state and
federal agencies testified. Additionally, the task force heard public
testimony from local communities and residents. On both the state and
federal level, the task force has identified numerous urgent needs. The
following are its top three recommendations:
1.  State-wide public testimony gathered by the task force made
it clear that the state and federal governments must provide
Alaskans with meaningful opportunities to participate in Arctic
policy and Outer Continental Shelf development decisions. Many
local government officials, tribal government representatives,
and individuals expressed a need for timelier, more frank, and
more thorough information from state and federal authorities
regarding policies and activities off Alaska's coasts. The task
force believes that consistent, structured communication and
consultation--particularly with those Alaskans likely to be
most impacted by evolving conditions--is the best way to build
consensus, advance responsible policies, and stimulate broadly
beneficial economic development.
2.  The state of Alaska has only just begun to grapple with the
challenges and opportunities developing in the far north. It is
imperative the state be strategically involved and in a
leadership role in the development of policies affecting the
state, its communities, and citizens. It is therefore among the
task force's highest priorities to press for the creation of a
commission to develop a comprehensive state strategy for the
Arctic. As the Arctic changes, the decisions Alaska faces will
continue to evolve and grow in complexity. An Alaskan Arctic
Commission will enable Alaska to more effectively respond to
unfolding developments and will jumpstart Alaska's preparations
to ensure that the interests of the state and its people are
protected. The commission will also provide a means for
communities and residents to remain engaged and be heard. To
further this recommendation, the legislative task force members
submitted House Concurrent Resolution 23 (HCR 23) to the
legislature for consideration. HCR 23 creates a 17 member
commission whose purpose is to develop an Alaskan Arctic
Policy. HCR 23 has passed the House of Representatives and is
now in the Senate for consideration. I am hopeful that it will
pass the legislature this session.
3.  The NWTF supports the Alaska State Legislature and the
state of Alaska continuing to encourage the United States
Senate to ratify the United Nations Convention on the Law of
the Sea (UNCLOS). Joining the more than 165 other nations that
have ratified UNCLOS will enable the U.S. to peacefully
legitimize its claims to resources in areas of the Continental
Shelf that extend beyond the 200-mile Exclusive Economic Zone.
To quote President George W. Bush, who, like President Barack
Obama, supports U.S. ratification of the convention, ``It will
give the United States a seat at the table when the rights that
are vital to our interests are debated and interpreted.''
The following pages include additional priorities, among the many
findings of the task force, in areas including Arctic governance, oil
and gas development, marine transportation, infrastructure, fisheries,
and research. The in-depth recommendations of the task force can be
found at www.anwtf.com.
Arctic Governance:
Changes in the Arctic make it necessary to evaluate the adequacy of
existing Arctic governance structures and to consider adjusting these
systems or creating new ones to better suit developing needs. At the
international level, Arctic nations must strengthen their relations and
enhance regulatory frameworks and policy mechanisms to address pressing
issues. We in Alaska must ensure that our Arctic residents and the
State of Alaska have a strong voice in these matters.
1.  The NWTF supports the development of a comprehensive U.S.
Arctic policy that is adequately funded to carry out its
mission. This policy should ensure that national interests are
balanced with Alaska state interests, so that commitments to
safeguard the environment and the wellbeing of the region's
communities and cultures accompany all strategies for economic
development.
2.  The NWTF recommends that the State of Alaska and the United
States participate in the adoption of international agreements
for shipping, fisheries, oil and gas development, and other
transboundary issues. It is in our interest to ensure all
parties develop resources in the region safely and responsibly.
3.  The NWTF recommends the State of Alaska and the Alaska
State Legislature support greater international cooperation
through the Arctic Council. Having recognized that the Arctic
Council is the world's predominant intergovernmental forum for
Arctic governance, the NWTF recommends greater state engagement
with the council and encourages its member countries to support
expanding its mandate as an institution for forging
multilateral agreements among Arctic nations. In May 2011, the
Arctic Council formalized a search and rescue agreement
detailing plans for Arctic emergency response. The Arctic
Council also created a task force on oil spill preparedness and
response. The task force is co-chaired by Russia and the United
States, and is meeting for the third time in Anchorage on March
20-22, 2012. More agreements of this nature need to be
finalized before development increases. Should the Council's
mandate expand further into economic development issues in the
Arctic, the Alaska Arctic Policy Commission's usefulness will
only increase. Additionally, Canada will chair the Arctic
Council in 2013 and the United States will assume the
chairmanship in 2015. The two countries should partner closely
during their respective chairmanships to further mutual goals.
The United States and Alaska should begin working together now
with Canada to begin the collaborative process. The Arctic
Policy Commission's deliberations and recommendations will be
vital in assuring that Alaska makes the most of any
partnership.
Arctic Oil and Gas Development:
A warming Arctic provides new opportunities and challenges for oil
and gas development. A 2008 U.S. Geological survey estimates that 13
percent of the earth's undiscovered oil reserves and 30 percent of the
undiscovered gas reserves are in the Arctic.
1.  The NWTF recommends that the State of Alaska and the United
States develop a framework for the identification, acquisition
and sharing of data and other information to support leasing,
permitting, and other agency decisions.
2.  The NWTF recommends that the State of Alaska and the United
States support continued improvement in the ability of industry
and the government to prevent, contain, control, clean-up and
remediate spills in the Arctic. These measures should include
contingency plans and response capabilities for all vessels
operating in Arctic waters.
3.  The NWTF recommends that the University of Alaska establish
an oil spill research center. The University of Alaska has
requested funding of approx. $2 million to establish an oil
spill research center but it is not currently in this year's
budget.
Arctic Marine Transportation:
Maritime powers have been searching for a shorter route from the
Atlantic to Asian waters for centuries. The warming Arctic raises the
feasibility of two such routes: the Northern Sea Route, north of
Russia, and the Northwest Passage, north of Canada and Alaska. Shipping
traffic--already increasing--is expected to surge in the decades ahead.
We must take steps to establish secure and environmentally sound marine
transportation in the region as soon as possible.
1.  The NWTF recommends that the United States, with the
participation of the state of Alaska, work with the
international community to finalize the Polar Code for ships
operating in Arctic waters and examine whether to establish an
offshore vessel routing scheme for circumpolar marine traffic,
including through the Aleutians.
2.  The NWTF supports increasing short- and long-range
navigational aids in the North American Arctic and extending
Automatic Identification System (AIS) vessel tracking across
the North Slope waters to Tuktoyaktuk, in the Northwest
Territories.
3.  The NWTF endorses completing the Aleutian Islands Risk
Assessment and recommends that the state of Alaska support and
participate in the United States Coast Guard Port Access Route
Study.
Arctic Fisheries:
As sea ice diminishes and some commercial fish species move into
northern waters, interest in Arctic fisheries has increased. However,
currently there is not nearly enough information available to make
sustainable management of commercial fisheries possible there, and in
2009 the North Pacific Fishery Management Council approved a moratorium
on commercial fishing in Alaskan waters north of the Bering Straits.
The NWTF believes the state of Alaska and the U.S. government should
continue in its precautionary policy, but the moratorium should not
cause Alaska to postpone research into viable Arctic commercial
fisheries.
1.  The NWTF recommends greatly increasing fisheries-related
research and monitoring in the region.
2.  The NWTF encourages the state of Alaska and the U.S.
government to continue actively negotiating fisheries-related
transboundary accords with other nations.
3.  The NWTF recommends that the state of Alaska and federal
authorities prepare strategies to maximize the degree to which
local communities and resident Alaskans will benefit from the
development of commercial fisheries in Arctic waters.
Arctic Infrastructure:
Immediate investment in Arctic infrastructure is a foremost
priority for Alaska and the entire United States. Increased human
activity related to shipping, oil and gas development, commercial
fishing, and tourism will require, at a minimum, new ports and safe
harbors, equipment and facilities for oil spill response, additional
Polar Class icebreakers for the U.S. fleet, and improved charting and
mapping.
1.  The NWTF recommends the Alaska State Legislature and the
state of Alaska continue to urge the federal government to
forward base the United States Coast Guard in the Arctic and to
fund the construction of additional ice breakers and ice-
capable vessels for the U.S. fleet. To further this effort, the
legislative members of the task force submitted House Joint
Resolution 34 (HJR 34) for consideration. This resolution urges
the U.S. Congress to fund all the facilities and vessels
necessary for the U.S. Coast Guard to fulfill its Arctic
missions, including funding more icebreakers and forward basing
the Coast Guard to the Arctic. HJR 34 has passed both the House
of Representatives and the Senate.
2.  The task force recommends the state of Alaska and the
federal government continue efforts to develop deep-water ports
and additional safe harbors in northern waters as soon as
possible. The State of Alaska and the U.S. Army Corps of
Engineers is currently undergoing a ports study. The task force
strongly urges that these efforts be fast tracked and that the
development and construction of at least one Arctic port be
undertaken in the next several years.
3.  The NWTF supports increased funding to expedite the
National Ocean and Atmospheric Administration's (NOAA)
Hydrographic Arctic mapping. The task force particularly
supports updated mapping of coastal navigation routes and
entrance routes to coastal villages.
Arctic Research:
Worldwide climate change is having an outsized impact on the
Arctic, where temperatures are rising twice as quickly as those in more
southern latitudes. Profound transformations are underway in the
Arctic's complex ecosystems. These changes are expected to trigger
unprecedented degrees of human activity in the region. As a
consequence, transformation in the far north will accelerate all the
more, not just environmentally, but also on socioeconomic levels. Under
these circumstances, the need for wide-ranging scientific research and
monitoring in the Arctic has never been more pressing. We must continue
to gather essential baseline information about the environment and its
dynamics in order to become better able to discern shifting conditions.
In turn, we will grow more proficient at grasping the implications of
changes there, and we will improve our ability to prepare for and
mitigate impacts. The NWTF recommends:
1.  The NWTF recommends that the state of Alaska and the
federal government identify priorities for Arctic research. By
ranking priorities funding can be targeted more effectively and
research can be better coordinated. Major knowledge gaps will
be closed far more quickly.
2.  The NWTF recommends improving the exchange of research
information and integration of data management. Faster and more
extensive integration of data collected by state and federal
agencies, academics, and industry would yield enormous benefits
for all stakeholders.
3.  The NWTF recommends increased long-term monitoring of the
Arctic, including routine surveys of key chemical, physical,
and biological parameters of the Beaufort and Chukchi Seas. In
order to better understand, quantify, and predict the effects
of on-going changes in both marine and terrestrial Arctic
ecosystems, Alaska must increase our long-term monitoring of a
wide range of environmental characteristics. Funding for Arctic
Ocean monitoring is under consideration in the Alaska State
Legislature but is not currently in any budget.
There are many issues facing the Arctic. Many need attention and
action now. Working together we can develop the Arctic in a manner that
benefits the state while maintaining healthy sustainable communities.
The Arctic conversation is really just beginning but the dialogue must
continue and engage all stakeholders. The forum for the dialogue isn't
as important as the opportunity for consistent, meaningful dialogue and
input. Thank you for your time and consideration on this matter.
______

Mr. Young. Mr. Rogers.

STATEMENT OF RICK ROGERS, EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR, RESOURCE
DEVELOPMENT COUNCIL FOR ALASKA

Mr. Rogers. Thank you, Congressman Young, Senator Murkowski
for traveling back home to hear our views on this important
national issue. I really appreciate it.
For the record, my name is Rick Rogers. I'm the Executive
Director of the Resource Development Council for Alaska. RDC is
a Statewide membership-funded nonprofit trade association and
we represent the combined interests of forestry, fishing,
tourism, mining, and oil and gas industries in Alaska. Our
membership is truly a broad cross-section of Alaska businesses,
including the aforementioned industries as well as local
communities, all twelve Alaska Native Regional Corporations,
organized labor, utilities and support businesses, all of whom
recognize the important role resource development plays in our
economy. For the record I have submitted a copy of our most
recent annual report to better reflect who I represent today.
The National Ocean Policy will have a disproportionate
impact on Alaska's resources and industries and our economy as
a whole. It is appropriate that the Subcommittee chose to hold
a field hearing here in Alaska. At approximately 34,000 miles--
and I think that's--the State found an additional 10,000
miles--anyway, we have a lot of coastline here in Alaska and we
have more coastline than the rest of the country combined. So
this policy has a disproportionate impact on Alaska.
The National Ocean Policy adds uncertainty and anxiety to
an already cumbersome and complex regime of state and Federal
permitting and oversight. Increased bureaucracy could hamper
the already slow processes with no added benefit to the
environment. In our view. the Coastal Marine Spatial Planning/
Regional Planning Body structure is an unauthorized new
regulatory program that suggests a Federal level ``top down''
approach to the management of resources with minimal local
input.
The ecosystem-based management goal requires a vast amount
of scientific data to be fully implemented. The lack of
sufficient information is often the basis for third-party legal
claims by environmental nongovernmental organizations, eNGO's,
to block development projects and their corresponding jobs.
Natural resource managers need to use the best available data
to move forward and make the best decisions with information
available. We're concerned that ecosystem-based management runs
the risk of paralysis by analysis.
The National Ocean Policy's stated goal of reaching to
onshore activities adds to the uncertainty and anxiety for
upland uses and resource development. Section 404 of the Clean
Water Act and the ubiquitous nature of wetlands means upland
activities are already highly regulated in Alaska. Ever
increasing and stringent clean air standards are already
burdensome offshore and inland. A plethora of petitions to list
additional species under the Endangered Species Act on and
offshore add burden to landowners and resource industries.
The hardrock mines in Alaska require over 60 state and
Federal authorizations to proceed with development. The
National Ocean Policy adds yet another hurdle to overcome and
may serve to provide an additional platform for third-party
eNGO's to litigate against projects that appear to lack the
informational requirements or expectations for the National
Ocean Policy.
RDC is concerned that Coastal and Marine Spatial Planning
may lead to far-reaching use restrictions on marine waters that
will override social and economic needs of Alaskans. Broad
swaths of submerged lands could be restricted in exclusionary
zones for a nebulous national agenda of ecosystem-based
management.
Even if restricted zones were more modest in size and
scope, use restrictions in strategic marine corridors necessary
for resource transport and shipping could be devastating to our
marine-dependent industries.
One of the key justifications for Coastal and Marine
Spatial Planning is to resolve conflict among diverse resource
interests, yet RDC members representing mining, tourism,
forestry, oil and gas and fisheries interests are firmly
aligned. These industries are all concerned that the National
Ocean Policy will create far more difficulties than it will
resolve.
RDC is concerned that funds used in implementing National
Ocean Policy will come at the expense of congressionally
mandated activities. RDC's member companies require mandatory
permits and often Federal leases to operate and declining
Federal resources should not be expended on National Ocean
Policy at the expense of these congressionally mandated
obligations.
RDC members also require the best scientific data to
address the impacts of their activities and funding diverted to
National Ocean Policy could come at the expense of these needed
scientific efforts. We urge Congress to maintain an integral
role in these broad efforts to change the way ocean and coastal
resources are managed and the power of appropriations should be
considered in restraining the premature implementation of the
National Ocean Policy.
Congressional oversight is needed to ensure implementation
of the National Ocean Policy does not constrain the ability of
Federal agencies to fulfill their congressional mandates to
adjudicate needed Federal permits and leases.
RDC is concerned with the process being used to roll out
this far-reaching policy. We have repeatedly requested
meaningful stakeholder engagement without the suspected bias
toward conservation and blocking of responsible resource access
and development. These concerns are underscored by the fact
that the Regional Planning Bodies charged with developing
zoning plans will be comprised solely of government officials.
Detailed economic analysis of the impacts of the policy
should be completed and available for full public and
congressional review before policy implementation. The Handbook
for Coastal and Marine Spatial Planning must be subject to
public input, review and comment before implementation.
We have urged the National Ocean Council to utilize pilot
projects in geographic areas where National Ocean Policy and
Coastal Marine Spatial Planning has broad acceptance, before
large swaths of ocean and marine areas, such as Alaska, have
the policy imposed upon them.
In this time of tenuous economic recovery and high
unemployment, Congress and the Administration should be
untangling the complex web of statutes and regulations that are
strangling our productive resource sectors of our economy. The
National Ocean Policy does the exact opposite by adding
complexity and jurisdictional ambiguity. Congress, the states,
and the private sector should have a more meaningful role in
the development and implementation of such far-reaching
policies for state and Federal waters and upland resources.
I really appreciate the opportunity to comment. For the
record I do have some additional backup that adds to your
emphasis on our Constitution and the importance of our
resources and our economy.
Thank you for the opportunity.
Mr. Young. Thank you, Mr. Rogers.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Rogers follows:]

Statement of Rick Rogers, Executive Director,
Resource Development Council for Alaska

Good morning Members of the Subcommittee. My name is Rick Rogers,
Executive Director of the Resource Development Council for Alaska
(RDC). RDC is a statewide membership-funded non-profit trade
association representing the combined interest of the Forestry,
Fishing, Tourism, Mining, and Oil and Gas industries in Alaska. Our
membership is truly a broad cross section of Alaska businesses,
including the aforementioned industries as well as local communities,
all twelve Alaska Native Regional Corporations, organized labor,
utilities and support businesses that recognize the important role
resource development plays in our economy. I have submitted a copy of
our most recent annual report for the record.
The National Ocean Policy will have a disproportionate impact on
Alaska's resource dependent industries and our economy as a whole. It
is appropriate the Subcommittee chose to hold a field hearing here in
Alaska. At approximately 34,000 miles, Alaska has more coastline than
that of all other states in our nation combined.
The National Ocean Policy adds uncertainty and anxiety to an
already cumbersome and complex regime of state and federal permitting
and oversight. Increased bureaucracy could hamper the already slow
processes with no added benefit to the environment. In our view the
Coastal Marine Spatial Planning/Regional Planning Body structure is an
unauthorized new regulatory program that suggests a federal level ``top
down'' approach to management resources with minimal local input.
The ecosystem-based management goal requires a vast amount of
scientific data to be fully implemented. The lack of sufficient
information is often the basis for third party legal claims by
Environmental Non-government Organizations (eNGOs) to block development
projects and their corresponding jobs. Natural resource managers need
to use best available data to move forward and make the best decisions
with information available. Ecosystem Based Management runs the risk of
``paralysis-by-analysis.''
The National Ocean Policy's stated goal of reaching to onshore
activities adds to the uncertainty and anxiety for upland land use and
resource development. Section 404 of Clean Water Act and ubiquitous
nature of wetlands means upland activities are already highly regulated
in Alaska. Ever increasing and stringent clean air standards are
already burdensome offshore and inland. A plethora of petitions to list
additional species under the Endangered Species Act on and offshore add
burden to landowners and resource industries. The hardrock mines in
Alaska require over 60 State and Federal authorizations to proceed with
development. The National Ocean Policy adds yet another hurdle to
overcome, and may serve to provide an additional platform for third
party eNGOs to litigate against projects that aooear to lack the
informational requirements or expectations for the National Ocean
Policy.
RDC is concerned that Coastal and Marine Spatial Planning may lead
to far reaching use restrictions on marine waters that will over-ride
the social and economic needs of Alaskans. Broad swaths of submerged
lands could be restricted in exclusionary zones for a nebulous national
agenda of ``ecosystem-based-management''. Even if restricted zones were
more modest in size and scope, use restrictions in strategic marine
corridors necessary for resource transport and shipping could be
devastating to our marine-dependent industries.
One of the key justifications for Coastal and Marine Spatial
Planning is to resolve conflict among diverse resource interests, yet
RDC members representing Mining, Tourism, Forestry, Oil and Gas, and
Fisheries interests are firmly aligned. These industries are all
concerned that NOP will create far more difficulties than it will
resolve.
RDC is concerned that funds used to implement National Ocean Policy
will come at the expense of congressionally-mandated activities. RDC's
member companies require mandatory permits and often federal leases to
operate, and declining federal resources should not be expended on
National Ocean Policy at the expense of these congressionally mandated
obligations. RDC members also require the best scientific data to
address the impacts of their activities and funding diverted to
National Ocean Policy could come at the expense of needed scientific
efforts.
We urge Congress to maintain an integral role in these broad
efforts to change the way ocean and coastal resources are managed, and
the power of appropriation should be considered in restraining the
premature implementation of the National Ocean Policy. Congressional
oversight is needed to ensure implementation of the National Ocean
Policy does not constrain the ability of federal agencies to fulfill
their congressional mandates to adjudicate needed federal permits and
leases.
RDC is concerned with the process being used to roll out this far-
reaching policy. RDC has repeatedly requested meaningful stakeholder
engagement without the suspected bias toward conservation and blocking
responsible resource access and development. These concerns are
underscored by the fact that Regional Planning Bodies charged with
developing zoning plans will be comprised solely of government
officials.
Detailed economic analysis of impacts of the policy should be
completed and available for full public and Congressional review before
policy implementation. The Handbook for Coastal and Marine Spatial
Planning must be subject to public input, review, and comment before
implementation.
We have urged the National Ocean Council to utilize pilot projects
in geographic areas where NOP and CMSP has broad acceptance, before
large swaths of ocean and marine areas, such as Alaska, have this
policy imposed upon them.
In this time of tenuous economic recovery and high unemployment,
Congress and the administration should be untangling the complex web of
statutes and regulations that are strangling our productive resource
sectors of our economy. The National Ocean Policy does the opposite by
adding complexity and jurisdictional ambiguity. Congress, the states,
and the private sector should have a more meaningful role in
development and implementation of such far-reaching policies for state
and federal waters and upland resources.
Thank you for the opportunity to comment on this far-reaching
initiative. We thank the members of this Subcommittee for watching out
for the best interests of Alaskans and all Americans.
Additional Background to Augment RDC verbal testimony.
Natural resources are vital to the economic survival of Alaska and
its residents. In part, Alaska was granted statehood due to our vast
natural resources; the federal government expected Alaska to utilize
its bounty of natural resources to build and sustain its economy.
Alaska's constitution includes a unique provision, Title 8, the
preamble of which states ``It is the policy of the State to encourage
the settlement of its land and the development of its resources by
making them available for maximum use consistent with the public
interest.'' To fulfill the vision of Alaska's Constitution, we must
have access to our resources, and avoid uncertainty and unnecessary
regulations that offer no added benefit to the environment.
The National Ocean Policy will have a disproportionate impact on
Alaska's resource-dependent industries and our economy as a whole. It
is appropriate the Subcommittee chose to hold a field hearing here in
Alaska. At approximately 34,000 miles, Alaska has more coastline than
that of all other states in our nation combined.
RDC members know that Alaska's economy is based on responsible
resource development conducted in accordance with existing local,
state, and federal environmental protections and laws. Alaskans must
continue to have access to our valuable and traditional resources. The
responsible development of these resources creates jobs in communities
throughout Alaska, many of which have few other jobs available. Many of
these communities will disappear if overly burdensome regulations are
added to existing and new projects.
Alaska fisheries provide over half of the commercial seafood
harvested in U.S., and these sustainably managed fisheries are a model
for the world. Oil and Gas reserves in the Beaufort/Chukchi Seas alone
could result in 26 billion barrels of oil and 32 trillion cubic feet of
natural gas over next 50 years, yielding 54,700 new jobs, $145 billion
in payroll, and $193 billion in government revenue. All Alaska
industries, forestry, tourism, oil and gas, fisheries and mining, are
highly dependent on ocean access and marine transportation.
For the record, RDC submits four publication summaries highlighting
the economic significance of oil and gas, mineral, tourism and
fisheries resources. Unfortunately we do not have a similar report of
our timber industry, except to report that it is a mere shadow of its
former self, having precipitously declined due to what RDC views as
failed federal public land policy constraining timber supply. The
decline of the timber industry in Alaska highlights our need to be ever
vigilant regarding the unintended consequences of policy initiatives
such as the National Ocean Policy and Coastal and Marine Spatial
Planning.
The policy raises significant concerns from the fisheries community
regarding the future role of the stakeholder driven Regional Fishery
Management Councils. The North Pacific Fishery Management Council is a
model for sustainable and adaptive management of this renewable
resource. The old adage, ``if it isn't broke, don't fix it'' should
apply and it needs to be abundantly clear that the decision authority
of the stakeholder driven Regional Fisheries Management Councils is not
compromised by a new National Ocean Policy structure. The Regional
Fishery Management Councils are working well and should not be coopted
by a new regional planning and management structure.
RDC is concerned that Coastal and Marine Spatial Planning may
impose disproportionate restrictions on the ability of Alaskans to have
a balanced and robust resource based economy. Consider that 58.6% of
uplands in Alaska are federally managed lands, 65% of which are in
restrictive conservation system units such as parks, Wilderness Areas,
refuges and wild and scenic rivers. For the record, we have submitted
an RDC publication entitled ``Who Owns Alaska'' which highlights the
dominance of federal management of uplands in Alaska with priorities
that are often in direct conflict with the economic interest of
Alaskans.
RDC shares the concerns expressed by Alaska Governor Sean Parnell
and the six other Governors in the Outer Continental Shelf Governors
Coalition in their letter to President Obama dated March 13, 2012. In
that correspondence, the Governors raise concerns of unintended
consequences for all types of energy development. RDC notes that the
same unintended consequences are likely to also affect fisheries,
forestry, mineral development and tourism activities.
RDC has weighed in on this important policy initiative several
times. We have asked that the National Ocean Council improve
coordination of existing protection measures, such as the Clean Water
Act, the National Environmental Policy Act, and the Magnuson-Stevens
Fishery Conservation Act instead of adding another layer of
bureaucracy. In reference to the other Strategic Action Plan objectives
not addressed in RDC verbal testimony, included are copies of two
detailed letters RDC wrote to the NOC in 2011, and our most recent
written input on March 28, just last week.
Attachments submitted for the record include:
2011 Annual Report of the Resource Development Council for Alaska.
Available online at http://akrdc.org/membership/annualreport/
annualreport2011.pdf
Economic Report Overview, Potential National-Level Benefits of Oil and
Gas Development in the Beaufort and Chukchi Sea, University of
Alaska Institute of Economic Research and Northern Economics.
Available online at http://www.northerneconomics.com/pdfs/
ShellOCS/National%20Effects%202-page%20brochure%20FINAL.pdf .
The Economic Benefits of Alaska's Mining Industry, Alaska Miners
Association, January 2012. http://www.alaskaminers.org/
mcd11sum.pdf
The Seafood Industry in Alaska's Economy, Prepared by Northern
Economics for the Marine Conservation Alliance, available
online at http://www.marineconservationalliance.org/wp-content/
uploads/2011/02/SIAE_Feb2011a.pdf
Alaska Visitor Statistics Program VI, Summer 2011, Executive Summary,
Prepared by The McDowell Group for Alaska Department of
Commerce, Community and Economic Development. Available online
at http://www.commerce.state.ak.us/ded/dev/toubus/pub/2011AVSP-
ExecSummary-StandAlone.pdf
Who Owns Alaska, A Special Issue of Resource Review, A periodic
publication of the Resource Development Council for Alaska.
Available online at http://akrdc.org/newsletters/2009/
whoownsalaska.pdf
RDC written comments to the National Ocean Council dated April 29,
2011, July 1, 2011 and March 28, 2012.
______

Mr. Young. Ms. Madsen.

STATEMENT OF STEPHANIE MADSEN, NATIONAL COMMITTEE CHAIR, UNITED
FISHERMAN OF ALASKA

Ms. Madsen. Thank you, Mr. Chairman and members of the
Subcommittee for taking time to hear our State's concerns about
the Administration's National Ocean Policy. I'm Stephanie
Madsen, the Executive Director of the At-sea Processors
Association, a trade association representing fishing companies
that participate in Federally managed ground fisheries in
waters off Alaska.
Today I am testifying on behalf of the United Fishermen of
Alaska, an umbrella organization composed of 37 Alaska
commercial fishing organizations, whose members account for
more than half of the seafood landed annually in the United
States.
Alaska's commercial fishing industry has participated at
every step of the public process as the Administration has
rolled out its NOP, which includes the ocean zoning concept. To
date, virtually none of the concerns that we've articulated
have been addressed.
My testimony will focus on three key areas of the NOP
initiative. One, the threat to NOAA's Fisheries' core science
programs from the diversion of funds to an unauthorized
initiative; 2, the usurpation of the role of expert fishery
managers to manage fishery resources by a new Federal
bureaucracy comprised; and 3, the possible proliferation of
unnecessary and unwise regulations under the NOP process and
the resulting threat posed to Alaska's largest private sector
private, the commercial fishing industry.
Alaska's commercial fishing industry appreciates the
efforts of Chairman Hastings, Subcommittee Chair Fleming, Mr.
Young and other members of the Natural Resources Committee, as
well as our Senator Murkowski, in continuing to press the
Administration to disclose how much money is actually being
spent on various Federal agencies on NOP implementation. The
linchpin of successful fisheries management in Alaska is good
science. We are already worried about possible impacts on
fisheries science and management programs given the grim budget
picture.
The NOP initiative, which is diverting untold sums from
NOAA and other agencies, further reduces the resources
available for NOAA Fisheries. Using a precautionary approach to
fisheries management, as scientific uncertainty from lack of
research goes up, the allowable harvest level is reduced, which
means fewer fishing and fish processing jobs and less income
for those still working. We cannot afford to continue to divert
funding from NOAA Fisheries' core science programs to support a
grandiose NOP initiative.
Much of what is contained in the NOP initiative was
contemplated in bills introduced in the 108th through the 111th
Congresses. Congress repeatedly refused to enact this
legislation. Now, without congressional authorization or
dedicated appropriations, the Administration states that NOP/
CMSP funding will come from repurposing existing resources. We
do not favor repurposing core NOAA Fisheries' programs to
establish Federally dominated Regional Planning Bodies that
could supplant the regional fishery management councils. It is
a hollow argument advanced by the Administration that
repurposing funds creates efficiencies when, at least for
fisheries management, it creates confusing, overlapping,
jurisdictional lines and duplicates existing processes.
Until Congress acts to authorize NOP/CMSP activities and
provides the necessary funding amounts, we urge Congress at a
minimum to prohibit the expenditure of Federal funds to
establish Regional Planning Bodies or to develop any plans
established within the scope of the E.O.
Since its inception, the NOP initiative has called for
establishing eight Regional Planning Bodies composed of
primarily Federal officials with some provision for state,
local and tribal interests. The Administration opposes
including members of the public on RPBs to avoid triggering the
Federal Advisory Committee Act. These RPBs are tasked with
developing CMS plans for sustainable use and long-term
production of the ocean, our coasts, and the Great Lakes.
With regard to fisheries, the Commerce Department is
obligated to integrate fishery management regulations so that
they're consistent with elements of any Federally developed
CMSP plan. All members of the North Pacific Council, our
regional council, are required by law to be knowledgeable and
experienced in the fisheries under council jurisdiction. The
Federal fishery management process in Alaska has been an
unqualified success. What would an RPB with no fisheries
expertise have over the Fishery Management Council?
The commercial fishing industry has asked repeatedly in
public comments and meetings with Administration officials for
assurances that CMS plans will not affect fishing activities.
Those calls have gone unheeded.
I think my written testimony is complete in there, but five
minutes goes fast. I guess, Congressman Young and Senator
Murkowski, under a plain reading of the NOP, provisions of the
CMS plans can affect fishing activities. By Executive Order the
Secretary of Commerce is required to promulgate regulations to
good effect in set provisions.
If the Administration wants to convince the commercial
fishing industry that it does not intend to supersede the
Regional Fishery Management Councils' authority, it should
explicitly exempt fishing-related provisions from CMS plans.
That concludes my testimony, Mr. Chairman. Thank you again
for the opportunity to testify. I'd be happy to answer any
questions.
Mr. Young. Thank you, Ms. Madsen.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Madsen follows:]

Statement of Stephanie Madsen, At-sea Processors Association,
on Behalf of the United Fishermen of Alaska

Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and Members of the Subcommittee for taking
the time to travel to Alaska to hear our State's concerns about the
Administration's National Ocean Policy (NOP).
I am Stephanie Madsen, the executive director of the At-sea
Processors Association (APA), a trade association representing fishing
companies that participate in federally managed groundfish fisheries in
waters off Alaska. Today, I am testifying on behalf of the United
Fishermen of Alaska (UFA), an umbrella organization composed of 37
Alaska commercial fishing organizations whose members account for more
than half the seafood landed annually in the United States.
Alaska's commercial fishing industry has participated at every step
of the public process as the Administration has rolled out its NOP,
which includes the ocean zoning concept of Coastal and Marine Spatial
Planning (CMSP). To date, virtually none of concerns that we have
articulated have been addressed. The Administration appears intent on
pursuing a pre-determined course of action without regard for the views
of the public, and just as troubling, represents a course of action
that lacks legislative authority and expends federal funds intended for
other purposes.
My testimony will focus on three key areas of the NOP initiative:
1) the threat to NOAA Fisheries' core science programs from the
diversion of funds to an unauthorized NOP/CMSP initiative; 2) the
usurpation of the role of expert fishery managers to manage fishery
resources by a new federal bureaucracy comprised of individuals without
relevant expertise, and 3) the possible proliferation of unnecessary
and unwise regulations under the NOP/CMSP process and the resulting
threat posed to Alaska's largest private sector employer--the
commercial fishing industry.
Budgetary and Fiscal Impacts of the NOP/CMSP Initiative
Alaska's commercial fishing industry appreciates the efforts of
Chairman Hastings, Subcommittee Chairman Fleming, Mr. Young, and other
Members of the Natural Resources Committee, in continuing to press the
Administration to disclose how much money is being spent by various
federal agencies on NOP implementation. The linchpin of successful
fisheries management in Alaska is good science. We are already worried
about possible impacts on Congressionally-authorized federal fisheries
science and management programs given the grim budget picture. The NOP
initiative, which is diverting untold sums from NOAA and other
agencies, further reduces the resources available for NOAA Fisheries'
science and management programs. Using a precautionary approach to
fisheries management, as scientific uncertainty from lack of research
goes up, the allowable harvest level is reduced, which means fewer
fishing and fish processing jobs and less income for those still
working. We cannot afford to continue to divert funding from NOAA
Fisheries' core science programs to support a grandiose NOP initiative.
From the issuance of the NOP Executive Order 13547 and the Final
Recommendations of the Ocean Policy Task Force in July 2010 to the
Draft National Ocean Policy Implementation Plan published in January
2012, the NOP initiative has consistently called for a costly new
expansion of federal ocean-related programs. The draft NOP
implementation plan issued in January, for example, proposes 53 federal
government actions and nearly 300 milestones. And, of course, the NOP/
CMSP program establishes a new federal bureaucracy by creating a
National Ocean Council, a Governance Coordinating Committee, eight new
Regional Planning Bodies each consisting of two dozen federal
officials, and myriad other committees and consultative bodies.
Much of what is contained in the NOP initiative was contemplated in
bills introduced in the 108th through the 111th Congresses. Congress
repeatedly refused to enact this legislation. Now, without
Congressional authorization or dedicated appropriations, the
Administration states that NOP/CMSP funding will come from
``repurposing'' existing resources. We do not favor ``repurposing''
core NOAA Fisheries science and management programs to establish
federally dominated Regional Planning Bodies that could supplant the
stakeholder driven regional fishery management councils. It is a hollow
argument advanced by the Administration that repurposing funds creates
efficiencies when, at least for fisheries management, it creates
confusing, overlapping jurisdictional lines and duplicates existing
processes.
Until Congress acts to authorize NOP/CMSP activities and provides
the necessary funding amounts, we urge Congress at a minimum to
prohibit the expenditure of federal funds to establish Regional
Planning Bodies or to develop any plans identified within the scope of
E.O. 13547.
NOP/CMSP Seeks to Usurp the Role of Regional Fishery Management
Councils
Since its inception, the NOP initiative has called for establishing
eight Regional Planning Bodies (RPBs) to be composed primarily of
federal officials with some provision for state or local government
representatives, and tribal interests. The Administration opposes
including members of the public on RPBs to avoid triggering
transparency requirements under the Federal Advisory Committee Act
(FACA). RPBs are tasked with developing ``National Ocean Council-
certified regional CMS Plans for the sustainable use and long-term
protection of the ocean, our coasts, and the Great Lakes.'' Provisions
of such plans are to be implemented by regulation. Moreover, all
federal agencies are required under the NOP program to ``endeavor, to
the maximum extent possible, to integrate their actions with those of
other partners to a CMS Plan.'' With regard to fisheries, the Commerce
Department is obligated to ``integrate'' fishery management regulations
so that they are consistent with elements of any federally developed
CMS Plan.
Federal fisheries off Alaska are managed currently under the
authority of the Magnuson-Stevens Act, or MSA. The North Pacific
Fishery Management Council is one of eight regional councils
established under the MSA, and it is charged with developing management
measures for fisheries occurring from 3 to 200 miles off the coast of
Alaska. The North Pacific Council is composed of 11 voting members,
which includes one federal official, three state officials, and seven
private citizens nominated by Governors and appointed by the Secretary
of Commerce. All Council members are required by law to be
knowledgeable of, and experienced in, the fisheries under Council
jurisdiction. The Councils involve affected users directly in the
decision making process. The federal fishery management process in
Alaska has been an unqualified success. All federally managed fish
stocks in the Alaska region are harvested at sustainable levels, and a
comprehensive set of regulations is in place to minimize fishing
impacts on the environment. The management process is noted for its
transparency and for the opportunities afforded to all stakeholders to
have their views given due consideration.
The commercial fishing industry has asked repeatedly in public
comments and meetings with Administration officials for assurances that
CMS Plans will not affect fishing activities. Those calls have gone
unheeded. We are left to conclude from a plain reading of the documents
giving force to the NOP that the Secretary of Commerce will be
obligated to promulgate new rules, or amend existing rules, to ensure
implementation of any provisions of CMS Plans that might relate to
fishery closures, mitigation measures, or catch limits.
The Proliferation of New Regulations Under the NOP Threatens Commercial
Fishing and Fish Processing Jobs--Alaska's Largest Private
Employment Sector
Regional plans developed by RPBs that are populated by dozens of
federal officials and certified by the Cabinet-level National Ocean
Council will be broad in scope and receive substantially less public
input than management measures developed through the MSA regional
fishery management council process. The various NOP/CMSP documents
issued by the Administration contain contradictory statements that this
program anticipates no new regulations and that all federal agencies
are obligated to issue or amend regulations to be as consistent as
possible with regional CMS Plans. Given that the NOP is given force
through Presidential decree, we fully expect federal agencies to follow
specific guidance to conform to provisions of regional plans.
Fisheries regulations are designed most often to address complex
resource management problems. Almost all management rules have
allocation impacts on fishery participants and even with the benefit of
detailed analysis cannot always avoid unintended consequences. In
short, even in a fisheries management system populated with highly
qualified resource management scientists and managers with decades of
experience and benefiting from expert analysis and the knowledge
derived from stakeholders' input at every meaningful stage of the
regulatory process, it is still difficult to minimize economic harm and
avoid unintended environmental consequences.
It is not difficult to envision a provision in a CMS Plan that
calls for a sizable area closure to fishing, or network of closed
areas. The purpose could be to create marine reserves or to set aside
areas for another commercial activity. How informed will an RPB be--
especially one composed primarily of federal agency officials without
fisheries experience--about the effects of displacing fishing activity?
Will there be an analysis of the economic consequences of losing access
to valuable fishing grounds? Will there be a sophisticated analysis of
the effects on habitat, bycatch, etc. if fishing activity is
redirected? Given the projected scope of CMS Plans and the lack of
fisheries experience of those voting on CMS Plan provisions, it is
highly unlikely that conservation benefits will be realized but highly
likely that jobs and income will be lost. Where is the public policy
rationale for creating jurisdictional confusion where none exists,
duplicating federal regulatory processes, and, most importantly,
distancing stakeholders from federal decisions that affect their
livelihoods?
On this topic, the Administration argues that the NOP does not
confer new authority upon federal agencies but simply operates within
existing statutory requirements. We agree. However, existing law, most
notably for our purposes Section 304 of the MSA, confers authority upon
the Secretary of Commerce to promulgate fishery management rules when
the regional fishery management councils do not act. Under E.O. 13547,
the Secretary is obligated to issue, or amend, regulations to the
maximum extent possible to give effect to National Ocean Council-
certified CMS Plans. In fact, many NOP advocates are environmental
organizations that favor dismantling the regional fishery management
council system. Their intent is for the NOP processes to override the
regional fishery councils and hand over decision making to federal
agencies.
Under a plain reading of the NOP, provisions of CMS Plans can
affect fishing activities, and by Executive Order, the Secretary of
Commerce is required to promulgate regulations to give effect to such
provisions. If the Administration wants to convince the commercial
fishing industry that it does not intend to supersede the regional
fishery management councils' authority, it should explicitly exempt
fishing-related provisions from CMS Plans.
That concludes my testimony, Mr. Chairman. Thank you, again, for
the opportunity to testify. I am glad to answer any questions.
______

Mr. Young. According to my rules, I always look to other
members of the panel to ask questions first and I'll ask
questions last.
Senator Murkowski.
Senator Murkowski. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you
to the members of the panel. I appreciate the perspective.
As I look out, we've got representation from all sectors of
the industries that are making things happen in the State. It's
more than a little bit disconcerting to hear that the unifying
theme is that there is no communication.
Ms. Madsen, to hear you state that UFA has been involved
every step of the way and yet you feel that there has been no
response to your input, no response to your participation in
this process and yet recognizing the industry that UFA is
involved with, that's more than a little bit disconcerting.
Representative Joule, you have indicated that within the
Northern Waters Task Force report that one of the prime
considerations or recommendations from that was the need for
communication. I think this is where we're all coming from with
this oceans policy, this Executive Order, this dictate from on
high in Washington, D.C., coming at and being essentially
forced upon a state like Alaska without that two-way
communication going back and forth.
I guess the first question I would ask would be directed to
you, Representative Joule, and that is whether or not you
believe that the principles, the considerations that have been
outlined in the Northern Waters Task Force report can be
coordinated with the proposal of the National Ocean Policy
Implementation Plan or whether or not you think the efforts
that are under way with the task force will be, I guess,
compromised under a proposal such as being considered.
Mr. Joule. I don't know if I'm going to get right to your
question, Senator Murkowski.
When we put this recommendation forward to establish an
Arctic Policy Commission, this was with the recognition that
other countries around the circumpolar north had put together
their policy plans for their countries and for their provinces
in the case of Canada. The United States and Alaska have not
done so.
Former President Bush initiated a directive before exiting
his presidency. That policy is there, but what we haven't seen,
Senator, is any plan of implementation of that policy and we
feel that this is an opportunity for our state with our
stakeholders with an eye on the future to put our policy
together prior to the Arctic Council grabbing the chair and
Canada and then again the United States years later.
We did that independent of the National Oceans Council or
the Coastal Marine Spatial Planning. I guess we want to have
the ability with Alaskans, together with this state
administration and somebody from the Federal Government, to sit
with us and begin that process.
Senator Murkowski. But to this point in time, from what I'm
hearing from all of you, that level of communication, that sit-
down, that's not happening.
Mr. Vincent-Lang, let me ask you. From the State's
perspective, you have been very clear in stating the State of
Alaska's concern and opposition. I think the comment that we
need more resources directed, not necessarily more rules, some
set out quite aptly. But it's my understanding from what you
have outlined that in fact there has been no coordination.
There has been no effort to attempt to work together, state to
Federal, that it has instead been a directive to the State that
this is in fact what it will be.
The question that I would have you focus on is: Given what
you have received from the Federal level, is there any effort
to work with the existing authorities in the state based on
what you have received to date from this Executive Order?
Mr. Vincent-Lang. Senator, through the Chair, the State
really feels like we've been a stakeholder in this process, not
being treated as a sovereign entity in this entire process.
We've really been relegated to providing written comments on a
variety of different documents rather than being treated as an
equal partner in the development, for instance, of the nine
strategic plans.
So we constantly are forced into the position of, just like
anybody else, providing comments rather than being treated as a
sovereign entity with sovereign roles and responsibilities and
authorities in this process. We've asked some pretty
fundamental questions regarding this National Ocean Policy.
We've asked them in several letters. I think Mr. Young put them
into the record here. We still don't feel we've gotten adequate
answers or adequate--or that the issues we've raised have been
addressed throughout that entire process. So as such, we don't
feel that we've been treated as an equal entity.
We do appreciate that the National Ocean Council is
considering making the decision process consensus based in
Alaska, but they also acknowledge that failure of reaching a
consensus will result in minority reports and, of course, the
State is a minority member of that body, and then subsequently
the decision will be made 3500 miles away in D.C. by the
National Ocean Council.
So, again, we're very troubled with that, that we're not
being treated as an equal in this process and will ultimately
potentially be treated as a minority as this moves forward.
Senator Murkowski. Of course, Mr. Chairman, that's what
we're all concerned about here is the diminishment of the
State's role most certainly.
One final question and I'll direct this to you, Mr. Rogers.
We recognize that within the oil and gas sector it's not easy;
it's not cheap to do business here in the State of Alaska. It's
not cheap or easy to do it here in this country. But let me ask
what happens to the added cost when you inject a level of
uncertainty as this National Oceans Policy Initiative, the
CMSP, would put in play?
When you add that level of uncertainty to an already
uncertain industry, trying to figure out what's going on with
taxes, what is happening with national and international
pricing, give me your 30,000-foot view of the potential impact
of a policy like this on an industry that we're so heavily
reliant on here in the State of Alaska.
Mr. Rogers. Thanks for the question, Senator.
Through the Chair, the debate here in Alaska, as you well
know in Juneau this year, is on the competitiveness of our oil
and gas industry and how we're competing for capital on a
global scale. I think, to your question, the added uncertainty
and the added burden that any of these policies put on that
industry or other resource industries in Alaska just adds to
reducing the competitive nature of Alaska with respect to other
jurisdictions.
For example, last year a delegation of elected leaders and
business leaders went on a tour to Norway to look at how Norway
does business in oil and gas. Unfortunately I was not fortunate
to be among them, but I did learn when they came back and
reported. One thing that really struck me is I'm told that in
Norway from start to finish it takes them about six months to
permit off-shore, very complex oil and gas exploration and
development activities.
Here in Alaska, as you know, we had Federal leases on the
OCS in 2008 and the leaseholders have yet to drill a single
exploration well. Now, we're seeing progress and thanks in much
part to your help we're getting closer and we're encouraged,
but adding more burden to that already difficult and complex
structure is not going to make Alaska more competitive. It's
going to reduce the level of resource development in our state.
As many economists have already studied, both from ISER and
other organizations, oil and gas and resource development is a
key underpinning to our economy. So all of Alaska will suffer
if we add more burdens and then make our state less
competitive.
Senator Murkowski. Thank you.
Mr. Chairman, I thank you for the opportunity to be part of
this field hearing this morning. I appreciate what the
witnesses have provided. I'm not going to be able to stay for
the second panel. I know, I'm going to have to let you carry
the burden here. I've got another scheduling item that I must
attend to. But I thank you for this.
I think this is extraordinarily important that we hear from
not only the State, the Legislature, the industries that are
the underpinning of our state's economy and fully understand
how the impact of this wrong-handed proposal coming out of the
Administration could negatively impact our success here in the
economy.
So I appreciate your focus on this.
Mr. Young. Thank you, Senator, for joining us. It was a
pleasure to have you for a short period of time. If nothing at
all, I'll see you this afternoon on the Park Service issue.
Senator Murkowski. Thank you.
Mr. Young. Thank you, Senator. You're excused.
This is to the panel. Have any of you been, other than,
say, commenting, have any of you been asked to appear or sit
down and discuss this and who's heading this thing up? Does
anybody know?
Ms. Madsen. Congressman Young, we have had conversations
and they have traveled to Alaska. They have met with the
seafood industry.
Mr. Young. Who are ``they''?
Ms. Madsen. CEQ.
Mr. Young. CEQ. But they're not even--you know, we had them
before the Committee. They will not tell us who's the driving
force other than the President behind this and where they're
getting their money. That's why, Madam Senator, I hope you're
aware on your committee you cut their funds off, squeezed their
you know what until they start explaining where they're taking
the money from.
I know with NOAA, Ms. Madsen, I believe they're not going
to have, for instance, a stock assessment every year like they
should. They're going to now try to go to every two or three
years. How does that affect the industry and the science which
is so important?
Ms. Madsen. Well, you've hit the nail on the head. I think
that I just heard this week that fortunately, thanks to Senator
Murkowski and having the Secretary in front of you, I think
they found a million dollars for our stock assessment this
year. But that's one year. The continuing diversion of funds, I
think we've got a Band-Aid this year.
But as I mentioned, if there's any uncertainty in the
science, then we're going to get lower quotas, and that affects
all of us. Again, I appreciate your vigilance in making sure
that they come to the table and explain to you how they're
getting these funds and using them.
Mr. Young. Reggie, you did it right. You got the
stakeholders involved. From what I hear from all of you and
what our testimony back in D.C. is, they have not communicated
with the State other than say: Give comment. They haven't had
any stakeholders at the table. They're coming out with these
grandiose ideas and then say, what do you feel about it? Yet
they don't listen to you, if I understand it. They've never
listened to anything you've suggested; is that correct.
Mr. Joule. Mr. Chairman, when we were back in Washington,
D.C. recently--when I say ``we,'' I'm talking about Speaker
Chenault, Representative Fairclough, Representative Saddler,
myself--we were back there for the purpose of trying to drum up
support for the passage of the ANWR legislation.
Mr. Young. We did that in the House. The Senate is a little
neglectful.
Mr. Joule. Yes, you did, once again, for the twelfth time.
We did meet with some of the folks from the National Oceans
Council. Those of us from Alaska that went back there together
met with them and the issues that came up were pretty clear.
One, we raised the same issue. Congress is not supportive of
this effort. Where are you getting your funds? What's going to
be the buy-in? How does this all work?
Those answers, I think, were fairly vague other than to say
it's going to come from across agencies. But I think that the
group that I was with were very pointed in their discussions
with them that, like what's being said here, conveyed the
concerns with what was going on with the National Oceans
Council and in particular the Coastal Marine Spatial planning.
Mr. Young. Again, my understanding, this is not only this
area. When we bring outside agencies in, we became a state with
103 million acres of land. We had the Native Land Claim
Settlement Act with 44 million acres of land.
If they implement this policy, Mr. Lang, do you believe
under this policy that we will lose control over our state
land?
Mr. Vincent-Lang. Mr. Chairman, I believe there's a
potential for that, yes, because I think that the decision-
making processes are basically being governed by potential
Federal bureaucracies that are going to numerically dominate
these regional planning boards. In the event their consensus is
not reached at the local level or the regional level, that
decision process will be sent back to Washington, D.C. by CEQ
to make decisions.
So I think there's a real potential that especially as this
planning effort potentially goes into state waters and upland
into areas of territorial into navigable waterways, it has a
real potential to affect the state authority to govern its
activities within its jurisdictions.
Mr. Young. Again, for the audience, CEQ was created by
Congress. I don't know what we were thinking, but it's under
the President. It really hands the President, this group right
here, control over the State of Alaska regardless of the
President. I want everybody to know this is not partisan. This
is in fact being proposed by this President, but it gives the
next President the same jurisdiction over the utilization of
our lands and to me that's quite disturbing.
I would like to see this--if this thing was to go forth,
and I was serious with Senator Murkowski, a letter should be
sent into the appropriators to try to eliminate the dollars. If
we have to duplicate from every agency that's under this
provision that we stand on this issue until we find out what
they're trying to achieve.
I feel sort of like the father that's the father of a
beautiful baby boy and has great potential--and my staff is
worried about where this is going. But he ends up in jail. We
created the 200-mile limit. You know, up until that time the
State had 12 miles of our waters and the rest was international
waters. Think about that, international waters.
We created this for an economic zone. Now we have an
economic zone and we lost nine miles of our water and we kept
three miles. Now they're taking three miles away from us and
adding it to the Federal waters under this program, which takes
away the right of the State. I'm thinking, what a mistake in
the way this has happened. ``They'' being the Federal
Government and the Congress that supported them and funded
them, maybe we ought to go back to the drawing board and just
defund the whole operation.
Mr. Rogers, we all know the answer to this, but how many
permits do you think we have to go through now for any
resources in Alaska? Do you have a count of how many permits?
Let's say for mining.
Mr. Rogers. Yeah, Congressman Young, it's between 60 and
70, for example, for large hardrock mining projects in Alaska,
like Fort Knox or some of those. That's a combination of state
and Federal authorizations and permits. So it's not a simple
process. It's very complex; it's very thorough.
I guess our point is we don't need to add additional
complexity and layers onto that already. We should be trying to
simplify it or at least streamline it and make it more
efficient.
Mr. Young. You just added something. I like that term.
There's nothing in this that says there will be less
regulations. We have to have 55 permits and after you get those
permits, these people might say, no; is that correct?
Mr. Rogers. It may be correct. Congressman, it's very
difficult to truly conceptualize how this would play out. But
on the one hand you read the policy, they talk about not adding
any additional regulations and yet they talk about convening
groups to do legal analysis to figure out what regulations may
be necessary or what new statutes. So it seems kind of
duplicitous in what they're trying to achieve.
Mr. Young. They had a hearing up here, I believe, last
December. When was that hearing? Were any of you involved in
that hearing? You were? Who was the panel? I mean, not you
guys. Who was up here.
Mr. Vincent-Lang. I think the Alaska one was held by a lady
from the Department of the Interior, like an Under Secretary. I
can't remember her name.
Mr. Young. None of the rest of you participated.
Ms. Madsen, I will tell you if I was a suspicious person,
with NOAA and the Endangered Species Act, this proposal for
ocean zoning, I would say, is another attempt at the fishing
industry. I believe that's really behind this whole thing. They
want to raise their fish commercially in big farms. This has
been NOAA's dream the whole time and get away from the wild-
caught fish, which is the key to our society in Alaska. That's
our biggest strength. You might want to comment on that. I
really think this is where this is headed.
Ms. Madsen. Congressman, you have also pointed out another
issue that we have constantly had a battle with different
administrations on farming and open ocean farming. That's
something that Alaska won't tolerate. So you're exactly right.
As you well know, I think our concern is that the North Pacific
has been, thanks to your help, the premiere council.
We have taken steps to protect not only the areas of
importance, we're concerned that that's going to be undermined
by a Regional Planning Body that has no expertise that will
totally undermine that open, transparent stakeholder process
that we've all become dependent on and it's an important
process. That's our main concern.
Mr. Young. Thank you.
Mr. Lang, I'm sure you're aware of the Executive Order.
Many people--I have yet to figure out who are these many
people--say, all we're doing is implementing the findings of
the U.S. Commission on Ocean Policy. But the Commission
recommended the ocean planning process be done through a
voluntary process and a stakeholder involvement.
Do you--there's been no stakeholder involvement. It hasn't
been voluntary. This is an Executive Order. That was the
Commission's recommendation not to do that, yet here we have
the Administration just doing the opposite. I go back to, other
than yourself, has anybody else been involved in this?
Reggie, you've been involved in that committee. Did they
talk to your committee at all?
Mr. Joule. We had invited State Department persons that's
senior adviser to the Arctic Council, but I don't think any of
them from the National Oceans Council made any of our task
force meetings.
MR. LANG: Mr. Chairman, I think I can probably give an
example to exemplify the process that's been used here and what
the State concerns are.
One of the nine strategic plans is an Arctic strategic
plan. Really the only reason the United States is an Arctic
nation is because of the State of Alaska. It would be very
critical in my eyes if you're going to have an Arctic policy be
developed that the State would be at the table, part of that
writing team, preparing that document rather than just being
asked to comment on that document as it comes out for a series
of public release opportunities and, again, being treated as a
stakeholder and providing comments into it.
Again, we weren't provided that opportunity to sit down and
be part of that writing team and actually develop that Arctic
policy that's going to greatly affect our state. Again, our
view of this thing is it's largely been a Federal effort
throughout all those different nine strategic plans where we
have an opportunity to provide comments just like anybody else
in this process, rather than being treated as an equal in that
process as it goes forward and those documents are developed.
You're right, those documents have significant policy
issues associated with them and they have significant
milestones placed into them. We're starting to see these things
end up in Federal documents. For instance, we just recently
reviewed a document that the Bureau of Oceans put out that said
future NEPA opportunities will be somewhat sideboarded by the
policies that are developed by the Regional Planning Boards.
So, for instance, the range of alternatives could be
sideboarded into the future as the Regional Planning Boards
make decisions and a variety of other recommendations regarding
the marine environment.
Mr. Young. I'm singing to the choir here. Our job is to try
to use your testimony to really try to show that there hasn't
been the involvement there should be. This is--you know, this
is the mark and the group of policy and philosophy of the
individuals now that work for the Federal Government, that they
know what's best for every state. I've always said, we're not
supposed to be the United States of the Federal Government. We
should be the United States of America.
For stakeholders not to be involved in something that
directly affects not only their livelihoods, but their lives in
total, is dead wrong. This is not the government that I know
and dearly love. This is a government that's gone far beyond.
Like I said, we're supposed to be--I got a big kick, and I will
pick on this President.
The day he says to the press, well, if the Supreme Court
rules against health care, that's the wrong thing to do because
Congress passed the legislation. Here we have, you know--the
Congress has chosen not to touch this ocean policy, big brother
BOB thing, and yet they're going and making an Executive Order
affecting stakeholders. We're sensitive in Alaska. Probably
nobody cares in Montana or Iowa or Kansas City or something
like that. But Alaska is a coastal Arctic nation and to have
this happen is, I think, inappropriate.
I hope the state and government and legislative body takes
a positive position and thumbs their nose at the Federal
Government if they continue to do this and we're not, you know,
have the courage to stop funding. That's the key, to stop
funding.
I want to thank this panel. We could go on with questions.
You will probably get some questions from me submitted to you
and I'd like to have them back. You're dismissed.
We have now the second panel: Ms. Kara Moriarty, Executive
Director of the Alaska Oil and Gas Association; Fred Parady,
Executive Directive of the Alaska Miners Association; John
Sturgeon, Director of Alaska Forest Association; Dr. John
Farrell, Executive Director of the U.S. Arctic Research
Commission.
Please sit down. I think you all know the regulations,
rules and those things.
Ms. Moriarty, you're up.

STATEMENT OF KARA MORIARTY, EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR, ALASKA OIL AND
GAS ASSOCIATION

Ms. Moriarty. Good morning, Congressman. For the record, my
name is Kara Moriarty and I am the Executive Director of the
Alaska Oil and Gas Association, commonly referred to as AOGA.
We are the business trade association for the oil and gas
industry here and our membership does represent the breadth and
scope of the industry. We represent both onshore and off-shore
companies here in Alaska. So, welcome home. We appreciate you
having the field hearing here today and for the opportunity to
testify.
Before I discuss some of our specific concerns with the
National Ocean Policy proposal, I first want to remind you,
Congressman, and others that AOGA would agree that a more
streamlined permitting and regulatory process is needed in the
Federal Government, but we believe that this should and could
be accomplished through improving existing statutory and
regulatory regimes which already encompass National Ocean
Policy concerns, including the Outer Continental Shelf Lands
Act, the National Environmental Policy Act, or NEPA, the Clean
Air and Water Acts, the Endangered Species Act, and the Marine
Mammal Protection Action, just to name a few.
There is no need to reinvent the wheel or add additional
layers to an already complex and lengthy project approval
process. We have submitted testimony in more detail about the
National Ocean Policy, but I'd like to emphasize some of our
main concerns today.
First, the draft plan contains very little information on
how Coastal and Marine Spatial Planning will be implemented
even though marine spatial planning is the crux of the issue
for National Ocean Policy. The public, including AOGA, has been
asking from the very beginning for details since this policy
was rolled out two years ago and we have yet to receive them.
According to language contained in the draft plan, details
will be included in the Handbook for Regional Coastal and
Marine Spatial Planning. However, to date, this handbook has
not been released, nor is there any real indication as to
exactly what details the handbook will contain. This lack of
detail creates huge uncertainties for the industry I represent.
At a minimum, public comment on the information to be contained
in the handbook should be collected and incorporated into the
final Implementation Plan before Coastal and Marine Spatial
Planning moves forward.
Second, no information--and the first panel talked about
this--but no information on Regional Planning Bodies has been
provided beyond basic information on membership, which right
now is to include only Federal, state and tribal
representatives. Stakeholders such as my industry will have no
direct representation.
Third, we are concerned that the National Ocean Policy
could reach far inland beyond oceans and coasts based on vague
language included in the draft plan and saying that inland
areas could be included, but there is no defining or clarifying
language.
Fourth, we are concerned that spatial planning will add to
rather than streamline statutory and regulatory processes for
oil and gas exploration and development in Alaska, as you have
said, Congressman. The Administration has said the policy will
not change existing Federal authorities and responsibilities;
however, the draft plan includes contradictory language that
Senator Murkowski already outlined.
Fifth, we are justifiably concerned that the National Ocean
Policy and Coastal Marine Spatial Planning will result in
exclusionary zoning of Alaska's oceans and coasts.
Sixth, we are concerned about how the implementation will
be funded. You've already mentioned that, especially given
scarce resources across all Federal agencies. We do not believe
National Ocean Policy should be given a priority or have funds
diverted from already existing programs.
Last, we are concerned that the policy will be used as a
tool for litigation. This is a real concern given the extreme
attention already on Alaska oil and gas projects and one that
should be acknowledged before pursuing implementation much
further.
The importance of oil and gas development in Alaska's OCS
cannot be overstated. Implementation of a National Ocean Policy
should not hinder efforts to develop the resources contained in
Alaska's OCS.
Thank you for the opportunity to testify, and we look
forward to the questions at the end of the panel.
Mr. Young. Thank you, Ms. Moriarty.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Moriarty follows:]

Statement of Kara Moriarty, Executive Director,
Alaska Oil and Gas Association

My name is Kara Moriarty and I am the Executive Director of the
Alaska Oil and Gas Association. AOGA is a business trade association
whose membership represents the breadth and scope of the oil and gas
industry in Alaska, from new explorers, small independents and legacy
development and production companies, to companies involved in the
transportation, refining and marketing of oil and gas in the state,
from Cook Inlet to the North Slope, onshore and offshore, including
companies with both federal and state interests. We appreciate you
holding a field hearing in the state and the opportunity to testify
today.
First of all, AOGA agrees that more streamlined permitting and
regulatory processes are needed, but believe that this should be
accomplished through existing statutory and regulatory regimes which
already encompass National Ocean Policy concerns, including the Outer
Continental Shelf Lands Act, the National Environmental Policy Act, the
Clean Air and Water Acts, the Endangered Species Act, and the Marine
Mammal Protection Act. There is no need to reinvent the wheel or add
additional layers to an already complex and lengthy project approval
process. Instead, focus should be on streamlining these existing
processes to reduce the delays and uncertainties synonymous with
permitting oil and gas activities in Alaska.
My testimony this morning will now focus on the three primary areas
of concern AOGA has with implementation of the National Ocean Policy as
currently envisioned by the National Ocean Council. First, the lack of
detail surrounding Coastal and Marine Spatial Planning and the policies
and procedures of the Regional Planning Bodies charged with creation
and implementation of the regional CMS plans. Second, the additional
layer of bureaucracy the National Ocean Policy in general, and Coastal
and Marine Spatial Planning in particular, could add to an already
established and complex statutory and regulatory regime. And finally,
concerns about how the National Ocean Policy will be implemented
throughout the federal agencies in a time of fiscal restraint and
scarce federal resources.
The Draft National Ocean Policy Implementation Plan contains very
little information on how Coastal and Marine Spatial Planning will be
implemented even though it is the crux of the National Ocean Policy.
The public, including AOGA, has continued to express concern about the
lack of detail about CMSP since the policy was rolled out in 2010, yet
the National Ocean Council has once again failed to address these
concerns. According to language contained in the Draft Implementation
Plan, details will be included in the Handbook for Regional Coastal and
Marine Spatial Planning. However, to date, the Handbook has not been
released nor is there any real indication as to exactly what details
the Handbook will contain. Importantly, there is no assurance that
public comment on the Handbook will be collected. This lack of detail
creates huge uncertainties regarding how CMSP will impact the oil and
gas industry. We would like to provide meaningful, substantive input,
but this is impossible without comprehensive information. At a minimum,
public comment on the information to be contained in the Handbook
should be collected and incorporated into the final implementation plan
before CMSP moves forward.
Similarly, no information on Regional Planning Bodies has been
provided beyond basic information on membership to include only
federal, state and tribal representatives. Under the Draft
Implementation Plan, stakeholders will have no direct representation on
the planning bodies, despite the fact that the planning bodies are
charged with creation and implementation of regional CMS plans
encompassing all ocean and coastal uses. If CMS plans are to be
effective and useful tools for ocean and coastal management, we believe
membership should be expanded to include representatives from
stakeholder groups, including the oil and gas industry. Without such
involvement, the potential is real for prohibitions against activities
such as oil and gas without the involvement of the most impacted
parties.
At this point, the Draft Plan does not even include information on
how stakeholders would be engaged in the CMS planning process by the
regional planning bodies. Apparently, this information will be included
in the Coastal and Marine Spatial Planning Handbook, but again, it is
not clear whether public comment will be collected. Furthermore, there
is some indication that the Handbook will contain ``guidance'' for
regional planning bodies only, rather than mandatory procedures, which
would result in even more uncertainty and potential delay or
prohibitions against oil and gas activities. At the very minimum, the
final implementation plan should specify the processes and procedures
for stakeholder and public engagement with the planning bodies on CMSP
issues.
In addition, no information has been provided on how disputes among
members of the regional planning bodies will be handled. Who is the
final arbiter on applicable law and policy with regard to a particular
project? It is easy to see how this could also delay or prohibit oil
and gas projects in Alaska due to numerous interested parties and
potentially overlapping jurisdiction and authority.
In this same vein, we are concerned that the National Ocean Policy
could reach far inland beyond the oceans and coasts. Once again, vague
language is included in the Draft Implementation Plan stating that the
geographic scope of Coastal and Marine Spatial Planning could include
``inland'' areas but no defining or clarifying language. Such a policy
could have huge impacts on the oil and gas industry in Alaska as the
North Slope still contains significant oil and gas resources.
Our next point concerns the potential for CMSP to add to rather
than streamline statutory and regulatory processes for oil and gas
exploration and development in Alaska. According to statements by the
National Ocean Council and other senior level officials in the
Administration, National Ocean Policy will not change existing federal
authorities and responsibilities. However, the Draft Plan includes
contradictory language. For example, one of the milestones identified
in the Draft Plan is for the Legal Working Group to complete review of
Ecosystem Based Management-relevant statutes and regulations to
identify ``potential legislative changes that would fill gaps and
support full implementation of EBM.'' This type of contradictory
language only creates confusion and needs to be removed from the final
implementation plan.
Additionally, messaging by the National Ocean Council and the
Administration must clarify that the National Ocean Policy will fit
within existing statutory and regulatory regimes. To reiterate my
earlier testimony, there is no need for a National Ocean Policy that
would reinvent the wheel or add new layers to the complex and lengthy
project approval process for Alaska oil and gas projects. Rather, focus
should be on streamlining existing processes to reduce the delays and
uncertainties.
As I have mentioned during my testimony, we are justifiably
concerned that National Ocean Policy and CMSP will result in
exclusionary zoning of Alaska's oceans and coasts. Though the National
Ocean Council and others have made statements that this will not be the
case, our fear is already being realized in environmental planning
documents. For example, in the Draft Programmatic Environmental Impact
Statement for the 2012-2017 Outer Continental Shelf Oil and Gas Leasing
Program, the U.S. Department of Interior stated that Coastal and Marine
Spatial Planning ``has emerged as a new paradigm and planning strategy
for coordinating all marine and coastal activities and facility
constructions within the context of a national zoning plan. Clearly,
zoning of Alaska's oceans and coasts, in advance of specific project
proposals, coupled with a lack of stakeholder involvement in the CMSP
process, could severely and adversely impact economic and resource
development projects in Alaska, including oil and gas activities.
Finally, AOGA is concerned about how implementation of the National
Ocean Policy will be funded, especially given scarce resources across
all federal agencies. Implementation of the National Ocean Policy
should not be given priority over existing regulatory and permitting
programs necessary for approval and oversight of resource and economic
development projects in Alaska, including oil and gas activities, or
funds diverted away from these programs.
Given the lack of detail described above and prevalent throughout
the National Ocean Policy Implementation documents, AOGA is concerned
that the Policy, particularly CMSP, will be used as a tool for
litigation. This is a real concern given the attention on Alaska oil
and gas projects and one that should be acknowledged before pursuing
implementation much further or so broadly. AOGA does not believe that
the National Ocean Policy should be implemented without detailed
information on the important aspects of implementation I have
described. At a minimum, AOGA believes implementation should not occur
until there has been adequate opportunity to provide input on these
issues.
The importance of oil and gas development on Alaska's Outer
Continental Shelf, to Alaska and the nation, cannot be overstated.
Developing these resources is essential to any effort to reduce our
dependence on foreign sources of oil and should not be unjustifiably
impeded by unclear project regulation and development procedures.
Alaska's OCS is estimated to hold 27 billion barrels of oil and 132
trillion cubic feet of natural gas, the development of which would
translate into an annual average of 54,000 new jobs over 50 years, $145
billion in payroll throughout the U.S. and $193 billion in revenues to
state, local and federal governments. These resources are also vital to
stemming the decline of oil flowing through the Trans-Alaska Pipeline
System, identified by the U.S. Department of Homeland Security as
critical national infrastructure, which is currently operating at one-
third capacity and will face continued operational challenges without
additional supply. Implementation of the National Ocean Policy should
not hinder efforts to develop the resources contained in Alaska's OCS.
Thank you again for the opportunity to testify today and I am happy
to answer any questions you may have about AOGA's views on the National
Ocean Policy and the impacts it may have on the oil and gas industry in
the state.
______

Mr. Young. Mr. Fred Parady.

STATEMENT OF FRED PARADY, EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR, ALASKA MINERS
ASSOCIATION

Mr. Parady. Good morning. My name is Fred Parady. I serve
as the Executive Director of the Alaska Miners Association. The
Alaska Miners Association is a nonprofit membership
organization established in 1939 to represent the mining
industry in Alaska. It is composed of more than 1,400
individual prospectors, geologists, engineers, vendors, suction
dredge miners, small family mines, junior mining companies and
major mining companies. Our members look for and produce gold,
silver, platinum, diamonds, lead, zinc, copper, coal,
limestone, sand, gravel, crushed rock, armor rock and other
materials all across Alaska.
Turning to the proposed National Ocean Policy. It will have
a substantial and negative impact on Alaska's resource-
dependent industries and Alaska's economy. The existing
regulatory regime is already overly complex, a blend of state
and Federal permitting and oversight that's anything but a
streamlined, sensible process. The National Ocean Policy simply
adds by stealth a layer of increased bureaucracy that will
virtually stop processes that already crawl with no concomitant
benefit to the economy.
It is our strong view that the Coastal Marine Spatial
Planning and Regional Planning Body structure is an
unauthorized regulatory program with no basis in statute and is
an end run by the executive branch around Congress. Lack of
sufficient information itself is a primary basis for third-
party legal claims by environmental groups seeking to block
development projects. These new requirements of the National
Ocean Policy will generate yet another round of endless study
and halt common-sense decisions in their tracks.
Our state's natural resource managers need to use the data
available to them and make decisions with the detailed
information that's already in the public records. Clearly
permitting uncertainty is increased by the National Ocean
Policy's stated intention to reach the onshore activities that
may have impacts on marine waters. The National Ocean Policy is
simply another obstacle and will provide an additional platform
for third-party environmental groups to litigate against
projects that fail to meet the vague and overly broad
informational requirements of the proposed policy.
AMA is further concerned that Coastal Marine Spatial
Planning will lead to far-reaching use restrictions on marine
waters that will override the social and economic needs of
Alaskans.
No one present at the signing of the original wetlands
legislation anticipated that it would be anything more than a
mechanism to ensure that ducks had sufficient wetlands for
breeding. Yet look at the ways in which the regulatory
interpretation has broadened from that date, particularly
through the expansion of the definition of what constitutes a
wetland and then contemplate the use of phrases--I lost track
of my thought here--the use of the phraseologies that are in
the National Ocean Policy. No net loss of wetlands should have
a parallel Alaskan goal of no net loss of access to our
resources.
One specific example where the National Ocean Policy would
slow projects is in regards to recovery of gold resources off
the shores of Nome, which the State recently successfully
leased. Such activity would be slowed, if not stopped, by the
proposed policy.
Please note that a justification for the CMSP is supposedly
to resolve conflict among diverse resource interests, yet every
resource interest that's presented testimony today stands
firmly aligned in opposing this overreaching effort.
In closing, AMA strongly urges Congress to maintain a laser
focus on the broad efforts to change the way ocean and coastal
resources are managed. Congressional oversight is needed to
prevent premature implementation of this policy and keep
Federal agencies at home fulfilling their core job of
processing Federal permits and leases.
There has not been meaningful stakeholder engagement. In
fact, to most Alaskans, today's hearing is going to be their
first comprehensive look at this Federal rulemaking by stealth.
Finally, during this very weak economic recovery with weak
job creation, the Administration should be looking to reduce
regulations, not to create another lair of job-killing
regulation. The National Ocean Policy is the wrong idea at the
wrong time. It adds complexity and jurisdictional ambiguity to
what is already a very difficult permitting environment.
Thank you for the opportunity to comment on this far-
reaching, poorly conceptualized and inadequately prepared
initiative.
Mr. Young. Thank you, Mr. Parady.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Parady follows:]

Statement of Fred Parady, Executive Director, Alaska Miners Association

Good morning members of the committee. My name is Fred Parady,
Executive Director of the Alaska Miners Association (AMA). The Alaska
Miners Association is a non-profit membership organization established
in 1939 to represent the mining industry in Alaska. The AMA is a 501 C-
6 International non-profit composed of more than 1400 individual
prospectors, geologists and engineers, vendors, suction dredge miners,
small family mines, junior mining companies, and major mining
companies. Our members look for and produce gold, silver, platinum,
diamonds, lead, zinc, copper, coal, limestone, sand and gravel, crushed
stone, armor rock, and other materials. Our members live and work
throughout Alaska, Canada, Russia, Mongolia, and the lower 49 states.
We have submitted the required documents for the record.
The proposed National Ocean Policy will have a significantly
disproportionate impact on Alaska's resource dependent industries and
our economy as a whole, for the simple and straightforward reason that
at approximately 34,000 miles, Alaska has more coastline than all of
the lower 48 states combined.
The existing regulatory regime is already cumbersome and complex, a
blend of State and Federal permitting and oversight that reflects
tangled history but is not a streamlined, sensible process. The
National Ocean Policy simply adds a layer of increased bureaucracy that
will further slow already slow processes with no concomitant benefit to
the environment. It is our strong view that the Coastal Marine Spatial
Planning/Regional Planning Body structure is an unauthorized new
regulatory program.
The ecosystem-based management goal as specified will undoubtedly
require vast quantities of scientific data. Given that the purported
lack of sufficient information itself is often the basis for third
party legal claims by Environmental Non-government Organization (eNGOs)
to block development projects, this new requirement will generate
another endless round of study and halt common sense decisions in their
tracks. Natural resource managers need to use best available data to
move forward and make the best decisions with information available.
Clearly, uncertainty is heightened by the National Ocean Policy's
stated policy of reaching to onshore activities that may have impacts
on marine waters. Section 404 of clean water act and the ubiquitous
nature of wetlands means upland activities already are highly regulated
in Alaska. A plethora of petitions to list additional species under ESA
onshore and off are adding substantial burdens to landowners and
resource industries, without resulting in any recognizable progress for
the underlying species. But one example is that hardrock mines in
Alaska require over 60 State and Federal authorizations to proceed with
development. The National Ocean Policy adds yet another another hurdle
to overcome, and will serve to provide an additional platform for third
party eNGOs to litigate against projects that fail to meet the
informational requirements or expectations for the National Ocean
Policy.
AMA is further concerned that Coastal and Marine Spatial Planning
will likely lead to far reaching use restrictions on marine waters that
will over-ride the social and economic needs of Alaskans. No one
present at the signing of the original wetlands legislation anticipated
that it would be anything more than a mechanism to insure ducks had
sufficient wetlands for breeding. Yet look at the ways in which
regulatory interpretation has broadened from that date. Broad swaths of
submerged lands could be restricted in exclusionary zones for a
nebulous national agenda of ``ecosystem based management''. One
specific Alaska example regards the recovery of gold resources off the
shores of Nome, which the State recently successfully leased. Such
activity would be slowed if not stopped. Even if restricted zones were
more modest in size and scope, use restrictions in strategic marine
corridors necessary for resource transport and shipping could be
devastating to our marine dependent industries.
One note worth making is that a justification for Coastal and
Marine Spatial Planning is to resolve conflict among diverse resource
interests, yet AMA and other resource associations are firmly aligned
in opposing this overreaching effort. We are all concerned that NOP
will create far more difficulties for these industries than it will
resolve.
In closing, AMA strongly urges Congress to maintain an integral and
substantial oversight role in these broad efforts to change the way
ocean and coastal resources are managed. The power of appropriation
could and should be used to restrain the premature implementation of
the National Ocean Policy. Congressional oversight is needed to ensure
implementation of the National Ocean Policy does not prevent Federal
Agencies from fulfilling their core congressional mandates to
adjudicate needed federal permits and leases.
AMA notes that there has not been meaningful stakeholder
engagement. Detailed economic analysis of impacts of the policy should
be completed and available for full public and Congressional review
before policy implantation. The Handbook for Regional Coastal Marine
Spatial Planning must be subject to public input, review, and comment
before implementation.
At best, we believe the National Oceans Council should utilize
pilot projects in geographic areas where NOP and CMSP has some
acceptance, before broad swaths of ocean and marine areas, such as
Alaska, have this policy imposed upon them.
Finally, during this very tenuous economic recovery with
accompanying high unemployment, Congress and the administration should
be untangling the complex web of complex statutes and regulations that
are strangling our productive resource sector of our economy and
killing job creation. National Ocean Policy does exactly the opposite--
it adds complexity and jurisdictional ambiguity. Congress, the States
and the private sector should have a more meaningful role in
development and implementation of such far-reaching policies for State
and Federal waters and upland resources.
Thank you for the opportunity to comment on this far-reaching
initiative.
______

Mr. Young. Mr. Sturgeon, Is there any forestry left in
Alaska, by the way?
Mr. Sturgeon. Pardon?
Mr. Young. Is there any forestry left in the State of
Alaska?
Mr. Sturgeon. We're definitely the last of the Mohicans,
but there's a few of us left. We're trying to stay alive.
Mr. Young. One of the disappointments in my career has been
the fact that at one time there were 15,000 high-paying jobs in
the State of Alaska and I think we may have maybe 80.
Mr. Sturgeon. That may be a little bit of an exaggeration,
but not many of us left.

STATEMENT OF JOHN STURGEON, DIRECTOR,
ALASKA FOREST ASSOCIATION

Mr. Sturgeon. Good morning, Representative Young. I'd like
to thank you for the opportunity to provide comments on the
National Ocean Policy's program. I'm here today representing
the Alaska Forest Association. The Alaska Forest Association
has represented Alaska's forest products industry since 1955.
Alaska has operated our forestry businesses in a
responsible manner for many years. I was a member of the tasks
force that developed Alaska's original Forest Practice Act.
That Act was designed to ensure that both water quality and
fish habitat were maintained at or above State standards during
and after road construction and logging operations. The Forest
Practice Act has worked very well for Alaska.
We have maintained excellent water quality and our
fisheries have been maintained in many areas and even improved.
For example, the Harris River watershed in Southeast Alaska was
heavily logged between 1985 and 1995 by Forest Service
contractors in conformance with state and Federal rules and
management practices.
We are happy to report to you that salmon returns in these
two heavily logged watersheds have doubled since logging
operations commenced many years ago. That area of our state has
been developed and the developed areas are already managed
responsibly.
Our state's streams, rivers and coasts do not need
restoration. Expanding existing Federal regulations and
permitting functions is not necessary in Alaska, and a through
cost-benefit analysis should be performed prior to making any
decision to expand any of the existing Federal programs.
The state and Federal agencies have already developed
methods of coordinating their various permitting and regulatory
programs. An expansive Federal program to coordinate permitting
and regulatory issues is not needed. For example, we ended our
Coastal Zone Program last year and we have experienced no
environmental impacts. Instead, we have eliminated the cost of
that program and have reassigned most of the former Coastal
Zone Program staff to more meaningful work. It would seem that
this new program flies in the face of the general mood of the
country for less government rather than more.
Climate change issues seem to dominate much of the draft
Implementation Plan for the National Ocean Policy. While there
is still considerable debate about the climate issue, we would
like to note that Alaska's coastal streams are not sensitive as
those in the Lower 48. Studies have shown that some warming
would actually be beneficial.
What is needed in Alaska is a more business-friendly
regulatory climate. Endless regulatory creep makes it very
difficult to maintain profitable businesses and the jobs those
businesses support, particularly in small communities where
most timber operations take place. If the Federal Government
truly wants to help in Alaska, the draft National Ocean Policy
Implementation Plan should be revised to concentrate on
eliminating redundant or unnecessary programs, regulations and
permitting functions.
The number of regulations small logging companies already
have to deal with is truly mind boggling. Unlike large
companies, small businesses cannot afford to hire an
environmental manager just to assure they're in compliance with
the many, many environmental regulations that they have to face
today. We urge you not to add yet one more layer of unnecessary
environmental regulations on top of what we already have to
deal with.
Once again, thank you very much for the opportunity to
testify today and we appreciate your attention to this
important issue.
Mr. Young. Thank you, Mr. Sturgeon.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Sturgeon follows:]

Statement of John Sturgeon, Director, Alaska Forest Association

Thank you for the opportunity to testify on the potential impacts
of the new National Ocean Policy.
My name is John Sturgeon and I am a Director for the Alaska Forest
Association. The AFA is the statewide association representing
companies engaged in forest practices including support companies. We
have 115 members and represent timber companies, loggers, trucking and
towing companies, suppliers, and other members who have a stake in the
future of a vital and hopefully healthy timber economy in Alaska.
We have several concerns with President Obama's ocean zoning
executive order.
The lands in Alaska are mostly undeveloped and the lands that have
been and are being developed are managed responsibly and in conformance
with State and federal regulations. There is no need for
``restoration'' of the lands in our State; we have abundant wetlands,
excellent air and water quality, we have increased our fisheries and
our wildlife is doing well. This new Policy will likely result in new
regulatory burdens without significant environmental improvements for
our State.
The National Oceans Policy purports to be a framework for
coordinating the efforts of many federal agencies, but the draft
Implementation Plan appears to encourage significant changes in federal
regulations and programs. For instance, the ``ecosystem-based
management'' concept in the implementation Plan seems to assume there
is some critical need to address climate change issues and sequester
carbon. Yet the plan seems to mostly ignore the costs impacts of taking
dramatic action on this hypothetical crisis. The draft Plan indicates
that implementation will require grants, new funding for National Ocean
Policy priorities and directs that new management practices be
developed; but there seems to be no mention of any cost-benefit
analysis for these expenditures. Additionally, the draft Plan promotes
the expansion of the Coastal Zone Management Act, but that Act is not
currently utilized in Alaska.
The draft Plan discusses improved efficiency of permitting, but it
would be a more helpful plan if it were more clearly aimed at reducing
the permitting requirements and eliminating redundant permitting and
regulatory processes. The draft Plan indicates there will be a
``special-planning'' effort, but we don't need additional land planning
help in Alaska. Instead, we need to foster a more friendly business
climate so we can continue to develop our resources in a responsible
manner. The loss of thousands of timber industry jobs in Southeast
Alaska is a good example of federal planning gone awry. In the
Southeast region of our State, the federal government has monopoly
power over the timber resources, but excessive environmental zeal in
the national forest planning process has resulted in the loss of 90% of
our timber supply from federal lands. Since the State and private lands
in the region are very limited, we have lost about 85% of our industry
employment due to the loss of access to federal timber resources.
The summary in the draft Plan states that this planning ``will be
done without creating new bureaucracy and without negative economic
impacts'', but that doesn't seem likely. This new Policy appears to be
headed toward more costly, restrictive rules and regulations.
Congress has already decided what laws and requirements apply to
coastal and ocean development and what policies and criteria federal
agencies should use to decide whether to grant a permit for a
particular project. Overlaying the President's ocean zoning policy and
plan on top of the existing statutory and regulatory framework creates
uncertainty and conflict. Both of which are problematic if you are
trying to encourage economic development, jobs, and certainty in
permitting.
Section 5(b) of the Executive Order says that ``executive
departments', agencies' or office's decisions and actions affecting the
oceans and coasts. . .will be guided by the stewardship principles and
national priority objectives set forth in the Final Recommendations''.
So the Executive Order says agencies must follow the President's
policies and objectives when making decisions. This mandatory language
is followed by language in the Executive Order that says ``to the
extent consistent with applicable law'' but what does that mean?
Does that mean that a permitting agency deciding whether to grant a
permit follows the direction of Congress in the Outer Continental Shelf
Lands Act which sets out a policy with Congressional direction to
promote development and to work with States and local communities in
making permitting and leasing decisions on a case by case basis? How
does a permitting agency with that Congressional statutory framework
fit that framework with the President's EO which says the policy
federal agencies should be following are the stewardship principles
designed to protect oceans and bolster conservation, (Section 1 of EO)
and to follow the guidance of the National Ocean Council (Section 1 of
the EO) not Congress, or States or local communities or stakeholders.
If the EO did not mandate federal agencies to follow the direction
and policy, if it said federal agencies ``may'' apply the policies and
principles of the EO if the action they are contemplating is not
already covered by an act of Congress and if the EO said federal
agencies must continue to give deference to, and cooperate and
coordinate with states, local communities, and stakeholders as set out
in current laws and regulations then the EO would avoid conflict and
uncertainty in federal decision-making. But it does not say that. It
uses mandatory language and while it contains some catch all language
``consistent with applicable law'' the language is not enough to save
the EO from becoming a problem.
How would any member of the public or industry supportive of a
permit or development know if the federal agency made its decision
based on the policy and requirements in statute or those set out in the
EO, or how much weight it gave to specific factors in its decision
making process? If you do not know which factors were relied on and to
what degree, then federal agencies can just follow the principles of
the EO and give lip service to the actual laws and regulations that are
on the books now. And companies looking to invest and create jobs are
going to be concerned at a minimum that it is uncertain what factors
will be brought to bear on their project.
This EO is trying to act in an area Congress has already acted in
and given direction to federal agencies. If the President wants to
create a new framework for federal action in the ocean and coastal
areas he should follow the proper procedure and introduce a bill that
sets a national policy on oceans like H.R. 21 was introduced in the
110th Congress and allow the issues to be openly debated.
The federal government should also be required to follow the
procedures of the Administrative Procedure Act which require federal
agencies to follow rules and provide an opportunity for the public to
comment, the Regulatory Flexibility Act which requires an estimate of
the impacts on businesses from federal agency action, and the National
Environmental Policy Act, which requires studies and analysis of any
major federal action, which a new national ocean policy certainly
qualifies for. (Since a timber sale for 10 acres qualifies) All these
protections should apply to this federal action in this EO because
imposing a new national ocean policy is very significant.
______

Mr. Young. Dr. Farrell.

STATEMENT OF JOHN W. FARRELL, EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR, U.S. ARCTIC
RESEARCH COMMISSION

Mr. Farrell. Good morning, Chairman Young. Thank you for
inviting me to speak to you today. Fran Ulmer, the Chair of the
Arctic Research Commission, sends her greetings and regrets
that she could not be here to testify today. She's attending
her son's wedding.
My name is John Farrell and I am the Executive Director of
the Commission. My principal duty is to develop and help
implement a National Arctic Research Policy and to recommend
goals and objectives for Arctic scientific research in service
to the nation. I've submitted my full statement, which I ask to
be made part of the hearing record.
I last testified before this Subcommittee in favor of your
bill. That was H.R. 2864 to amend the Hydrographic Services
Improvement Act. The Commissioners have asked me to pass along
their congratulations to you on the passage of the Arctic
Marine Shipping Assessment, an Act that you sponsored and
worked on with the Commission.
My message today to you is simply this: The five Arctic-
related actions in the National Ocean Policy will improve safe
operations in the Arctic for both the public and private
sectors and will boost our economic growth and enhance
security. These five actions will create a unifying framework
that will do the following: Improve coordination and
integration for those who operate in the Arctic, reduce
conflicts and delays that hinder economic development, increase
operating efficiencies and reduce uncertainty in the
marketplace while at the same time ensuring that our oceans
will remain productive for future generations.
These actions were selected with considerable input from
Alaska stakeholders and from others with Arctic experience, and
we will continue to refine these actions based on further
public comment and input. The first action is to advance marine
mapping and charting as you've previously called for.
Charts are central to our understanding of the region and
are essential to ensuring, in the words of Lieutenant Governor
Mead Treadwell and Commissioner Dan Sullivan, a quote, a safe,
secure and reliable Arctic marine transportation system. That's
the first action.
The second is to enhance communications systems in the
Arctic. Improved early warning and emergency response systems
will speed our ability to assess and respond to emerging events
and therefore minimize downtime. An example is implementing the
automatic identification system, the AIS.
The third action will be to augment our basic oceanographic
observations in the Chukchi and Beaufort Seas. A greater
understanding of how the ecosystem is changing will serve as a
guide for resource managers and provide subsistence-based
communities with information they need to adapt to variable
conditions.
Fourth, we aim to improve preparation and response
management to emergencies that might arise from resource
development and marine transportation. While greater
international cooperation has already begun, there's room for
more coordination, planning and training.
Finally, the fifth action from the Arctic Strategic Action
Plan is to better observe and forecast Arctic sea ice, a topic
whose importance and significance is well known to the people
in this room. Improving sea ice maps, analyses and forecasts
will support homeland and national security, safe ship
operation and navigation and resource development.
These five actions I've discussed are part of a
comprehensive National Ocean Policy that has been called for by
two bipartisan commissions for over a decade.
In closing, the Policy's emphasis is on more efficient and
effective uses of existing authorities and resources. The
Policy is implemented under existing law and does not impose
any new regulations or alter any existing Federal authorities,
inland or otherwise. The Policy does not impose any
restrictions on ocean activities or direct that any area be
designated for specific use or be off-limits to specific
activities.
The Commission supports the Federal Government's commitment
to continue to engage state, local, tribal partners, industry,
the public and other stakeholders in refining and implementing
these five actions.
Thank you again for considering the Commission's views on
this policy.
Mr. Young. Thank you, Doctor. I thank the panel.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Farrell follows:]

Statement of John Farrell, Executive Director,
U.S. Arctic Research Commission

Good morning Chairman Young. Thank you for inviting me to speak on
National Ocean Policy, and the relevance to Alaska.
My name is John Farrell, and I am the Executive Director of the
U.S. Arctic Research Commission (USARC), a small, independent Federal
agency, created by the Arctic Research and Policy Act (ARPA) of 1984. I
testify today on behalf of Commission Chair Fran Ulmer and the other
presidentially appointed Commissioners.
As the Executive Director of the Commission, my principal duty is
to work with the Commissioners to develop and recommend an integrated
national Arctic research policy and to put forward a biennial report
identifying goals and objectives for Arctic research. In addition, I
assist the Interagency Arctic Research and Policy Committee (IARPC),
also created by ARPA, to establish a national Federal Arctic research
program plan to implement the policy and to fulfill the research goals.
I'm here today to speak about the Arctic component of the draft
Implementation Plan for National Ocean Policy. This policy was created
by the National Ocean Council in response to President Obama's
Executive Order 13547, titled ``Stewardship of the Oceans, Our Coasts,
and the Great Lakes,'' that was released on July 19, 2010.
The National Ocean Council asked me and Robert Winokur, the Deputy
Oceanographer of the U.S. Navy, to help lead a team to draft the Arctic
portion of this policy, and that's what I'll testify about today.
Please note that the actions I will discuss today are not final. I
look forward to reviewing the comments recently submitted by the public
on the draft plan, so that we can adjust the Arctic section to better
reflect the needs and concerns identified by the public.
Draft Implementation Plan for National Ocean Policy
A draft Implementation Plan has been created for National Ocean
Policy. This Plan lays out the initial steps required to achieve the
vision and charge of the Policy, and addresses the most pressing marine
challenges that face our nation. The Plan describes the specific
actions within the scope of the National Ocean Council's charge that
the Federal Government will undertake to deliver tangible results to
the American people.
The Plan does not encompass all Federal actions relating to oceans.
Instead, it focuses on nine priority objectives. For each, a suite of
actions and their intended outcomes are described. For each action, key
milestones are outlined, lead agencies or other responsible entities
are identified, and timeframes are listed. This structure is designed
to provide a clear layout of what will be accomplished, by whom, and
when.
The purpose of the plan is to help unify Federal efforts within the
scope of the National Ocean Policy around clearly articulated
priorities and to identify a path to achieve them, to help meet the
essential needs of Americans, and to ensure positive outcomes in
addressing some of the most pressing challenges facing our ocean and
the many Americans who rely on keeping our oceans healthy and
productive.
The National Ocean Policy is structured around nine priority
objectives, and one of these, ``Changing Conditions in the Arctic,''
pertains directly to Alaska. The Arctic Ocean is identified as a
priority region--the other priorities refer to issues rather than
regions--because rapidly diminishing sea ice is presenting
opportunities and challenges with great implications for Alaska and the
nation as a whole.
Scope and focus of testimony
Today, I will limit my testimony to the Arctic portion of the
Implementation Plan, because I am familiar with it. I will not discuss
other, broad themes in the Plan, such as ecosystem-based management,
and coastal and marine spatial planning. They are beyond my area of
expertise and the Commission has not developed a position on those
elements of the Plan.
Robert Winokur and I led a team of experts, from a wide range of
Federal Departments and Agencies, to draft this Plan objective titled,
``Changing Conditions in the Arctic.'' Our goal was to address
environmental stewardship needs in the Arctic Ocean and adjacent
coastal areas in the face of climate-induced and other environmental
changes.
``Changing Conditions in the Arctic''
The United States has broad interests in the Arctic. These range
from national security and territorial sovereignty to sustainable
management of domestic energy and living resources, environmental
protection, cultural heritage, and scientific research. These interests
must be addressed within the context of change, environmentally,
market-driven, and otherwise. The Nation, the State of Alaska, Tribal
governments, and coastal communities are faced with critical decisions
about how best to manage natural resources and sustainable human
activities in this region. They must do so in cooperation with other
countries that also have equities in the Arctic.
One of the most dramatic changes is the decrease in the areal
extent and thickness of Arctic Ocean sea ice. Diminishment of the ice,
and thawing permafrost leave large areas of coastal Alaska vulnerable
to threats from rising sea level, stronger storms, and increased
erosion. Marine and terrestrial ecosystems, regional weather patterns,
and even the global climate system are affected by the retreat of sea
ice. Ice-diminished transit routes in the Bering, Chukchi, and Beaufort
Seas and other regions of the Arctic invite increased international
resource development, commerce, and transportation, which will bring
both new socioeconomic and environmental opportunities and stressors.
Such rapid changes underscore the need for improved and timelier
information across diverse scales and disciplines to provide effective
stewardship, to ensure that natural resource management and economic
development in the region are environmentally sustainable, and to
support effective early warning and emergency response systems.
Improved science and technology are needed to help the scientific
community forecast changes with greater certainty and provide guidance
for local communities, resource managers, and commercial interests in
this remote region.
Improvements in daily and weekly sea ice forecasts, for example,
will benefit local community activities and safety, while also helping
to provide a safe, secure, and reliable Arctic marine transportation
system.
Improved hydrographic mapping and bathymetric charting for mariners
and for other users of marine transportation systems are also needed.
Such products will reduce the risks of maritime incidents and will
facilitate more resilient ocean and coastal economies.
Another crucial resource will be a distributed biological
observatory that will allow us to collect and share baseline ecosystem
data, and better monitor, assess, and forecast environmental conditions
under changing climate scenarios.
For the Arctic region, this draft Implementation Plan strives to
balance economic growth, community resilience, and environmental
stewardship. By working through interagency structures, and by placing
an emphasis on improved coordination with the State of Alaska and other
stakeholders with common equities, the draft Plan will ensure that
initiatives to advance national priorities are informed by the latest
developments in science and technology.
The transboundary effectiveness of all of these activities,
including considering the needs of the indigenous people and
communities of Alaska, can be enhanced through sustained cooperation
with the State of Alaska and the Arctic Council.
Five actions in ``Changing Conditions in the Arctic''
Action 1: Improve Arctic environmental response management.
The melting of sea ice and global market forces will encourage
natural resource development in the Arctic. A commensurate rise in
marine traffic will likely increase the potential for significant
accidents and pollution incidents.
Alaska's Lieutenant Governor Mead Treadwell recently pointed out
the need to pay ``close attention to communities, the coastal
communities, people who depend on subsistence resources, people who
depend on whaling or sealing, or going after walrus to make sure that
any oil spill response in the arctic works very closely with community
members.''
Preparing and responding to emergencies related to resource
development and marine transportation in the Arctic requires improved
coordination, planning, and training; stronger interagency research;
and enhanced State, Federal, and international cooperation and
collaboration.
In the event that responsible private parties fail or are unable to
meet their statutory responsibilities for prevention, mitigation, and
cleanup of marine pollution events in the Arctic, this action addresses
development and implementation of response coordination, procedures,
and decision support systems to protect communities and ecosystems from
oil spills and other incidents associated with resource extraction
(e.g., oil and gas) and Arctic marine transportation (e.g., commercial
shipping and tourism).
Specifically, this action supports the development and
implementation of response coordination and decision-support mechanisms
to support agency responsibilities, such as NOAA's Arctic Environmental
Response Management Application (ERMA), Alaska Joint Assessment Team,
State-Federal Alaska Data Integration Working Group, and Alaska
Regional Response Team (ARRT). A number of Federal departments and
agencies are charged with ensuring that resource development projects
and marine transportation comply with health, safety, and environmental
protection standards. Implementation of this action will require close
coordination with a number of existing entities, including the Arctic
Interagency Policy Committee, the Interagency Working Group on
Coordination of Domestic Energy Development and Permitting in Alaska,
and internationally with the working groups and task forces of the
Arctic Council.
Action 2: Observe and forecast Arctic sea ice.
Sea ice forecasting is one of the most urgent and timely ocean
issues in the Arctic region. Continued rapid loss of sea ice will be a
major driver of changes throughout the Arctic, creating opportunities
and challenges. Polar regions, although physically remote from major
population centers, have profound significance for the global climate.
They act not only as regulators of global temperature, but also as
barometers of change. The loss of sea ice affects marine access,
regional weather, global climate, marine and terrestrial ecosystems,
and coastal communities. For example, a better understanding of how
loss of sea ice in the Bering Sea (the location of the largest
commercial fishery in the United States) will influence the entire
marine ecosystem is of critical importance.
All-season observations from spaceborne and airborne platforms,
ships and ice camps, and instruments on and under Arctic sea ice
provide short-term information on ice conditions for tactical users.
Such observations also support research into understanding Arctic
processes and environmental variability and in improving forecasts.
This action will improve daily to weekly sea ice models and provide
forecasts and new seasonal predictions in formats that are amenable to
a wide variety of government agencies and regional users.
Action 3: Implement a distributed biological observatory.
Changes in location and timing of the seasonal ice edge can have
profound effects on benthic and pelagic marine ecology and human
activity. These changes affect the distribution and abundance of baleen
whales, and the ability of ice-dependent marine mammals to reproduce
and rear young on ice. Likewise, stranding of ice-dependent species on
land reduces their likelihood of survival or reproductive rate, and may
make the animals less available to subsistence hunters. The effects of
these changes on Arctic ecosystems and Alaska Natives who depend on
these species are poorly understood.
Continued observations are needed to form the basis of
understanding the changing processes in the Arctic region. A
distributed biological observatory is one distinct component of the
integrated Arctic Observing Network. A distributed biological
observatory will improve our understanding of how changes in climate
and the Arctic ecosystem will affect subsistence cultures in the
region. New collaborations and partnerships will increase our capacity
to monitor and assess changing environmental conditions. In addition,
all participating agencies will be better able to determine and
mitigate the effects of their decisions on marine resources, resulting
in improved conservation, protection, and management of Arctic coastal
and ocean resources.
Action 4: Enhance communication systems in the Arctic.
Communications are essential to implementing the Arctic priorities
in the National Ocean Policy. Early warning and emergency response
systems would improve our ability to assess the timing and nature of
emerging events in the Arctic region, such as environmental disasters,
and will improve responses to them.
The Federal Government will advance two aspects of communications:
technical capabilities and outreach. On the technical side, the Federal
Government will strengthen existing communication systems to allow
vessels, aircraft, and other users to effectively communicate with each
other and to receive information (e.g., real-time weather and sea ice
forecasts) that will significantly decrease the risk of environmental
damage and loss of life and property at sea. On the outreach side,
special emphasis will be placed on communications with native
communities. This is in addition to enhancing the technical
capabilities in these areas. The enhancements described here will build
upon and support the guidelines and responsibilities in the Arctic
Search and Rescue Agreement, to which the United States is a signatory.
Action 5: Advance Arctic mapping and charting.
Lt. Gov. Treadwell, who is also the former Chairman of the U.S.
Arctic Research Commission, has long been a proponent of additional and
higher-resolution imagery, mapping and charting of Alaska's lands, both
on and offshore. He and other Alaska State leaders, such as Cora
Campbell, Commissioner of the Alaska Department of Fish and Game, and
Doug Vincent Lang, Acting Director of the Division of Wildlife
Conservation, have underscored the importance of such activities to
Alaskans.
As I too stressed in my testimony before this Subcommittee on May
6, 2010, in the hearing on H.R. 2864 titled, ``Charting the Unknown:
America's Arctic Seafloor,'' that maps and charts are central to our
understanding of the Arctic region, and are essential for effective
stewardship of this rapidly evolving environment. Knowledge of Arctic
marine ecosystems, marine transportation, Arctic sovereignty and
governance, and climate change adaptation strategies that coastal
communities must develop to sustain their cultures and traditions all
fundamentally rely on maps to visualize and depict critical aspects of
the operating environment.
While ocean and coastal mapping in general is part of the
``Observations, Mapping, and Infrastructure'' priority objective in the
draft Plan, this action will support the unique needs for accurate
hydrographic surveys and shoreline mapping essential to modernizing
nautical charts of U.S. Arctic waters and the Alaskan coastline. The
action will enhance maritime commerce and help coastal communities
develop adaptation strategies and disaster preparedness plans. It will
increase the effectiveness of decisions regarding permitting, future
ecosystem studies, and environmental stewardship. Mapping also supports
biological habitat characterizations for ecosystem stewardship and
restoration, development of storm readiness adaptation strategies for
coastal communities facing the impacts of climate change, and emergency
preparedness and response tools such as Arctic ERMA.
How was the draft Plan developed?
The plan was drafted with the involvement of stakeholders and
sought significant input, at various stages of development, from
national, regional, and local stakeholders and the general public.
Two public comments periods (from January through April, and from
June through July) on a full-content outline of the plan were held in
2011. Another comment period, on the draft Plan, has just closed.
Public listening sessions were held in Barrow on June 9, 2011 and
in Anchorage on June 10th. And to reach even further, a webinar, co-
sponsored by the U.S. Arctic Research Commission and the National Ocean
Council, and hosted by the Alaska Center for Climate Assessment &
Policy, of the University of Alaska Fairbanks, was held on April 19,
2011, and included a Q&A session.
Furthermore, the Governance Coordinating Committee, composed of
State, Tribal, and local government officials, such as Mark Robbins,
from the Alaska Governor's Office, and the Ocean Research Advisory
Panel, including the Anchorage-based Director of the Alaska Ocean
Observing System, Molly McCammon, provided input for the Plan.
Comments and suggestions from these efforts, such as from the State
of Alaska, from industry organizations, from non-governmental
organizations and from individuals were duly considered and in many
cases incorporated into what we drafted.
Fiscal Responsibility
In developing the Arctic component of the draft Plan, we were
instructed by the National Ocean Council to consider three questions:
1.  What activities can be accomplished with existing Federal
and partner resources?
2.  How can existing resources be re-purposed for greater
efficiency and effectiveness?
3.  Where do we need to include activities that with minimal
additional resources may allow for additional truly
transformative and far-reaching impacts?
These questions are addressed in the actions developed in the draft
Implementation Plan, and are specifically detailed in the milestone
section.
How will the Implementation Plan increase efficiencies?
The Plan identifies not only resource requirements, but also
expected efficiencies to be gained in plan implementation among Federal
agencies, and with State, tribal, and local government partners.
Through increased communication, coordination, and integration across
all levels of government, agencies will streamline processes and reduce
duplicative efforts, while better leveraging limited resources.
How will the draft Plan be used?
Once final, each participating Federal agency will begin
implementing the actions contained in the Implementation Plan. Federal
agencies will coordinate and collaborate with State, Tribal, and local
authorities, regional governance structures, academic institutions,
nongovernmental organizations, recreational users, private enterprise,
and other stakeholders. The Plan will be adaptive and allow for
modifications. The Plan will be reviewed annually and modified, as
needed, based on new information or changing conditions. Given the
uniqueness of Alaska, regional coordination, planning and
implementation of the Plan will be critical. Actions will need to be
tailored to regional needs and priorities.
In summary, the U.S. Arctic Research Commission supports the draft
Implementation Plan for National Ocean Policy and specifically the
actions proposed in the national priority objective, ``Changing
Conditions in the Arctic.'' These actions are not yet final. But if
properly supported, the Commission thinks these actions should
significantly advance our knowledge and understanding of the Arctic
Ocean, and these will be of great use to resource managers and policy
makers responsible for the overall economy of the State of Alaska, the
focus of this field hearing.
Thank you for considering the Commission's views on the National
Ocean Policy.
______

Mr. Young. Ms. Moriarty, if the Administration continues to
tell us that the National Ocean Policy and Marine Spatial
Planning is not zoning, isn't that exactly what the Department
of the Interior called it in the draft five-year plan?
Ms. Moriarty. Congressman Young, yes. In fact, in the draft
programmatic Environmental Impact Statement for this next
year's leasing program, they said--the Department of the
Interior stated that Coastal and Marine Spatial Planning,
quote, has emerged as a new paradigm and planning strategy for
coordinating all marine and coastal activities and facility
constructions within the context of a National Zoning Plan,
unquote.
So to us that is a concern because clearly zoning of
Alaska's oceans and coasts in advance of projects could
severely impact resource development.
Mr. Young. That was my interpretation. I'm glad you brought
it up and clarified that.
Mr. Parady, if the reach of the Marine Spatial Planning
Initiative goes to the head of each watershed in Alaska, that's
another concern. This is not just about oceans. Is there
anywhere in the state that your operation would not be
affected?
Mr. Parady. I believe it reaches to every mining operation
in the state, including those that are in advanced stages of
exploration, such as Donlin or Pebble or any of the advanced
exploration projects that are currently ongoing in the state.
Mr. Young. OK. Again, do you have any sense of what
criteria a potential mining operation will face when they get
all the state and Federal permits? I heard it was 55 permits.
What do you think this will add?
Mr. Parady. Mr. Chairman, I think it will add, say, at
least a year to a permitting timeline that already stretches
through the five--the Pebble Project Limited Partnership, I
think, has invested over $120 million in their environmental
studies and has yet to reach the permitting process, and I
think it's duplicative. The number I have on the number of
permits required is 68. So somewhere between your 55, Eric's 60
to 70 and my 68 is an enormous amount of environmental baseline
data produced under NEPA and the Clean Water Act, et cetera.
Mr. Young. Mr. Sturgeon, the draft National Ocean Policy
Plan says that one of the national priorities and objectives is
to address the major impacts of urban and sub-urban development
on agriculture, including forestry and animals, on ocean,
coastal and Great Lake waters. That sounds like your industry
may be facing new restriction on forestry operations. I think
in your testimony you already followed everything that's been
required by you, right.
Mr. Sturgeon. Representative Young, I certainly think so.
What really concerns us about this when we talked earlier about
the Coastal Zone Program when it first started, we thought it
would be something that would protect waterfowl habitat and
that kind of thing. But what happened very quickly is that they
said anything that went inland, like salmon spawning, for
example, and birds, migratory birds would go from the oceans to
inland or anything that would transition in between would be
part of the regulatory process. So this concerns us really a
lot because we think this will affect our operations directly,
so it's definitely something that's going to affect our
industry.
Mr. Young. Well, Mr. Sturgeon, again, I think the broad
plan states that one of the action items is to protect 2
billion acres of land and to identify the high conservation
priorities with at least 35 percent being forest lands of the
highest value for maintaining water quality.
Do you have any idea where these high conservation priority
lands will be identified and who will identify them?
Mr. Sturgeon. Well, I don't know, but I can guess from past
practices that if there's high-value timber there, it obviously
will end up in the priorities. So I don't know where those are.
Mr. Young. Again, do you think it will be--does anybody
have any idea under this plan who would identify it.
Mr. Sturgeon. No, we have no idea. It's one of the problems
of the plan. It's really hard to evaluate it because it's vague
in a lot of areas and the vagueness certainly concerns us right
now.
Mr. Young. Dr. Farrell, with all due respect, you said
there wouldn't be any more regulations. They have already
started implementing regulations. On what basis did you make
that statement.
Mr. Farrell. Well, just from my understanding and from what
the Administration has been giving us.
Mr. Young. You've got to respectfully question the
Administration.
I want to ask all of you: We're sitting here banging this
Executive Order. There's been a reason why the bills, more than
four bills that have been introduced on ocean policy haven't
even got the light of day regardless of who's in control. You
notice we took over control just a few years ago or two years
ago. Before that, why didn't the Congress act? Do you think
there can be a bill that would be beneficial, but still address
some of the issues of the policies of the ocean?
I'm one that believes in protecting the ocean, but this
thing is so large and broad and the regulations--and by the
way, rarely do lawsuits occur against the permittee, the permit
person that applies for it. It occurs on the action of the
agencies and did they do it right. That's what happens. It's
never about--against the mining industry, against the oil
industry or against the forestry industry; it's done against
the agencies.
With this many agencies it looks to me that this would be a
great feeding ground for lawyers against the agency with the
issue of the permit. Do you think we can write a bill--could
there be a bill written that would solve the problems and
concerns you have? Instead of just saying no, I'm always
worried about--remember I said about the boy that ended up in
jail. Sometimes it might be better if we wrote some
legislation. Do you think as stakeholders you could be able to
write something that would protect your interests and still get
something done? Anybody, I don't care.
Mr. Parady. I would only respond that I think clearly
that's what's needed. Having a stakeholder engagement process
in the concept of Federal rulemaking without having had the
necessary legislative debate and creation of a balance of
interest through statute is what's exactly missing here, is
that chance for back and forth give and take so that we all get
to put our views on the table and pound out some sort of
reasonable compromise.
These regulations are created in a--it's almost like the
old-time convention environment, the back-room environment
where they hadn't seen sufficient light of day. They need a
legislative debate.
Mr. Young. Anybody else?
Ms. Moriarty. I would only add that I agree with Mr. Parady
that, first of all, the stakeholders, if you're going to have
an effective policy to regulate something as broad as our
oceans, ocean is different here Alaska and across the Nation.
We as stakeholders have not been invited to participate.
I guess I would just go back to my original statement in my
testimony that before we try and develop a brand new policy,
why don't we try and improve the existing policies that we
already have that protect several aspects of the oceans. We
think that should be the first place to start. If there are
gaps, then maybe there can be a piece of legislation to protect
the oceans, but unless all the stakeholders are engaged and
involved from the very beginning through all the details, I
don't see how it would work.
Mr. Young. Anybody else?
Dr. Farrell, U.S. Arctic Research, I'm going to make a
suggestion. I'm one that believes we are an Arctic nation
because we're in the Arctic. And I would like suggest
respectfully that the Commission stay in the Arctic. Don't get
below it. That's just a little bit of advice. Because we do
have challenges in the Arctic. It is an unknown area.
But when I see the forest industry involved, the mining
industry involved, the oil industry involved, the fishing
industry involved, I get a little bit concerned when they
haven't been at the table. Your table is relatively new, I
mean, with all due respect. Climate change is happening. We
probably have a navigational lead or we have a lot of different
issues up there, which we did not have before. But these other
ones are a known quantity. That's why I'm really looking for a
possibility--I've asked staff maybe to look at it--that will
offset this proposal.
I really think this is just breeding a total standstill of
any activities and not only in the ocean, I think this thing is
so far-reaching. Again, I said that's why Congress hasn't acted
because this will affect the farmers in Iowa, anything. They're
not quite aware that this is a stealth attack. That's exactly
what it is. I am very concerned. You.
You may ask why we had these hearings up here today. We're
building a record. We're going to--we sent a letter yesterday.
Dr. Hickston is sending a letter from the Chairman to cut the
funding. We're going to have letters now to all the different
agencies requesting more information on what's happening here
and we'll go--we already have one to the CEQ. We're going to
have more members get involved because we do think this is a
great encroachment on our individual states, our coastal state
and existing law. Existing law. I'm pretty proud of the
Magnuson-Stevens Act. I'm pretty proud of what it's been named
to do. We are a nation and this is a state that relies on
resources.
A lot of our Congressmen don't understand that you can't
recover in this nation the natural resources to manufacture it
from. That is reality. You can't do it by buying all your
clothes from China and our oil from overseas. You have to have
a development of resources.
So we're establishing a record. I have no more questions
for the Subcommittee. We will probably submit some questions to
you down the line establishing this record about where we're
going along this issue. If there's no other comments from
anybody, I would like to adjourn this hearing at this time. It
lasted exactly about two hours. Thank you very much. This
meeting is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 11:47 a.m., the Subcommittee was adjourned.]

[Additional material submitted for the record follows:]

[A letter submitted for the record by the Alaska Federation
of Natives follows:]

Alaska Federation of Natives

April 6, 2012
The Honorable John Fleming, Chair
Subcommittee on Fisheries, Wildlife, Oceans and Insular Affairs
U.S. House of Representatives
416 Canon House Office Building
Washington, DC 20515

RE:  Comments of Alaska Federation of Natives on 'Alaska's Sovereignty
In Peril: The National Ocean Policy's Goal to Federalize Alaska''

Dear Chairman Fleming:

I am submitting the comments of the Alaska Federation on the
oversight hearing on ``Alaska's Sovereignty In Peril: The National
Ocean Policy's Goal to Federalize Alaska'' in form of a letter to the
Subcommittee on Fisheries, Wildlife, Oceans and Insular Affairs that
was held in Alaska recently.
By way of background, AFN is the largest Alaska Native organization
in Alaska. Our membership includes 178 villages (both federally
recognized tribes and village corporations), 13 regional for-profit
Native corporations (established pursuant to the Alaska Native Claims
Settlement Act), and 11 regional non-profit and tribal consortia that
contract and run federal and state programs that provide a broad range
of human services to their member villages. AFN's over-arching mission
is to enhance and promote the cultural, economic and political voice of
Alaska Natives.
The United States Constitution provides that ``Congress shall have
Power...To regulate Commerce. . .with the Indian Tribes.'' With this in
mind, we ask you to include Alaska Natives as you move forward in
addressing ``Alaska's Sovereignty In Peril: The National Ocean Policy's
Goal to Federalize Alaska.'' The subcommittee must ensure that the
voices and concerns of Alaska Natives, Alaska Native Tribes, Alaska
Native Regional and village corporations and Alaska Native tribal
consortia are considered when it addresses the nation's oceanic
policies.
We urge the subcommittee to consider the following:

Congress must continue to support the Alaska Natives'
rights of exemption under the Marine Mammal Protection Act as
the oceans off the coast of Alaska are a source of food
security for our people.

Funding Alaska Native in the management of marine
mammal mammals including their full involvement in research
activities regarding these resources.

Recognition by the federal government that Title VIII
of ANILCA IS Indian Legislation.

Amending ANILCA to replace the current rural priority
with a ``rural plus Native'' priority.

Expanding tribal compacting and contracting of
subsistence programs.

Exempting the Regional Advisory Councils (RACs) from
the Federal Advisory Committees Act (FACA).

Ensuring Alaska Native communities are protected
throughout implementation of Department of Interior Secretary
Salazar's directives to the Federal Subsistence Board following
his review of subsistence management, to include at least the
following:

Adopting the ``criterion-referenced''
methodology (developed by the University of Alaska,
Anchorage's Institute of Social and Economic Research
or ISER) for making rural v. non-rural determinations.

Deferring to Regional Advisory Committees
regarding the subsistence needs of the Alaska Natives
including but not limited to rural/non-rural
determinations as they are intimately familiar with
local conditions in their regions.

Excluding Military bases from consideration--
when military installations are in an area that
otherwise would be considered rural, the fact that a
military installation is present should not alter an
area's rural status.
We ask that you add the comments of the Alaska Federation of
Natives into the hearing record of the oversight hearing on ``Alaska's
Sovereignty In Peril: The National Ocean Policy's Goal to Federalize
Alaska,''
We thank you for your consideration of protecting the rights of the
people of Alaska, and in particular, the rights of the Alaska Natives
who have lived off the land and waters within the State of Alaska long
before the arrival of Western Society.
Sincerely,

Nelson N. Angapak, Sr.
Senior Vice President
cc: The Honorable Gregorio Kilili Camacho Sablan The Honorable Don
Young The Honorable Lisa Murkowski


