- HARNESSING AMERICAN RESOURCES TO CREATE JOBS AND ADDRESS RISING GASOLINE PRICES: IMPACTS ON BUSINESSES AND FAMILIES

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

HARNESSING AMERICAN

RESOURCES TO CREATE

JOBS AND ADDRESS

RISING GASOLINE PRICES:

IMPACTS ON BUSINESSES

AND FAMILIES

=======================================================================

OVERSIGHT HEARING

before the

COMMITTEE ON NATURAL RESOURCES

U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

Thursday, March 31, 2011

__________

Serial No. 112-14

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Natural Resources

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.fdsys.gov
or
Committee address: http://naturalresources.house.gov

U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
65-461                    WASHINGTON : 2011
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800; DC
area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104  Mail: Stop IDCC, Washington, DC
20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON NATURAL RESOURCES

DOC HASTINGS, WA, Chairman
EDWARD J. MARKEY, MA, Ranking Democrat Member

Don Young, AK                        Dale E. Kildee, MI
John J. Duncan, Jr., TN              Peter A. DeFazio, OR
Louie Gohmert, TX                    Eni F.H. Faleomavaega, AS
Rob Bishop, UT                       Frank Pallone, Jr., NJ
Doug Lamborn, CO                     Grace F. Napolitano, CA
Robert J. Wittman, VA                Rush D. Holt, NJ
Paul C. Broun, GA                    Raul M. Grijalva, AZ
John Fleming, LA                     Madeleine Z. Bordallo, GU
Mike Coffman, CO                     Jim Costa, CA
Tom McClintock, CA                   Dan Boren, OK
Glenn Thompson, PA                   Gregorio Kilili Camacho Sablan,
Jeff Denham, CA                          CNMI
Dan Benishek, MI                     Martin Heinrich, NM
David Rivera, FL                     Ben Ray Lujan, NM
Jeff Duncan, SC                      John P. Sarbanes, MD
Scott R. Tipton, CO                  Betty Sutton, OH
Paul A. Gosar, AZ                    Niki Tsongas, MA
Raul R. Labrador, ID                 Pedro R. Pierluisi, PR
Kristi L. Noem, SD                   John Garamendi, CA
Steve Southerland II, FL             Colleen W. Hanabusa, HI
Bill Flores, TX                      Vacancy
Andy Harris, MD
Jeffrey M. Landry, LA
Charles J. ``Chuck'' Fleischmann,
TN
Jon Runyan, NJ
Bill Johnson, OH

Todd Young, Chief of Staff
Lisa Pittman, Chief Counsel
Jeffrey Duncan, Democrat Staff Director
David Watkins, Democrat Chief Counsel

------

CONTENTS

----------
Page

Hearing held on Thursday, March 31, 2011.........................     1

Statement of Members:
Duncan, Hon. John J., Jr., a Representative in Congress from
the State of Tennessee, Prepared statement of..............    62
Hastings, Hon. Doc, a Representative in Congress from the
State of Washington........................................     1
Prepared statement of....................................     2
Markey, Hon. Edward J., a Representative in Congress from the
State of Massachusetts.....................................     3
Prepared statement of....................................     5

Statement of Witnesses:
Fox, Michael J., Executive Director, Gasoline & Automotive
Service Dealers of America, Inc............................    26
Prepared statement of....................................    28
Graves, Hon. William P., President & CEO, American Trucking
Association, Inc...........................................     6
Prepared statement of....................................     7
Harbert, Karen A., President and Chief Executive Officer,
Institute for 21st Century Energy, U.S. Chamber of Commerce    15
Prepared statement of....................................    17
Shawcroft, Don, President, Colorado Farm Bureau, Testifying
on behalf of the American Farm Bureau Federation...........    22
Prepared statement of....................................    23

OVERSIGHT HEARING ON ``HARNESSING AMERICAN RESOURCES TO CREATE JOBS AND
ADDRESS RISING GASOLINE PRICES: IMPACTS ON BUSINESSES AND FAMILIES.''

----------

Thursday, March 31, 2011

U.S. House of Representatives

Committee on Natural Resources

Washington, D.C.

----------

The Committee met, pursuant to call, at 10:02 a.m. in Room
1324, Longworth House Office Building, Hon. Doc Hastings
[Chairman of the Committee] presiding.
Present: Representatives Hastings, Duncan of Tennessee,
Bishop, Lamborn, Wittman, McClintock, Thompson, Denham, Tipton,
Gosar, Southerland, Landry, Fleischmann, Markey, Kildee,
DeFazio, Napolitano, Holt, Grijalva, Costa, Lujan, and Sutton.

STATEMENT OF HON. DOC HASTINGS, A REPRESENTATIVE IN CONGRESS
FROM THE STATE OF WASHINGTON

The Chairman. We will come to order. The Chairman notes the
presence of a quorum. The Committee on Natural Resources is
meeting today to hear testimony on Harnessing American
Resources to Create Jobs and Address Rising Gas Prices: Impacts
on Businesses and Families. Under Rule 4[f], opening statements
are limited to the Chairman and Ranking Member of the Committee
so that we can hear from our witnesses more quickly.
However, I ask unanimous consent to include all Members'
opening statements if they desire to have them submitted by the
close of business today. Without objection, so ordered. The
Chair will now recognize himself for his opening statement.
Similar to the Summer of 2008, today's escalating gas
prices are affecting the way American families budget and the
way small businesses operate across this country. The Energy
Information Agency (EIA), an agency within the Department of
Energy, already projects that the national average price of
gasoline will be $3.56 this year. This is over a 90 percent
increase from the $1.85 per gallon in January 2009. Any
increase in gas prices impacts our economy.
According to a study by Cameron Hanover, every penny
increase in the price of gasoline costs consumers a cumulative
$4 million per day. This means that the 60-cent increase in gas
prices since the beginning of the year has cost American
families a total of approximately $7.3 million. Higher gasoline
prices have always had a ripple effect through our economy. For
example, high gasoline prices cause family vacations to be
canceled. That impacts tourism and the restaurant and
hospitality industries that are vital to local economies. These
businesses, in turn, reduce their hiring and their purchases.
Our government should take steps to address rising gasoline
prices by developing our own American energy resources.
Unfortunately, since taking office, President Obama and his
Administration have done exactly the opposite and have
repeatedly blocked access to American energy. I wish the
President would show the same enthusiasm for U.S. energy
production as he has shown for foreign energy production in
countries such as Brazil. While speaking in Brazil about their
recent oil discoveries, President Obama said, and I quote,
``When you are ready to start selling, we want to be one of
your best customers.''
The President should instead focus on creating American
energy and American jobs. Republicans, meanwhile, are actively
moving forward with solutions to expand American energy
production. As part of the House Republicans' American Energy
Initiative, I recently introduced three bills aimed at
increasing offshore energy production. Reversing President
Obama's Offshore Moratorium Act requires the Administration to
lease in areas containing the most oil and natural gas and a
goal of producing 3 million barrels of oil by 2027. This would
reduce imports by one-third.
Yesterday, the President also announced the goal of cutting
imports by one-third. We share this goal, but we clearly have
different ways of getting there. President Obama has a ``drill
nowhere new'' plan. Republicans have a ``drill smart'' plan.
The second bill, Putting the Gulf Back to Work Act, would end
the de facto moratorium in the Gulf by setting a firm timeline
for the Secretary to act on permits, and my third bill, The
Restart the American Leasing Act Now, would require that lease
sales be held on offshore Virginia and the Gulf of Mexico that
were canceled or delayed by the Obama Administration. Because
of the Administration's action, 2011 will be the first year
without an offshore lease since 1958.
As we learned at a recent hearing in this Committee, the
Congressional Research Service calculates that the U.S. has the
most potential natural gas, oil and coal reserves in the world.
It is imperative that America starts developing more of these
energy resources to create jobs and to help jumpstart our
struggling economy. Ultimately, America has a choice to either
develop our own energy resources, or allow our economy to be
subject to the whims of unfriendly foreign sources of energy.
It is unfortunate that the threat of $4 or $5 gasoline has
to be the impetus for this conversation. But if nothing is
done, eventually, $5-a-gallon gasoline won't be a threat, it
will be a reality. With that, I yield back my time and
recognize the gentleman from Massachusetts, Mr. Markey.
[The prepared statement of Chairman Hastings follows:]

Statement of The Honorable Doc Hastings, Chairman,
Committee on Natural Resources

Similar to the summer of 2008, today's escalating gasoline prices
are affecting the way American families' budget and the way small
businesses operate across the country. The Energy Information
Administration (EIA)--an agency within the Department of Energy--
already projects that the national average price of gasoline will be
$3.56 per gallon in 2011. This is over a 90 percent increase from $1.85
per gallon gasoline in January 2009. Any increase in gasoline prices
impacts our economy. According to a study by Cameron Hanover, every
penny the price of gasoline increases, it costs consumers a cumulative
$4 million per day. This means that the 60 cent increase in gas prices
since the beginning of the year has cost American families a total of
approximately $7.3 billion.
Higher gasoline prices also have a ripple effect on our economy.
For example, when high gasoline prices cause family vacations to get
canceled, that impacts the tourism, restaurant and hospitality
industries that are vital to local economies. These businesses in turn
reduce their hiring and purchases. Our government should take steps to
address rising gasoline prices by developing our own American energy
resources. Unfortunately, since taking office, President Obama and his
Administration have done exactly the opposite and have repeatedly
blocked access to American energy.
I wish the President would show the same enthusiasm for U.S. energy
production as he has shown for foreign energy production in countries
such as Brazil. While speaking in Brazil about their recent oil
discoveries, President Obama said, ``When you're ready to start
selling, we want to be one of your best customers.''
The President should instead focus on creating American energy and
American jobs.
Republicans meanwhile are actively moving forward with solutions to
expand American energy production.
As part of House Republican's American Energy Initiative, I
recently introduced three bills aimed at increasing offshore energy
production.
The Reversing President Obama's Offshore Moratorium Act requires
the Administration to lease in areas containing the most oil and
natural gas and sets a goal of producing 3 million barrels of oil per
day by 2027. This would reduce foreign imports by nearly one-third.
Yesterday, the President also announced a goal of cutting imports
by one-third. We share this goal, but we clearly have very different
ways of getting there. President Obama has a drill nowhere new plan.
Republicans have a drill smart plan.
My second bill, the Putting the Gulf Back to Work Act, would end
the de facto moratorium in the Gulf of Mexico by setting a firm
timeline for the Secretary to act on permits.
My third bill, the Restarting American Offshore Leasing Now Act
would require that lease sales be held in offshore Virginia and the
Gulf of Mexico that were canceled or delayed by the Obama
Administration. Because of the Administration's actions, 2011 will be
the first year without an offshore lease sale since 1958.
As we learned at a recent hearing in this Committee, the
Congressional Research Service calculates that the U.S. has the most
potential natural gas, oil and coal resources in the world.
It's imperative that America starts developing more of these energy
resources to create jobs, help jump start the struggling economy and
strengthen our national security.
Ultimately, America has a choice to either develop our own energy
resources or allow our economy to be subject to the whims of unfriendly
foreign sources of energy. It is unfortunate that the threat of $4 or
$5 gasoline has to be the impetus for this conversation but if nothing
is done, eventually $5 gasoline won't be a threat--it will be the
reality.
______

STATEMENT OF HON. EDWARD MARKEY, A REPRESENTATIVE IN CONGRESS
FROM THE STATE OF MASSACHUSETTS

Mr. Markey. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, very much. When John
Lennon penned the song ``Imagine'' in 1971, it was an anthem
for dreamers in search of a Utopia here on Earth. Forty years
later, we will hear today about the pursuit of another
imaginary Utopia with the majority and the oil industry
harmonizing on the same refrain, imagine. Imagine a world where
the price of oil is determined by a free market and where an
increase in domestic drilling might lower the price for
consumers. Imagine a world where President Obama is locking up
our domestic resources and preventing American oil production.
Imagine there was no BP oil spill, and that isn't easy even
if you try, and imagine that the majority is truly for an ``all
of the above'' energy strategy and that they are serious about
developing renewable energy on public lands. Unfortunately,
these are all dreams. The oil market isn't free. It is a rigged
monopoly, manipulated by a cartel that is draining the wealth
out of the American economy. Any increase in the domestic
production of oil can simply be offset by cuts in OPEC
production so that the price remains as high as possible.
The Administration is not locking up public lands and
preventing energy production. Forty percent of all public lands
and 60 percent of the public lands in the lower 48 are
currently open to energy development. Roughly 80 percent of all
oil and gas resources on the Outer Continental Shelf are in
areas where drilling is allowed. Our domestic oil production is
at its highest level in nearly a decade. As a result, the five
largest oil companies made nearly $1 trillion in profits over
the last decade while consumers paid record prices at the pump.
With oil prices sky high and with 61 million acres of
public land under lease on which they have not yet even started
producing oil, the coming decade is looking to be just as
profitable for big oil and just as painful for the American
people. There is no de facto moratorium. The temporary pause on
new deepwater wells in the Gulf occurred in the wake of the
worst environmental disaster in American history. Once industry
finally demonstrated that it had the capacity to actually cap a
deepwater blowout, the Interior Department issued the first
deepwater permit within 11 days. In the last month, the
Department has issued seven deepwater permits, exceeding the
monthly average from 2009, before the BP spill.
The majority is not supporting an energy policy that would
move us toward renewable energy. In reality, the majority's
plan could be called ``Oil Above All.'' Thus far, this
Committee has held seven hearings on oil, and none on renewable
energy. This comes on the heels of the Bush-Cheney renewable
energy moratorium on public lands that led to zero permits for
solar development and only four permits for wind projects being
issued over an eight-year period.
Yesterday, President Obama laid out a path to reduce our
foreign oil imports by a third and lay the foundation for a
transition to clean energy. In the short term, we should
release oil from the Strategic Petroleum Reserve, which has a
proven record of lowering prices and helping consumers, and is
the one weapon we possess against OPEC. And we should increase,
not cut, funding for the Commodities Futures Trading Commission
so that it can implement the law and rein in excessive
speculation in energy markets, which will also help consumers.
In imaginary land, it may be possible to base our nation's
energy policies on bumper sticker slogans. In the real world,
we need responsible energy policies that respond to the great
economic national security and environmental threats rather
than a one-dimensional oil-above-all strategy that has been
given to us. It is time to move away from an imagined drilling
Utopia and work cooperatively on real solutions to the real
energy problems that we face. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Markey follows:]

Statement of The Honorable Edward J. Markey, Ranking Member,
Committee on Natural Resources

When John Lennon penned the song ``Imagine'' in 1971, it was an
anthem for dreamers in search of a utopia here on Earth.
Forty years later, we will hear today about the pursuit of another
imaginary utopia with the majority and the oil industry harmonizing on
the same refrain: ``Imagine.''
Imagine a world where the price of oil is determined by a free
market and where an increase in domestic drilling might lower the price
for consumers.
Imagine a world where President Obama is locking up our domestic
resources and preventing American oil production.
Imagine there was no BP oil spill. And that isn't easy, even if you
try.
And imagine that the majority is truly for an ``all of the above''
energy strategy, and that they are serious about developing renewable
energy on public lands.
Unfortunately, these are all dreams.
The oil market isn't free. It is a rigged monopoly, manipulated by
a cartel that is draining the wealth out of the American economy. Any
increase in the domestic production of oil can simply be offset by cuts
in OPEC production so that the price remains as high as possible.
The Administration is not locking up public land and preventing
energy production. 40 percent of all public lands, and 60 percent of
the public lands in the lower 48, are currently open to energy
development. Roughly 80 percent of all oil and gas resources on the
Outer Continental Shelf are in areas where drilling is allowed. Our
domestic oil production is at its highest level in nearly a decade.
As a result, the 5 largest oil companies made nearly $1 trillion in
profits over the last decade while consumers paid record prices at the
pump. With oil prices sky high and with 61 million acres of public land
under lease on which they have not yet even started producing oil, the
coming decade is looking to be just as profitable for Big Oil and just
as painful for the American people.
There is no de facto moratorium. The temporary pause on new
deepwater wells in the Gulf occurred in the wake of the worst
environmental disaster in American history. Once industry finally
demonstrated that it had the capacity to actually cap a deepwater
blowout, the Interior Department issued the first deepwater permit
within 11 days. In the last month, the Department has issued 7
deepwater permits, exceeding the monthly average from 2009, before the
BP spill.
And the majority is not supporting an energy policy that would move
us toward renewable energy. In reality, the majority's plan could be
called ``Oil Above All.'' Thus far, this committee has held 7 hearings
on oil and none on renewable energy. This comes on the heels of the
Bush-Cheney ``renewable energy moratorium'' on public land that led to
zero permits for solar development and 4 permits for wind projects
being issued over 8 years.
Yesterday, President Obama laid out a path to reduce our foreign
oil imports by a third and lay the foundation for a transition to clean
energy. In the short term, we should release oil from the Strategic
Petroleum Reserve, which has a proven record of lowering prices and
helping consumers and is the one weapon we posses against OPEC. We
should increase, not cut, funding for the Commodity Futures Trading
Commission so that it can implement the law and rein in excessive
speculation in energy markets, which will also help consumers.
In imaginary land it may be possible to base our nation's energy
policies on bumper-sticker slogans. In the real world, we need
responsible energy policies that respond to the great economic,
national security, and environmental threats that a one-dimensional
``Oil Above All'' strategy has given us. It is time to move away from
an imagined drilling utopia, and work cooperatively on real solutions
to the real energy problems we face.
______

The Chairman. I thank the gentleman from Massachusetts, and
now we will hear from our witnesses. We have with us The
Honorable Bill Graves, President and CEO of the American
Trucking Association and former Governor of the Sunflower
State, I might add; Ms. Karen Alderman Harbert, CEO of the
Institute for 21st Century Energy, U.S. Chamber of Commerce;
Mr. Don Shawcroft, President of the Colorado Farm Bureau
representing the American Farm Bureau; and Mr. Michael J. Fox,
Executive Director of Gasoline and Automotive Service Dealers
of America.
Like all of our witnesses, you have written testimony, and
that will be included in the record, but we ask that you keep
your oral remarks to five minutes. Talking about the five-
minute lights, that little mechanism in front of you has a
green light, a yellow light and a red light. When the green
light is on, that means your five minutes has started. When the
yellow light comes on, that means there is one minute left, and
when the red light comes on, that means that the five minutes
have expired. I just ask that you keep to that time if you can,
and you do have to press the button on the mics, so with that,
Governor Graves, you may begin.

STATEMENT OF HON. WILLIAM GRAVES, PRESIDENT & CEO, AMERICAN
TRUCKING ASSOCIATION

Mr. Graves. Chairman Hastings, Congressman Markey, members
of the Committee, thanks for the opportunity to testify this
morning. The trucking industry is essential to freight
transportation and the nation's economy. We deliver virtually
all the consumer goods in the United States. We employ nearly 7
million Americans in trucking-related jobs. It is an extremely
competitive industry comprised largely of small businesses. The
hearing title focuses on gasoline, but I am going to direct my
remarks to the price of diesel fuel, which of course is the
lifeblood of trucking.
This year, trucking will consume over 35 billion gallons of
diesel fuel and is on page to spend $135.8 billion, which is
about $35 billion more than was spent in 2010. Each penny
increase in the price of diesel costs the trucking industry an
additional $356 million a year. High fuel prices impact
trucking companies both directly and indirectly. Many companies
have difficulty recovering the full cost of rapid diesel price
increases. However, eventually these higher costs are passed on
to consumers.
In addition, as consumers are forced to spend more money on
energy and their every essentials, they have less money to
spend on consumer goods, which translates to a reduction in the
demand for freight transportation services and reduces trucking
company revenues. The impact high fuel prices have on the
trucking industry is depicted on a chart that is, I think,
displayed overhead and perhaps is in the packet as well, which
shows the close correlation between diesel price increases and
trucking company bankruptcies. The bottom line is that as a
result of this dramatic increase in the price of diesel we do
expect an increasing number of trucking companies to fail.
There is no single solution to high oil prices. We are not
going to be able to either simply conserve or to drill our way
out of this crisis. We are going to have to do both. My written
testimony advances several recommendations to incentivize
conservation. Demand reduction is a very important part of a
comprehensive energy strategy. These policy initiatives include
a national maximum speed limit of 65 miles per hour allowing
safe and more productive trucks, investing in highway
infrastructure to reduce congestion and supporting research for
new fuel efficient truck technologies. Recognizing Committee
jurisdiction, I am going to focus the remainder of my remarks
on the supply side.
The dramatic increase in the price of oil is fed by the
perception that over the next few years there will be a
shortage of oil. For this reason, in addition to investing
alternative fuels and reducing the demand for petroleum,
Congress and the Administrative should embrace measures to
increase our domestic production of crude oil. We produce 30
percent of our oil from the Gulf of Mexico. We believe Congress
should urge the Department of the Interior to issue both
shallow-and deepwater drilling permits in the Gulf. We also
believe Congress should direct the Administration to include
the Atlantic and Eastern Gulf in the environmental impact study
for the upcoming leasing program.
We need to fully develop our oil shale resources in
Colorado, Utah and Wyoming. We should invest in coal-to-liquid
and gas-to-liquid technologies to take advantage of our vast
domestic coal and natural gas resources. We also need to
promote the use of natural gas, but LNG-powered trucks cost
almost twice as much, so a financial incentive, such as a tax
credit, may be needed to encourage the purchase of these
vehicles. In addition, we would encourage Congress to
incentivize the construction of standardized LNG refueling
stations and provide a weight variance from the Federal gross
vehicle weight limits for trucks to accommodate the increase in
weight associated with LNG technology.
ATA appreciates this opportunity to be present, and I am
going to be pleased to answer any questions that you may have,
and I will yield back the balance of my time, Mr. Chairman.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Graves follows:]

Statement of William P. Graves, President and Chief Executive Officer,
American Trucking Associations, Inc. (ATA)

Chairman Hastings, Congressman Markey and Members of the Committee:
My name is Bill Graves, and I am the President and Chief Executive
Officer of the American Trucking Associations. Prior to joining ATA, I
spent 22 years in Public service in the State of Kansas, highlighted by
two terms as Governor. However, it's my trucking heritage, and not my
political history, that I am representing today. My father, and his
father, started Graves Truck Lines in 1935 at the height of the Great
Depression. I was fortunate to have been raised in the industry and I
attribute much of the success I've had in my professional and political
careers to the ``trucking'' values I've learned along the way: the
importance of safety, the value of customer service, the essentiality
of trucking, and the value of being involved in an Association at both
the state and national levels.
The American Trucking Associations (ATA) is the national trade
association of the trucking industry. Through its affiliated state
trucking associations, affiliated conferences and other organizations,
ATA represents more than 37,000 trucking companies throughout the
United States.
The trucking industry is the backbone of this nation's economy with
nearly 7 million Americans working in trucking-related jobs. Trucks
move 70% of our Nation's freight tonnage and earn 82% of the nation's
freight revenue. The trucking industry delivers virtually all of the
consumer goods in the United States. We are an extremely competitive
industry comprised largely of small businesses. Roughly 96% of all
interstate motor carriers operate 20 or fewer trucks.
The hearing title focuses on gasoline, but I will direct my remarks
to the price of diesel fuel, which is the lifeblood of the trucking
industry. This year, the trucking industry will consume over 35 billion
gallons of diesel fuel. This means that a one-cent increase in the
average price of diesel costs the trucking industry an additional $356
million a year in fuel expenses. The national average price of diesel
fuel is currently over $3.90 per gallon, which is nearly $1.00 more
than just one year ago.

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 65461.001

.epsThe trucking industry is on pace to spend $135.8 billion on
fuel this year. This is $34.3 billion more than we spent in 2010 and
$56.3 billion more than in 2009.

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5461.002

.epsToday it costs approximately $1,200 to refuel a long-haul,
over-the-road truck. As a result of this dramatic increase in the price
of diesel, we expect an increasing number of trucking companies to
fail. Despite the widespread use of fuel surcharges, the price of
diesel fuel and motor carrier failures are highly correlated.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5461.003

.epsThis hardship surprises few in the industry. For many truckers,
fuel has surpassed labor as their largest operating expense. Trucking
is a highly competitive industry with very low profit margins. Our
industry cannot simply absorb these rapid increases in fuel costs and
eventually these costs must be passed through to our customers. So not
only do high fuel prices devastate truckers, but they harm consumers
who are forced to pay higher prices for food, clothing and other basic
necessities.
A. Why has the Price of Diesel Increased?
Diesel fuel is a commodity that is refined from petroleum. Like
most commodities in a competitive marketplace, its price is determined
by supply and demand. The following chart demonstrates the close
correlation between the price of petroleum and the prices of gasoline
and diesel fuel.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5461.004

.epsWith the exception of a brief period following Hurricanes
Katrina and Rita in 2005, the prices of gasoline and diesel have
paralleled the price of petroleum.
The recent run-up in petroleum product prices, including gasoline
and diesel, is the result of a confluence of factors.
First, domestic oil production is under siege. The U.S. is the
third largest oil producer in the world; however, our production of
domestically produced oil from Alaska and the Gulf of Mexico is
declining and new sources of production have been placed off limits for
environmental reasons. Drilling moratoria, the refusal by the
Department of the Interior (DOI) to process drilling permits, multi-
year environmental impact studies, and political decisions that declare
vast amounts of American energy resources on federal lands off limits
to energy production have all taken their toll on U.S. petroleum
production and--will have an even greater impact on future production.
Each year our existing wells yield less oil. This natural depletion
reduces domestic production by 3% annually. Without a concerted effort
to drill more wells, domestic oil production will continue to fall and
the U.S. will have to import an increasing percentage of its crude oil.
Indeed, this year, as a result of aggressive government intervention,
domestic oil production in the Gulf of Mexico is expected to fall by
16%.\1\ Current U.S. regulatory policy has put the country on a path
towards declining domestic supplies and has led speculators to conclude
that crude oil will soon be in short supply. This has resulted in an
unnecessary increase in the current price of oil at a time when the
supply of oil is adequate to meet current demand.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Source: American Petroleum Institute, citing Energy Information
Administration, Short-Term Energy Outlook (March 8, 2011)
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Second, recent events in North Africa and the Middle East have
reminded us of how vulnerable our energy supply is to geo-political
events beyond our control. While current supplies appear to be adequate
to satisfy global demand, the fear that revolution will spread to other
oil producing nations in the region has contributed to a spike in crude
oil prices. This recent geo-political instability and its impact upon
petroleum prices should serve as a wake-up call to reduce our
dependence on foreign oil.
Third, there has been a dramatic decline in the value of the
dollar. Since oil is denominated in dollars, a portion of the increase
in the price of oil can be attributed to the fall in the value of the
dollar relative to other world currencies.
Fourth, there has been a significant increase in investments
petroleum futures by non-commercial participants. This increased
speculation may be partially responsible for the increase in
commodities prices. We note that the last Congress passed financial
reform legislation and that Commodity Futures Trading Commission (CFTC)
is in the process of drafting regulations to implement new authority to
curb excessive speculation.
Lastly, federal and state biodiesel mandates have contributed to
higher diesel prices. This year, the federal Renewable Fuel Standard
(RFS) mandates that 800 million gallons of biomass-based diesel fuel be
blended into the diesel fuel pool. Because biodiesel costs
significantly more than Ultra Low Sulfur Diesel (ULSD) fuel, this
federal mandate increases the country's diesel fuel bill by more than a
billion dollars annually. In addition to the federal RFS requirements,
diesel consumers are forced to pay higher prices due to state biodiesel
consumption mandates that distort fuel distribution efficiencies and
disadvantage consumers that refuel in those states.
It is clear that our energy crisis is a complicated problem that
requires a comprehensive solution. Against this backdrop, we greatly
appreciate the opportunity to discuss actions that Congress can take to
help address the soaring price of diesel fuel.
B. A Comprehensive Solution
The fuel crisis we face today is severe. There is no single
solution to high oil prices and Congress must embrace a multifaceted
approach to resolving this problem. We are not going to be able to
either simply conserve or drill our way out of this crisis. Instead, we
must embrace a ``we need it all'' approach that focuses on the
following recommendations to increase our domestic crude oil supplies
and incentivize conservation measures.
1. Recommendations to Increase Supply
For the foreseeable future, the trucking industry will continue to
depend upon the diesel engine and an adequate supply of diesel fuel to
deliver America's freight. Presently, there is no affordable technology
that is capable of replacing the efficiency of the diesel engine for
heavy duty trucks. As our population continues to grow and other
nations continue to industrialize, the global demand for diesel fuel
will continue to increase.
The dramatic increase in the price of oil is fed by the perception
that over the next few years there will be a shortage of oil. For this
reason, in addition to investing in alternative fuels and reducing the
demand for petroleum, Congress and the administration must both embrace
measures to increase our domestic production of crude oil.
Increasing access to--and production of--American crude oil
supplies will help lower diesel fuel prices. To achieve this goal we
need to begin environmentally responsible exploration for crude oil in
the Arctic National Wildlife Reserve and Outer Continental Shelf. We
also must begin developing the oil shale resources in Colorado, Utah
and Wyoming and eliminating the barriers to utilizing coal-to-liquid
technologies to take advantage of our vast domestic coal resources. The
technology exists to ensure that these resources are developed in a
manner that protects the environment.
Drilling for oil in Alaska and the Gulf of Mexico, or mining oil
shale in Colorado, Wyoming and Utah requires multiple government
approvals and permits. The fact that the Bureau of Land Management,
Bureau of Ocean Energy Management Regulation and Enforcement, EPA, the
Fish and Wildlife Service, National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration, and the Army Corps of Engineers (just to name a few)
each have the ability to unilaterally stop energy development projects
is a very large reason for declining U.S. production and the diesel and
gasoline price surges that we are experiencing today. These redundant
processes present multiple opportunities for special interest groups to
derail energy development projects.
The debate over whether to drill in these areas of the United
States has been ongoing for decades. In light of geopolitical
instability, the growing demand for energy in Asia and Europe, as well
as the development of new drilling techniques and more robust
environmental safeguards, it is time to change these policies and
develop these critical domestic resources. As Congress considers
reforming our domestic energy policy, we should keep in mind that Clean
Air Act permits, Clean Water Act permits and land use development
permits, all of which contain a host of environmental protections, are
preferable to importing oil from Venezuela or off the coast of Cuba
with virtually no environmental protections and adverse implications
for U.S. energy security.
Congress and the administration must reverse the current policies
that have declared vast areas of American energy resources off-limits
and have led to the perception that the U.S. will begin to produce even
less oil and become increasingly dependent on imports to satisfy the
demand for transportation fuels.
a. Develop U.S. Offshore Petroleum Resources. Notwithstanding the
Administration's stated intent to encourage the development of
additional domestic petroleum resources, DOI has taken numerous actions
that will impede our ability to maintain (and grow) our domestic
production of crude oil.
Twenty-nine percent of our domestically produced oil comes from the
Gulf of Mexico. As we approach the one-year anniversary of the Macondo
blowout, it is important that we analyze the steps that have been taken
to minimize the already small risk that a similar event could occur in
the future. The federal government has stepped up its regulatory
oversight of Gulf drilling operations and implemented new regulations
and safety requirements. Simultaneously, the petroleum industry has
invested over a billion dollars in new technologies to enhance its oil
spill response capabilities and ensure that oil from a future spill can
be captured to avoid significant environmental damage.\2\ As this was
occurring, the administration imposed a moratorium on drilling in the
Gulf of Mexico. When a federal court overturned the moratorium, the
administration ignored the court's decision and unilaterally decided to
stop issuing drilling permits. As a result, U.S. oil production in the
Gulf of Mexico is expected to decline by 16% this year. DOI recently
issued five deepwater drilling permits and we hope that this signals
the administration's intent to reverse course and permit the continued
development of this critical domestic energy resource. Congress should
require DOI to issue both shallow and deepwater drilling permits in the
Gulf of Mexico.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ New York Times, http://www.nytimes.com/2010/07/22/business/
energy-environment/22
response.html?_r=1 (July 2010)
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
In March 2010, the administration canceled lease sales in the
Beaufort and Chukchi Seas and withdrew Bristol Bay from the existing
offshore leasing program. Two months later, the administration canceled
a Virginia offshore lease sale and the remaining 2010 Gulf of Mexico
lease sales. These areas were previously studied and determined to be
viable areas for the safe and environmentally responsible production of
crude oil.
The administration recently narrowed the scope of the areas to be
studied in connection with the 2012-2017 Outer Continental Shelf (OCS)
leasing program to remove large areas in the Atlantic and the eastern
Gulf of Mexico from the scope of the environmental analysis. DOI's
declaration that it will not even study these areas amounts to willful
blindness and risks great harm to the fragile U.S. economic recovery.
Studying these areas is not a decision to develop them; it simply
ensures we understand the environmental implications of drilling there.
Ultimately, DOI and the affected states may determine not to develop
certain areas, but that determination must be an informed decision,
which will not happen if politics displaces science and areas are
declared off limits before they are even studied. Congress should
require the administration to include these OCS regions in the
environmental impact study underlying the 2012-2017 OCS leasing
program.
b. Develop U.S. Onshore Petroleum Resources. To improve our
domestic energy security and lower diesel fuel prices, onshore energy
production also must be encouraged.
Oil shale deposits in the Rocky Mountains are estimated to contain
800 billion barrels of oil and there are vast conventional oil and
natural gas resources on federal lands in the West. Yet these resources
are being systematically removed from the nation's energy portfolio.
The administration reduced the size of commercial oil-shale leases by
87% and cancelled oil and gas leases on 77 parcels in Utah, even though
these parcels had already been subjected to the required environmental
analysis.\3\ The administration also suspended 61 leases in Montana.
Congress should require the administration to proceed with the
development of these domestic energy resources.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ Source: American Petroleum Institute (March 2011).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Three months ago, the administration designated nearly 200,000
square miles of Alaska as critical habitat for the polar bear. The
breadth of this designation is unprecedented and will preclude the
development of our on-shore oil and gas resources in Alaska. In
addition, the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge (ANWR) remains off limits
to oil and gas development. Allowing the development of 2,000 out of
almost 20 million acres is necessary to balance environmental interests
with our need to enhance domestic energy security. Moreover, the
failure to move forward with energy projects in Alaska exposes the
Trans-Alaska Pipeline System to supply shortages that create
operational challenges. Congress should require the administration to
embrace a sensible approach to oil and gas development in Alaska that
balances energy and environmental interests and takes into
consideration the desires of the citizens of Alaska.
c. Canadian Oil Sands. Although located outside U.S. borders, the
Canadian oil sands represent a secure source of oil that currently
accounts for 9% of the oil we consume. To ensure our continued access
to this strategic resource, Congress should require the administration
to approve the permit for the Keystone XL pipeline. The development of
Keystone XL will provide a stable, long-term supply of crude oil from
Canada--one of our strongest and most loyal allies--to refineries in
the United States. Upon completion of Keystone XL, it is estimated that
the Canadian crude being transported to the United States through the
pipeline system will approach 1.1 million barrels per day. This is
equal to roughly half the crude oil we import from the Middle East.
Keystone XL would create jobs and increase tax revenue for state and
local governments along the pipeline route.
d. Renewable Fuels. The trucking industry supports the development
of alternatives to diesel fuel, including the voluntary use of
renewable diesel that meets the ASTM D975 diesel standard--the fuel
that trucks were engineered to operate on. Biofuels represent a
potential fuel source that could increase the domestic supply of diesel
fuel; however, they are significantly more expensive than petroleum-
derived diesel fuel and present several operational challenges for the
trucking industry. Even if the price were equivalent, first generation
biodiesel yields a ten percent energy penalty compared to ULSD, gels in
cold weather, and requires increased truck maintenance obligations. As
such, federal and state mandates to use biodiesel disadvantage diesel
fuel consumers.
There is a significant difference between first generation
biodiesel and renewable diesel. Renewable diesel uses renewable
feedstock to produce a biofuel that is substantially similar to
petroleum-derived ULSD fuel. It has equivalent energy content to ULSD,
better cold weather performance than biodiesel, and can be transported
through our existing pipeline system, which lowers its distribution
costs. Today, the most cost effective way to produce renewable diesel
is to co-process it in a modern petroleum refinery. Yet, the first
generation biodiesel producers have successfully lobbied to create
economic barriers to the development of this high quality next
generation renewable fuel by denying this fuel equivalent treatment
under the tax code. These economic disincentives built into the tax
code also discourage the development of new processes (e.g., algae-
based bio oil) to make renewable diesel. Congress should remove the
barriers to co-processed renewable diesel (and other middle
distillates) and embrace a technology neutral approach to biofuel
production. To ensure that trucking companies are insulated from poor
performing alternative fuels, Congress should require all on-road
diesel fuel to meet the ASTM D-975 standard.
While on the subject of biodiesel and renewable diesel, we support
a tax credit that helps narrow the cost differential between ULSD and
renewable diesel; however, Congress should eliminate this credit for
renewable fuel that is produced in the U.S., and subsequently exported
for consumption outside the U.S. While the last Congress eliminated the
``splash and dash'' loophole on foreign produced biodiesel, the
American public would be outraged if they knew that their tax dollars
were still being spent to subsidize biodiesel that is ultimately
exported for foreign consumption. Biodiesel blending tax credits should
be contingent upon the fuel being consumed in the U.S.
e. Natural Gas. Another alternative fuel of interest to the
trucking industry is natural gas. While compressed natural gas (CNG) is
being used for light and medium trucks on relatively short routes, CNG
does not appear to provide sufficient range for the long-haul, heavy
truck. There are, however, a very limited number of centrally refueled
long-haul trucks operating successfully on liquid natural gas (LNG).
This fuel may not be appropriate for trucks engaged in long-haul,
irregular routes, which would require a robust LNG refueling
infrastructure.
While there are numerous challenges associated with a switch to
natural gas, there are three significant hurdles that must be overcome
to increase the penetration of this alternative fuel. First is the
significant price premium for natural gas vehicles. Currently, a truck
that runs on LNG costs almost twice that of a comparably equipped
diesel truck. Second, is the need for financial assistance in building
out a robust, competitive, standardized refueling infrastructure. LNG
refueling stations can cost a million dollars or more to construct.
Third, there is a significant weight penalty associated with this
technology, which can reduce payload and affect productivity in weight
sensitive applications. To address these hurdles, Congress should enact
natural gas vehicle tax credits to offset the significant cost
differential between diesel trucks and trucks that operate on LNG. This
could facilitate the economies of scale in production of these heavy
trucks to bring the initial costs down. Congress also should
incentivize the construction of LNG refueling stations and ensure that
the industry embraces a single refueling standard to overcome refueling
compatibility issues. Congress should provide a weight variance from
the federal gross vehicle weight limits to accommodate the increase in
weight associated with LNG technology. These measures could reduce our
reliance on petroleum, enhance our energy security, and reduce long-
term operating costs of some trucking sectors.
f. One National Diesel Fuel Standard. While gasoline moves people,
diesel fuel moves our economy. Due to the uniquely interstate nature of
diesel fuel, Congress should take extraordinary steps to ensure that no
state enacts a boutique diesel fuel mandate. Today, California and
Texas require special boutique diesel fuel blends. These unique blends
cost more to produce and prevent diesel fuel from simply being
transported from one jurisdiction to another in times of shortage. In
addition, boutique fuels are typically produced by only a handful of
refineries, which results in less competition, higher refining margins,
and ultimately higher fuel prices.
While Congress took steps to curb the proliferation of boutique
fuels as part of the Energy Policy Act of 2005, the Act created a
loophole for states seeking to enact renewable fuel mandates. To date,
seven states have enacted biodiesel mandates and several others are
considering this course of action. In light of the biomass-based diesel
mandate included as part of the expanded federal renewable fuel
standard (RFS), Congress should preempt state biodiesel mandates. These
duplicative state mandates are not needed to ensure a strong domestic
biodiesel industry and will simply create an economic environment where
biodiesel producers can charge extraordinarily high prices for their
product--insulated from the checks and balances of a competitive
market. The federal RFS guarantees that 1 billion gallons of biodiesel
will be consumed domestically--the free market must be allowed to
operate to ensure that this mandate is achieved in the most cost
effective manner possible. State biodiesel mandates will distort the
free market and prevent biodiesel from being consumed in those parts of
the country where it is most economical to do so. Congress must preempt
state biodiesel mandates as inconsistent with our national interest and
efforts to promote the cost effective production and use of biofuels.
2. Recommendations to Reduce Demand
Reducing the nation's consumption of diesel fuel will reduce the
overall demand for petroleum and should result in lower prices for
petroleum products.
a. Control Speed. The typical heavy-duty diesel truck travels
between 5 and 7 miles on a gallon of diesel, depending upon load,
route, equipment and drivers' skill. Speed has a direct correlation to
fuel consumption. In fact, for each mile per hour that a truck travels
above its optimal fuel efficiency point, its fuel economy decreases by
1/10 of a mile per gallon. For example, a truck traveling at 65 mph
that is capable of achieving 6 miles per gallon, will achieve only 5
miles per gallon when traveling at 75 mph. Reducing speed has a
positive impact on fuel consumption in both cars and trucks. For this
reason, Congress should establish a national speed limit of 65 mph for
all vehicles.
ATA also has petitioned the Administration to require that all new
trucks be equipped with factory-installed devices that electronically
limit the truck's maximum speed to 65 mph. The National Highway Traffic
Safety Administration has agreed to begin a rulemaking in 2012. Given
the significant benefits, we believe action should be taken sooner. In
addition to the fuel conservation benefit from ensuring that trucks do
not exceed this speed, we are confident that this measure will further
reduce the number of truck-related fatalities that occur on our
nation's roadways.
b. Address Congestion and Highway Infrastructure. Americans waste a
tremendous amount of fuel sitting in traffic. According to the most
recent report on congestion from the Texas Transportation Institute, in
2009, drivers in metropolitan areas wasted 4.8 billion hours sitting in
traffic, and burning 3.9 billion gallons of excess fuel at a cost of
$115 billion. The cost to the trucking industry was $33 billion. ATA
estimates that if congestion in these areas was eliminated, nearly 32
billion gallons of fuel would be saved and carbon emissions would be
reduced by 314 million tons over a 10-year period. Congress should
invest in highway infrastructure improvements that eliminate major
traffic bottlenecks, with a specific focus on bottlenecks that have the
greatest impact on truck traffic.
c. Enhance Truck Productivity. By reducing the number of trucks
needed to move the nation's freight, the trucking industry can reduce
fuel consumption, which would produce significant environmental
benefits. More productive equipment--where it is consistent with
highway and bridge design and maintenance of safety standards--is an
additional tool that should be available to states. A recent study by
the American Transportation Research Institute found that use of these
vehicles could reduce fuel usage by up to 39%, with similar reductions
in criteria and greenhouse gas emissions. The reduction in truck
vehicle miles traveled on highways such as the New York Thruway,
Massachusetts Turnpike, Florida Turnpike, and on roads throughout the
Western United States, has lowered the amount of fuel burned in these
states. Congress should provide flexibility to the states, with federal
oversight, to allow the use of more productive trucks.
d. Support Truck Fuel Economy Standards. The Energy Information and
Security Act of 2007 requires EPA and NHTSA to promulgate fuel economy
standards for commercial medium- and heavy-duty trucks. This
congressional mandate is being implemented through the rulemaking
process. ATA supports truck fuel economy standards as the preferred
method of controlling greenhouse gas emissions from our industry,
provided that the standards set are technologically and economically
feasible, do not compromise truck performance, and provide
manufacturers sufficient stability and lead time for production.
e. Reduce Main Engine Idling. The Federal Motor Carrier Safety
Administration (FMCSA) Hours-of-Service regulations require mandatory
off duty rest periods. Many over-the-road drivers rest in the sleeper
berth compartment in their truck cabs and need to cool or heat the cab
to rest comfortably. In extremely cold weather, truck drivers also will
idle their engines to prevent the engine block from freezing. Argonne
National Laboratory estimates that the average long-haul truck idles
for 1,830 hours per year. With hundreds of thousands of these trucks on
the road, idling has a significant impact on fuel consumption and the
environment. The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) estimates
that idling trucks consume approximately 1.1 billion gallons of diesel
fuel annually.
Several options are currently available to reduce engine idling.
Auxiliary power units (APUs) are among the most popular choices in
anti-idling equipment providing climate control (heating and cooling),
engine preheating, battery charging, and power for household
accessories without use of the truck's main engine. APUs have been
proven by the Federal Highway Administration to save up to one gallon
of fuel per hour of idling and to substantially reduce emissions and
greenhouse gases.
While reducing main engine idling is a laudable goal, three major
barriers stand in the way of trucking companies purchasing such
equipment for their daily use: (1) the failure to grant exceptions for
the additional weight associated with anti-idling equipment, (2) the
imposition of a federal excise tax on the purchase of such devices, and
(3) the actual cost of the devices themselves.
Since idling reduction equipment will add weight to a truck, many
fleets cannot afford to reduce their cargo capacity to compensate for
the installation of idle reduction equipment on a truck. To address
this concern, Congress authorized a 400-pound weight exemption for
trucks equipped with idle reduction equipment under Section 756 of the
Energy Policy Act of 2005. While Congress' intent was to mandate this
exemption, the Federal Highway Administration (FHWA) has determined
that states ``may'' adopt the exemption on a voluntary basis. FHWA's
interpretation of the weight exemption gives states the option of
whether to allow the exemption or not. To date, 32 states have passed
legislation recognizing the 400-pound weight tolerance and a handful of
states are exercising enforcement discretion. Congress should clarify
that the 400-pound weight exemption is applicable to idling reduction
equipment nationwide.
While APUs are a proven alternative to main engine idling, most
trucking companies just cannot afford purchasing devices that can cost
up to $10,000 per unit. Congress should provide tax credits or grants
to expedite the introduction of idling reduction equipment.
f. Fully Fund EPA's SmartWay Program. In February 2004, the freight
industry and EPA jointly unveiled the SmartWay Transport Partnership, a
collaborative voluntary program designed to increase the energy
efficiency and energy security of our country while significantly
reducing air pollution and greenhouse gases. The program, patterned
after the highly-successful Energy Star program developed by EPA and
DOE, creates strong market-based incentives that challenge companies
shipping products and freight operations to improve their environmental
performance and improve their fuel efficiencies. To become a partner a
fleet must commit to reduce fuel consumption through the use of EPA-
verified equipment, low-viscosity lubricants, or other measures.
Participation in the program doubles each year and by 2012, the
SmartWay program aims to save between 3.3 and 6.6 billion gallons of
diesel fuel per year. EPA predicts SmartWay participants will also
reduce their annual greenhouse gas emissions by 48 million tons of
CO
2
equivalents.
SmartWay is a unique resource that reviews the use of new
technologies that are proven to reduce fuel consumption and then uses
market incentives to promote their deployment. Although the program is
a demonstrated success story, its future funding remains uncertain.
Congress should add a specific line item appropriation for SmartWay and
increase our investment in this program to facilitate its expansion.
g. Support Research and Development of New Technologies. As we look
toward the future, the trucking industry will be pressured to further
conserve fuel. The industry will find it difficult to do this without
new affordable technologies. Technology advancements have stalled for
many years and an infusion of funding into an organized research
program will be critical to developing the next generation of more
efficient and lower carbon-emitting trucks. To address this issue,
Congress should fund research and development in the areas of new
engine technologies, aerodynamics, tires, batteries, hybrids, cab
insulation, anti-idling equipment, and alternative fuels.

* * * * *

ATA appreciates this opportunity to offer our insight into measures
that the country should take to help address high diesel fuel prices.
______

The Chairman. Governor, thank you very much. You set a
very, very high standard on brevity, but we appreciate that.
Ms. Harbert, you are recognized.

STATEMENT OF KAREN ALDERMAN HARBERT, CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER,
INSTITUTE FOR 21ST CENTURY ENERGY, U.S. CHAMBER OF COMMERCE

Ms. Harbert. Thank you, Chairman Hastings and Ranking
Member Markey and members of the Committee for this
opportunity. Oil is the lifeblood of the global economy
produced in over 70 countries and 31 states. The International
Energy Agency projects that fossil fuels will still account for
80 percent of the world's energy supply in 2035. The EIA has
just upped its average price for gasoline this year to $3.70.
Every one-cent increase in the price of gasoline costs
Americans roughly a billion dollars a year. The average
American household is expected to spend $2,800 on gasoline this
year, $850 more than in 2009.
Additionally, each $10 increase in oil prices can knock a
few tenths of a percent off any increase in GDP. Today, about
97 percent of the Federal offshore lands and 94 percent of
Federal onshore lands are not leased. As a result, our net
imports of petroleum and of related products rose to $265
billion in 2010. That is about half of the U.S. trade deficit.
There are some good policy options. The current price
escalation is distinctly different from the previous price
increases in two ways. First, we now understand the abundance
of our domestic resources.
The Congressional Research Service says the proven
recoverable reserves of American oil, natural gas and coal
combined are the world's largest, and the U.S. Geological
Survey estimates that our oil shale reserves could be five
times as large as Saudi Arabia's proven reserves. Second, our
larger share of the burgeoning energy crisis is the direct
result of Federal policies. From the earliest days, the Obama
Administration has continually taken land and water off the
table for oil and gas production, canceling leases in Utah and
Montana and Wyoming, imposing a moratorium in the Gulf of
Mexico and proposing a leasing plan out to 2017 that takes more
resources off the table in the Atlantic, the Gulf and Alaska.
A Wood Mackenzie study released in January estimates that
increasing the access to these reserves would actually create
500,000 jobs and $150 billion in revenue. Reversing these
policies presents a ready-made solution to this Congress and
the Administration. In the Gulf of Mexico, the Administration
has said it has lifted the moratorium in the Gulf, but has done
it in word and not in deed. The EIA projects a 30-percent
decrease in production in the Gulf by 2012. We have only
witnessed seven deepwater rigs set sail for other countries
just recently, and they have only issued seven deepwater
permits.
Recently, the Department of Justice filed a brief which
stipulated that 270 permits were pending for shallow-water
drilling and 52 for deepwater. This validates the EIA's
projections. The Gulf of Mexico was a tragedy, and industry has
stepped us, has invested billions of dollars to create rapid
response systems. Mr. Chairman, the Putting the Gulf Back to
Work Act that you recently drafted, which ensures the
Department of the Interior can no longer sit on permit
applications indefinitely, will prevent those jobs from being
lost and more foreign barrels from being imported.
Alaska. The areas north of Alaska contain upwards of 30
billion barrels of oil. However, leases that have already been
paid for and issued remain idle while they await an air quality
permit from the EPA. This is a perfect example of the
regulatory uncertainty facing our domestic producers. Canada,
our most reliable and largest supplier of imported oil, the
President recognized that yesterday and its huge potential, yet
we have Section 526 on the books which can prohibit the U.S.
Government and specifically the Department of Defense from
using this valuable resource. We should repeal that provision
immediately.
Additionally, the Keystone Pipeline, which would bring
significant quantities of Canadian oil to our market and create
jobs immediately is being held up at the Department of State.
We urge the Congress to encourage the Department of State to
permit this project. On oil shale, we potentially hold half of
the global oil shale reserves in the world. Yet, 70 percent of
these reserves are located on Federal lands. The government
should be directed to allow access to these reserves and to
better understand them and to better support the additional
work to extract them safely and environmentally sustainably.
However, there are three bad ideas that we should not
pursue, and if pursued would have negative impacts on our
economy and our economic security. One we have heard from the
Administration and the Congress which is use it or lose it, in
fact imposing penalties on companies that are not actively
producing. A leaseholder is classified as non-producing while
it is undertaking government-required seismic and environmental
review. Penalizing companies for being responsible seems to be
egregious and will only push them overseas. Another proposal is
releasing oil from the Strategic Petroleum Reserve. This will
do nothing to reduce prices and will leave us vulnerable to
future disruptions.
Last, the Administration has proposed to levy almost $90
billion of new taxes on America's oil industry. We have tried
this before in 1980, and what did it do? It reduced domestic
production. It increased our imports and reduced Federal
revenues, so in conclusion, today, America's unemployment rate
rests at 8.9. With energy prices on the rise, businesses and
consumers have less spending flexibility. We cannot let these
rising prices and a lack of a coherent energy policy to imperil
our economic recovery. We need common-sense policies, and
Congress should ensure that the industry has access, regulatory
certainty and a fiscal policy to transform these resources to
power our economic recovery. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Harbert follows:]

Statement of Karen A. Harbert, President & Chief Executive Officer,
Institute for 21st Century Energy, U.S. Chamber of Commerce

Thank you, Chairman Hastings, Ranking Member Markey, and members of
the Committee. I am Karen Harbert, President and CEO of the Institute
for 21st Century Energy (Institute), an affiliate of the U.S. Chamber
of Commerce. The U.S. Chamber of Commerce is the world's largest
business federation, representing the interests of more than three
million businesses and organizations of every size, sector and region.
The mission of Institute is to unify policymakers, regulators,
business leaders, and the American public behind common sense energy
strategy to help keep America secure, prosperous, and clean. In that
regard we hope to be of service to this Committee, this Congress as a
whole, and the Administration.
What's the Problem?
The U.S. government has a long history of sporadic attempts to
respond to oil and gasoline price spikes, and frankly, has missed the
mark nearly every time. Much of the lack of success can be attributed
to misunderstanding of petroleum market fundamentals. Oil is the
lifeblood of the global economy. As such, it is produced in over 70
countries and in 31 states here at home. Oil is largely fungible and
essentially traded as a global commodity. As we have all seen recently,
what happens on the other side of the world can have a profound impact
on the price paid at home. This is not only true for supply
disruptions, or threats of supply disruptions, it is also true for
changes in demand.
After oil prices climbed to a record-high $143 per barrel in July
2008, the U.S. and the world entered an economic recession that
significantly curbed demand, causing oil prices to plummet 60% over the
next seven months. Since then, much of the world began positive
economic growth again, led by developing economies like China and
India, resulting in a gradual increase in oil prices. Over the past two
years, we have seen prices climb almost 90%. However, because demand
was down in the U.S. and the increase was gradual, most Americans did
not really notice it. The recent political turmoil in North Africa and
the Persian Gulf created fears of further instability and supply
disruptions, and prices climbed precipitously. It is important to
understand that even if the political unrest subsides and global
supplies are unaffected, increased global demand has essentially set a
new price floor. Given today's market fundamentals, it is difficult to
see prices returning to their 2009 levels.
While the drama of political struggle has been unfolding overseas,
the U.S. has been experiencing its own energy security struggle at
home, fueled by regulatory uncertainty. The past two years have seen
the first upturn in U.S. crude oil production in over 25 years of
decline. This increase is evidence of the significant lag time to bring
new production to market. For offshore production increases, much of it
is due to production incentives created in the latter 1990s through the
Deepwater Royalty Relief Act. The increased production is also a
testament to technological advances in the oil and natural gas
industry. A tremendous amount of increased production has come from
unconventional formations in the inner-mountain west that were
previously too expensive to produce with existing technology. Also
production on private lands has greatly increased. Increased oil
production coupled with decreased demand has nearly eliminated the gap
between domestically produced and imported oil for the first time in 15
years. However, if we look to the future, it is not so bright.
Even while production has increased on private land, federal
government actions have reduced the country's ability to produce energy
resources on federal lands. From its earliest days, the Obama
administration has continually taken land off the table for oil
production, most notably the Gulf of Mexico. The de facto moratorium
that has been put in place to prevent new oil (and natural gas)
exploration and production has put the country back on a declining
production trend. The Energy Information Administration (EIA) recently
projected that by 2012 U.S. crude oil production will decrease by more
than 90 million barrels, almost all of which is directly attributable
to an expected 30% decrease from the Gulf of Mexico.
There has been much discussion of how many permits are being issued
and how many more are pending. Recently, the Department of Justice
filed such a brief which stipulated that 270 permits were pending for
shallow water drilling and 52 permits in deep water. These numbers are
significantly larger than numbers discussed by the Department of
Interior, and they demonstrate the true nature and extent of the de
facto moratorium in the Gulf and explain EIA's declining projections.
The administration has continually promised that the spigot will
open soon for new exploration and production. However, there is no
time-table much less a commitment to begin issuing permits at a
sufficient rate again, leaving domestic producers in limbo and costing
them millions of dollars in idled equipment and declining revenues. We
have already witnessed seven deepwater rigs set sail for more
hospitable climes in other countries taking jobs and tax revenue with
them.
Yes, oil prices are largely set by the global market, but like all
commodities, they are influenced by price signals. Turmoil in oil
producing countries and regulatory uncertainty in the U.S. has forced
the market to build in additional risk premiums to the price even as
production has changed little. Similarly, political stability in the
Middle East and greater regulatory certainty in the U.S. will signal to
the oil markets that risk has decreased and prices can decline.
Competitiveness
Federal policies that are hampering production are not only
threatening our energy security, but also severely harming our
competitiveness. The International Energy Agency (IEA) projects that
global energy demand could increase by nearly 50% by 2035. It also
projects that fossil fuels will account for 80% of the world's energy
supply, only slightly down from today's 86%. Fossil fuels, and oil
specifically, will continue to fuel the world's economies, and
countries that are realizing the most economic growth are thinking and
acting strategically to ensure future supplies will be available to
maintain economic growth and competitiveness.
In 1970, investor-owned companies controlled 85% of the world's oil
reserves. Today, it has shrunk to only 6%, with National Oil Companies
and other governmental entities controlling more than 90% of the
world's oil reserves. Our international strategic competitors are not
only increasing their own production, but they are exploiting the tie
between their governments and their oil companies to invest in new oil
reserves in other countries. It is very difficult for a private
corporation, no matter how large it may be, to compete against central
governments. These other countries are taking positive steps to ensure
they have the energy resources to fuel economic growth well into the
future. We are not.
Indeed, the United States is set an opposite course. About 97% of
the federal off-shore lands and 94% of federal on-shore lands are not
leased. Not only has the federal government been reducing access to the
country's energy resources, but it has also been making it more
difficult and expensive to produce on the few areas that remain
available. New and proposed regulations will add to the cost of
production, making it even less competitive to produce oil and natural
gas in the U.S. Even areas that are not under specific moratoria have
proven to be equally inaccessible. The United States Geological Survey
estimates that 30 billion barrels of oil lie off the north coast of
Alaska. Even after billions of dollars have been invested in leases to
explore in this area, the administration continues to erect barriers
that prevent access to this tremendous resource.
The largest publicly traded oil companies are increasingly looking
overseas to the remaining areas that have not already been locked up by
other countries' national oil companies. Demand for oil will continue
to increase as the economy recovers. Since access to federal resources
is declining, more of our demand will be met by imports. Our net
imports of petroleum and related products rose to $265 billion in
2010--a sum equivalent to more than half the U.S. trade deficit.
In short, America's access to oil, our predominant source of
energy, is declining at home and abroad. The same cannot be said for
our global competitors, and our ability to compete, generate investment
and revenue and foster economic growth is tremendously diminished as a
result.
Good Ideas
This is not the first time that rising gasoline prices have turned
America's attention to energy policy. The cycle is nearly as
predictable as the swallows returning to San Juan Capistrano. We often
hear the same solutions proposed, some helpful and some not so.
However, the situation is distinctly different this time. A larger
share of the burgeoning energy crisis is the direct result of federal
policies. Reversing these policies presents a ready-made solution for
the administration and Congress to make a positive contribution, both
in the near-term and the long-term. If we had fully implemented
policies proposed in the past when prices have risen, we would find
ourselves in a much different situation than we do now. Congress does
deserve credit for not reauthorizing its moratorium on off-shore oil
and natural gas production in 2008, even if the administration has
failed to capitalize on the opportunity to improve our future.
Today many of the same options would significantly benefit the
country, but addressing the administration's recent actions presents a
real near-term path for improving the country's situation. A Wood
McKenzie study released in January emphasizes this point. It estimates
that increasing access to federal energy resources would create more
than 500,000 jobs, increase domestic production by 35%, and provide an
additional $150 billion in government revenue.
Gulf of Mexico
Before the de facto moratorium, about one-third of domestic oil
came from the Gulf of Mexico. Almost a full year after the Obama
administration implemented a de facto moratorium on new exploration,
this vital resource base remains in flux. Less than half the normal
rate of shallow water permits has been issued even while acknowledging
shallow-water operations are distinctly different from the
administration's deep-water risk assessment. The administration
estimated that its official moratorium would result in some 12,000 jobs
being lost. A subsequent study performed by Dr. Joseph Mason, Chair of
Banking at Louisiana State University, concluded that the de facto
moratorium could ultimately cost nearly 25,000 jobs in the region and
35,000 nation-wide.
Mr. Chairman, the ``Putting the Gulf Back to Work Act'' that you
recently drafted is precisely the type of proposal that can improve our
energy future almost overnight. By removing many of the obstacles
preventing exploration and production in the Gulf of Mexico and
ensuring the Department of Interior can no longer sit on permit
applications indefinitely, we can prevent those jobs from being lost,
those foreign barrels of oil being imported, and provide the first
glimpse of certainty the energy industry needs to increase investments
in America.
Alaska
The areas of the north coast of Alaska represent a tremendous
resource, containing upwards of 30 billion barrels of oil. The
University of Alaska Anchorage estimates that developing these
resources will create 35,000 new jobs. Moreover, as production on
Alaska's North Slope continues to decline, this new source of product
will ensure the Trans-Alaska Pipeline will continue to run for decades
to come, bringing even more oil to the rest of the country.
However, leases that have already been paid for and issued remain
idle awaiting air-quality permit that has been pending at the
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) for four years. This is a perfect
example of the regulatory uncertainty facing domestic producers. When
leases lay idle six years after being issued, one can understand why
corporations would think twice about investing the millions of dollars
in projects on federal lands.
Canada
We have heard much about the need for energy independence over the
years, yet we hear little of reliable trading partners whose energy
resources secure our energy future just as much as domestic production.
More than one-third of our imported oil comes from Canada and Mexico.
The proximity of these supplies and the security of our relationships
with our neighbors make these imports a vital prong to our energy
security. Canadian imports specifically have become an increasingly
large component of our oil supply. However, we have policies in place
that deter additional use of Canadian crude. Section 526 of the Energy
Independence and Security Act of 2007 can prohibits the U.S.
government, specifically the Department of Defense, from using oil from
the largest and most stable source of U.S. import, the Albertan oil
sands.
This policy hinders the military's readiness, threatens our energy
security, and increases greenhouse gas emissions the exact opposite the
policy is intended to prevent. Make no mistake the oils sands will be
developed, the question is where will the product be used. If this fuel
is not imported to the United States via pipeline, it is most likely to
be exported to Asia via tanker and refined under weaker emissions
standards. This provision must be repealed--our national security and
energy security depend on it.
Additionally, the proposed Keystone XL pipeline would bring
significant quantities of Canadian crude oil to U.S. refineries,
displacing imports from other, less-secure trading partners.
Construction of this strategic asset will create an estimated 15,000
direct jobs immediately and ultimately foster the creation of some
250,000 more jobs. Additionally, a recent study conducted by the
Perryman Group found that bringing the additional crude to the U.S.
that would be carried by this pipeline would reduce non-Canadian
imports, from the Middle East or Venezuela by 40%. However, the project
is in limbo awaiting a Presidential Permit by the Department of State.
We encourage the Congress to urge Secretary of State Clinton to issue
the permit without further delay.
Oil Shale
Recent technological advances have lead to large increases in
domestic production of unconventional oil from shale formations,
especially on privately-owned lands. The advent of these technologies
has helped displace oil imports, and it will significantly improve our
energy security in coming years. However, the oil shale itself truly
has the potential to completely turn the global oil market on it head.
Oil shale is a sedimentary rock that is not a widely distributed as
conventional oil-bearing formations, but it is a tremendous potential
resource. The World Energy Council conservatively estimates that global
reserves of oil shale amount to 2.8 trillion barrels of oil, and more
than half of that (about 1.5 trillion barrels) is estimated to be in
the Western United States. To put this in perspective, the world's
proven conventional oil reserves are estimated at 1.3 trillion barrels.
If these estimates are correct, we not only have more oil shale than
all of OPEC's proved conventional oil reserves, but more than the
entire world's. But it will not mean anything if we cannot get access
to it.
The production of oil shale is energy intensive and has
traditionally required mining techniques. This not only makes it
expensive to produce, but it also has engendered opposition from
special interests. With about 70% of the U.S. reserves located on
federal lands, the federal government has prohibited production, and
even most research, on the country's--and perhaps the world's--largest
oil resource. However, as conventional oil reserves have declined or
become less accessible, more research and development has been
conducted to make oil shale production more efficient and with a
smaller environmental footprint. Given the magnitude of this resource,
it is more than prudent for the federal government to allow access to
our reserves and to support additional work on improving the production
process.
Industry Investment
The Gulf of Mexico oil spill was a human, environmental, and
economic tragedy. The administration has only acerbated the impact by
its continued de facto moratorium on off-shore exploration and
production. It has done this in spite of the proactive efforts the
industry has made in addressing concerns that it was not prepared to
contain and mitigate future spills. The off-shore industry has invested
billions of dollars in the creation of the Marine Well Containment
Company and the Helix Energy Solutions Group, two interim rapid
response systems that separately provide capabilities to contain up to
60,000 barrels of oil per day at up to an 8,000 foot depth. These
companies have applied the lessons learned from the Gulf of Mexico oil
spill last year to develop and pre-stage equipment throughout the Gulf
to quickly contain any future spill. Regardless of an exemplary record
and very low probabilities, we now know a significant spill can happen
and a response capability exists. The country can be assured that the
offshore industry is prepared to start producing domestic energy and
jobs again with the highest degree of safety precautions, exceeding
even the government's standards.
Bad Ideas: Use it or Lose it, Tap the SPR, Raise Taxes
It seems that for every idea that would create jobs, increase our
energy security, and increase federal revenues, there is one that will
do the exact opposite. Every time prices increase, many of the same
ideas are offered up as short-term solutions. One proposal we just
heard President Obama recycle yesterday is imposing penalties on
companies that are not ``actively producing'' on federal leases.
Proposals based on this ``use it or lose it'' theory are just as
fallacious and damaging to our competitiveness now as they have been
when rejected in the past. However, this current iteration is perhaps
more egregious as the administration is threatening to penalize ``non-
producing'' leaseholders when the administration itself is refusing to
issue permits to produce. Producing from new areas is very time and
cost-intensive. Reducing the time period a leaseholder has to begin
production adds to the risk of the investment and further discourages
domestic production.
Another proposal rearing its head once again is to sell oil stocks
from the Strategic Petroleum Reserve. The reserve, which was
established on the heels of the 1973 Arab oil embargo, is suppose to
act as a hedge against supply disruptions. It is debatable how much
prices would decline if the 727 million barrels were released, but it
is certain that prices would increase as soon as the releases subsided
and the U.S. would be more vulnerable to the impacts of actual supply
disruption.
Additionally, the Administration's has proposed to levy almost $90
billion of dollars of new taxes on America's oil industry. Many in
Congress also use the event of price increases to call for increased
taxes on oil companies. A Wood McKenzie study released in January
estimated that the proposed tax increases would lead to as many as
170,000 jobs being lost through 2014. While it is difficult to mitigate
higher gasoline prices immediately, it is not difficult at all to
reject tax increases that would cost so many their jobs.
Unfortunately, we have a good example of the negative consequences
of such actions. The creation of a ``Windfall Profits Tax'' in 1980
caused domestic production to decrease and imports to increase. Prices
consumers paid were relatively unaffected, but jobs were lost in the
oil industry and federal royalty revenues declined. With such a great
example of the impacts of these proposals, it is negligent to pursue
them again.
What is at stake?
If the administration and Congress do not both embrace these
positive steps and reject the negative steps, Americans will pay a
heavy price, not only economically but also a with greater risk to our
energy security. Every one cent increase in the price of gasoline costs
Americans roughly an additional $1 billion per annum. The average
American household is expected to spend $2,800 on gasoline this year,
$850 more than 2009. Additionally, each $10 increase in oil prices can
knock a few tenths of a percent off any increase in GDP. The quicker
the increase, the more pronounced the impact on economic growth.
Because of the global recession, the cumulative amount of money spent
on oil has become a larger share of global GDP since most other areas
of economic output have remained constant or declined. At current
prices, oil accounts for nearly 5% of global GDP, a level not seen
since 2008 when oil was selling at $150.
Higher energy prices erode expendable income for America's families
and marginal profits for America's businesses. At a time where we are
just beginning to realize positive economic growth again, these price
increases can have a profoundly negative impact. U.S. policy alone
cannot recalibrate global oil markets on its own. However, U.S. policy
can absolutely have a positive impact on U.S. prices just as it has had
a negative impact.
As energy costs increase, businesses have less money to pay
employees, new or existing. If prices remain elevated long enough, the
unemployment rate can be expected to rise. This of course would be on
top of the current historically high unemployment rate. As the
administration and some in Congress have made calls to raise taxes on
the oil and gas industry, it is also important to remember the consumer
and job impacts such policies would have.
CONCLUSION
Today, the official unemployment rate stands at 8.9%, and if the
underemployed and long term unemployed are counted the figure could be
as high as 17%. Our nation can and will recover but we cannot let
rising energy prices and lack of a coherent energy strategy imperil
this recovery. We need common sense policy and regulation that
recognizes today's energy resources while also investing in tomorrow's
technologies. We are blessed with an abundance of the conventional and
unconventional fuels that will part of our energy landscape for
decades. According to the Congressional Research Service, the proven
recoverable reserves of American oil, natural gas and coal combined are
the world's largest and the USGS estimates that our oil shale reserves
could be five times as large as Saudi Arabia's reserves. Congress
should ensure the energy industry has access, regulatory certainty and
fair fiscal policy to transform these resources into energy to power
our economy. We are also blessed with a good neighbor, Canada, and
Congress should eliminate discriminatory policies endangering our
ability to expand our energy trade. These steps alone will not be
sufficient to meet all of our future energy needs. However, the threats
to America's competitiveness and national security will only grow if we
ignore the tremendous potential of our domestic resources to fuel a
more secure energy future.
______

The Chairman. Thank you very much for your testimony. I
gave you a little bit of time because of the generous time that
Governor Graves had left over.
Ms. Harbert. Thank you for that fair and balanced
treatment.
The Chairman. Mr. Shawcroft, you are recognized.

STATEMENT OF DON SHAWCROFT, PRESIDENT, COLORADO FARM BUREAU,
TESTIFYING ON BEHALF OF THE AMERICAN FARM BUREAU FEDERATION

Mr. Shawcroft. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, good morning. Good
morning members of the Committee and particularly
Representatives from Colorado. My name is Don Shawcroft. I am
President of the Colorado Farm Bureau, and I am here today to
testify on behalf of the American Farm Bureau Federation, a
grassroots organization representing a diverse range of
agricultural producers from all 50 states and Puerto Rico. I am
a rancher from the San Luis Valley in Southern Colorado. Thank
you for holding this hearing and inviting me today.
We appreciate the opportunity to share the impact that high
fuel costs have on our nation's farm and ranch families.
America's farmers and ranchers continue to work hard to produce
the safest, most abundant food supply in the world.
Unfortunately, our nation's dependence on foreign sources of
fuel threatens our livelihood. The prices of energy-related
imports and interest rates most affect U.S. agriculture's
bottom line on an annual basis. Over the past 11 years, it has
been true that some sectors of agriculture have seen good
prices for their products.
Farmers and ranchers have little, very little, ability, if
any, to pass on to the purchasers of our products our cost of
business, including those for fuel, fertilizer, seed and
agricultural chemicals. That is why the Farm Bureau believes
that the United States should be focused on energy
independence, and develop and employ a diversity of broad-based
domestic energy supplies. Last week, farm diesel fuel used in
tractors and combines to plant and harvest crops was on average
$3.47 per gallon in Colorado.
Just last night, a news anchor was complaining about how it
cost him more than $60 to fill his gas tax in his car. I would
like to tell you a little bit about that reality in filling
tanks on tractors and combines. Last week, at those prices, it
would cost over $930 to fill a Case 9370 tractor that is used
to till the land, and it would over a $1,050 to fill the tank
on a new John Deere 9870 combine used to harvest those crops.
Please understand that is not just a one-time fill any more
than you just fill a tank on a car one time if you make a trip.
It takes many times of filling those tanks in order to do the
work on a farm.
Like many ranchers, I face a challenge which is slightly
different than filling tractors. I have pickups that have to be
filled with gas or diesel. I have trucks that have to be filled
with diesel. I am not fortunate enough to have enough land in
one place to keep my livestock there year round. Therefore, I
must cumulatively transport those cattle hundreds of miles
during a year so that they will have adequate grazing. In order
to move them safely, I must load them in semi-tractors and
trailers that take a lot of fuel. A fuel bill for one truck can
be over $500 for just one trip.
It also affects rural Colorado as well and rural United
States. My local school district has reported to me that they
traveled 148,340 miles with their buses last year. Keep in
mind, that is not a lot of buses. It is a small school
district. At the current cost of fuel, that is approximately
$65,000 for a small school district. Definitely a challenge.
Given the hype about food versus fuel, I am sure you have
heard a lot of claims about ethanol's impact on gasoline
prices. To be clear, ethanol production has no impact on the
cost of a barrel of crude oil. In fact, as oil prices rise,
ethanol becomes more important keeping gasoline costs lower,
but the price of a barrel of crude certainly impacts all
aspects of agriculture including putting fuel in your tanks and
food on your tables.
Farm Bureau energy policy is clear. We support a diverse
domestic energy portfolio for this country that should include
all forms of energy, domestic oil and gas production, clean
coal technology, next generation nuclear technology and various
renewable energy opportunities. All these energy components
represent pieces of a puzzle that we can put together to solve
the problem and so that we can become more independent in our
energy production.
We urge you to take the steps needed to make our country
energy independent. We need a commitment to domestic oil and
gas production that must include production for our most
energy-rich areas such as the Outer Continental Shelf, the 1002
area of the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge and even the
Piceance Basin in my home state of Colorado. Please continue to
develop all sources of energy, and please continue the tax
incentives for ethanol, biodiesel and the approved increase in
the current ethanol blend of 15 percent. Thank you for the
opportunity you have given me to testify. I look forward to
your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Shawcroft follows:]

Statement of Don Shawcroft, President, Colorado Farm Bureau,
Testifying on Behalf of the American Farm Bureau Federation

My name is Don Shawcroft, President of the Colorado Farm Bureau. I
am here today on behalf of the American Farm Bureau Federation (Farm
Bureau). Farm Bureau is a grassroots organization representing a
diverse range of agricultural producers from all 50 states and Puerto
Rico. I am a rancher from the San Luis Valley in Colorado.
Farm Bureau appreciates the opportunity to share the impact that
high fuel costs have on our nation's farm and ranch families. These
prices affect not only our businesses, but our families and communities
as well. America's farmers and ranchers work hard to produce the
safest, most abundant food supply in the world; unfortunately our
nation's dependence on foreign sources of fuel threatens our
livelihood.
Our businesses rely on fuel: Diesel to run our tractors and
harvesters, gasoline for our pickups, natural gas and petroleum used to
manufacture our fertilizer, herbicides and pesticides. Profitability in
agriculture is affected greatly by high fuel prices, whether they are
caused by instability in other parts of the world or increasing demand
from emerging nations. That is why Farm Bureau believes that the United
States should be focused on energy independence.
Our grassroots members, representing all 50 states and Puerto Rico
and all sectors of agriculture, believe that we must develop and employ
a diverse, broadbased domestic energy supply. We support the
development and implementation of a comprehensive national energy
policy, which includes conservation, efficiency, exploration and
research and provides for the domestic production of traditional and
renewable energy sources. Opening and using new sources of petroleum,
along with existing and future home-grown fuels, should keep current
and future generations of Americans safe from the economically
devastating effects of our dependence on foreign energy.
Over the past 11 years, we have seen very volatile oil and natural
gas prices due to a variety of factors. Although some sectors of
agriculture have seen good prices for their products, their
profitability is hindered by high energy costs. Farmers and ranchers
have little, if any, ability to pass our costs of business, including
those for fuel, fertilizer, seeds and agricultural chemicals, on to our
customers.
Farmers have been impacted particularly hard by the rising costs of
inputs needed to grow their crops. According to the USDA Economic
Research Service (ERS) farmers can expect to pay almost 85 percent more
than they paid in 2000 just to put their crops in the ground this
spring. The ERS calculates the operating costs per planted acre--or
cash costs--of the country's most produced crops. This data includes
the costs of seeds, fertilizer, chemicals, fuel and electricity,
repairs and interest on operating capital. It does not include the cost
of labor for the farmers or an employee, the cost of land, the cost of
property taxes or the cost of insurance. The ERS data shows that in
2011 corn farmers can expect cash costs that are 85 percent higher than
their costs in 2000. Similarly, cotton farmers can expect to see a 77
percent increase and rice farmers a 72 percent increase. ERS has been
tracking this data for grain sorghum since 2003. Grain sorghum
producers have seen their cash costs rise more than 77 percent in 8
years.
Fertilizer and Chemical Costs
Farmers and some ranchers depend on fertilizer to enhance the
nutrients in their soil to produce the safest and most abundant food
supply in the world. Unfortunately, we have seen fertilizer prices
skyrocket due to a rise in the costs of natural gas and crude oil,
increasing demand from emerging countries and a decline in domestic
fertilizer production.
Natural gas accounts for 70 percent to 90 percent of the cost of
producing anhydrous ammonia, a key source of nitrogen fertilizer. The
sharp rise in natural gas prices and the resulting curtailment of U.S.
fertilizer production has had a dramatic impact on fertilizer prices
throughout the marketing chain and, in particular, at the farm level.
According to ERS, between 2000 and 2011 the fertilizer costs for rice
rose 125 percent, cotton rose 175 percent and corn rose 197 percent.
The fertilizer costs for grain sorghum have risen 127 percent.
As U.S. fertilizer production has slowed, we have become
increasingly dependent on foreign sources of the product. According to
The Fertilizer Insitute (TFI) two of the components of fertilizer,
nitrogen and potash, are usually imported from other countries. Current
fertilizer prices are expected to surge this spring due to the costs of
transporting the imported components and growing demand from other
countries. According to TFI, the United States was the fourth largest
consumer of fertilizer for fiscal years 2007 and 2008. The top three
consumers were China, the rest of the world and India. Brazil came in
fifth, followed by Indonesia.
Additionally, the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) is now
pursuing policies which would replace coal and other fossil fuels with
natural gas for electricity production. While many factors go into
determining fertilizer prices, the natural gas price is a principal
component. Should EPA's policies have the effect of pushing natural gas
prices higher, we anticipate those costs will combine with other
factors into pushing fertilizer prices higher. In addition to making it
difficult for domestic manufacturers of fertilizer to make a profit,
these policies will make farmers even more dependent on others for our
farm inputs.
Natural gas and crude oil spikes have a dramatic impact on the
costs of the herbicides and pesticides that we use to protect our
crops. According to ERS, the cost of agricultural chemicals increased
58 percent for rice and 19 percent for cotton since 2000, and 24
percent for grain sorghum since 2003. On the other hand, the cost of
chemicals for corn decreased by 1 percent.
Fuel Costs
As President of Colorado Farm Bureau, I spend a lot of time talking
to the corn and potato farmers who grow two of our state's largest
crops. Last week, farm diesel fuel used in tractors and combines to
plant and harvest these two crops was, on average, $3.47 per gallon in
Colorado.
I know from conversations with farmers and ranchers in other parts
of the country that they also struggle with rising diesel costs. Like
all transportation fuels, the price of farm diesel varies from state to
state. Most states do not publish these prices, with Illinois being the
exception. According the USDA-Illinois Department of Ag Market News,
the average price of farm diesel in Illinois rose from an average of
$1.70 per gallon in March 2009, to an average of $3.56 per gallon in
March 2011. That is a 103 percent increase in price over the past two
years.
Most Americans are feeling sticker shock caused by high gasoline
prices when they fill their automobile's tank. There is no term in the
English language to accurately describe what farmers and ranchers feel
every time they put diesel in the tanks of their farm equipment. I have
a couple of examples based on the price in Colorado last week.
The fuel capacity on a CaseIH 9370 tractor is 270 gallons, which
results in a $936.90 price tag every time the tank is filled. A new
John Deere 9870 STS has a fuel capacity of 305 gallons. At last week's
prices the cost of that tank of fuel is $1,058.35. Depending on the
number of acres being covered, farmers and ranchers have to fill those
tanks multiple times just to complete the work on one field or pasture.
Due to the fracturization of land, we have many fields to cover.
Ranchers face a different set of challenges caused by high oil
prices. Like many ranchers, I have to keep my herd on several parcels
of land, which requires daily trips between pastures to check on the
health and safety of my animals and to feed and water them.
Throughout the year, I have to move cattle hundreds of miles to
ensure that they have adequate grazing land. In order to move the
cattle safely, I must use multiple semi-trailers and make multiple
trips. The semis typically have 300 gallon capacity fuel tanks.
Depending on the length of the trip and the terrain we must cover, fuel
efficiency varies and affects the numbers of times I have to refuel
these trucks on one trip. The fuel bill for just one truck can be over
$5,000 on just one trip. Ranchers in other parts of the country face
similar issues
Gasoline prices in my area are $3.49 per gallon. I use a lot of
gasoline in the engines of the vehicles and equipment needed to run my
business. It makes more sense for me to have the gasoline delivered to
my ranch rather than going to town every time I need to refuel.
However, convenience costs--specifically, $3.52 per gallon.
Given the hype about ``food v. fuel,'' I am sure you have heard a
lot of claims made about ethanol's impact on gasoline prices. It is a
myth that ethanol is a factor in the high cost of gasoline. Ethanol
production has no impact on the cost of a barrel of crude oil. In fact,
as oil prices rise, ethanol becomes more important to keeping gasoline
costs lower. At $40 per barrel for oil, the energy value of corn in
terms of British Thermal Units (BTU) produced is roughly $2.50 per
bushel; at $100 per barrel, that same bushel of corn is worth more than
$6.50. This is strictly the energy value of the corn as fuel, not as a
value added product that has been converted into valuable livestock
feed and a fuel able to be mixed with gasoline and fully functional in
our automobiles.
Farm Bureau believes that renewable fuel production can help make
our country energy independent, generate good jobs in rural
communities, and help keep farming and ranching fiscally sound. We
support the goal of the 25x'25 Alliance to generate 25 percent of our
nation's energy supply from our nation's farms, ranches and other
working lands by 2025.
High gasoline costs have impacts on farm and ranch families that go
beyond production costs. Many of our families depend on off-farm
employment to supplement their agricultural income and allow them to
continue to feed the world. The jobs are rarely just a few miles from
home. Steadily increasing gas prices are eating away at these families'
fiscal health. Beginning farmers and ranchers can be hit hardest by
this situation.
Rural school budgets have also taken a beating from the high cost
of gasoline. Our school buses must travel long distances to transport
our children to and from school every day. Rural schools' ability to
fund and provide quality education for our children is being eaten away
by high fuel costs.
Officials at my local school district told me that our school buses
traveled 148,340 miles in the 2009-2010 school year. Those buses
averaged 8 miles per gallon. According to my math, that comes out to
18,542 gallons of gas. Calculated at the current retail price in my
town, the yearly cost of fuel for the district is almost $ 65,000--a
potentially devastating outlay for a rural school district.
In addition to endangering the futures of our children, this
situation can create additional tax liabilities for farmers and
ranchers. Many school districts rely heavily on funds gained from
property tax revenue. As landowners, we bare a great deal of the costs
for our rural schools--schools that have educated generations of many
of our families. However, property tax increases chip away at our
profitability and reduce our ability to provide for our families and
the families of our employees.
Solutions
We must renew America's commitment to domestic oil and gas
production. Energy rich repositories such as the Outer Continental
Shelf, the Bakken Oilfields and the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge
must be explored and opened for oil and gas production. The
advancements made in oil and gas-drilling technology will increase the
environmental protections for capturing energy feedstocks.
Additionally, we must increase domestic oil refining capacity and
diversify the geographic locations of those refineries.
We must continue to develop all sources of renewable energy. These
sources must play a vital role in securing America's energy security.
As with drilling techniques, much advancement has occurred in the
production of renewable energy sources such as ethanol, biodiesel,
biomass, wind and solar energy.
We must do more to make home-grown energy available to American
consumers, including implementing the approved increase of the current
ethanol blend rate to 15 percent and building a biofuel infrastructure
which includes blender pumps and biofuel pipelines. We must continue to
provide incentives, such as the tax credits currently in place, to
encourage the production of biodiesel fuels.
American agriculture needs reliable and reasonably priced fuels in
order to maintain its ability to feed, clothe and fuel the world. We
urge you to take the steps needed to make our country energy
independent. The livelihoods of our families, our communities and our
businesses depend on it.
Thank you for the opportunity to testify. I look forward to your
questions.
______

The Chairman. Thank you, Mr. Shawcroft. Our last witness is
Mr. Fox, and you may proceed, Mr. Fox.

STATEMENT OF MICHAEL J. FOX, EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR, GASOLINE &
AUTOMOTIVE SERVICE DEALERS OF AMERICA, INC.

Mr. Fox. Good morning, Chairman Hastings, Ranking Member
Markey, members of the Committee. My name is Michael J. Fox,
and I am the Executive Director of the Gasoline and Automotive
Service Dealers of America, the trade association representing
gasoline retailers, and we thank you for the opportunity to
come here this morning. Our industry, and specifically our
members, are still attempting to recover from the boom-and-bust
commodity cycles of the past from Hurricane Katrina to the most
recent runup in crude oil and gasoline prices. Gasoline
retailers stand bewildered in the face of such surging and
volatile prices. Sales volumes and consumer demand have not
returned to normal demand cycles.
The housing bubble, unemployment crisis and slow post-2008
economic recovery have continued to strain businesses and
consumer pocketbooks and have caused retail stations to close
at alarming rates. Those remaining still struggle with the
additional capital requirements, diminished profitability and
general business uncertainties brought on by higher wholesale
prices and ever thinning margins due to higher production costs
and credit card/debit card swipe fees. Gasoline retailers feel
the effects of higher crude prices and higher wholesale fuel
costs instantly.
A gasoline retailer is like a consumer who fills up the car
weekly, except high-volume retailers need to fill up daily or
every other day, and their gasoline tanks are 8,500 gallons,
not 20 gallons like a consumer. Most retailers are not free to
shop for the best price daily as consumers can when not happy
with one particular retailer's price that day. Most retailers
have fuel supply agreements that make them captive customers of
the major oil companies or middle men called distributors.
Even when a retailer is supplied by a distributor, most
times that distributor is a captive customer of major oil. More
locked in captive customers equal larger big oil profit. The
facts are clear. Big oil profits are huge and growing no matter
what the economic climate or troubles come out such as the
tsunami in Japan, the collapse of Wall Street and subsequent
big bank bailouts. We continue to see big oil profit while
small gasoline retailers, consumers and of course our economy
struggle.
I am aware that Congress is currently debating measures to
address rising gasoline prices and to bring relief to small
businesses like ours and our customers that depend so much on
our product for their livelihoods and general mobility. I
commend this Committee and the Congress and both sides of the
aisle for their commitment to this endeavor. It is certainly
both in the interest of your constituents and the interest of
our broader economic well being. Unfortunately, there is no
magic bullet that will lower the price of gasoline tomorrow.
However, that is not to say no government solution will
bring consumers relief at the pump. First and foremost,
Congress can and should take additional steps to address
excessive speculation and opaque market activity in the energy
derivatives market. As a founding member of the CMOC or
Commodities Market Oversight Coalition, members have been
advocating for complete transparency, accountability and
oversight in the energy trading markets.
CMOC is an informal coalition whose participating members
represent an array of business, consumer interests that
advocate in favor of government policies that promote stability
and confidence in the commodities market and that the preserve,
the interest of bona fide hedgers, consumers and the broader
economy. Excessive speculation is the greatest concern to our
members. While speculation in and of itself is not a bad thing,
in a transparent and well-functioning energy market, it
provides the hedging community with the necessary liquidity and
facilitates price discovery. However, when said speculation is
driven to excess, it creates volatile markets, unprecedented
price swings, diminished the ability of commercial hedgers to
manage price risk associated with commodities such as gasoline
and dislocates market prices from supply and demand
fundamentals.
There are some that argue that the business community and
commercial end users of derivatives are united in their
oppositions to reform limits on speculation. This is also not
true, and I am proof of that here today. I also urge you to
look at the thousands of comments sent from businesses and
consumers alike to the CFTC on Monday in support of proposed
rules on speculation written under mandate by Congress in the
Dodd-Frank Act. You will note however the financial community
banks, hedge funds and pensions profit from excessive market
volatility and speculation at the expense of captive customers,
retailers, business owners and of course our economy.
Once the CFT implements the necessary reforms provided by
Congress in the Dodd-Frank Act which, simply put, assures
complete transparency and bans all types of excess speculation
and provides that Congress resist ideological crusades to
repeal these forms and instead affords the CFT the support, the
resources and the funding to do the job intended. Congress will
send a clear message that markets will hear loud and clear, and
unlike many other solutions being considered by Congress, the
effect will be immediate. I look forward to addressing all your
questions and appreciate the time that you have afforded me
here today.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Fox follows:]

Statement of Michael J. Fox, Executive Director, Gasoline & Automotive
Service Dealer's of America, Inc., Connecticut Based Trade Association
Representing Gasoline Retailers, Automotive Repair Shops, Body Shops,
Towing Operators & Car Washes

Honorable Chairman Hastings, Ranking Member Markey and members of
the committee; thank you for the opportunity to testify before you
today on rising gasoline prices and the negative impact on small
family-run businesses and what can be done to provide effective short-
and long-term relief for both the small business gasoline retailers and
the customers they serve.
My name is Michael J. Fox and I currently serve as the Executive
Director of the Gasoline & Automotive Service Dealer's of America, Inc.
(or GASDA, Inc.) a trade association who members are responsible for
pumping over 1.4 billion gallons of gasoline in the State of
Connecticut. In Connecticut and nation-wide, most gasoline retailers
are small, family-owned and operated-businesses that are involved in
their local communities. In Connecticut, they provide employment for
approximately 4,000 people.
Our industry and specifically our members are still attempting to
recover from boom and bust commodity cycles of the past, from hurricane
Katrina to the more recent run-up in crude oil and gasoline prices.
Gasoline retailers stand bewildered in the face of such surging and
volatile prices. Sales volumes and consumer demand have not returned to
normal demand cycles. The housing bubble, unemployment crises and slow
post-2008 economic recovery have continued to strain businesses and
consumer pocketbooks, and have caused retail stations to close at
alarming rates. Those remaining still struggle with the additional
capital requirements, diminished profitability and competitiveness, and
general business uncertainties brought on by higher wholesale prices
and the ever thinning margins due to higher product costs and credit
and debit card swipe fees.
Gasoline retailers feel the effects of higher crude prices and
higher wholesale fuel costs instantly. A gasoline retailer is like a
consumer who fills up the car weekly, except some high volume retailers
need to fill up daily or every other day and their gasoline tank is
8500 gallons, not 20 gallons. Most retailers are not free to shop for
the best price daily as a consumer can when not happy with one
particular retailers price that day. Most retailers have fuel supply
agreements that make them captive customers of the ``Major Oil''
companies or middlemen called ``distributors.'' Even when a retailer is
supplied by a distributor, most times that distributor is a captive
customer of ``Major Oil.'' A big reason Major Oil is and has been
exiting the direct serve market. More locked in captive customers
equals larger Big Oil Profits. The facts are clear, Big Oil profits are
huge and growing no matter what the economic climate or troubles come
about, such as the tsunami in Japan, the collapse of Wall Street and
subsequent Big Bank bailouts. . .we continue to see Big Oil profit
while small gasoline retailers and consumers struggle.
I am aware that the Congress is currently debating measures to
address rising gasoline prices and to bring relief to small businesses
like ours and our consumers that depend so much on our product for
their livelihoods and general mobility. I commend this committee and
the Congress, and to both sides of the aisle, for the commitment to
this endeavor. It is certainly both in the interests of your
constituencies and the interests of our broader economic well-being.
Unfortunately, there is no immediate ``magic bullet'' that will lower
the price of gasoline tomorrow, however that's not to say that there
are no government solutions that will bring consumers some relief at
the pump.
I. Addressing ``Excessive Speculation'' in the Energy Derivatives
Marketplace
First and foremost, Congress can and should take additional steps
to address ``excessive speculation'' and opaque market activity in the
energy derivatives markets. As a founding member of the Commodity
Markets Oversight Coalition (or CMOC), GASDA members have been
advocating for complete transparency, accountability and oversight in
the energy trading markets. CMOC is an informal coalition whose
participating members represent an array of business and consumer
interests that advocate in favor of government policies that promote
stability and confidence in the commodity markets and that preserve the
interests of bona fide hedgers, consumes and the broader economy.
We commend the Congress for the reforms that it included in the
2008 Close the Enron Loophole Act, which was championed by Congressman
Peter Welch of Vermont, and the 2010 Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform Act,
which included comprehensive commodity trading reform under Title VII
of the Act. The reforms of the Dodd-Frank Act are designed to bring
energy derivative trading out in the open through mandatory reporting
and clearing requirements, and to subject such trades to oversight by
the Commodity Futures Trading Commission (CFTC), including prohibitions
on fraud, manipulation and excessive speculation, all of which over-
the-counter trading has been free from since these markets were
deregulated in 2000.
``Excessive speculation'' is of the greatest concern to my members.
While speculation is in and of itself not a bad thing--in a transparent
and well functioning energy marketplace, it provides the hedging
community with necessary liquidity and facilitates price discovery.
However, when said speculation is driven to excess, it creates volatile
markets, unpredictable price swings, diminishes the ability of
commercial hedgers to manage price risks associated with a commodity
such as gasoline, and dislocates market prices from supply and demand
fundamentals.
There are some that argue that such a conclusion is ``fantasy'' and
assert that there are no reputable academic or governmental studies
that provide evidence that speculation can every be harmful or
``excessive.'' This is not true. I have included for the record a list
a sampling of 58 studies, reports, and analyses that show the affects
that excessive speculation and market opacity have had on the commodity
markets. I have also included a recent study by Stanford that is
exceptionally conclusive.
There are some that also argue that the business community and
commercial end-users of derivatives are united in their opposition to
reform and limits on speculation. This is also not true and I am here
as proof. I also urge you to look at the thousands of comments sent
from businesses and consumers alike to the CFTC on Monday in support of
a proposed rule on speculation limits, written under mandate by the
Congress in the Dodd-Frank Act. You will note, however, see much
support from the financial community that profit from excessive market
volatility and speculation (banks, hedge funds, pensions) at the
expense of others (captive customers, retailers, consumers, business
owners).
Some argue that for every gallon of gasoline, consumers are paying
a ``speculative premium'' of as much as $1 per gallon as a result of
excessive speculation in the crude oil and gasoline markets. Congress
could immediately remove this ``speculative premium'' by:

Supporting the implementation of authorities provided
the CFTC under the Dodd-Frank Act, especially comprehensive
transparency requirements, rules to strengthen prohibitions on
fraud and manipulation, and meaningful position limits designed
to protect against the burdens of excessive speculation;

Fighting efforts to strip funding from this agency at
a time in which additional resources are needed to implement
these new reforms and to respond to ever changing global and
domestic market conditions and trading practices;

Considering legislation to restrain or limit the
involvement of ``index funds'' and other so-called ``passive
investors,'' whose buy-and-hold strategies have severely
disrupted price discovery and caused volatile swings in the
price of gasoline; and by

Reforming the tax code to close loopholes currently
being exploited by Wall Street commodity traders that allows
them to pay little or no taxes on their speculative profits
while commercial hedgers are taxed at higher rates.
Once the CFTC implements the necessary reforms provided by the
Congress in the Dodd-Frank Act, which simply put assures complete
transparency and ``bans all types of excessive speculation'' and
provided the Congress resists ideological crusades to repeal these
reforms and instead affords the CFTC the support, resources and funding
to do the job intended--Congress will sending a clear message that the
markets will hear loud and clear. And, unlike many other solutions
being considered by Congress, the effect will be very immediate.
II. Releasing from the Strategic Petroleum Reserve (SPR)
A release from the Strategic Petroleum Reserve (SPR) will also have
an immediate but short term positive impact, unlike reforms of the
commodities markets, which would have both an immediate and permanent
impact on the marketplace. However, this solution should not be
ignored. It is just smart policy. Even a small release of 30 or 100
million barrels will have the immediate effect of driving some bullish
and speculative activity out of the marketplace and help signal
somewhat of a much needed correction to an overly emotional market.
Some argue there should be no release from the SPR because there is
no present or imminent supply disruption or surge in demand. Yet, these
same critics also say that speculation is not at fault because there is
a global supply and demand problem, and/or they argue that there is a
domestic supply and demand problem that requires increased domestic
drilling. I just don't understand this logic. A small SPR release is
just simply in the interests of small businesses, consumers and the
struggling economy, especially in light of the delayed reforms at the
CFTC, market irrationalities and world events.
III. Implementation of a Long-term Domestic Energy Policy
This SPR release worked during Katrina and at other times in our
history because it bought time and immediate relief to struggling
consumers until the damaged refineries could get back up and running
and pipe lines repaired. Such releases from the SPR are a good idea and
good timing but without a long-term strategy of increased domestic
energy production and decreased reliance on foreign energy, it is only
a short-term fix.
Once the commodity markets are repaired, our nation can and must
turn its attention to its energy policy. But not before. We must have
functional, transparent and responsive commodity markets that can hear
and respond affectively, much as the stock markets would do to signals
from Washington and market-makers. Any announcement of a comprehensive
long term energy policy of domestic energy production increases and
alternative energy solutions must be heard loud and clear by markets in
order for them to have the intended result. Otherwise, it could serve
the same affects of an SPR release--Washington acts, the market
responds, and then only days later rumors of another ``crisis'' drives
speculators back into the markets and the prices surge again.
There is much the Congress can do but it should walk the walk, not
just talk the talk. Measures to address rising gasoline prices that are
explored by this committee and this Congress must be backed up by hard,
concrete actions that can be measured by results. Otherwise this is
just another form of ``speculation'' and that is what we are trying to
eliminate. Let's return to markets that are responsive to cold, hard
supply and demand fundamentals and then give them the supply needed to
meet the demand through a smart and effective domestic energy policy--
something that is, indeed, long overdue.
Thank you for the opportunity to come here and speak to you today
and I will answer any questions you may have.
______

The Chairman. Thank you, Mr. Fox, and thank all of you for
your testimony. We will now begin a round of questioning. Each
Member will have five minutes, and I will recognize myself for
five minutes, and I would like to ask a question of all of you.
All of your testimony talked on different nuances and different
things that we could do, but there is a fundamental issue here
it seems to me, and I just want to know if you agree with me,
and that is if you have a shortage of something, that tends to
rise the prices, so one of the antidotes for that is to
increase the supply.
Greater supply tends to bring down the price of whatever
commodity you are talking about, and I just want to ask all of
you very quickly to you agree with that assessment starting
with you, Governor Graves?
Mr. Graves. Certainly, Chairman, and of course I agree with
the President's efforts reducing our import of foreign oil. It
seems to me like we have to do three things. We have to
conserve more. We have to basically find alternatives, and we
have to maintain domestic production as we transition into our
future.
The Chairman. Ms. Harbert?
Ms. Harbert. I agree. We live in a global oil market. It is
not controlled by one entity or another. It is a global
commodity, and we need to send the market short-term and long-
term signals that there would be more supplies that we have a
more predictable market over the longer term.
The Chairman. Mr. Shawcroft?
Mr. Shawcroft. Mr. Chairman, I would agree also with the
single caveat that not only supply but the reliability of that
supply and reducing volatility in that supply, and you talk
about speculation that definitely influences that price.
The Chairman. Mr. Fox?
Mr. Fox. I agree, but the problem that we fact today is
with the speculators in the market that we have today. More
production, I am afraid that the speculators will just take
over that increased supply. If we look at the inventory levels
of crude oil today and gasoline, we are above the five-year
average. That is a market fundamental that should see prices
dropping but because of speculators in the market, we are
seeing prices increase. I think if you times increased
production, a release from the Strategic Petroleum Reserve
along with an announcement of real market reforms due to
speculation and provide funding for the CFTC, we would see
prices tank.
The Chairman. Well, the reason I ask that question, and I
know it was pretty fundamental because it is a supply equation,
and let me go back a bit. In 2008, when gas prices were up
above $4.00 a gallon, you all probably painfully remember that,
I certainly do, there were moratoria, a Presidential moratorium
and a Congressional moratorium, and both of those ended in
2008, and yet the prices dropped down, and I think this plays
into I think, Mr. Harbert, what you said, and probably you all
alluded to, crude is an international commodity and what we did
with ending those moratoria was send a signal to the market
that we are going to utilize the resources we have. Therefore,
the market reacted, including the speculators, and prices
dropped.
We seem to be in a different situation now, but the bills
that I introduced, for example, and again, Ms. Harbert, you
alluded to the fact of the huge reserves that we have, I
alluded to that in my opening remarks, if we drill domestically
smart where we know there are tremendous reserves, would that
not suggest that we will get probably a more supply online
quicker rather than later if we know where these potential
resources are. I will just ask that to all of you because we
are not doing that in our country right now, so, Governor, let
me start with you and go right down the line.
Mr. Graves. Well, certainly I agree, Mr. Chairman. Again, I
come to this hearing not so much in search of 25-cent a gallon
fuel. I come to this hearing in search of some stability in the
fuel markets and again some guidance or hope that we are
starting a more pragmatic transition into what our future is
going to look like, and our transportation industry has relied
upon petroleum-based products forever, and we are more than
interested in transitioning to new sources of fuel, new sources
of power, but it is not something that it is like a light
switch that just goes on and it changes over night.
In the meantime, we absolutely don't have a fuel that will
move 80,000 pounds over the Rocky Mountains other than diesel
fuel, so our concern again is not seeking cheap fuel. Our
concern is seeking some stability in the fuel available to us
for the near term.
The Chairman. Yes. Very quickly because time is running
out.
Ms. Harbert. I think what you are talking about is becoming
more self-reliant, and according to the IEA, $26 trillion in
investment is needed to meet the growing world energy demand. I
think the question is, is any of that money going to be coming
here, or are we putting policies in place that will discourage
that investment from happening here. An investment to bring
those molecules to the surface will happen in other countries,
and those jobs will be created elsewhere, and they should be
created here.
The Chairman. Mr. Shawcroft.
Mr. Shawcroft. Again, Mr. Chairman, as I stated in my
testimony, we believe that all forms of energy need to be
brought online as soon as possible.
The Chairman. Mr. Fox?
Mr. Fox. I agree, Mr. Chairman, and I just would like to
say that if we go on a path of increased drilling, you are
certainly right on when you say target where the product is,
but if we create alternate energy sources, that will create
additional competition which would drive the price down even
further.
The Chairman. I agree. That is why I have been an advocate
of all of the above energy plan. I finally have to say I
remember 25-cent gasoline by the way. Date myself. Gentleman
from Massachusetts recognized.
Mr. Markey. I think I was behind you at that pump. Mr. Fox,
in the Republican HR-1, their first bill this year, their
budget, they left in $18 billion for loan guarantees for
nuclear power, but zeroed out all the loan guarantees for wind
and solar and renewable energy. Is that a good strategy, or
would you like to see loan guarantees in their for renewables
as well?
Mr. Fox. Absolutely would like to see loan guarantees for
renewables. Again, any increase in competition----
Mr. Markey. I got you. Thank you. How about you, sir?
Mr. Shawcroft. I presume you are speaking to me?
Mr. Markey. Yes.
Mr. Shawcroft. Thank you, Mr. Markey.
Mr. Markey. $18 billion for nuclear and then they took all
the money out for wind and solar for loan guarantees. Do you
think we should keep in the competition that exists amongst all
these energy technologies?
Mr. Shawcroft. There should be technology, and certainly
competition, but we believe that all forms of energy need to be
pursued.
Mr. Markey. Thank you, so zeroing out wind and solar is not
a good idea, would you agree with that?
Mr. Shawcroft. No, I wouldn't.
Mr. Markey. OK. Good. How about you, Karen?
Ms. Harbert. The nuclear loan guarantees were passed by
bipartisan Congress.
Mr. Markey. No, but what I am saying--
Ms. Harbert. And the renewable guarantees, they received an
enormous amount of loan guarantees in the stimulus package.
Mr. Markey. No, I appreciate that, but you support taking
out the loan guarantee money for wind and solar?
Ms. Harbert. I did not say that. I said that they had
received a much greater amount of loan--
Mr. Markey. No. I am asking you if you support taking out
the loan guarantee money for wind and solar and leaving it in
for nuclear? That is all I am asking you.
Ms. Harbert. We supported the stimulus package which in it
had huge loan guarantees for the renewable technologies.
Mr. Markey. OK. So you do support it?
Ms. Harbert. And we need renewable technologies.
Mr. Markey. OK. Thank you. I appreciate that. Mr. Graves?
Mr. Graves. Congressman Markey, a Governor from Kansas
supports sun and wind power.
Mr. Markey. Thank you. Thank you. I appreciate that, so,
Mr. Fox, the CFTC regulations are being promulgated as we
speak. However, the majority actually has now cut funding for
the CFTC by more than a third in HR-1. If we were to cut
funding for the CFTC and hamper its efforts to issue and
enforce these new regulations, would that lead to higher energy
prices for consumers? Would speculators rest easier if they
knew that the funding wasn't there to police them?
Mr. Graves. The fastest way to $6 gasoline is to cut the
funding to the CFTC.
Mr. Markey. So you do believe it would lead to excessive
speculation?
Mr. Graves. Yes, sir.
Mr. Markey. OK. Now, earlier this month, we heard from the
former Administrator of the Energy Information Administration
during the Bush Administration, Guy Caruso. He has been quoted
as saying that oil prices would be reduced by $5 to $10 per
barrel by deploying the Strategic Petroleum Reserve depending
upon the timing and the volume of the deployment. Do you agree
that deploying the Strategic Petroleum Reserve could have that
type of impact on prices?
Mr. Graves. I know we have seen that in the past, but when
we have deployed the SPR before, we had issues such as
refineries being down due to Hurricane Katrina so we could
monitor and see when those refineries were coming back online.
I believe any release of the Strategic Petroleum Reserve timed
along with proper funding and proper CFTC authorization would
drive prices down to that level and more.
Mr. Markey. Great. In 2008, the American Trucking
Association testified before the select Committee on Energy
Independence. In that testimony, the American Trucking
Association, and I quote, said that, ``The ATA has asked the
Administration to release oil from the Strategic Petroleum
Reserve. While we know that the Strategic Petroleum Reserve
does not contain enough oil to permanently alter the supply of
crude oil in the marketplace, we believe that strategic
releases of the SPR could temporarily increase the supply of
crude oil and hopefully help restore rational behavior to the
petroleum markets.''
This type of government intervention could drive
speculators out of the market and help ensure that petroleum
prices are once again driven by supply and demand. Do you agree
with that Governor Graves?
Mr. Graves. I do, Congressman.
Mr. Markey. Yes, so the deployment of the Strategic
Petroleum Reserve can in fact have an impact on the attitude
and the actions of speculators out in the marketplace.
Mr. Graves. It can, Congressman, and I said my concern goes
beyond that to long-term stability in pricing.
Mr. Markey. Ms. Harbert, could you tell me which nation we
get the most oil from, and we know it is the Canadians. Canada
made a decision some years ago that it was going to try to turn
sand that had low concentrations of tar mixed in with it into
oil. Very expensive, consumes massive amounts of oil, and it
turns out that cooking the tar out of the sands takes quite a
bit of energy. It is so environmentally damaging that the
European Union is moving to prevent tar sands oil from entering
the European market, but nevertheless with oil prices above
$100 a barrel, this production has meant huge profits for Shell
and BP and other companies.
My question to you is looking at the greenhouses gases as
they are being produced out of that source, do you think that
there is a reason for the United States to ask for additional
environmental protections to be built into that methodology of
producing oil?
Ms. Harbert. Well, first of all, I appreciate your
acknowledgment that Canada is a hugely important trading
partner with the United States and has the potential to grow as
the President recognized that yesterday, and having that
resource right across our border and having the potential to
grow it I think needs to be recognized in light of our growing
energy security challenges. I do think we want to see the oil
sands continue to make improvements in the way that they are
extracted and the way they are transported, but make no mistake
any policy you put in place on this side of the border will not
deter their continued production.
Those oil sands are going to be developed, and they are
going to be sold. The question for us is do they come here
where we have high emission standards and high refining
standards, or are they put on tankers, going across large seas
and refined in areas where they don't have high emissions
requirements, so I think that also is a fundamental part of the
equation that needs to be taken into account.
Mr. Markey. Thank you, Ms. Harbert.
The Chairman. The time of the gentleman has expired. The
gentleman from Colorado, Mr. Lamborn?
Mr. Lamborn. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you all for
being here, and I especially want to welcome the witness from
Colorado. It is good to talk to you.
Mr. Shawcroft. Thank you.
Mr. Lamborn. This Committee is well represented by
representatives from Colorado. I think there are four that I
know of off the top of my head on both sides of the aisle, so
thank you for being here. I have a question for you based on
your written testimony. In it you point out that we are
increasingly dependent on foreign imports of fertilizer and its
components due to the decline in U.S. fertilizer production, so
if there is clearly a market for fertilizer in this country,
why is domestic production declining, and the second part of
that question is what does that mean for the consumer, the
Americans who enjoy our agricultural products?
Mr. Shawcroft. The cost of production overseas is
definitely less than it is here in the United States, and that
is the reason that it comes from out of the United States.
Ninety-five percent of fertilizer production, particularly
ammonia, that cost comes from natural gas. That is why we
believe at the American Farm Bureau we need to develop all
sources of energy, including natural gas. What it means to
consumers? Definitely an increase in fertilizer, increase our
costs, but as I stated in my oral testimony, we as farmers and
ranchers have a very, very limited ability to pass that cost on
to the purchasers of our products. Does that answer your
question?
Mr. Lamborn. Yes, and I appreciate your being here today.
It is always good to see someone from my home state of
Colorado, and, Mrs. Harbert, I have a couple questions for you.
What new regulations have the Obama Administration imposed on
energy production in the Gulf of Mexico since the BP oil spill
that, in your opinion, go beyond what is necessary to ensure
environmental responsibility? I know some of what they
addressed was to prevent another spill, but some people have
said they over-reacted, or they imposed regulations that didn't
directly address what happened at BP.
Ms. Harbert. I think the policy framework in the Gulf has
been one of shutting down production, and we do need to take
into account what happened in the spill, and appropriate safety
procedures need to be put in place, and the industry did step
up to the table, invested billions and now has systems in place
that the Department of the Interior has certified are adequate,
even exceed their requirements for response.
They are putting currently and are promulgating regulations
and so the industry has yet to have a clear idea of what type
of criteria they are going to have to meet, and that is very
difficult to make investment decisions when you don't know what
your requirements are going to be. Regulations continue to be
promulgated by the Department of the Interior and will continue
to be, as I have said, until the remainder of this year.
They are continuing environmental reviews, environmental
regulations that are making the production in the Gulf of
Mexico, quite frankly, remain in flux, and the industry has
only received in deep water seven permits, permits that were
already issued before. They have been reissued, so there is
nothing new going on in the Gulf because no new exploration
will be happening until they know what criteria they have to
meet.
Mr. Lamborn. OK. Thank you, and let me just interject a
comment here. I am really pleased to join with Chairman
Hastings in introducing three what I believe are very important
pieces of legislation to address the deregulatory gridlock that
has occurred in the Gulf of Mexico in particular, and that will
speed up permitting and help open up some areas that previously
were open, but I think have arbitrarily been closed for
production, so I look forward to that legislation.
Let me ask you a question about the Strategic Petroleum
Reserve, Ms. Harbert. Do you believe that this short-term
action, if it is taken, of tapping into that is good
considering the long term, and are there better things that
could be done to lower the price of gasoline and the cost on
consumers other than tapping in to this reserve?
Ms. Harbert. The Strategic Petroleum Reserve holds 40 days
of American demand, and so we should be very careful of how we
use it because we really have it there as an insurance policy
for when there is a severe supply disruption of which we do not
have right now, so the little amount of oil that we would put
out in the market, the short-term signal, will do nothing to
ease the long-term price increase. It is increasing because
demand is increasing.
China and India are pushing up the demand for oil in the
world, and as we look around the world where the demand is
coming from, from the developing countries, that is not
expected to end, so a short-term solution to a much longer
long-term problem is not a solution, and so we really need to
think about the longer-term implications of how to address the
fundamental problem, which is we don't have adequate supply,
and we can be part of that solution, or we can choose to
actually import more from other countries.
Mr. Lamborn. OK. Thank you very much. Mr. Chairman, I yield
back.
The Chairman. The gentleman yields back his time. The
gentlelady from California, Mrs. Napolitano.
Mrs. Napolitano. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. There are a lot
of questions that I would have, and time will not permit me to
ask all of them, but we know that drilling is not going to
solve the issue. I think we need to look for more alternative
ways to produce the energy that is necessary whether it is for
farming or for running the diesel fuel trucks or the equipment
that is needed in farms. I have been to some of the research
institutions where they are using algae trying to produce fuel
for John Deere. I am not sure if you are aware of that, but
that is something futuristic, and who knows? Maybe that will
come to fruition some day.
Mr. Shawcroft, if the entire Outer Continental Shelf were
open to drilling, it only increases oil production by 1.6
percent by the year 2030 and peak .787 barrel per day, reduce
world prices by 70 cents per barrel. The BLM spaced it out of
41 million acres already under lease onshore, only 12 million
acres, less than one-third, or 30 percent, is actually in
production. In the last two years, U.S. has increase oil
production by more than a third.
In 2010, the Bureau of Ocean Management offered 37 million
acres in the Gulf. However, oil companies are only producing
6.5 million acres, which is 70 percent, so wouldn't it be
possible that we can't continue to rely on oil production and
should be focusing time and funding to renewable energies to
supplant our needs, and I do agree with your statement energy
independence should be our nation's focus, and I think that
this Administration has been doing that very well.
Again, on the research, those are issues that are critical
for me, and then to the farmers is additional improvements in
manufacturing and producing the largest crops, especially when
it deals to water, and the Ranking Member, and water and power,
and water is a commodity we no longer have too much of, so I
will lay it on you, and if you will address those?
Mr. Shawcroft. Thank you, ma'am. Mrs. Napolitano, as well
as the Committee, several issues you have raised certainly we
do believe in developing renewable energies, and we believe
that even futuristic energies that are being developed now we
need to be working on those things so that when they become
economically viable, and they really provide a solution or a
supplement to our need today, that needs to be pursued.
You raise the issue of leases and production. There is
another important component that I believe hasn't been
mentioned very clearly today and that is the permitting
process. Just because an oil company has a lease in an area
does not mean that they have a permit to extract what we need
out of those lands.
Mrs. Napolitano. They may not have applied for those
permits.
Mr. Shawcroft. That is true, and if they do not, as I think
Ms. Harbert mentioned, they may not know exactly what the rules
of the game so to speak are going to be, and that is an
uncertainty of which oil companies are not willing to take. We
face the same thing as far as uncertainty as to what our fuel
costs are going to be for the coming growing season. I am very
troubled by the fact that diesel fuel very likely will be over
$4.00, maybe over $5.00 a gallon for the summer when we move
our cattle to and from the range. Last year it cost us $4.00
per loaded mile. This year, I don't know what it will be, $5,
$6? It is a very scarey situation. Did I answer your questions
adequately ma'am?
Mrs. Napolitano. Sort of. Kind of. Anybody else? I have
limited time, so I wanted to make sure that I had an
opportunity for somebody else to answer.
Ms. Harbert. I think we agree on a number of the points
that you just raised. We are going to need multiple options
going forward to secure our energy future, but that doesn't
mean shutting off the options we have today. I think I would
comment on your estimate about the amount of oil that might be
on the outer continental shelf. That is based on 35-year old
data and has not been updated yet, and we need access to the
shelf for the industry who is best positioned really to know,
as was mentioned earlier, about where are the highest
probability potential reservoirs, and so we are going to need
lots of options. Let us use today's and invest in tomorrow's as
well.
Mrs. Napolitano. Thank you. Mr. Fox, the Administration's
2012 budget requests $4 per acre-foot for non-producing Federal
oil and gas leases, which would provide incentive for the oil
and gas companies to produce more resources. The HR-927, the
United States Exploration on Idle Tracks introduced by our
Ranking Member and Representative Holt also institutes this fee
and repeals deep gas industry royal relief. Is your
organization supportive of the budget requests and of this
provision in the legislation, and if not, what improvements
can/should be made?
Mr. Fox. I don't know enough about that particular
provision to answer that question accurately.
Mrs. Napolitano. OK. Thank you very much. Thank you, Mr.
Chair.
The Chairman. I think the gentlelady. The gentleman from
Tennessee, Mr. Fleischmann, is recognized.
Mr. Fleischmann. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Ladies and
gentlemen, welcome. Thank you for your testimony today. I
represent the third district of Tennessee. The largest city
there is Chattanooga. Chattanooga is an outstanding trucking
hub and, Governor Graves, I want to say it as a great privilege
to have great trucking companies in Chattanooga, and trucking
is so critically important and vibrant to our economy to the
distribution of goods in this country, and I am proud to be an
advocate for those companies.
Governor, I have a question to start with you, sir. Higher
oil prices will undoubtedly have an impact, sir, on small
businesses across America. In addition this distinguished
Committee, I also serve on the Small Business Committee in
Congress, and I would like to know, sir, if you could please
speak to the cost of higher fuel prices to the companies you
represent. How specifically will this affect other costs
associated with these companies, sir, and how long these
businesses will be able to survive under the current
conditions, sir?
Mr. Fox. Well, I mean, I think everyone knows that the last
couple of years have been just bad generally for all businesses
but certainly the trucking industry, which is predominantly
very, very small, independent owner/operators, small family
businesses with five or fewer trucks. I mean, the UPSes and the
FedExes are the exception. Very candidly, many have fallen out
of the business already just simply due to the economic
downturn, and I think what we are struggling with right now is
that a lot of people put off capital investment decisions the
last couple of years because they simply didn't have the money
to buy new equipment.
We are faced with a lot of new regulatory issues on driver
safety, training requirements, and so we are looking at
increasing driver pay. There are a whole bunch of things right
now that have been teed up. The timing, you might say, it is
not good in that there are a number of things we need to do in
our industry to upgrade our fleets, take advantage of new clean
diesel technologies, things like that, and we are facing a
moment with rising fuel prices when we actually need whatever
cash we have available to go out and take care of our normal
business, so it is hard enough for the very well-established
big firms. It is going to be impossible for a lot of the small
firms.
Mr. Fleischmann. Thank you, sir. Ms. Harbert, I have a
question for you, ma'am. Can you please tell me about how many
jobs have been lost in the United States in the last few months
as an impact of higher gas prices and how many business you
have heard from at the chamber that have been negatively
impacted by these high prices, ma'am?
Ms. Harbert. Well, thank you for that question,
Congressman. I don't know that we have any scientific data yet
because it takes some time for that to be accumulated, but we
do know that we have 13.9 million people unemployed in this
country, and we know we are not addressing that gap with high
energy prices because businesses aren't hiring. They are paying
their energy bills, and so we know that over the next 10 years,
we have to create 20 million new jobs, and if we don't have
affordable energy, we won't be able to meet the employment
needs of our nation.
I think while we don't have the month-to-month data, we are
certainly getting, my phone certainly rings off the hook with,
small and medium size, and this is all around the country, that
have a great desire to contribute to our economy but are
really, really struggling.
Mr. Fleischmann. I understand. Thank you. As a followup
question, as you many of you all know, I continue to oppose
higher taxes across the board in this country. One area I would
like to ask you ma'am, can you speak to how higher prices on
the oil industry proposed by this Administration would affect
jobs in the United States?
Ms. Harbert. Absolutely. Right now, I mean, American has
one of the highest corporate income tax rates of the world to
begin with, and then to go ahead and single out an industry and
levy additional taxes on top of that in a global energy market,
which is very competitive, will only force our American energy
companies to go elsewhere and develop those resources, those
jobs, and those revenues for other countries rather than here,
and so we will see a great deal of jobs lost in the energy
industry, which employees about 9.2 million today.
We will begin to see them having to make very difficult
decision of moving overseas, investing overseas when other
countries are lowering their tax rates to incent people to come
to their countries. We saw the President in Brazil. Brazil is
inviting people to come there and develop, and companies are
responding because it is attractive to invest in Brazil. We are
not seeing that type of response here in the United States
because we are contemplating raising taxes on that industry
upon which we rely.
Mr. Fleischmann. Thank you. Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
The Chairman. I thank the gentleman. The gentleman from
Arizona, Mr. Grijalva.
Mr. Grijalva. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Fox, we hear a
lot about the importance of free market in our economy, and
justifiably so. Markets are an essential part of our system,
but I think we overlook the realities and the histories of
specific industries, such as the oil industry. Would you call
the oil market in the pure sense of the word a free market?
Mr. Fox. No, sir.
Mr. Grijalva. Do you want to elaborate on that, please?
Mr. Fox. When you look at the industry itself, when you
talk about big oil, I think you have to break the industry down
in segments. Big oil today talks about a free market and free-
market system, and they have it. They are allowed to go
wherever they can obtain the cheapest commodity, crude oil,
overseas or here in the United States, so they can put it
through the refineries at the cheapest cost to the them. Once
that product is refined and delivered to the middle men or the
distributors and to our retailers, we are locked in as a
captive customer with supply contracts. We are not free to go
around and find the cheapest price.
More importantly, the excuse of that is because they want
to ensure integrity of the product. Let me give you an example.
I was a Mobile Oil retailer for 20 years. Forty-first highest
volume Mobile retailer in the United States. I could find
Mobile product in the State of Connecticut where I was based 20
cents a gallon cheaper, but I was restricted because I had a
contract directly with Mobile Oil Corp., so in essence, I was
going to a middle man saving 20 cents a gallon when going
direct to the manufacturer of the product, I paid the highest
price for that produce. There is something wrong with that. I
don't think that is a free-market system.
Mr. Grijalva. And your opinion, Mr. Fox, let me continue,
the Dodd-Frank bill. Does it do enough to address the
speculation concerns that you were talking about earlier in
your testimony?
Mr. Fox. I think the argument out there today if we
implement the Dodd-Frank bill the way it is supposed to be
implemented, and that is the argument that is out there, how it
is supposed to be implemented, there are some problems and
issues that we see with the current proposed CFTC proposals. I
think we need to strengthen them. More importantly, I think we
have to need to make sure that the funding is there for the
CFTC. Unfortunately, here in Washington, you get two shots at
the apple. You have to fight real hard to get proper
legislation passed, and once you are able to accomplish that
against the K Street lobbyists, then you have to fight for the
funding, so we can pass the bill in its proper form, but if we
don't get the funding, we can't do the job. You can't do one
without the other.
Mr. Grijalva. Thank you. One last one, Mr. Fox, in the
first question I think you responded to part of this, but as a
representative of gasoline retailers, someone who is intimately
involved with the weird intricacies of the international oil
market, is there something I think about this oil market that
we talked about in the first question that you wish the
American public understood better or knew?
Mr. Fox. I think I wish the public knew that it is not your
local gasoline retailer. We are the sounding board for the
consumer when they come in. I think what happens is the news
and the media does a great job saying gasoline prices went up
say 15 cents a gallon today, yet the local retailer may go up
20 cents, and that may be because of a state tax, which is on a
percentage basis, so my wholesale costs went up 15 cents, now
my credit card just increased another five cents, and on top of
that, if I have a percentage-based tax in my state, I have to
increase it even more, so the end cost to me is not 15 cents.
The raw cost is.
By the same token, in Connecticut, when we reduced the
gasoline tax, we had the highest in the nation, and I sponsored
legislation to reduce that highest gas tax in the nation, the
tax only went down 14 cents, yet the retail price of gasoline
went down 20 cents. That is what I don't think the consumer or
people in Congress or our local legislators understand very
well.
Mr. Grijalva. Thank you very much. I yield back, Mr.
Chairman.
The Chairman. All right. I thank the gentleman for yielding
back. The gentleman from Colorado, Mr. Tipton?
Mr. Tipton. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I would like to
thank all of our panel for being here and just kind of quick
comment, Mr. Fox, when you are talking about not seeing free
markets, I feel the pain here when I have to pay rent in
Washington, D.C. I don't see free markets here either in terms
of it. I would certainly like to express especially my deep
appreciation for Don Shawcroft being here out of the Colorado
Farm Bureau. I am your proud representative, was just in the
San Luis Valley not long ago and appreciate all of the efforts
that the Farm Bureau makes on behalf of our state and the
citizens of our country and what our potato crop does for
generating revenues for this country as well, and thank you so
much for your testimony and being here.
Mr. Shawcroft. Thank you. I am glad to be here.
Mr. Tipton. Now, Don, I would like to ask you just a couple
of questions here that obviously rising gas prices affect
margins of companies that rely on transportation, to be able to
deliver the goods as you were noticing and then any aspect of
their business really. That is a cost that you are going to
have. Over the past few years, we have seen an increase in
regulations, particularly the farm industry is paying a huge
price for this I think in terms of EPA regulations, dust
particulate, whatnot that they are coming up with now,
increased restriction on drivers, on capacities, rising
equipment costs overall.
Would you like to comment how these things all combined,
all combined, is this making businesses even more sensitive to
the rising fuel costs that we are now seeing?
Mr. Shawcroft. Thank you, Mr. Tipton. Certainly, every cost
that comes along affects your bottom line. It is even more
difficult than agriculture because not only does it affect what
you are actually having to pay for, but it is also affecting
what happens to your product once it leaves your farm or ranch.
You mentioned the transportation cost. The transportation cost
involved in the agricultural product once it leaves the farm is
tremendous. It is probably the largest component of what a
retail market, individual consumer goes in and pays for that
product.
The other issues, certainly regulatory issues are
tremendous. There is a proposal right now that if we have to
apply for an NPDES permit in order to spray pesticides close to
bodies of water, and certainly Ms. Napolitano mentioned
adequately the need for water, and Colorado water is vital. If
we spray pesticides that is labeled according to FIFRA near
that body of water, we may be required to apply for an NPDES
permit. We are told that if we do that, that NPDES may cost as
much as $23,000 for a single individual to obtain. That is a
cost that is very difficult to bear.
Mr. Tipton. And these are costs that particularly our farm
and ranch communities cannot truly pass on?
Mr. Shawcroft. That is right. We are a price taker. When we
sell our product, when we purchase products, we purchase them
at full retail price just as anybody else.
Mr. Tipton. So if I juxtapose that a little bit to the
Governor's comment in regards to we are seeing trucking
companies go out of business, then really with regulations that
we have here in this country, are we threatening the food
supply of this country simply because you aren't going to be
able make it as a farmer and rancher?
Mr. Shawcroft. Absolutely. Not only are you threatening the
food supply, but you are also threatening the fiber, the basic
of a rural community.
Mr. Tipton. Right.
Mr. Shawcroft. That farm, if it is next to a source of
development, is very much a threat in going out of business
because if you just can't make it, and it is the only source of
income, or in fact if it isn't your only source of income, but
you just finally say I have had it, I cannot stand the
additional expense, and the simply way out, I am ready to
retire, is to sell and let it be developed.
Mr. Tipton. OK. I would kind of like to ask you a little
more I guess philosophical sort of a question.
Mr. Shawcroft. Sure.
Mr. Tipton. As an American, is it smarter for us to be able
to buy food that is grown in this country, or should we be
relying on food grown outside of our country?
Mr. Shawcroft. Absolutely smarter to have that product in
the United States as much as we can.
Mr. Tipton. Great, so what you are saying--
Mr. Shawcroft. We are a country who loves to have food,
whatever we want to eat all year long, 365 days a year.
Mr. Tipton. So would it be sensible by that extension for
us to be able to develop our resources to be able to provide
our fuel? We may have that global economy out there for fuel
prices, but if that supply given the turmoil in the Middle East
cuts off those sources coming into our country, would it be
good common sense maybe to develop our resources right here in
the United States?
Mr. Shawcroft. Absolutely. As I stated, we need to develop
all sources of energy.
Mr. Tipton. Great. And let us see. I did also have a
question I think it was for Mr. Graves, and it was your comment
are those fuel costs, are those passed on to the consumer, and
how is that impacting prices on struggling families, moms and
dads, grandmas and grandpas that are having a tough time paying
their bills?
Mr. Graves. Well, I would say that initially small
operators have a difficult time passing through fuel costs.
They especially get hit hard, especially when it spikes up
quickly. Again, some of the more sophisticated companies have
contracts structured in such a way that they more easily pass
through fuel surcharge costs. Ultimately, when things
stabilize, everybody adjusts their rates accordingly, and, I
mean, we are not benevolent operations. We are not
recreational. We are in it for a business, and it gets passed
through to consumers, and everybody pays.
Mr. Tipton. Great. Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. The time of the gentleman has expired. The
gentleman from New Jersey, Mr. Holt.
Mr. Holt. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Fox, it is the local
retailers that are catching the brunt of the dissatisfaction
right now with the high gasoline prices, and I wanted to pursue
the line that you have been talking about. Do you think that
big oil companies, the production companies, feel that they are
in a partnership with the retailers? In other words, do they
share their good fortune their times of tens of billions of
dollars in profit with the local retailers?
Mr. Fox. I think they do a tremendous job of talking the
talk, and a terrible job of walking the walk of what they are
saying. In fact, if you look at big oil, they are exiting the
retail market. Exxon Mobile just recently sold off all of the
gasoline retailers in the State of Connecticut. They made
promises to them for over eight years, and every single one of
those retailers just feels like they were used and abused and
sold off.
Mr. Holt. A lot of the talk over the last day or so or
actually recent weeks, even here in this Committee, has
suggested that it is the failure of the offshore licensing and
permitting that is responsible for $3 and $4 a gallon gasoline.
I would like to pursue that and understand how that could be.
Governor Graves, is it true that domestic oil production is
about the highest it has been in a decade and about double what
it was for each of the previous four years, six, seven, eight
nine?
Mr. Graves. Well, that is not a subject that I am expert
on, but from what I understand, our production has essentially
just about plateaued in that the issue becomes what are we
going to do? Wells deplete over time.
Mr. Holt. Well, let me just ask. I have here a graph. It
probably doesn't show up for you or for the people looking, but
in fact, U.S. domestic oil production is about the highest it
has been in a decade, but even more to the point, it is about
double what it was in 2005, 2006, 2007, 2008, so I think there
is something going on here other than domestic oil production,
and you have touched on this before, a couple of you, with
regard to speculation. Now, obviously there is a place for
this, for price discovery, and there is a place for hedging.
Mr. Fox, do you happen to have any figures or any familiarity
with the degree to which this is pure speculation or this is a
matter of useful price discovery?
Mr. Fox. I spent last night reading a recent 385-page
report and was amazed to find out that right on page 1 it said
that prior to 2000, before deregulation came in, that about 70
percent of all of the speculation that was done in the energy
markets was for bona fide hedgers, in other words people that
used and utilized the product, and after deregulation, we have
completed flipped that. It is now 70 percent pure speculators.
If that is not factual evidence that speculation is the
problem, I don't know what anyone will ever believe is.
Mr. Holt. OK. Now, I guess I would like to ask you to
repeat for the record something I think I heard you say a few
minutes ago that removing the ability of the regulators,
particularly the Commodity Futures Trading Commission, would do
more to increase prices at the pump than anything else. Could
you put it in your words what it was you said?
Mr. Fox. Yes, I think you enjoyed my comment where I said
the fastest way to $6 retail gasoline prices was to not fully
fund the CFTC and not impose the Dodd-Frank regulations. That
is the fastest way to get to $6 gasoline.
Mr. Holt. So you are saying that it is speculation in the
financial markets, manipulation of the big companies that are
having a much greater effect than whether there are leases
granted offshore or permits granted for more drilling?
Mr. Fox. I think those speculators will use all those
debates and arguments, I have coined a new phrase, to use fear
over facts, and that is how we will get to $6 with the
speculators in the market.
Mr. Holt. Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. Time of the gentleman has expired. The
gentleman from Florida, Mr. Southerland, is recognized.
Mr. Southerland. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Fox, let me
ask you regarding your retailers, and I think you have been a
retailer?
Mr. Fox. Yes, sir.
Mr. Shawcroft. As a small business owner that you have
been, and obviously your association with many others, when you
look at your pro forma of your small business going forward and
the investment that you have, and I am not familiar with your
business, I don't know if you are still in or have been in, but
what is an acceptable profit margin for a retailer/distributor
that you represent or that you owned?
Mr. Fox. I can tell you that the word ``acceptable''
certainly doesn't come into play because the consumer kind of
adjusts our profit margin for us. The average is about 10 cents
a gallon. The problem with that is that is a 10-cent gross
margin. As gasoline prices, the retail price, continues to
escalate, credit card fees take up anywhere from seven to eight
cents of that, and then environmental costs eat up the rest.
Mr. Southerland. Yes, but clearly in a retail storm, you
have a business.
Mr. Fox. Right.
Mr. Southerland. And you have revenues that come into your
business?
Mr. Fox. Correct.
Mr. Southerland. Not just through gas, but, I mean, through
all kind of things. I mean, all the products on your P&L at the
end of the year, what is an acceptable profit margin for the
business?
Mr. Fox. We probably operate somewhere in the neighborhood
of seven to nine percent total.
Mr. Southerland. OK. And I am a small business owner, and
that kind of resonates I think across specialties in our small
businesses, seven to nine percent, so would you describe the
profits of oil companies because I hear that all the time?
Would you say those profits are in billions of dollars?
Mr. Fox. Yes.
Mr. Southerland. OK. Well, if you think that it is
acceptable to have a six-, eight-, to nine-percent profit
margin for your business, then why is a similar profit margin
not acceptable for all businesses?
Mr. Fox. Because the CEO of a service station doesn't get
$450 million in salary, and that is perfectly relevant.
Mr. Southerland. No, no. And that is great, but it is
relative, and so if an oil company has to spend, and I am not
on a board. Again, I am a small business owner, but a profit
margin is a profit margin is a profit margin, and when I hear
detractors and people that want to harm oil companies, they
always talk about the dollar figure, the billions, the
billions, the billions, but they never, ever talk about it and
analyze it as a business person would in terms of a profit
margin. If you have to spend $100 billion to earn a profit
margin of five, but I never hear it put in those terms.
Mr. Fox. What does that have to do with the amount of money
that company spends with the CEO that spends 30 hours a week on
the golf course making $450 million----
Mr. Southerland. Sir, look. I will tell you this. You are
getting down in the weeds. It doesn't matter what a private
company----
Mr. Fox. I guess if the expense doesn't matter by lowering
the profit margin, I don't know what will.
Mr. Southerland. What a company wants to pay, and what a
Board and private stockholders want to pay a CEO is their
business. You don't have to buy their oil. You don't have to
buy their gas, but to demonize companies that have a six
percent, seven percent, Exxon 8.8, Chevron, 9.8, BP 6.6, I
think is a bit disingenuous when all of us in the small
business world recognize that on a great day if we could obtain
a six-, seven-, eight-percent profit margin as you claim is
acceptable for your business, why are you choosing different
standards? Business is business is business, and it discredits
your argument.
Mr. Fox. I don't think it is does, sir, and I will explain
it to you very simply. When you say if I don't like their
profit margins, don't buy their gas, don't buy their oil, I
don't know how I would get to work. I don't know how I would do
the job that I am supposed to do, so we talk about that they
operate in the free market, but they operate under a captive
customer system, so again I think it is very relevant when a
CEO working 90 hours makes $450 million, and that lowers that
profit margin to seven percent, and a service station owner
working 90 hours, makes $60,000 a year. I think that is
relevant. You may not, but I do, and I guess we will just agree
to disagree.
Mr. Southerland. We will agree to disagree. The Ranking
Member made a comment about imagine, and I enjoy his comments.
I really do, but one thing I don't imagine, I didn't imagine
last the gas prices in my neighborhood gas station increase 13
cents in one day. I didn't imagine that President Obama stated
that we have to have higher gas prices as a necessary component
to move America off of oil, and that is what we have. It is
almost like he planned it this way, and so I thank you for
being here. I thank you for facing the heat.
We will disagree, and that is OK. I think through our
disagreement we can find common ground hopefully, but not at
the expense of hard work and honest dealings, and success
usually shows up in the form of money, not debt, and I think
that applies across any business.
Mr. Fox. I will agree with your last comment there that no
one should be forced off of something through higher prices. I
will agree with you there.
The Chairman. The time of the gentleman has expired. The
gentleman from New Mexico, Mr. Lujan.
Mr. Lujan. Mr. Chairman, thank you very much, and I
certainly believe that suggesting, Mr. Chairman, and I haven't
read anywhere that President Obama, as part of any of his
agenda, said he wants higher prices at the pump for any
American. I think that is just ridiculous as we talk about this
notion of an economic recovery, and we need to make sure that
we are doing all that we can to be able to see what we can do,
and, Mr. Chairman, I think it is important that as I have----
The Chairman. Would the gentleman yield?
Mr. Lujan. Yes, sir.
The Chairman. I think that the gentleman from Florida was
alluding to a speech that then candidate Obama made
specifically in San Francisco about the cost of energy prices
where he made the statement that Americans would necessarily
have to have higher energy prices, and he was referring to the
Cap and Trade legislation that of course only passed the House,
but I think the gentleman from----
Mr. Lujan. Mr. Chairman, I think you for making the
important distinction that the President was not referring to
fuel prices at the pump. I appreciate that very much.
The Chairman. No. If the gentleman will yield, it was
higher energy prices, and I think that is what the gentleman
from Florida mentioned, but I appreciate the gentleman
yielding.
Mr. Lujan. I appreciate that, Mr. Chairman, and, Governor
Graves, thank you very much for being here as well, sir. In
addition to your responsibilities with working with the
Trucking Association, do you also have a trucking company?
Mr. Graves. Not any longer.
Mr. Lujan. I think that not any longer still allows you to
answer some of these questions then, Governor. With some of the
folks that are members of the Trucking Association, can you let
me know on average what maybe the profits were that they made
last year, the dollar amounts?
Mr. Graves. Well, if you get to double digits, you are one
of the very, very best. I would say most of them aspire the
five to six percent, but on average, I would say a lot of them
are down in the two or three pennies.
Mr. Lujan. And what does that translate to in dollars, the
largest, the strongest trucking company in America?
Mr. Graves. Well, I mean, again, we represent everyone from
UPS and FedEx, which is in the billions, to single independent,
owner/operator-type companies.
Mr. Lujan. Very good, so would it surprise you, Governor,
that the oil and gas industry last year made $77 billion when
our trucking companies who are suffering at the price at the
pump got nowhere near that?
Mr. Graves. No, I mean, and I think just picking up on the
previous conversation that took place, I mean, as a Governor, I
have appreciated companies that have come into my state. My
fiend, Boone Pickens, who owned the preponderance of natural
gas holdings in the Hugoton Field, you spend an enormous amount
of money. It is like any business venture. The investment that
goes in to actually producing those products is pretty
substantial, so that is a great thing about America.
Mr. Lujan. And, Governor, I think this is somewhere where
we agree that the Gas Company Association appreciates that we
could be able to get to more fuel associated with natural gas
for our trucks. Is that something that there is some agreement
there?
Mr. Graves. We are certainly interested in the development
of natural gas. I met with Mr. Pickens and explained to him
three things. First of all, the trucks are very expensive,
about double what the current models are. There is a weight
penalty carrying that additional fueling system, and there is
no fueling infrastructure in this nation to support across the
road trucking, but a number of our members are embracing
natural gas. In fact, I think that is what the President is
going to see tomorrow at his visit to the UPS facility in
Maryland.
Mr. Lujan. Thank you, Governor, and, Ms. Harbert, you said
you were in favor, and the Chamber is in favor of free markets,
is that yes or no?
Ms. Harbert. Yes.
Mr. Lujan. So should there be $31 billion in taxpayer
subsidies to support the oil-free market?
Ms. Harbert. Well, I think there is a prejudice right
there, that there is a subsidy.
Mr. Lujan. Yes or no. Chairman? Just a yes or no, Ms.
Harbert, because we used a little bit of my time having a
little back and forth with the Chairman.
Ms. Harbert. Well, I think we need to understand what your
definition of a subsidy is a tax treatment. Does the
pharmaceutical industry get a subsidy because they have any tax
treatment?
Mr. Lujan. I guess that is a no?
Ms. Harbert. What is your definition of a subsidy?
Mr. Lujan. Mr. Chairman, reclaiming my time. Ms. Harbert,
maybe I will submit the question in writing, and I will see if
I can get a yes or no that way. I think it is important to note
that if we stop $31 billion in taxpayer subsidies over the next
few years, we have seen that over the top five oil and gas
companies made a trillion over the last five years. As has been
pointed out time and time again through the hearing, we have
heard that there is no production going up in the United
States.
Under President Obama's Administration, in 2009 and 2010,
according to the U.S. Energy Information Service, it is the
highest in a decade. We need to talk about the reality of what
is plaguing the country, and fortunately, I think that we are
going to be able to get to the bottom of this, and I would hope
that as we talk about policy, even if we have a disagreement on
how much we should open up drilling anywhere in the United
States that we would at least carefully look at what
speculators are doing to impact prices at the pump.
When I go home, Mr. Chairman, a few seconds for your
indulgence, people are tired of the fighting and bickering back
forth, and I know you hear it as well as I do, Mr. Chairman, we
all do, and there seems to be an area where at least some ideas
that just because they are offered with someone whose party
begins with a D and the other whose party begins with an R or
the Independents around the country that these are some things
that we can get to the bottom of, and, Mr. Chairman, these
hearings are extremely useful when we get answers to these
questions understanding we only have a few minutes to ask them
rather than just trying to come up with an answer that doesn't
answer the question.
I appreciate very much the time that we get a chance to
visit, and I respect the Chairman very much as well, and I
thank you for the time as well. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. Time of the gentleman has expired. The
gentleman from Arizona, Mr. Gosar?
Dr. Gosar. Thank you. Governor, in best-case scenario, I
heard the Ranking Member talk about imagine a technology. Best-
case scenario probably is natural gas. What kind of timeframe
are we talking about for a fundamental infrastructure,
particularly for the west?
Mr. Graves. Well, I think they are well on their. I mean,
there has been a number of companies that have embraced natural
gas. I mean, we have seen it in our municipal bus fleets. There
is a lot of that being deployed in the refuge industry. Anybody
that is working in an around sort of a confined metro area that
can establish fueling stations and runs essentially an in-and-
out kind of operation. I start out dispatched in the morning to
go do a mission. When I am done, I go back to my home base, and
I have a fueling opportunity there.
I mean, I think, in my vision, again you would have to
still build a viable business model, but some day as you take
metropolitan areas like the Los Angeleses and the Phoenix and
the Salt Lakes and the Denver, as those natural gas fueling
stations begin to build out, eventually we will be in a
position for a long-haul vehicle to leave one of those
locations, travel across to the other one and be confident
there is fuel available when they get there. How long will that
take? I don't know. That may depend in large on the decisions
that you all make about the government's support for building
out that kind of infrastructure because it is going to be very
expensive.
Dr. Gosar. But wouldn't you say the West is kind of the
stepchild to the East in regards to that?
Mr. Graves. Well, I mean, I think, again, the major parcel
companies are all starting to look at natural gas for
metropolitan deliveries, and it is even happening on the East
Coast as we speak, so, again, everybody is watching their
bottom line, but I think everybody recognizes that Mr. Pickens
has done a great job of promoting, and more power to him, that
it is an optional fuel for our industry in the future.
Dr. Gosar. I agree, but it is more metropolitan, and, I
mean, Arizona had one of these debacles with natural gas. I
mean, it cost the state well in excess of $2 billion in
incentives and wasn't probably thought out real well, and
particularly with vast rural areas in rural Western America, it
makes it almost cost-prohibitive and more anti-competitive,
would you not say?
Mr. Graves. A the moment, it is cost prohibitive.
Dr. Gosar. And wouldn't you say it is probably at least a
decade away?
Mr. Graves. I would guess that if in my lifetime I see a
deployment of a lot of natural gas commercial vehicles, that
would be marvelous.
Dr. Gosar. Wonderful. Ms. Harbert, competition is really
the basis of economics, right, and once you have monopolies, we
have big problems. With what we are seeing with this technology
or actually lack of technology to be honest with you, and
particularly out in the West, and we have lots of independent
truckers, the profit margins on the independents are closer to
two to three percent, so when we are talking about trying to
push higher gas prices and looking at energy alternatives, we
are actually predisposing a monopoly, are we not?
Ms. Harbert. Well, I think we are also predisposing higher
prices, and in today's economy, that is a big problem for
small-and medium-sized businesses and American families. What
we need to be doing is looking at the whole set of resources
and ensuring that there are the most options on the table so
the consumer has some choice, the efficiency of the market
works, and we deliver maximum product to our advantage. We do
also need to invest in technologies. The reason we need to
invest in technologies though is not to force them into the
marketplace. It is to bring down the costs so that they can
more effectively compete in the marketplace, so I think we are
all pro technology.
I think it is a way to actually invest in technology. The
purpose is to bring down the cost over time so that we can
effectively complete in the marketplace and have more options,
not fewer.
Dr. Gosar. And so I am getting to that technology
incentive, so a lot of it is done through tax breaks, is it
not?
Ms. Harbert. In many a different industries I think it is.
Dr. Gosar. Because that is the only way you are going to
get people to go into those areas. I mean, I am a dentist, so
we are tech savvy, and you have to have the new toy. The only
difference between men and boys are the price of their toys,
but----
Ms. Harbert. But it depends. I mean, you can't subsidize
anything forever. We can't afford it, so for early market
makers and new emerging technologies, do they need an incentive
to actually get out into the marketplace? Yes and perhaps, but
do we and can we afford to subsidize those forever, and the
answer is no, so we have to push those things to be more
efficient and cost effective.
Dr. Gosar. In the current environment, do you see us
picking and choosing which are winners and losers in the energy
industry?
Ms. Harbert. Absolutely.
Dr. Gosar. Thank you. I yield back the balance of time.
The Chairman. The gentleman yields back his time. The
gentleman from Oregon, Mr. DeFazio?
Mr. DeFazio. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Ms. Harbert, you
mentioned as a factor in these very, excessively high fuel
prices the very high U.S. corporate tax rate. Can you name one
major energy producer who paid that statutory maximum?
Ms. Harbert. I don't have access to all----
Mr. DeFazio. I don't believe there is one.
Ms. Harbert. I don't know their tax returns, but I think
it----
Mr. DeFazio. OK. Well, then how about let us go to Exxon
Mobile. How much did they pay in U.S. taxes last year, income
taxes?
Ms. Harbert. You certainly must have----
Mr. DeFazio. On their record profits, how much did they pay
in U.S. income taxes?
Ms. Harbert. Sir, I don't work for Exxon Mobile, so I don't
know the answer. You must have something in front of you that
could help us.
Mr. DeFazio. OK. Well it has been in the press. I am sure
you read the Journal and the Times and other things. They paid
nothing. In fact, they accumulated tax carry forwards for
future years' profits.
Ms. Harbert. So I guess we are discounting the amount of
money Exxon Mobile invested to bring the product to market.
Mr. DeFazio. No. Excuse me. Excuse me. You are making a
point about the high statutory rate. Nobody but suckers pays
that rate, some poor little corporation based here in the U.S.
The multi-nationals on average pay a fraction of that. They
keep their profits overseas, and Exxon Mobile paid zero income
taxes in the United States last year, the year before, the year
before and the year before, and they had very large profits, so
please don't mention again that it is the high statutory rate
that they don't pay that drives the excess prices.
Now let us go to the issue of whether or not we are
operating in a free market, and I brought this up a couple of
weeks ago, and the head of the U.S. Energy Information
Administration, they are pretty oil friendly, he said that even
if the U.S. was to significantly increase production, OPEC
would decrease production because they have set price targets,
which is something I have been onto for years. They set a
target. Now, that violates the WTO.
I have asked the Clinton Administration to file a complaint
at the WTO. They demurred. I asked the Bush Administration to
file complaint at the WTO against OPEC. Three of them are
members, two are observers wanting membership. They demurred. I
have asked the Obama Administration. They demurred. Now, does
anybody think we really have a free market here when OPEC can
manipulate and set a price. I mean, they are very overt about
it. Does anybody agree that perhaps we should use our trade
agreements and file a complaint against their price fixing?
Mr. Fox. I don't believe we have a free market, and yes, I
think you should.
Mr. DeFazio. OK. Anybody else? OK.
Mr. Fox. I believe my home state Senators recently
introduced legislation in the Senate that would allow OPEC to
be sued.
Mr. DeFazio. OK. Great. Well, I had a bill in the House
last time. I will do it again this time, but a bipartisan
problem with this issue. No one want to take on OPEC.
Ms. Harbert. OPEC's share of the global energy supply is
going down, not up. Non-OPEC supply is going up. We have an
opportunity to be a growing contributor to the non-OPEC supply
if we open up for exploration and production here.
Mr. DeFazio. OK. Thank you very much.
Ms. Harbert. The reason we have increased production today
is based on what happened in 1990.
Mr. DeFazio. Thank you. That is excellent. Thank you. Thank
you. Ma'am, I didn't ask you a specific question. I am
reclaiming my time. I asked the question of the panel. You
don't believe we should take on OPEC I take, and we shouldn't
file a trade complaint even though they are violating the World
Trade Organization agreements? You don't believe we should file
a complaint, right?
Ms. Harbert. We will look forward to what the Obama
Administration has to say.
Mr. DeFazio. Well, the Bush Administration, the Clinton
Administration. It is bipartisan. You represent businesses. You
represent the free market. How about your supporting my
proposal and the proposal of the Senator from Connecticut that
we sue through the WTO OPEC for price fixing and market
manipulation? Yes or no? Yes or no?
Ms. Harbert. I think that requires a lot of legal analysis.
I am happy to have----
Mr. DeFazio. OK. OK. Ma'am, your answer is no. Now let us
go to one other quick question here, and that would be, Mr.
Fox, some have been saying gee, the Enron amendment doesn't
really matter the fact that most of the people in the market
were like you, sir, a farmer, and they might or might not take
ultimate delivery, or they were hedging their production costs.
Now we have massive speculation in these energy markets,
incredible volatility. There is right now no shortage of oil
around the world, but the price somehow is creeping over $4 a
gallon. I just got to wonder what is really going on here, and
one would think that perhaps it has something to do with
speculation, so other than Mr. Fox, does anybody agree that we
should get rid of the Enron Amendment altogether, go back to
the status quo ante, which is basically you are hedging your
producer? Sir, you are a farmer.
Mr. Shawcroft. Yes, I am.
Mr. DeFazio. You may use hedging yourself.
Mr. Shawcroft. I certainly believe that we should do all
that we can to lower the price of gas and the price of diesel.
Mr. DeFazio. OK.
Mr. Shawcroft. We need to be careful about what we do and
what the unintended complications are, unintended consequences
are.
Mr. DeFazio. Right.
Mr. Shawcroft. Just--WTO, I certainly would support WTO and
pursuing that if that is what is in the best interest for the
overall picture of the country.
Mr. DeFazio. Great. OK. Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. The time of the gentleman has expired. The
gentleman from California, Mr. Denham.
Mr. Denham. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I also wanted to quote
another small piece out of the press. San Francisco Gate, deal
with it. We will need oil and gas for decades, and one of the
paragraphs it says, ``Obama also says the industry is getting
big bucks and subsidies each year. Not true. Like any business,
oil and gas companies qualify for tax deductions, but they are
far less generous than those enjoyed by the majority of energy
companies. True, oil and gas companies receive Federal energy
R&D funding, but on average, electric technologies and
renewables like wind and solar receive more than 22 times as
much funding. Ethanol and biofuels are subsidized at a level
190 times that of oil and natural gas.''
To get back to a point that the Ranking Member made, I
agree in balance, too. We need wind and solar. We have that in
the Central Valley of California, but we also have hydro and
biomass. Would each of you not agree that is an important part
of our energy portfolio and should also be considered as green
energy?
Mr. Fox. I agree we have to look at everything, but the
problem that you have is everybody is just saying OK, if one
industry gets billion dollars, we should get a billion dollars
and another billion dollars and another billion dollars, and
the problem with that is----
Mr. Denham. But I am not saying anything about subsidies.
As part of our green portfolio, hydro and biomass, two green
facilities in my area, do you agree that should be considered
as part of our overall portfolio?
Mr. Fox. Yes, sir, anything that increases competition.
Mr. Denham. Thank you. Do you also agree?
Mr. Shawcroft. Absolutely. We need to pursue anything that
is in fact renewable. Hydro is one of the best renewable
sources we have.
Mr. Denham. Thank you. Renewable energy but not considered
as part of the green energy.
Mr. Shawcroft. I understand that.
Ms. Harbert. We have broad differences across our country,
and so we need to recognize the broadest definition possible
that recognizes the Southeast is not like the Northwest.
Mr. DeFazio. Thank you.
Mr. Graves. Yes.
Mr. DeFazio. Thank you. I appreciate the quick answers
since we are short on time. The main part of my questions here
today are on job losses that we see not only throughout Central
Valley but throughout the nation. I represent an area that has
some of the highest unemployment in the entire nation. We are
at about 20 percent, a lot of that due to environmental
regulations that shuts off our water and closes down our farms,
but I am a farmer, and I am one of the fortunate ones that not
only has water, but I have a permanent crop.
I grow almonds, and I have the opportunity to hold my crop
in a warehouse and not ship it until the prices come up, but
some of my friends that have been forced to pull out all of
their trees, if they are fortunate enough to get the water
allocation that they are under contract for, they plant a row
crop. With the high cost of gas right now, they are now looking
at can I afford to put a row crop in, or do I just let the
ground go fallow, which again, when you have 20 percent
unemployment, will continue to drive up that unemployment rate.
Just a quick response from Mr. Shawcroft. What type of job
loss do you expect to see nationally from farm economy just due
to the gas price whether it is at $4 and if it escalates to $5,
how many more farmers will just not plant or plant, but then
not harvest because of the increase in cost?
Mr. Shawcroft. I really can't give you a figure. It really
depends on the individual situation. For us, ourselves, you
have something that is permanent. Cattle, you can't just get
and out of the cattle business instantly. You have an
investment in that genetics. You have an investment in what you
have been able to put together. It is very difficult to jump in
and out. It would have to be a decision based on individual
situations. I understand that California in particular is
facing a real challenge as far as this fuel cost, planting
cost. They are looking at can I even afford to plant the crop,
or should I just give it up for the year?
Mr. Denham. Yes, and, Mr. Shawcroft, if you could provide
us back any numbers that the Farm Bureau has on loss of crops
or revenue or jobs, most importantly jobs, with the escalation
of gas prices, that would be helpful.
Mr. Shawcroft. I would be glad to do that.
Mr. Denham. All right. And as well for the Trucking
Association, Mr. Graves. All of those crops that aren't going
to be planed, they are obviously not going to be shipped, and
even in my case, I am going to hold everything in the warehouse
because I can't afford to ship it right now. How many jobs do
you think we lost through our farm economy just not shipping
during this time of high gas prices?
Mr. Graves. Well, I am not going to have a very good answer
that one. I mean, we simply know that we are all struggling to
pull ourselves out of the economic doldrums, and to whatever
extent fuel prices put the breaks on that, it is bad for
everyone in all segments of U.S. business.
Mr. Denham. Thank you, and I do the family shopping when I
am at home, and I had the same question for the Chamber. I know
all of our Ag prices are going to go up, all of our Ag
commodities, everything that goes through the grocery stores as
well as many other products. Will the Chamber have any numbers
on what we expect to see the job loss due to the high
escalation in gas prices at $4 and especially if it gets up to
$5 this summer on the job loss associated with that?
Ms. Harbert. Well, we certainly know what it does to
disposable income and the reduction there and the contraction,
and people will not be spending on things that will require
transportation, more planting, et cetera, so it reverberates
through the entire supply chain, and that is really hard in the
very short term to put numbers on it, but we will certainly do
our best.
Mr. Denham. Thank you. I mean, this is one more impact that
is going to hit the Central Valley really hard. We are going to
see a much greater job loss here than the rest of the Nation
and you guys getting back to us on the job loss that we expect
nationwide would be very helpful. Thank you.
The Chairman. The time of the gentleman has expired. The
gentleman from Michigan, Mr. Kildee?
Mr. Kildee. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Governor Graves, Mr.
Fox has said earlier that excessive speculation is
significantly driving up prices for consumers. Do you agree
that speculation is increasing energy prices?
Mr. Graves. Yes, I do.
Mr. Kildee. Governor Graves, would you agree with Mr. Fox
that cutting funding for the CFTC to promulgate and enforce new
regulations to rein in speculation could lead to higher prices?
Mr. Graves. I would oppose cutting the funding, yes.
Mr. Kildee. Thank you. I appreciate your brief and succinct
answers. Thank you. Mr. Chairman, I yield back the balance of
my time.
The Chairman. I think the gentleman for yielding back his
time. The gentleman from California, Mr. McClintock is
recognized.
Mr. McClintock. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Much has been made
by our friends on the other side that oil production is higher
now than it has been in a decade. I think it needs to be
pointed out that there is an enormous lead time from lease to
development to production, which means that higher production
today is a result of decisions that were made years and years
ago. It is not a reflection of current policy. The current
policy of this Administration has been highly restrictive, and
there is concern that is quite deliberate. We have had a little
bit of discussion about that today.
Mr. Chairman, I would ask for permission to enter into the
record an exchange between CNBC's John Harwood and Senator
Barack Obama in June of 2008. Harwood asks him, ``So, could the
high oil prices help us?'' His response is, ``Well, I think I
would have preferred a gradual adjustment,'' so it is becoming
of great concern that the restrictive policies of the
Administration are specifically designed to gradually increase
the price of oil and gasoline in this country.
The Chairman. Without objection, that will appear in the
record.
Mr. McClintock. Thank you. We have been talking a lot about
opening up the Strategic Petroleum Reserve. Isn't the real
Strategic Petroleum Reserve of the United States the vast, vast
petroleum resources that we have locked without our own
borders? Should we be releasing that reserve? I ask each of you
that question.
Mr. Shawcroft. I would certainly support that.
Mr. Fox. I would support that.
Mr. Graves. Yes.
Ms. Harbert. No.
Mr. McClintock. No, you would not? You don't think we
should be developing our vast petroleum reserves?
Ms. Harbert. I am sorry. I thought you said release the
Strategic Petroleum Reserve. I misunderstood you. No, we
should----
Mr. McClintock. I am thinking of the real petroleum reserve
of this country.
Ms. Harbert. Real. I am sorry. Absolutely----
Mr. McClintock. Shale oil reserves that are three times the
proven reserves in Saudi Arabia, for example.
Ms. Harbert. I recant what I said, and I fully support the
development of domestic resources.
Mr. McClintock. Well, let me go on and ask you another
question, Ms. Harwood. The Administration contends that the
vast acreage that has been leased already is sitting idle. You
touched upon this in your remarks, but I would like you to
elaborate on it. The implication is that we don't need to lease
new lands for oil exploration and production because the oil
companies are currently lackadaisically sitting on enormous
acreage of leased land they are not even using.
Ms. Harbert. I think it is important to get some facts on
the table. That is inaccurate because a lease by this
Administration is considered idle if it is going through the
government-required reviews and environmental studies, which we
all want to see done. It is not considered active until the
molecules come out of the ground, so all of the money and all
of the studies and all of the environmental reviews are
considered part of the ancillary activities. Therefore, they
are considered idle.
On the contrary, actually of all of the acreage that we
have, which came off of moratorium in 2008, only 3 percent has
been leased offshore. A scant amount of our acreage has
actually been leased. We have a tremendous opportunity if we
can get those leases put out for least, put out for the
industry to actually invest in and create those jobs here at
home, so we have to get some facts on the record. Nobody is
sitting on leases. They are doing the required permitting
process to actually----
Mr. Denham. So the only reason those leases are considered
inactive by the government is because of government-imposed
restrictions and requirements that are holding up the
development of those lands?
Ms. Harbert. They are going through the government-required
permitting process.
Mr. Denham. One thing that I do agree with my friends on
the other side about is subsidies. I don't think we ought to be
subsidizing any form of energy production whether it is
nuclear, oil, wind or solar. Governor Graves spoke of
government mandates to force conservation and taxpayer
subsidies for mandates like natural gas vehicles. Don't
American consumers deserve accurate price signals so that they
can make rational decisions about what fuels to use and what
equipment to buy?
I mean, prices convey a wealth of data, everything from the
political situation in the Middle East to piracy in Somalia to
steel prices, shipping costs, substitute fuel costs, bribery
rates in Venezuela, American drilling moratoriums. All of these
and infinitely more data go into the price signals. They make
it possible for consumers to make rational decisions. Why would
we want to distort those price signals and deny consumers the
ability to make rational decisions in the marketplace?
Ms. Harbert. I think we all agree that a free market
certainly works the best, and a transparent market works the
best. I think we have to be clear about what we are talking
about in subsidies. One man's subsidy is another man's tax
treatment. Depreciation is treated in the oil and gas industry
differently than it is treated in a different industry, and so
if we are going to single out an industry and all of a sudden
change their tax treatment that every other element of our
private sector enjoys, then we are doing that.
We are singling out and penalizing, so we need to be
careful out singling out industries and changing the rules of
the game. Depreciation is depreciation is depreciation. It is
different per industry, but it shouldn't be changed across the
board.
Mr. Denham. I see my time has expired.
The Chairman. The time of the gentleman has expired. The
gentlelady from Ohio, Ms. Sutton.
Ms. Sutton. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. This first question is
for Mr. Fox. Mr. Fox, Exxon paid zero in income taxes last
year. As a small business owner, did you pay income taxes last
year?
Mr. Fox. Yes, ma'am.
Ms. Sutton. I thought so. Did you receive any subsidies,
billions of dollars of subsidies?
Mr. Fox. No, ma'am.
Ms. Sutton. OK. I just heard the comment one man's subsidy
is another man's, I think, tax treatment, and so we see what
the tax treatment that you as a small business owner are
getting in contrast to what Exxon has been able to accomplish
for themselves with those helping them do their bidding. I
would just to like to say about the evidence. We are here and
we are hearing the claims that opening up new, more publicly
owned lands, both onshore and offshore to conventional energy
production will lower energy prices, but the evidence doesn't
seem to support that conclusion.
We have heard a lot about 2010 domestic natural gas
production reached an all-time high, and domestic oil
production reached its highest levels in nearly a decade. We
know there are a lot of lands that are available for drilling.
There are millions of acres of lands already leased, but not
being drilled, and even as oil prices surge, which we have
heard a lot here today, the Federal government continues to
provide billions of dollars in subsidies to the well-
established and well-healed oil industry.
It is clear that these subsidies and what we are doing now,
coupled with the increased production has failed to insulate
the American consumer from energy price fluctuations. We cannot
continue to subject American families to the outrageous and
inexplicable increase in prices at the pump, so the question
is, a number of you mentioned energy independence and the
freedom from prices by expanded drilling, but what about
Canada?
Canada produces 3.3 million barrels a day and consumes
almost 2.2 million barrels a day. Canada is a big net exporter
sending a lot of fuel, for example, into U.S. gas tanks, but
prices at Canadian pumps have tracked with ours since 2007, and
both nations have been pulled up and down and up again by
roller coaster gas prices. Canada, with its fast resources and
small population can't drill its way out of price runups, so
why should the American people believe when you say that they
should expect a different outcome in this nation, and if we
could just be very brief in our answers, and, Mr. Fox, I will
let you sit this one out.
Mr. Fox. Thank you.
Mr. Graves. Well, I said earlier that I don't think I am
here today seeking cheap fuel. I am here seeking a dependable
supply of diesel fuel for the foreseeable future, and the thing
for our industry specifically that is really disruptive is the
price spikes, and what I think we are fearful of is that if we
start sending signals as a government that we are going to
start to move away from a willingness to develop domestic oil,
that is only going to further drive prices up which in turn we
pass through to consumers and make quality of life here much
more unaffordable.
Ms. Sutton. I thank the gentleman for your answer. Of
course, as the facts show though, we haven't shied away from
domestic production because we have seen the increase in the
past year as just articulated, but I appreciate your response.
If I could just move on because the time is so limited, and
this is very simple because this is a yes or no question. If we
were to open up new and more and what in some cases appear to
be environmentally sensitive areas to additional and new
drilling, is it your opinion that the American people should
believe that OPEC can't and won't counter the impacts of new
supply through production adjustments?
Ms. Harbert. I am not here representing OPEC and won't
speak for them. What I will say----
Ms. Sutton. I asked for your opinion. That is all.
Ms. Harbert. The world price for oil is set on the global
market and that we will certainly have a positive contribution
to make by amplifying our supply contribution to that, and we
will be able to import less. Therefore, we will be spending
less money overseas. We spent $265 billion last year on
importing oil. We would like to see more of that money actually
invested here to create jobs here.
Ms. Sutton. Would anybody like to answer?
Ms. Harbert. I mean, that would be an inoculation, I think
it would be----
Ms. Sutton. I thank you. I thank you, but would anybody
like to answer the question that I asked?
Mr. Shawcroft. My response would be supply as well as the
price of oil is determined by many factors. We need to apply
all that we can. We need to bring all sources of energy to the
table. Whether OPEC is going to change that or not, that is
certainly their decision. What we do in this country does in
fact impact the prices that we pay at the pump.
Ms. Sutton. So it is really important that we be diverse in
our approach to energy?
Mr. Shawcroft. On both sides of the scale, ma'am.
Ms. Sutton. Thank you, sir. Would you like to add?
Mr. Fox. My opinion is OPEC will do whatever it needs to do
to keep price ranges in the target that they want it in.
Ms. Sutton. I thank you.
The Chairman. I thank the gentlelady. The gentleman from
Pennsylvania, Mr. Thompson is recognized.
Mr. Thompson. Thank you, Chairman. We have heard a lot of
discussion this afternoon, and some of it I think was confusing
subsidies with treatment of the tax code, and I will be the
first to suggest that our tax code in this country is broken.
Hopefully, we can do something about that, but that said, I
also just want to point out in terms of what does make a
difference in gasoline prices from figures, in May of 2008,
gasoline prices at the pump was over $4 a gallon, and the
Presidential moratoria was lifted in June of 2008 followed by,
and I wasn't here at the time, but my comment isn't about time,
Congressional moratoria was removed for October 1, 2008.
You know the price at the pump was $1.75, so don't tell me
that the policies that we do here in Washington don't have an
immediately effect on gas prices. My first question is we
created the Department of Energy a long time ago, and among all
the purposes, I assume that part of the purpose is to make sure
that we have reliable and affordable energy for this country,
something to do with energy security as well. Very important.
Very quickly, and then my second question we will have lots
of time to talk about, but given that fact, what letter grade
would you give the Federal government policy for providing
affordable and reliable energy since that time? How well have
we done? What letter grade would you put? A through F.
Governor, do you want to start?
Mr. Graves. I would probably pick somewhere around C to C-.
Ms. Harbert. For today's energy, D. For tomorrow's
potential energy, they have ranked very high in spending a lot
of money on that.
Mr. Thompson. OK.
Mr. Shawcroft. Overall, I would go in with C-, maybe even
down to D.
Mr. Fox. F.
Mr. Thompson. All right. Very good. Here is the opportunity
for you to give a little more of a comment, just quickly, you
all bring expertise to the table in this issue in terms of how
energy affects our business or families. What is your top
priority that you would include in a national energy plan that
would really accomplish the mission of providing affordable and
reliable energy to both our families and our businesses, your
top item. We will start with Mr. Fox and go that direction.
Mr. Fox. I think we have to develop a comprehensive energy
plan that we don't talk about during an election cycle that we
actually do and we actually mean. We have to start walking the
walk and get rid of the political talk we talk. That is the
most important thing we do. We have been here today for a
couple of hours, and all we keep doing is talking about the
other side and the other side and the other side. Get rid of
the other side. Get rid of the word Republican, Democrat and
start talking about the issues. It is the only thing the
American consumer and the people care about.
Mr. Thompson. So something credible that would actually be
implemented?
Mr. Fox. Yes, sir.
Mr. Thompson. OK.
Mr. Shawcroft. First off, I would say pursue all sources of
energy, and the second thing, and particular to that, would be
to eliminate what speculation you can eliminate and certainly
eliminate as much regulation as you possibly can. Let people go
out and get it.
Mr. Thompson. OK. Thank you.
Ms. Harbert. There is a reason why the American private
sector is sitting on a bunch of capital. It is not because they
want to put it under their bed sheets. It is because of the
regulatory uncertainty and the problems in getting permitting
to actually put their capital to work, so we need permit
streamlining, we need regulatory certainty so we can get some
energy generation, transmission, distribution and new
production online.
Mr. Thompson. OK.
Mr. Graves. I would say it is the concern that I would like
to see more discussion about the transition from essentially a
petroleum-driven economy to an alternatively fueled economy. I
think we all know we are going that way, but again, my industry
doesn't see that we are going to be there anytime soon, and in
the near term, we need diesel fuel to run trucks.
Mr. Thompson. Right. My next question, there is a
difference between subsidizing something, which I see as
pushing into the commercialization prematurely because if you
take the government rug away, and there are many examples of
that today, solar and wind is a part of that, if you pull that
subsidy rug away it collapses and research and development,
which is extremely important because we should always be
looking for the future. Is that something that you agree with?
What are your thoughts in terms of are we over-subsidizing
versus really we should be focusing our assets on research and
development versus prematurely commercializing?
Mr. Fox. I think subsidizing research and development is
very important, but when we subsidize innovation, I think we
have to put the checks and balances in place to make sure we
are not subsidizing failure, but we incentivize success.
Mr. Thompson. OK.
Mr. Shawcroft. I certainly agree with that. Subsidies can
play a definite, necessary role in the research and development
in certain industries.
Ms. Harbert. We should be investing in research and
development, but in the area of subsidies, we need to be
looking at ways that actually lessen the burden on the
taxpayer, that are more deficit-neutral like providing perhaps
concessionery financing that would be paid by the developer
rather than actually relying on straight-up subsidies that are
paid for by the taxpayer. There are lots of opportunities to do
that. It does not need to be just straight tax credits and tax
subsidies, much more market-friendly, deficit-neutral ways to
do it.
Mr. Tipton. OK. Thank you, Chairman.
The Chairman. The time of the gentleman has expired. Our
last questioner is a gentleman from Louisiana, Mr. Landry.
Mr. Landry. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Ms. Harbert, do you
know how much taxes Petrobras pays?
Ms. Harbert. I do not. I do not.
Mr. Landry. Mr. Fox?
Mr. Fox. I don't.
Mr. Landry. No? OK. I don't know why we pick on our U.S.
companies. Let me ask you also, Mr. Fox, do you know where the
profits of Petrobras are?
Mr. Fox. No, sir.
Mr. Landry. How about the profits of Saudi, Amoco, any at
OPEC?
Mr. Fox. No, sir.
Mr. Landry. No? But you got not problems with them making
profits?
Mr. Fox. I wouldn't say I don't. I have a problem with the
method in which they obtain those profits through non-
traditional, free-market methods.
Mr. Landry. What would you say to those members of OPEC who
fly around in those big jets and come party in the United
States and all that. I mean, do you think that is just terrible
of them?
Mr. Fox. I don't think anybody flying around in a jet that
hasn't earned is wrong. I just think when you can't treat OPEC
like you can treat any other business in the world when they
operate through a cartel. You would never let me as a gasoline
retailer get together with all my retailers in the United
States and fix the retail price of gasoline. You would pass
legislation to prevent that.
Mr. Landry. So you think Exxon colludes with OPEC?
Mr. Fox. No, sir, I didn't say that.
Mr. Landry. Well, but you had a problem with the profits,
and you had a problem with the salaries of Exxon officials and
oil and gas officials, but you don't have a problem with OPEC's
profits? I am just trying to make sure we level the playing
field here.
Mr. Fox. I absolutely agree on leveling the playing field.
I have a problem when you make a comparison that Exxon Mobile's
profits are about seven to eight percent, and you say a
gasoline retailer's profits are seven or eight percent, and you
compare those two and saying I am complaining about it. What I
am complaining about is how you got down to that seven or eight
percent was to pay the CEO $450 million for doing a 90-hour
job, and the service station retailers gets paid $60,000 for
doing it, and the CEO has a private jet and flies that Sheik
from OPEC here.
Mr. Landry. Isn't that what America is all about, about
that American dream, about that kid that might not have it real
good who maybe grows up in a poor family and works his way all
the way to the top, and shouldn't he be able to make as much
money as he possibly can and work as less hours as he can if he
is that smart and that good? I mean, should we destroy the
American dream to put your equation into play here? I mean, I
don't know? I mean, just answer yes or no?
Mr. Fox. I can't.
Mr. Landry. OK.
Mr. Fox. He is not that smart. He is not that good.
Mr. Landry. Really? OK. Well, are you a member of PMAA?
Mr. Fox. No, sir.
Mr. Landry. NACS?
Mr. Fox. No, sir.
Mr. Landry. OK. See, I did business with gasoline retailers
for a long, long time. Now, isn't it true that when prices
rise, it puts a pinch on you all?
Mr. Fox. Yes, sir.
Mr. Landry. OK. Isn't it true though that when prices fall,
you make a lot more money?
Mr. Fox. I would say to you when prices are low, we make a
reasonable profit margin, and when prices escalate, we get
screwed.
Mr. Landry. Well, but is it when prices are lower, or is
when the prices are falling that you make your biggest profit
margin?
Mr. Fox. No, sir, I disagree. In today's market, I disagree
with you.
Mr. Landry. I disagree with you. That is not from my
experience, and look. I want you to know, I have no problem
with you making a profit.
Mr. Fox. I am just saying to you in today's market----
Mr. Landry. I have no problem. I would like you to make 10,
15, 20 percent.
Mr. Fox. I think your statement five to 10 years ago was
correct on falling prices. I think your statement today is
wrong.
Mr. Landry. Now let me ask you a question. What would an
all-electric automobile market do to your industry?
Mr. Fox. Destroy it.
Mr. Landry. OK. Could you tell me that again what an all
electric car market would do what to your business?
Mr. Fox. Destroy it. I am a fossil fuel seller.
Mr. Landry. All right.
Mr. Fox. It doesn't mean I wouldn't support an electric
vehicle as long as I could provide the electric service.
Mr. Landry. Gasoline to it, right? That is right. If you
could provide the gasoline, you don't care about whether it is
electric or not.
Mr. Fox. If I could provide the alternative fuels that are
being developed today in a free and open market, I am all for
it.
Mr. Landry. Right. That is right.
Mr. Fox. But when you restrict me from doing that because
you pass legislation to do that, I have a problem with it.
Mr. Landry. Well, let me just get the one last question,
and you all can pick who answers. We have heard from the
Administration and from across the aisle that increasing
domestic production will not help our gas prices in the short
term, but in what term will alternative energy proposals begin
to affect gas prices? Is it a short term, long term? Can we do
an alternative project right now that is going to just make the
price of gas just start falling?
Mr. Shawcroft. Anything that we do, alternative or not, is
going to have a time lag.
Mr. Landry. Thank you. But I am just curious.
Mr. Shawcroft. Anything.
Ms. Harbert. All alternatives today are more expensive than
the resources we have available that are conventional, so that
is a fact.
Mr. Landry. Right. The demand should increase--increasing
the demand. Real quick. I am about to run to out of time.
Mr. Shawcroft. The obvious flip-side of that question is we
need to start developing it now, or you won't have it in the
future.
Mr. Landry. Right. Real quick. I am about to run out of
time. Does increasing supply in the market, would that have an
effect short-term? Would it be quicker to increase supply than
it would be to go to an alternative energy? Would that have a
quicker impact on gas prices?
Mr. Shawcroft. Yes. I believe so, yes.
Mr. Landry. Yes? OK.
Ms. Harbert. Market responds to signals like that.
The Chairman. The time of the gentleman has expired. I want
to thank the panel very, very much for your testimony. As you
can see by the give and take from all the Members, this is an
issue that we are hearing from from our constituents, and it is
an issue that frankly I believe needs to be resolve, and I
think it needs to be resolved in a bi-partisan way. I certainly
agree with the sentiments that all of you have said, but
sometimes other issues get in the way. That is the nature of
living in a free society, and I don't think any of us would
trade that however, so we will have to work our way through
that.
I hope, as I mentioned in my opening statements that
whatever action we take is not going to be a constant reaction
to $5 gasoline, which would probably be a short-term fix. We
need a long-term fix, and that is why I mentioned, and others
have mentioned, and you have all alluded to, we need an all-of-
the-above energy plan, and I have been talking about that for
some time, but we certainly can't ignore the abundance of the
resources that we have within our country right now.
If we utilize those resources, from this Member's point of
view, we will send a very, very strong signal to the energy
market that the United States is serious about becoming less
dependent on foreign energy sources, and I think that is good
for the American consumer, so thank you all for being here, and
without objection, the Committee will stand adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 1:35 p.m., the Committee was adjourned.]

[Additional material submitted for the record follows:]

[The prepared statement of Mr. Duncan follows:]

Statement of The Honorable John J. Duncan, Jr.,
a Representative in Congress from the State of Tennessee

In my absence, I submit this statement to the House Committee on
Natural Resources:
Similar to my colleagues on the Committee, I am concerned about the
rising gas prices that we continue to see in this country. This is an
issue that affects almost everyone in our nation directly and affects
the rest of our citizens indirectly. Prices will continue to rise as
long as this de facto moratorium continues as ``law of the land''. I am
extremely disappointed in this Administration and their unwillingness
to produce energy in this country. President Obama has recently visited
Brazil and has congratulated them on their efforts of off-shore
drilling practices. This ``there not here'' approach is out of touch
and absolutely ridiculous. Frankly, I want to know ``why not here?''
and ``why not now?'' As a former small business owner, I know that if I
had the ability to do a job myself, it would be more efficient and
would also save my company money. Wake up, Mr. President! We have the
ability to produce and explore energy here in the United States through
off-shore and deepwater drilling, as well as our resources in ANWR.
Let's drill here and drill now. This will be more efficient, will
produce American jobs, and will save our nation tremendous amount of
money.


