- EFFECT OF THE PRESIDENT'S FY 2012 BUDGET AND LEGISLATIVE PROPOSALS FOR THE OFFICE OF SURFACE MINING ON PRIVATE SECTOR JOB CREATION, DOMESTIC ENERGY PRODUCTION, STATE PROGRAMS AND DEFICIT REDUCTION

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

EFFECT OF THE PRESIDENT'S FY 2012 BUDGET AND LEGISLATIVE PROPOSALS FOR
THE OFFICE OF SURFACE MINING ON PRIVATE SECTOR JOB CREATION, DOMESTIC
ENERGY PRODUCTION, STATE PROGRAMS AND DEFICIT REDUCTION

=======================================================================

OVERSIGHT HEARING

before the

SUBCOMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND
MINERAL RESOURCES

of the

COMMITTEE ON NATURAL RESOURCES
U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

Thursday, April 7, 2011

__________

Serial No. 112-21

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Natural Resources

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.fdsys.gov
or
Committee address: http://naturalresources.house.gov

----------
U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE

65-624 PDF                       WASHINGTON : 2011

For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800;
DC area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104 Mail: Stop IDCC,
Washington, DC 20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON NATURAL RESOURCES

DOC HASTINGS, WA, Chairman
EDWARD J. MARKEY, MA, Ranking Democrat Member

Don Young, AK                        Dale E. Kildee, MI
John J. Duncan, Jr., TN              Peter A. DeFazio, OR
Louie Gohmert, TX                    Eni F.H. Faleomavaega, AS
Rob Bishop, UT                       Frank Pallone, Jr., NJ
Doug Lamborn, CO                     Grace F. Napolitano, CA
Robert J. Wittman, VA                Rush D. Holt, NJ
Paul C. Broun, GA                    Raul M. Grijalva, AZ
John Fleming, LA                     Madeleine Z. Bordallo, GU
Mike Coffman, CO                     Jim Costa, CA
Tom McClintock, CA                   Dan Boren, OK
Glenn Thompson, PA                   Gregorio Kilili Camacho Sablan,
Jeff Denham, CA                          CNMI
Dan Benishek, MI                     Martin Heinrich, NM
David Rivera, FL                     Ben Ray Lujan, NM
Jeff Duncan, SC                      John P. Sarbanes, MD
Scott R. Tipton, CO                  Betty Sutton, OH
Paul A. Gosar, AZ                    Niki Tsongas, MA
Raul R. Labrador, ID                 Pedro R. Pierluisi, PR
Kristi L. Noem, SD                   John Garamendi, CA
Steve Southerland II, FL             Colleen W. Hanabusa, HI
Bill Flores, TX                      Vacancy
Andy Harris, MD
Jeffrey M. Landry, LA
Charles J. ``Chuck'' Fleischmann,
TN
Jon Runyan, NJ
Bill Johnson, OH

Todd Young, Chief of Staff
Lisa Pittman, Chief Counsel
Jeffrey Duncan, Democrat Staff Director
David Watkins, Democrat Chief Counsel
------

SUBCOMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND MINERAL RESOURCES

DOUG LAMBORN, CO, Chairman
RUSH D. HOLT, NJ, Ranking Democrat Member

Louie Gohmert, TX                    Peter A. DeFazio, OR
Paul C. Broun, GA                    Madeleine Z. Bordallo, GU
John Fleming, LA                     Jim Costa, CA
Mike Coffman, CO                     Dan Boren, OK
Glenn Thompson, PA                   Gregorio Kilili Camacho Sablan,
Dan Benishek, MI                         CNMI
David Rivera, FL                     Martin Heinrich, NM
Jeff Duncan, SC                      John P. Sarbanes, MD
Paul A. Gosar, AZ                    Betty Sutton, OH
Bill Flores, TX                      Niki Tsongas, MA
Jeffrey M. Landry, LA                Vacancy
Charles J. ``Chuck'' Fleischmann,    Edward J. Markey, MA, ex officio
TN
Bill Johnson, OH
Doc Hastings, WA, ex officio
------

CONTENTS

----------
Page

Hearing held on Thursday, April 7, 2011..........................     1

Statement of Members:
Holt, Hon. Rush D., a Representative in Congress from the
State of New Jersey........................................     4
Prepared statement of....................................     5
Lamborn, Hon. Doug, a Representative in Congress from the
State of Colorado..........................................     1
Prepared statement of....................................     3

Statement of Witnesses:
Kitts, Eugene, Senior Vice President, Mining Services,
International Coal Group, Inc., on behalf of the National
Mining Association.........................................    27
Prepared statement of....................................    29
Lambert, Bradley C., Deputy Director, Virginia Department of
Mines, Minerals and Energy.................................    40
Prepared statement of....................................    42
Lovett, Joe, Executive Director, Appalachian Center for the
Economy and Environment....................................    51
Prepared statement of....................................    53
Pineda, Loretta, Director, Division of Reclamation, Mining
and Safety, Colorado Department of Natural Resources.......    31
Prepared statement of....................................    33
Resolution of the Interstate Mining Compact Commission
submitted for the record...............................    38
Resolution of National Association of Abandoned Mine Land
Programs submitted for the record......................    39
Pizarchik, Joseph G., Director, Office of Surface Mining
Reclamation and Enforcement, U.S. Department of the
Interior...................................................     6
Prepared statement of....................................     8

Additional materials supplied:
Alabama Surface Mining Commission, Indiana Department of
Natural Resources, Kentucky Department for Natural
Resources, Railroad Commission of Texas, Utah Division of
Oil, Gas and Mining, Virginia Department of Mines, Minerals
and Energy, West Virginia Department of Environmental
Protection, and Wyoming Department of Environmental
Quality, Letter to The Honorable Joseph G. Pizarchik,
Office of Surface Mining Reclamation and Enforcement, dated
November 23, 2010, submitted for the record................    68
Conrad, Gregory E., Executive Director, Interstate Mining
Compact Commission, and Douglas C. Larson, Executive
Director, Western Interstate Energy Board, on behalf of the
WIEB Reclamation Committee, Letter to The Honorable Joseph
G. Pizarchik, Director, Office of Surface Mining
Reclamation and Enforcement, dated January 7, 2011,
submitted for the record...................................    70
Western Governors' Association, Letter to The Honorable Ken
Salazar, Secretary, U.S. Department of the Interior, dated
February 27, 2011, submitted for the record................    89

OVERSIGHT HEARING ON THE ``EFFECT OF THE PRESIDENT'S FY 2012 BUDGET AND
LEGISLATIVE PROPOSALS FOR THE OFFICE OF SURFACE MINING ON PRIVATE
SECTOR JOB CREATION, DOMESTIC ENERGY PRODUCTION, STATE PROGRAMS AND
DEFICIT REDUCTION.''

----------

Thursday, April 7, 2011

U.S. House of Representatives

Subcommittee on Energy and Mineral Resources

Committee on Natural Resources

Washington, D.C.

----------

The Subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 10:04 a.m. in
Room 1324, Longworth House Office Building, Hon. Doug Lamborn
[Chairman of the Subcommittee] presiding.
Present: Representatives Lamborn, Benishek, Duncan, Gosar,
Flores, Landry, Fleischmann, Johnson, and Holt.

STATEMENT OF HON. DOUG LAMBORN, A REPRESENTATIVE IN CONGRESS
FROM THE STATE OF COLORADO

Mr. Lamborn. The Subcommittee will come to order. The
Chairman notes the presence of a quorum, which under Committee
Rule 3[e] is two Members, so we are over that 50 percent. The
Subcommittee on Energy and Mineral Resources is meeting today
to hear testimony on the effect of the President's Fiscal Year
2012 budget and legislative proposals for the Office of Surface
Mining on private sector job creation, domestic energy
production, state programs and deficit reduction.
Under Committee Rule 4[f], opening statements are limited
to the Chairman and Ranking Member of the Subcommittee.
However, I ask unanimous consent to include any other Members'
opening statements in the hearing record if submitted to the
clerk by close of business today. Hearing no objection, so
ordered. I now recognize myself for five minutes.
During today's hearing, we will hear from the
Administration and witnesses on the President's proposed Fiscal
Year 2012 budget for the Office of Surface Mining and
associated legislative initiatives. Before I review the issues
with the President's budget, I want to make one matter very
clear. Chairman Hastings and I have initiated an investigation
into the Office of Surface Mining's attempt to rewrite the 2008
Stream Buffer Zone Rule and the ongoing fiasco resulting from
the Administration's rushed effort to fast-track major changes
to an existing and significant rule.
I want to be very clear. This Committee expects the
Administration and this agency to be forthcoming in response to
Committee requests. Failing to respond to Committee requests in
a timely manner is unacceptable. This Committee will hold this
agency and the Department accountable for responding to our
requests. As representatives of the American people, Congress
has both the obligation and the responsibility to conduct
oversight, and we cannot--and this Committee and this Chairman
will not--accept stonewalling.
Now moving on to the review of the President's budget, the
President's budget includes legislative proposals to change the
2006 amendments to Title IV of the Surface Mining Control and
Reclamation Act, SMCRA for short, Amendments that took Congress
10 years to negotiate and pass. The recent proposed changes to
Title IV will have a devastating effect on the original deal
that states made with the Federal Government and codified in
SMCRA where 50 percent of the AML fees are returned to the
state of origin.
If the Administration amendments are adopted, those states
that are significant donors to the Federal program will
question what they got in return for their mandatory
investment. As I mentioned above, even more egregious than this
budget proposal is the agency's ongoing effort to rewrite the
2008 Stream Buffer Zone Rule, a rule that an independent
contractor hired by this Administration found will result in
the loss of over 7,000 direct jobs nationwide and eliminate
over 20,000 direct and indirect jobs in Appalachia. Over 29,000
people will be driven into poverty.
After the job loss estimates became public, this
Administration ended the contract with this particular
contractor. Once the information on the economic impact of the
preferred alternative became public, the Administration
immediately tried to distance itself from the contractor and to
deny any knowledge of the forecasted job losses associated with
the Administration's preferred alternative.
Since the Administration took office, the Department of the
Interior has taken steps to reduce access to domestic energy
and mineral resources on Federal lands. With the President's
proposed for the Office of Surface Mining and the rewrite of
the 2008 Stream Buffer Zone Rule, the Department and this
agency in particular is restricting access to private coal
deposits. This is because SMCRA applies to all domestic coal
mines regardless of surface or mineral ownership status.
More than 130,000 Americans depend on coal production for
their livelihood. Throughout America, there are places where
the only industry in town is the coal mine. While this
Administration may think it is a preferred alternative to
displace tens of thousands of workers, destroying coal mining
will kill these one-industry towns, push tens of thousands of
American families into poverty and leave our nation poorer and
drive energy costs higher, all counter to the original intent
of SMCRA.
SMCRA was designed to promote the development of the
nation's largest resource of conventional fuel to help meet the
energy needs of the American people while ensuring that the
extraction of the coal resources is done in an environmentally
responsible manner. Make no mistake about it. Coal is vital to
the American economy, especially to the generation of
electricity. Nothing can touch it for efficiency and savings.
Unless and until someone comes up with commercially viable
alternatives, it would be foolish to try to get rid of coal.
America is a nation of excellence. Our achievements through
the development of our abundant natural resources allowed us to
become the richest country in the world, win world wars and
raise our standard of living far above much of the world.
Increasing access to these resources, yes including coal, will
allow us to become less dependent on foreign sources of energy
and mineral resources, create new private-sector jobs and add
revenues to government coffers, reducing the national debt and
thereby increasing our national and economic security.
In closing, I am concerned that this budget makes cuts to
programs that are important to states and citizens, proposed
ending programs by fiat that are the result of tremendous
negotiations in Congress and in the end reprogram money for a
rushed and ill-advised rewrite of an important rule, the Stream
Buffer Zone Rule. I look forward to hearing from our witnesses,
and I now recognize the Ranking Member for five minutes for his
opening statement.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Lamborn follows:]

Statement of The Honorable Doug Lamborn, Chairman,
Subcommittee on Energy and Mineral Resources

During today's hearing we will hear from the Administration and
witnesses on the President's proposed FY-2012 budget for the Office of
Surface Mining and associated legislative initiatives.
But before I review the issues with the President's budget, I want
make one matter very clear.
Chairman Hastings and I have initiated an investigation into the
Office of Surface Mining's attempt to rewrite the 2008 stream buffer
zone rule and the ongoing fiasco resulting from the Administration's
rushed effort to fast track major changes to a significant rule.
I want to be very clear, this Committee expects the Administration
to be forthcoming in responses to Committee requests. While the
Administration may be unfamiliar with the process of oversight from
this Committee, failing to respond to Committee requests in a timely
manner is unacceptable and this Committee will hold this agency and the
Department accountable for responding to our requests. As
Representatives of the American people, Congress has both the
obligation and the responsibility, to conduct oversight and we cannot,
and this Committee and this Chairman will not, accept stonewalling.
Now, moving on to the review of the President's budget.
The President's budget includes legislative proposals to change the
2006 amendments to Title IV (4) of the Surface Mining Control and
Reclamation Act, SMCRA for short--amendments that took this body 10
years to negotiate and pass. The proposed changes to Title IV (4) will
have a devastating effect on the original deal states made with the
federal government and codified in SMCRA where fifty percent of the AML
fees are returned to the state of origin. If the Administrations
amendments are adopted those states that are significant donors to the
federal program will question what they get in return for their
mandatory investment.
As I mentioned above, more egregious than this budget proposal, is
the agency's ongoing effort to re-write the 2008 Stream Buffer Zone
Rule. A rule that an independent contractor, hired by the
Administration, found will result in the loss of over 7,000 direct jobs
nationwide and eliminate over 20,000 direct and indirect jobs in
Appalachia. After the job loss estimates became public, the
Administration ended the contract with the contractor.
Once the information on the economic impact of the preferred
alternative became public the Administration immediately tried to
distance themselves from the contractor and deny any knowledge of the
forecasted job losses associated with the Administration's preferred
alternative.
There is a famous quote with a wry observation that applies to the
Office of Surface Mining's treatment of SMCRA and their state partners.
``We trained hard, but it seemed that every time we were
beginning to form into teams, we would be reorganized.. . .I
was to learn that later in life we tend to meet any new
situation by reorganizing, and a wonderful method it can be for
creating the illusion of progress while producing confusion,
inefficiency and demoralization.''
Let me repeat the last part of that quote because I believe it
aptly describes the outcome of the Administration's actions in the re-
write of the 2008 Stream Buffer Zone Rule and the proposed legislative
changes to SMCRA--``and a wonderful method it can be for creating the
illusion of progress while producing confusion, inefficiency and
demoralization.''
Since the administration took office the Department of the Interior
has taken steps to reduce access to domestic energy and mineral
resources on federal lands including renewable resources like wind and
solar. With the President's proposed budget for the Office of Surface
Mining and the re-write of the 2008 Stream Buffer Zone Rule the
Department and this agency in particular is restricting access to
private coal deposits as SMCRA applies to all domestic coal mines
regardless of surface or mineral ownership status.
More than 130,000 Americans depend on coal production for their
livelihood. Throughout America there are places where the only industry
in town is the coal mine. While this Administration may think it is a
``preferred alternative'' to displace tens of thousands of workers,
destroying coal mining will kill these one industry towns, push tens of
thousands of American families into poverty, and leave our nation
poorer--all counter to the original intent of SMCRA.
SMCRA was designed to promote the development of the Nation's
largest resource of conventional fuel to help meet the energy needs of
the American people while ensuring the extraction of the coal resources
is done in an environmentally responsible manner.
America is a nation of excellence. Our achievements through the
development of our abundant natural resources allowed us to become the
richest country in the world, win world wars, and raise our standard of
living far above much of the world. Increasing access to those
resources will allow us to become less dependent on foreign sources of
energy and mineral resources, create new private sector jobs and add
revenue to government coffers, reducing the national debt and thereby
increasing our national and economic security.
In closing, I am concerned that this budget makes cuts to programs
that are important to states and citizens, proposes ending programs by
fiat that are the result of tremendous negation in congress and in the
end reprograms money for a rushed rewrite of an important rule.
______

STATEMENT OF HON. RUSH HOLT, A REPRESENTATIVE IN CONGRESS FROM
THE STATE OF NEW JERSEY

Mr. Holt. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The Office of Surface
Mining, Reclamation and Enforcement is charged with a number of
important responsibilities, among them protecting citizens and
the general environment from the harmful effects of surface
coal mining operations, also for ensuring that land is restored
following mining operations, and for addressing the effects of
past mining operations by reclaiming and restoring abandoned
mines.
Under the Bush Administration, the Office of Surface Mining
routinely allowed destructive practices to go unchecked, and in
the final days in office, the Administration released what has
come to be known as a midnight regulation revising the Stream
Buffer Zone Rule to remove key protections for streams and
rivers threatened by the dumping of mining waste. To me, this
is an egregious rollback of protective responsibility.
Yet, mountaintop removal mining does continue to have
significant effects on people and places in Appalachia.
According to the EPA, since 1992, nearly 2,000 miles of
Appalachian streams have been filled, polluted, as a result of
mountaintop removal activities. Mountaintop removal in
Appalachia has deforested an area the size of the State of
Delaware. A recent EPA study found that mountaintop removal
mining has adversely affected aquatic life downstream in nine
out of every 10 streams in the region. However, the Bush
Administration's revised Stream Buffer Zone Rule loosened the
restrictions on placing valley fill in or near streams. This
rule was challenged in court, and the Obama Administration is
now going through the process of issuing a new stream
protection rule.
Mr. Chairman, I note your call for an investigation or your
announcement that you are undertaking a look at how the Office
is administering that rule, and I ask that the minority have
access to all the relevant documents on this matter. It is
critical that the revised rule ensure that our environment and
these communities are protected. That is why I am a cosponsor
of the Clean Water Protection Act, H.R. 1375, a bill introduced
by my colleague from New Jersey, Representative Pallone, a
member of this Committee, to prohibit the dumping of waste from
mountaintop removal coal mines into rivers and streams.
The Administration is also requesting an additional nearly
$4 million and 25 full-time employees to expand oversight of
stream protection activities in Appalachia. Regarding the
Abandoned Mine Land coal program, the AML program, the
Administration is proposing reforms that would eliminate
unnecessary spending and focus mine reclamation efforts on the
most dangerous abandoned coal mines, and I would ask that the
witness characterize what are the most dangerous abandoned
mines.
The proposal would do away with payments to states and
Native American tribes that have completed their abandoned coal
mine reclamation activities saving taxpayers something over a
billion dollars over the next decade. It would institute a
competitive process for AML grants so that the funds could go
to the highest-priority abandoned coal mines. Currently, AML
funds are allocated based on current and historic coal
production as opposed to where the greatest need for
reclamation actually exists, and I look forward to learning
more about the merits of the proposal.
The responsibility of OSM to our environment and to people
in that region is tremendous, and it is imperative that
Congress provide this agency with the tools it needs, the
oversight that it deserves and the support that it deserves,
and I thank the Chairman for holding this hearing and the
witnesses for your testimony to come. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Holt follows:]

Statement of The Honorable Rush D. Holt, Ranking Member,
Subcommittee on Energy and Mineral Resources

Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The Office of Surface Mining Reclamation and Enforcement (OSM) is
charged with protecting citizens and the environment from the harmful
effects of surface coal mining operations, ensuring that land is
restored following mining activities, and addressing the effects of
past mining operations by reclaiming and restoring abandoned coal
mines.
Under the Bush Administration, the Office of Surface Mining
routinely allowed some of the most destructive practices to go
unchecked. During its final days in office, the Bush Administration
issued a ``midnight regulation,'' revising the Stream Buffer Zone Rule
to remove key protections for streams and rivers threatened by the
dumping of mining waste.
Yet mountaintop removal mining has significant impacts to the
people and places of Appalachia. According to the Environmental
Protection Agency, since 1992, nearly 2,000 miles of Appalachian
streams have been filled as a result of mountaintop removal activities.
Mountaintop removal in Appalachia has deforested an area the size of
Delaware. A recent EPA study found that mountaintop removal mining
adversely impacted aquatic life downstream in nine out of every 10
streams in the region.
However, the Bush Administration's revised stream buffer rule
loosened the restrictions on placing valley fill--the waste byproduct
of mountaintop removal mining--in or near streams. This rule was
challenged in court and the Obama Administration is now going through
the process of issuing a new Stream Protection Rule. It is critical
that the revised rule ensure that our environment and these communities
are properly protected. That is why I am a cosponsor of the Clean Water
Protection Act (H.R. 1375), a bill introduced by my colleague from New
Jersey, Rep. Pallone, to prohibit the dumping of waste from mountaintop
removal coal mines into our precious rivers and streams.
The Administration also is requesting an additional $3.9 million
and 25 full time employees to expand oversight of stream protection
activities in Appalachia. This commitment must be maintained.
Regarding the Abandoned Mine Land (AML) coal program, the
Administration is proposing reforms that would eliminate unnecessary
spending and focus mine reclamation efforts on the most dangerous
abandoned coal mines. The proposal would do away with payments to
states and Native American Tribes that have completed their abandoned
coal mine reclamation activities, saving taxpayers approximately $1.2
billion over the next decade. It also would institute a competitive
process for AML grants so that the funds could go the highest priority
abandoned coal mines. Currently, AML funds are allocated based on
current and historic coal production, as opposed to where the greatest
need for reclamation activities exists. I look forward to learning more
regarding the merits of this proposal.
The responsibility of OSM to our environment and the American
public is tremendous, and it is imperative that the Congress provide
this agency with the tools it needs to do its job.
I thank the Chairman for holding this hearing and the witnesses for
their testimony today. I yield back.
______

Mr. Lamborn. OK. And thank you. We will now hear from our
first panel of witnesses, and this is Mr. Joseph Pizarchik,
Director of the Office of Surface Mining with the Department of
the Interior. Thank you for being here this morning, and we
look forward to comments. As you probably already know, there
are five minutes on the clock. The light after four minutes
will turn yellow and then turn red after five minutes. Thank
you for being here.

STATEMENT OF JOSEPH PIZARCHIK, DIRECTOR, OFFICE OF SURFACE
MINING, U.S. DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR

Mr. Pizarchik. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and members of the
Subcommittee for inviting me here today to testify on behalf of
the Administration's Fiscal Year 2012 budget request for the
Office of Surface Mining, Reclamation and Enforcement. In 1977,
Congress enacted the Surface Mining Control and Reclamation Act
and created OSM for two basic purposes: First, to assure that
the nation's coal mines operate in a manner that protects
society and the environment during mining operations and
restores the land to beneficial productive use following
mining; second, to implement an abandoned mine land program to
address the hazards and environmental degradation caused by
pre-law unregulated mining.
Now, as then, coal remains an important fuel for America
and provides about half of the nation's electricity. Congress,
when it enacted the Surface Mining Act, recognized a need to
strike a balance between the nation's need for coal as an
essential source of energy and the protection of society and
the environment from the adverse effects of coal mining. OSM
was charged with striking that balance. The 2012 budget is a
focused budget. It is a budget that reflects tough choices that
we have had to make in these difficult times.
In overview, the Fiscal Year 2012 budget request for OSM
totals $145.9 million in discretionary spending, a decrease of
$16.9 million from the 2010 enacted level and what level we
have been funded out through 2011 to this point. It supports
528 full-time equivalent employees, which is down from about
1,500 in 1994 and supports about 1,900 state and tribal
employees that helps to support them. Some of the highlights in
the discretionary spending include a regulatory funding program
increase of $3.9 million for 25 additional staff to meet our
statutory oversight obligations and to continue to fulfill the
Administration's commitment to reduce the harmful environmental
impacts of coal mining.
However, most of these funds, $2.3 million, and 18 of the
FTE's, Full-time Employees, are not really new but are offset
from cuts that are proposed to the Federal Emergency Program.
Those reductions amount to $3.5 million and 18 employees, and
the work that they had been conducting is being picked up and
handled by the states due to the significant increases that
they have been receiving. We are also proposing to reduce $11
million from the regulatory grants provided to the state and
encourage the states to recover those costs from the industries
for the services that they provide to the industry.
We propose the reduction of $1 million of Federal high-
priority projects. There is a proposed reduction of $1.3
million for funding for technical studies, mine map
preservation. We also propose a cut of $500,000 to eliminating
a funding for audit services that are no longer needed. We also
are proposing cuts in administrative costs of $573,000 to OSM
to be achieved through reductions in travel, information
technology and strategic sourcing. There was a similar
reduction for the current Fiscal Year that we are implementing.
The Administrations's 2012 proposed budget for OSM also
includes a legislative proposal to revamp the abandoned mine
land program to reduce unnecessary spending and to ensure that
the most dangers abandoned coal mine sites are addressed. Major
components include the elimination of payments to states and
tribes that have certified they have completed reclamation of
all of the abandoned mine lands within their boundaries. That
is projected to reduced spending for 2012 by $184.2 million and
is expected to reduce the Federal budget deficit by $1.2
billion over 10 years.
The proposal also includes a legislative change to modify
how the grants for abandoned mine reclamation is distributed
going from a production-based formula to a competitive process
with an advisory committee to address the most dangerous safety
and environmental hazards. Those types of hazards include
abandoned mine lands that were created prior to the enactment
of the Surface Mining Act that propose an extreme danger to the
health and safety to the people or property, that provide
adverse effects to health or safety and create severe
environmental problems to the environment.
The budget proposal also includes the creation of a
parallel abandoned mine land program for the reclamation of
abandoned hard rock mines. It would provide for funding from a
new AML reclamation fee on hard rock production that would be
developed by the Bureau of Land Management within the
Department of the Interior. In order to achieve efficiencies,
the expertise that OSM has gained over the years on recovering
coal fees would be used to cover the AML fees.
In conclusion, the Fiscal Year 2012 budget is a fiscally
sound and responsible budget that lowers the cost to the
American taxpayers, reduces the Federal subsidy to the mining
industry and will reduce the size of the Federal deficit. Thank
you. I am available for questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Pizarchik follows:]

Statement of Joseph G. Pizarchik, Director, Office of Surface Mining
Reclamation and Enforcement, U.S. Department of the Interior

Mr. Chairman and Members of the Subcommittee, thank you for
inviting me to testify on the Fiscal Year 2012 budget request for the
Office of Surface Mining Reclamation and Enforcement (OSM).
The Surface Mining Control and Reclamation Act of 1977 (SMCRA)
established the Office of Surface Mining Reclamation and Enforcement
for two basic purposes: First, to assure that the Nation's coal mines
operate in a manner that protects citizens and the environment during
mining operations and restores the land to beneficial use following
mining; and second, to implement an Abandoned Mine Lands (AML) program
to address the hazards and environmental degradation remaining from two
centuries of unregulated mining. These tasks are vital to public health
and safety, and the environmental well-being of the United States.
The SMCRA recognized the need to ensure that the Nation strikes a
balance between the protection of the environment and the Nation's need
for energy. Nearly 34 years after the passage of SMCRA, coal remains an
important fuel source for our country, providing about half of our
Nation's electricity. In the continued drive to decrease our Nation's
dependence on foreign oil, coal will continue to be part of our
domestic supply of energy for the foreseeable future.
While new energy frontiers are being explored, including the
development of clean coal, the coal supply (conventional coal
production) is essential to the Nation's energy requirements. In order
to ensure that coal is produced in an environmentally conscious way,
OSM is committed to carrying out the requirements of SMCRA in
cooperation with States and Tribes. Of the almost 2,400 employees
involved in carrying out these two responsibilities on a daily basis,
less than 25 percent are employed by OSM. The rest are State and Tribal
employees who implement programs approved by the Secretary of the
Interior with assistance from OSM. States permit and regulate 97
percent of the Nation's coal production. States and Tribes also abate
well over 90 percent of the AML problems.
The major tasks for OSM are to ensure that States and Tribes
successfully address coal mining activities by ensuring they have high-
quality regulatory and AML frameworks and to oversee implementation of
their programs. Importantly, OSM also provides technical assistance,
funding, training, and technical tools to the States to support their
regulatory and reclamation programs.
Currently, 24 States have approved regulatory programs in place
pursuant to Title V of SMCRA. There are 25 States and three Tribes that
administer approved AML programs pursuant to Title IV of SMCRA.
Since enactment of SMCRA in 1977, OSM has provided more than $3
billion in grants to States and Tribes to clean up mine sites abandoned
before passage of SMCRA. In the course of addressing health, safety and
environmental hazards, about 255,000 acres of Priority 1 and 2
abandoned coal mine sites have been reclaimed under OSM's AML Program,
though many sites still remain.
The authority to collect and distribute the AML reclamation fee was
revised by the Tax Relief and Health Care Act of 2006, which included
the 2006 Amendments to SMCRA (Public Law 109-432). Among other things,
these amendments extended the authority for fee collection on mined
coal through September 30, 2021, and changed the way that State and
Tribal reclamation grants are funded, beginning in FY 2008. State and
Tribal grants are funded by permanent appropriations that are derived
from current AML fee collections and the general fund of the U.S.
Treasury.
The 2006 Amendments dramatically increased funding to States and
Tribes, from $145.3 million in FY 2007 to the most recent distribution
made available of $395.6 million for FY 2011. Because of the increased
State and Tribal funding, OSM began phasing out Federal responsibility
for addressing AML emergency projects. It is more efficient and cost
effective to provide responsibility for AML related issues to a single
manager, from a single source of funding. In FY 2012, States with AML
programs will have fully assumed this responsibility, so the budget
eliminates the remaining discretionary funding for State emergency
grants and Federally-managed emergency projects.
The budget also includes a legislative proposal to reform the AML
reclamation program to eliminate unnecessary spending and focus
reclamation efforts on the Nation's most dangerous abandoned mines.
First, the budget proposes to eliminate the unrestricted payments to
States and Tribes that have completed their abandoned coal mine
reclamation. Terminating these payments will save taxpayers $1.2
billion over the next decade. Second, the budget proposes to reform the
allocation of grants for coal AML reclamation to a competitive process.
The current production-based formula allocates funding to States that
have the most coal production and not necessarily States with the most
critical reclamation needs. A competitive process would ensure that
funding addresses the highest priority AML coal sites across the
Nation, regardless of which State they are located in and how much coal
is currently produced. Third, the budget proposes to create a parallel
hardrock AML program, with fees collected by OSM and distributed
competitively by the Bureau of Land Management. The mandatory
distribution to the United Mine Workers of America (UMWA) health
benefit plans, estimated at $225.3 million in FY 2012, will not be
affected by this proposal.
Fiscal Year 2012 Budget Request Overview
The FY 2012 budget request for OSM totals $145.9 million in
discretionary spending and supports 528 equivalent full-time positions.
Compared with the 2010 enacted level of $162.9 million, this represents
a net decrease of $17.0 million. The budget request contains a
programmatic increase of $3.9 million for expansion and enhancement of
Federal oversight and stream protections. Reductions include $11.0
million in discretionary spending for State regulatory program grants
to be offset with increased user fees for services provided to the coal
industry; $6.8 million for State and Federal emergency grants and
projects, Federal high-priority projects, and related Federal
reclamation operations staff; $1.2 million for technical studies and
mine mapping under the Applied Science Program; $500,000 for audit
activities; and $160,000 for coal outcrop fire projects. The budget
also includes a decrease of $1.3 million for administrative savings and
efficiencies.
OSM's budget also contains an estimated $539.1 million in permanent
appropriations. This spending includes $313.8 million for reclamation
grants to non-certified States and Tribes (those with remaining
abandoned coal mine problems); and $225.3 million for the UMWA for
specified health benefits plans. This spending is derived from both the
AML and U.S. Treasury Funds. The estimates, as contained in the budget
submission, are projections based on information current as of the end
of the 2010 calendar year and subject to change since they are based on
fee collections and requests from the UMWA.
Regulation and Technology Appropriation
The OSM's overall FY 2012 request includes $118.5 million for the
Regulation and Technology appropriation, $8.8 million below the 2010
enacted level. This includes an increase in funding and staff to
support the expansion and enhancement of Federal oversight of State
programs and stream protections, and reductions for regulatory grants,
technical studies, and other efficiency gains. The FY 2012 budget
request will enable OSM to provide financial and technical support, and
training to the 24 States with approved regulatory programs. It will
also enable OSM to continue to administer Federal regulatory programs
in States that do not operate their own programs and on Federal and
Tribal lands.
The requested programmatic increase of $3.9 million and 25 FTE will
support the Administration's commitment to significantly reduce the
harmful environmental impacts of coal mining in Appalachia, formalized
in a Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) with the Army Corps of Engineers
and the Environmental Protection Agency. Increased resources and
technical skills are needed to implement this new strategic direction
i.e., enhanced oversight, stream protections to maintain the hydrologic
balance of watersheds, coordinated permitting, and increased
transparency as priorities for the coming years, while continuing to
provide the technical support and training that States and Tribes need
to maintain program effectiveness.
A large portion of the regulatory and technology funding
appropriated to OSM is distributed to the States and Tribes in the form
of regulatory grants. These grants account for 51 percent of this
proposed appropriation. For FY 2012, the request includes $60.3 million
for regulatory grants, $11.0 below the 2010 enacted level. States are
encouraged to offset the decrease in Federal funding by increasing cost
recovery fees for services to the coal industry. The decrease supports
the Administration's commitment to reduce subsidies to fossil-fuel
industries.
In addition, a decrease in technical studies of $834,000 is
proposed. OSM will use its existing staff to provide direct technical
assistance to the States and Tribes to address technical on-the-ground
issues instead of funding nationwide or regional studies.
The remaining portion of the budget provides funding for OSM's
regulatory operations on Federal and Indian lands, evaluation and
oversight of State regulatory programs, technical training and other
technical assistance to the States and Tribes as well as administrative
and executive activities.
Abandoned Mine Reclamation Fund Appropriation
The request includes $27.4 million for the AML appropriation, which
is $8.1 million below the 2010 enacted level. The budget supports OSM's
program evaluations and reclamation operations, watershed cooperative
agreement projects, fee compliance and audits, technical training and
other technical assistance to the States and Tribes as well as
administrative and executive activities. Reductions are proposed for
State and Federal emergency grants and projects, Federal high-priority
projects, related Federal reclamation operations staff, the Applied
Science Program (technical studies and preservation of mine maps),
audits related to coal export litigation, and coal outcrop fire
projects and monitoring.
As previously stated, because of the increased State and Tribal
funding, OSM began phasing out Federal responsibility for addressing
AML emergency projects. Therefore, the budget request eliminates
discretionary funding for State emergency grants and Federally-managed
emergency projects. States with AML reclamation programs will now
address AML emergencies to improve efficiency and coordination.
The budget proposes to decrease funding for technical studies by
$366,000 and $160,000 for coal outcrop fire projects. In addition, the
proposal reduces funding for audit activities related to coal export
issues because the funding is no longer needed. The balance of the
reductions for this account is derived from efficiencies in travel and
strategic sourcing.
Permanent Appropriations
The OSM will continue to distribute mandatory funding to States and
Tribes under the AML program and make payments to the UMWA health
benefit plans. The budget request includes a legislative proposal to
eliminate payments to certified States and Tribes and restructure AML
coal payments from a production-based formula to a competitive process,
allocating $313.8 million in 2012 for reclamation of the highest
priority coal AML sites in the Nation. In addition, the proposal will
also create a new parallel AML program for the reclamation of abandoned
hardrock mines, funded by an AML fee on hardrock production.
Altogether, this proposal will reduce Federal spending by an estimated
$184.2 million in 2012 and an estimated $1.8 billion over the next
decade while ensuring that the Nation's highest priority abandoned coal
and hardrock mines are addressed.
Initiatives
The OSM's activities and related budget support the Presidential
and Secretarial initiatives for responsible production of coal through
the protection, preservation, and restoration of mined lands;
restoration of lands left unreclaimed; and provision of opportunities
for youth.
It is essential to have properly mined coal and to see that land is
reclaimed in accordance with the permit and the law. State permitting
actions and inspections of mine sites are among the most important ways
to help ensure the law is being implemented and to protect society and
the environment. Consistent with the intent of SMCRA that States take
the lead in regulating coal mining, in FY 2010, States completed 49,799
partial and 29,095 complete inspections for a total of 78,894
inspections. The OSM conducted 2,067 oversight inspections in primacy
States during that year, a 40 percent increase over the number
conducted in FY 2009.
As part of the Secretarial initiative to increase youth employment
in DOI programs, OSM set a goal in FY 2010 and FY 2011 to increase
youth engagement by 35 percent over the FY 2009 baseline. In FY 2010,
OSM engaged 218 youth. Accomplishments included engaging 198 youth
through partnership efforts and 20 new students under other hiring
authorities. In FY 2012, OSM will continue to support the program
through ongoing activities and partnerships, with a cumulative goal of
engaging 219 youth in its programs.
Conclusion
The FY 2012 budget is a fiscally responsible request that lowers
the cost to the American taxpayer while ensuring coal production occurs
in an environmentally responsible way.
Thank you for the opportunity to appear before the Committee today
and testify on the FY 2012 budget request for OSM.
Please be advised that due to my previous position with the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, I have recused myself from matters
pertaining to Pennsylvania that would present a conflict or an
appearance of impropriety. The Committee questions that fall within the
scope of my recusal I will refer to my deputy, Glenda Owens, who is
here today.
______

Mr. Lamborn. OK. Well, thank you for your statement, and we
will now begin questioning. Members are limited to five minutes
for their question, although we may have additional rounds. I
now recognize myself for five minutes for questioning. Mr.
Pizarchik, as I understand it, your office reprogrammed
approximately $7 million from the states' Title V program to
pay for the rewrite of the 2008 Stream Buffer Zone Rule.
Now, this was after the agency had spent more than five
years and many millions of dollars to produce the 2008 Stream
Zone Buffer Rule, a rulemaking process that included 40,000
public comments and two proposed rules supported by more than
5,000 pages of environmental analysis from five different
agencies. According to your Department's own environmental
impact statement that was made public, your preferred
alternative would eliminate more than 29,000 coal mining and
related jobs and eliminate a significant portion of coal
production in this country, more than 20 percent of surface
mining in the east and up to 50 percent of underground mining
nationwide.
You testified in an Appropriations Subcommittee hearing
earlier this year that OSM had paid the contractor about $3.5
million so far. That means about half of the reprogrammed money
has not been spent. Would you commit to me today to stop this
rulemaking process, redirect the money back to states' Title V
program and begin to repair the damage caused by this exercise?
Mr. Pizarchik. The stream protection rule that we are
working on is still under development, and we are in the
process and will continue to work forward with the effort to
improve the stream protection rules, to refine our regulations,
to do a better job of striking the balance between meeting this
country's energy needs with coal and protecting the environment
from the adverse impacts of coal mining.
Mr. Lamborn. And the tens of thousands of jobs are just
going to be a byproduct that you are going to ignore?
Mr. Pizarchik. The numbers to which you refer are working
numbers from the contractor's early draft, and those numbers
are premature at this point. We are still in the process of
developing the proposed rulemaking. We are still in the process
of developing the environmental impact statement. In accordance
with the National Environmental Policy Act, development of that
information is information that we would use in determining
what would be in the proposed rulemaking.
At this time, it is premature and speculative to assess any
numbers or to provide any impacts of that because we have not
progressed to the point of having a draft environmental impact
statements that is based on sound science and information that
will allow us to make informed decisions on what should be in
the proposed rulemaking.
Mr. Lamborn. Is the contractor that you had initially hired
still working for the agency?
Mr. Pizarchik. The contractor and the Office of Surface
Mining, by mutual agreement, decided it was in the best
interest of both parties to end that working relationship.
Mr. Lamborn. Now, the end of that working relationship, did
that have anything to do with the fact that some of the numbers
that came out show that there would be massive job losses?
Mr. Pizarchik. There were a number of factors that went
into the decision to end the relationship. Under the contract
terms, it was set to expire May 31 of this year, and the
parties concluded it was in their best interest to end that
relationship on March 24.
Mr. Lamborn. But did it have anything to do with the very
negative economic news that had been part of the preliminary
analysis?
Mr. Pizarchik. I believe, if you recall what I had
indicated, that was a very early working draft, and from my
other testimony, those numbers don't have a sound basis, and we
are still in the development stage of preparing a draft
environmental impact statement. It is premature to make any
speculations as to what numbers would be now or in the future
in that the Department is still developing the economic impact
analysis, and that information as it is developed will help
inform the Department on what should be in the proposed
rulemaking.
At this point, we are still in the development process, and
we haven't reached the point where we have information on which
to decide what will be in the proposed rulemaking.
Mr. Lamborn. Now, the previous rule took five years, 40,000
public comments, thousands of pages of environmental analysis.
Why wasn't that rule sufficient?
Mr. Pizarchik. That rule modified a Reagan-era rule and
swung the pendulum too far the other way. There were defects
that were acknowledged in that rulemaking process. The rule has
been challenged in court in litigation, and as part of figuring
out what is in the best interest of the environment and society
and this country as far as its energy needs, we had decided it
was best to modify the existing regulations in order to better
strike a balance of protecting the environment while helping
meet this country's energy needs.
Mr. Lamborn. Well, it sounds like what you are working on
is being rushed right through. At this point, I am going to
defer to the Ranking Member for up to five minutes for
questions.
Mr. Holt. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I just wanted to make
sure that it is clearly stated in the record what you just
mentioned in passing. The rule that was changed by this so-
called midnight regulation was promulgated in which
Administration?
Mr. Pizarchik. I am sorry. Which rule? You are talking
about the one we are working on, or the midnight one?
Mr. Holt. The Stream Buffer Rule.
Mr. Pizarchik. That was promulgated during the
Administration of President Ronald Reagan.
Mr. Holt. OK. And I would just comment that I find it
interesting that the majority is indirectly attributing to the
Reagan Administration an attack on jobs. Are you in a position
to characterize the degree of deliberation that is going into
the current rulemaking process relative to what went into the
process to rescind the Reagan Administration rule?
Mr. Pizarchik. Yes. From the standpoint of our current
process, we initiated it with an advance notice of proposed
rulemaking that we filed in November of 2009. We received over
32,000 public comments on that proposed rulemaking. We had made
some suggestions as to possible options that we should consider
as well as we solicited ideas from the public. We received a
number of ideas from the public. We took that information and
used it to develop some potential concepts, and then we went
out and conducted about 15 stakeholder sessions where we met
with the industry, we met with the regulated community, we met
with regulators, we met with environmentalists, United Line
Workers of America and received input from them on those
possible ideas and concepts. We also conducted scoping sessions
on the environmental impact statement and received thousands of
comments on that document. We have gone beyond the statutory/
regulatory requirements as far as obtaining public input, both
the 32,000 comments on the advance notice of proposed
rulemaking and the comments we received at the stakeholder
outreach sessions are not required by the statute. Those are
our efforts to try to get more information from the public and
from the regulated community in order to make a better informed
decision. We conducted scoping sessions around the country. We
had nine public meetings where we invited the public to come
in, anyone from the public to come in and provide their
comments on what ought to be in the scope of the environmental
impact statement. To date, we have received more public
comments in the time period than were received the entire time
period on the 2008 Stream Buffer Zone Rule.
Mr. Holt. And just to be clear, in most of what you just
said, you were using the past tense. It is still going on, is
that correct?
Mr. Pizarchik. That is correct because once we get to the
point where we actually have a draft environmental impact
statement and that we have a proposed rule, those will be
published for public comment, and everyone will have the
opportunity to comment on that. One other thing that we did
differently is during the preparation of the draft
environmental impact statement, we solicited and had input from
states and other folks who were cooperating on the development
of this regulation, and we shared drafts, working drafts, of
the chapters as they were being prepared when they first came
right off the press from the contractor to obtain their input.
The states have been helpful in providing input and
suggestions on that. That information we are using to help
prepare the final draft of the environmental impact statement.
Again, that is another process where we have tried to be more
open with the cooperating agencies and going beyond what was
required by the statute.
Mr. Holt. Would you say that this is a more-inclusive,
more-deliberative process than went into the December 2008
decision to revise the three-decade-old rule?
Mr. Pizarchik. That is my understanding. We have already
had more public input than was received on that process when we
started at a much earlier basis. To my understanding, the
public input on the 2008 rule was limited to what was provided
on the proposed rulemaking when it was published.
Mr. Holt. Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I will have a
couple more questions if there is an opportunity.
Mr. Lamborn. OK. I thank the Ranking Member. Now I would
like to recognize the Member who was here when the gavel came
down, Representative Flores of Texas.
Mr. Flores. I have no questions at this time, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Lamborn. OK. Then, we will go to Dr. Benishek. Excuse
me. Yes. I want to make sure I follow the right order. Thank
you. Dr. Benishek?
Dr. Benishek. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I thank the
witnesses for joining us today as well. My northern Michigan
district has a long history of iron and coal mining, and while
Michigan is not home to surface coal mining operations, 68
percent of our power is generated by coal, so coal production
matters to people in Michigan. It becomes clear to me every day
that a major barrier to job creation is red tape and
regulations by the Federal Government, and they are often job
killers.
Mr. Pizarchik, proposed changes to the stream protection
rule are not the only regulations that coal mining communities
have to deal with. The Army Corps of Engineers and the EPA have
their own regulations concerning coal production. Is your
Department looking at the big picture and taking into account
the cumulative impact of proposed stream protection rule? How
is it duplicative or inconsistent with existing Clean Water Act
regulations?
Mr. Pizarchik. In the process of deciding and evaluating
the existing regulations and the statutory requirements in
determining what we think needs to be improved in order to
utilize the best science that we have available and the best
modern techniques that we have available to do a better job of
allowing mining to meet the environmental standards that are
out there and to protect environment and society, we are
looking at the big picture of that.
The provisions that we are considering are not duplicative
of the Clean Water Act in that under the Surface Mining Control
and Reclamation Act, it specifically provides that any
provisions dealing with the Clean Water Act are within the
exclusive jurisdiction of the Environmental Protection Agency.
What we are considering to include in the proposed
rulemaking is revisions of the existing regulatory requirements
that we have in the regulations, many of which have been there
for three decades or so to take advantage of that modern
science and that new information and to more fully implement
the provisions of the Surface Mining Act that charge OSM
specifically with protecting the environment, to making sure
that the society is protected from the adverse impacts of the
coal mining and to make sure that there are provisions taken to
enhance the water resources, the wildlife resources and the
fish resources.
That is repeated a number of times in the statute. Not only
that, the statute specifically provides that mining is to be
designed to prevent material damage to the hydrologic balance,
a/k/a to the streams, outside the provides it for it to
minimize damage within it.
Dr. Benishek. But I guess my problem is that so many times
we have these answers where people are responsible to more than
one agency, and despite what you say, it becomes very difficult
for anyone in business to deal with multiple agencies of the
government, and how can you assure me that there are not going
to be contradictory regulations that people are having
difficulty wading through all this stuff in order to keep
people employed?
Mr. Pizarchik. Part of what our charge is when looking at
these regulations is to determine where there is ambiguity or
need for clarity. We intend to make those types of changes. We
are also evaluating and considering a provision providing for
the regulatory authorities to cooperate in their decision-
making process, but notwithstanding that, we are not waiting
for the regulations in that particular area.
We have embarked on a process with the Army Corps of
Engineers and with the Environmental Protection Agency and
Office of Surface Mining and Reclamation, and we have started
to do a better job of improving the permit coordination
decisions because there are some provisions in that if you have
a mine where you are going to either mine a stream or bury a
stream you need to obtain a permit from the Army Corps of
Engineers and the EPA. If you are going to be discharging
water, you need a permit from the Clean Water Act regulatory
authority.
What we worked out with those agencies and in the State of
Tennessee where we are the primary regulatory authority is a
process where the agencies have agreed to get together in the
early stages to work with the operator in order to minimize any
duplication and to streamline the process so that there aren't
any inconsistencies or any contradictions in the requirements
for a surface mining permit or for a Clean water Act permit.
We have offered our services, the Office of Surface Mining
Reclamation and Enforcement to work with the other states on it
and to try to facilitate a development of those improvements in
that particular state so perhaps they can improve their
processes with the EPA and the Army Corps and the state SMCRA
and Clean Water Act regulatory authorities.
Dr. Benishek. I would appreciate forwarding to the
Committee the people that are involved in this process of
streamlining it so that I can better understand the process.
Mr. Pizarchik. OK. If you may, I could also provide a copy
of the memorandum of understanding, standard operating
procedures that we developed in Tennessee in conjunction with
the Tennessee folks and the Federal agencies. That might help
you understand what we are trying to do.
Dr. Benishek. Thank you.
Mr. Lamborn. OK. I thank the Member. Now we will hear from
the person who is next in line when we started the hearing, and
that would be Representative Johnson of Ohio.
Mr. Johnson. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman, and, Mr.
Pizarchik, I have a lot to cover here in a short time, so I am
going to ask you to keep your answers clear and concise if at
all possible. As I am sure you are probably aware, I represent
Southern and Eastern Ohio, and the coal mining industry is a
vital economic driver in my district, and this proposed Stream
Buffer Zone Rule rewrite could potentially shut down three coal
mines in my district resulting in the loss of 1,300 direct jobs
and over 10,000 indirect jobs while simultaneously reducing
coal production in Ohio by 55 percent.
Now, this is not only going to devastate parts of my
district because of the job loss, but it is going to cause
electricity rates in Ohio and the Midwest to skyrocket, and I
am looking forward to some serious and truthful answers from
you today about this action over the last two years and what it
is going to result in. How can you say that the rewrite of this
rule is to take into consideration the environment and what is
best for American society and our energy policy?
I don't see the wisdom in further bureaucratic regulatory
overreach that will destroy thousands of jobs, reduce coal
production and ultimately result in skyrocketing electric
rates. Explain to me the wisdom of how that fits into what is
good for America and what is good for our energy policy?
Mr. Pizarchik. We do not yet have a proposed stream
protection rule. We are in the process of developing that. We
do not know what is going to be in that rule yet, so any
numbers or anything else is pure speculation without a basis.
Mr. Johnson. OK. Well, it is not speculation, Mr. Director.
It is the result of the study that was done by the contractor
that you hired and since released. That is where those numbers
came from, so let me get into that. I would like to point out,
as has been noted, this previous Stream Buffer Zone rulemaking
process took five years, 5,000 plus pages of environmental
analysis and 40,000 public comments. Yet, you assert that this
one-and-a-half-year process that you folks are going through
now is more deliberate and more complex and more comprehensive
than that. Explain.
Mr. Pizarchik. In the previous process, that was five
years. It was totally within the Department with its resources.
In the process that we have engaged upon, we were using
internal resources and outside contractor resources to prepare
some of the information in a more expedited fashion on that,
and from the standpoint where that document was not released by
us, that was the first working draft of the contractor, and it
was a very preliminary document.
Mr. Johnson. Has there been any negotiations and settlement
agreements with the environmental groups that challenged the
original 2008 rewrite? Yes or no.
Mr. Pizarchik. We had a meeting with the----
Mr. Johnson. Yes or no, have there been negotiations and a
settlement?
Mr. Pizarchik. We had a meeting with the Plaintiffs where--
--
Mr. Johnson. Has there been a settlement with those
environmental groups?
Mr. Pizarchik. There is a settlement agreement for part of
the----
Mr. Johnson. OK. There is a settlement. Let me move on. Let
me move on to the contractor. Can you explain the process by
which you hired Polu Kai Services in June 2010? Was this a
competitive bidding process for this contract?
Mr. Pizarchik. Yes.
Mr. Johnson. OK. So at the time that you hired them,
obviously you felt that they were qualified do to the work,
correct?
Mr. Pizarchik. We used a competitive process.
Mr. Johnson. At the time that you hired them, you felt that
they were qualified, or you wouldn't have hired them, correct?
Mr. Pizarchik. Based on the documents they provided, they
made the impression they were the best qualified.
Mr. Johnson. I will take that as a yes. Now, can you walk
me through the process of terminating? You said it was of
mutual interest. I don't want to know what Polu Kai's mutual
interests were. I want to know what the Office of Surface
Mining's mutual interests were in terminating that contract.
How did that fit into what is best for America and our energy
policy? What were your interests in terminating that contract?
Mr. Pizarchik. The contract ended at the mutual agreement
of the parties. It was not terminated.
Mr. Johnson. No. You said it was based on mutual interests.
What were your mutual interests, and why did you want that
contract terminated?
Mr. Pizarchik. From the standpoint of the working
relationship that we had with the contractor----
Mr. Johnson. Did you ever speak to anyone in the Executive
Office of the President about the devastating effects that this
potential rule rewrite or the results that Polu Kai had found,
have you talked to anyone in the Executive Office of the
President because he says we are supposed to be creating jobs,
not destroying jobs? That is what he says, but clearly that is
not what this rewrite is going to do.
Mr. Pizarchik. It is premature to speculate what this
rewrite will do because we do not yet have a proposed
rulemaking.
Mr. Johnson. So the contractor that you hired that you felt
was qualified that produced results of a subcontractor that was
experienced in the industry, so you don't find credibility in
what your contractor provided, correct? They are the ones that
said that this could destroy jobs.
Mr. Pizarchik. As part of the rulemaking process, it is
important for me to have an understanding of the bases in the
documents on that. In working through that, it was our
determination that it was in the mutual interest to both
parties that we end the working relationship.
Mr. Johnson. I realize I am over my time, Mr. Chairman. Let
me just end by saying this: I find it incomprehensible that
anyone could determine that this process is in the best
interest of America, America's energy policy moving forward and
the President's stated goal of creating jobs. I yield back, Mr.
Chairman.
Mr. Lamborn. OK. Thank you. We are going to go to the next
questioner, and that would be Representative Landry of
Louisiana.
Mr. Landry. Mr. Chairman, I would like to yield some time
to Mr. Johnson so he could finish his remarks.
Mr. Johnson. OK. Thank you to my colleague for giving me a
little more time. In that way, we are not quite so rushed. Let
me get back to have you spoken to anyone in the Executive
Office of the President about the mutual decision to terminate
Polu Kai?
Mr. Pizarchik. The decision was a mutual agreement of the
Office of Surface Mining and Polu Kai Services to end the
working relationship.
Mr. Johnson. OK. I am going to give you a little bit more
time to go back to answer that question. What was your office's
interest, and why did you want to terminate that contract? Did
it save money?
Mr. Pizarchik. We did not terminate the contract. It was in
the mutual interest of both of the parties that we agreed to
end the working relationship.
Mr. Johnson. Yes, but you wanted results out of that
contract. I have served in the U.S. Government in the Defense
Department for over 27 years. We don't terminate contracts
unless we either get what we pay for, which is a good use of
taxpayer dollars, or the contractor is not delivering, so
explain to this panel, please, what was your interest in
terminating that contract?
Mr. Pizarchik. Again, we did not terminate the contract. We
had certain expectations.
Mr. Johnson. Did the contract end?
Mr. Pizarchik. By mutual agreement of the parties.
Mr. Johnson. Well, that is a contract termination, Mr.
Pizarchik. Under whatever terms you want to call it, that is a
termination. It might not have been termination for cause, but
it was a termination. What was your interest in terminating the
contract?
Mr. Pizarchik. We had contracted for certain services, and
over the course of the time period, there were work products
which we received from the contractor that met our
expectations, and there were some work products where they did
not, and----
Mr. Johnson. Explain which ones did not.
Mr. Pizarchik. At this point, it is our best interest, and
we think it makes more sense to move forward rather than to
getting into information and things that have already----
Mr. Johnson. But you had a reason for terminating that
contract. I would like to know what work products from that
contractor were you not happy with? Did it happen to be the
statistics on the number of job losses and the potential
production of coal reductions that would result from this
action?
Mr. Pizarchik. The numbers that were provided by the
contractor were not the basis for the parties mutually agreeing
to end the working relationship.
Mr. Johnson. OK.
Mr. Pizarchik. There were a number of other factors that
got involved. As under any contract, I think as you are aware,
that sometimes things develop differently through the course of
the contract than either of the parties had anticipated.
Mr. Johnson. Well, clearly you are not going to answer my
question about what your interests were in terminating the
contract, and I find that disturbing, but that is up to you. It
seems clear to me that before this hearing today that there was
collusion at some level between certain members of the
Department of the Interior, OSM and outside groups to change
the 2008 Stream Buffer Zone Rule without respect to the lengthy
five-year process that led to that rulemaking, and that this
stems from their disgust with the coal mining industry as a
whole.
Unfortunately, with your testimony today, I have no reason
to believe that this was not the case. It seems to me that
certain people at OSM and at the Department of the Interior
were going to change this rule without respect for the impacts
on the coal mining industry and the economy as a whole, and in
my opinion, Mr. Director, that is just absolutely wrong. I am
deeply concerned with the process and the actions of OSM over
the past two years, and I can assure you that I will continue
to closely monitor this issue in the future because the jobs
and the livelihoods of the thousands in my district are on the
line with this rule rewrite and are very much of a concern of
mine.
I was able to get an amendment in our first continuing
resolution that prevented funding for you to complete this
process, and if I have the opportunity, and I am going to look
for it, I am going to reinsert that amendment so that if we can
influence your inability to implement this, I am going to do
so, and I hope that you, OSM and the Department of the Interior
keep those people in mind that are going to lose their jobs and
that are going to experience these skyrocketing electric rates
with this rulemaking process, and with that, Mr. Chairman, I
yield back.
Mr. Lamborn. OK. Thank you. That time has expired, so we
will now recognize the gentleman from Arizona, Representative
Gosar.
Dr. Gosar. Mr. Director, my district, Arizona's First
Congressional District, can be a national model for an energy-
driven economic recovery. Rural Arizona is rich with natural
resources ripe for extraction, including some of the largest
copper deposits in North America. Currently, over 67,000 people
in the Arizona's natural resources and mining sector. In 2008,
it was estimated that the sector directly contributed to over
$4.7 trillion to the state's gross domestic product.
The natural resources mining and energy generation sector
is critical to my district's local economy. However, regulatory
and bureaucratic barriers not only prohibit the expansion and
development of the sector, but they threaten existing jobs.
Times are tough in my district and in my state. The states of
Arizona's unemployment rate sits at 9.6 percent, well above the
national average. In my district, it is even worse.
The unemployment rate in all eight of the counties is all
above the national average, and six of the eight are over 10
percent. In fact, in two of my leading areas, unemployment in
the Navajo Nation is approaching 60 percent, and the San Carlos
Tribe is almost 75 percent. I strongly believe we must find a
careful balance between environmental protection, worker safety
and economic activity, but the Federal Government needs to work
with industry, not against it.
Specifically, I, like many of my colleagues here today, are
concerned about OSM's effort to rewrite the 2008 Stream Buffer
Zone Rule. There are 10 major active mines in Northeastern
Arizona, and this policy threatens their viability. In
particular, I would like to highlight the Kayenta Coal Mine,
which would be adversely affected by OSM's draft environmental
impact study. The Kayenta employs about 500 people, mostly Hopi
Native Americans. The coal from that mine is delivered to the
Navajo Generating Station located about 100 miles East in Page,
Arizona.
The plant provides 95 percent of the electricity in the
Central Arizona Project, a critical water infrastructure
project in my state that delivers over 500 billion gallons of
Colorado River Water to a three-county service area that
includes more than 80 percent of the population, Phoenix,
Tucson and Pinal Counties. The plant and the coal mine provide
$137 million in revenue and wages to the Navajo Nation and its
tribal members and about $12 million annually to the Hopi
Tribe, which is 88 percent of the tribe's annual operating
budget.
The total operation completely located in Arizona has a
significant economic benefit for the tribes in my state. So now
here comes my question, OK? I think several of my colleagues
have started hitting on it. Is there any credible evidence that
streams cannot be restored in Kayenta?
Mr. Pizarchik. The existing regulations that we have under
the current Surface Mining Act do not provide for a complete
collection of the baseline data as to what is in the stream,
and if you----
Dr. Gosar. I am really confused. There seems to be no
evidence is what we are finding out. There is no evidence that
shows that under current rules those streams cannot be taken
care of as is.
Mr. Pizarchik. And under the proposed concepts that we have
been considering, the operator will have the opportunity if
they choose to mine through a stream to restore its form and
function.
Dr. Gosar. Then let me ask the next question. Why is the
mine being penalized as we speak?
Mr. Pizarchik. I am sorry, sir. I have no idea what you are
referring to as far as the mine being penalized.
Dr. Gosar. Well, that coal mine in Kayenta is already being
penalized based upon jurisdiction over that stream
reconstruction. There is no evidence, and so I am wondering why
we are actually penalizing the tribe and trying to close their
mine?
Mr. Pizarchik. That is something of which I am not familiar
with.
Dr. Gosar. I would like to have an answer on that, please.
Mr. Pizarchik. We will have to be able to get back to you
on that.
Dr. Gosar. Thank you.
Mr. Pizarchik. Do you have any more specifics as to what is
occurring there?
Dr. Gosar. I will make sure you get all the specifics so
that we can get that answer.
Mr. Pizarchik. OK. Thank you.
Dr. Gosar. Why doesn't the draft EIS specifically address
the economic impacts of the Native American communities?
Mr. Pizarchik. We don't have a draft EIS yet. We are still
working on a draft EIS, and we expect our draft EIS when it
comes out to cover all of the points that are appropriate and
required under the National Environmental Policy Act.
Dr. Gosar. But isn't there evidence that there was
collusion based upon what we are seeing within the aspects of
the data collection in this agency, and just to give you a
hint, I do believe the Hopi Nation actually kicked out the
environmentalists doing some of the data collection, did they
not?
Mr. Pizarchik. I have no information on that, Congressman.
Dr. Gosar. Thank you. I am running out of time. Page 219 of
the EIS table, 4.5 to 6.8 illustrates coal royalties and
estimates disbursements to the states for the Fiscal Year 2008.
Why is this outdated? Why aren't we showing more updated
information in regards to royalties given to tribes?
Mr. Pizarchik. As I indicated, we do not have a draft EIS
at this point in time. The draft EIS is still under development
and preparation.
Dr. Gosar. Why aren't we showing updated panels and
disbursements for royalties? Isn't that part of the process and
part of the equation?
Mr. Pizarchik. We do not have a draft EIS at this point. We
are attempting to make sure we have one that covers all the
appropriate information required by the National Environmental
Policy Act.
Mr. Lamborn. OK. I thank the member. Now the Member from
South Carolina, Representative Duncan.
Mr. Duncan. I thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you for having
this hearing. South Carolina doesn't have a lot of coal mines,
if any. We do have some contractors in our state that operate
on mines in other states, so I appreciate the validity and the
timeliness of this because it seems like the Administration
continues to thwart American resources being used for American
energy needs. It is concerning to folks in South Carolina.
When we talk about open-pit mining, we are concerned that
they may affect the granite mines that we have in our state,
which we are blessed with that, so Mr. Chairman, I would like
to yield the balance of my time back to the gentleman from
Arizona to finish his line of questioning.
Dr. Gosar. Thank you to my colleague. I want to go back to
this draft EIS, specifically addressing the economic impacts.
Why doesn't specifically address the Native American
communities?
Mr. Pizarchik. Again, the document to which you are
referring, it was the first working draft prepared by the
contractor. There is not a draft EIS in place yet. We expect to
have a draft EIS that would comply with all the NEPA
requirements and include the information necessary when it is
ready. Right now, we do not have such a document.
Dr. Gosar. I understand the Navajo and Hopi's are
designated environmental justice communities. Don't you think
it would be appropriate that the EIS address those significant
economic ramifications for those communities?
Mr. Pizarchik. I believe it would be appropriate for a
draft EIS when we have one to address all the requirements that
are appropriate under the National Environmental Policy Act. At
this point, we aren't there yet.
Dr. Gosar. So shouldn't we be taking into specific dialogue
the cumulative effects of coal production on the jobs and
revenue on the Native Americans in Arizona, New Mexico and
Montana specifically?
Mr. Pizarchik. Part of our job is to strike that balance
between protecting the environment while helping meet the
country's energy needs. The purpose of having a draft
environmental impact statement is to garner the information, to
provide the information so that I, the Department, we can make
a determination of what ought to be in the proposed rulemaking.
We do not have a draft EIS yet. We do not have the information
that we need to make the determination as to what is
appropriate to include in the proposed rulemaking, so anything
at this point is just speculative.
Dr. Gosar. It may be speculative, but unfortunately, in my
state, what we see is the random selection of information that
we want to include and not to include. I want to bring up
specifics. We just had the USGS try to do a subsurface model
without going back to the communities of interest to look at
information that should be included in an environmental or
actually a dialogue of mapping out subsurface waters, and it
seems like we see this over and over again with agencies that
we are picking and choosing what information we want to use,
and it seems like the Native Americans seem to have been left
out in this process, and we don't want them to be left out of
any process.
Mr. Pizarchik. And I agree. I don't want them left out
either. I have been out to meet with Hopi and Navajo as well as
with the Crow, and I am well aware of the circumstances out
there and how important coal is to their communities and to
their economy, and I am well aware of the concerns out there
and the situation on that. From our standpoint, we need to have
all appropriate information required under the Environmental
Policy Act in order to be able to make informed decisions, and
we are not at the point where we have that information that we
need in order to be able to make the determination and inform
this determination as to what should be in the proposed
rulemaking.
Dr. Gosar. And you do understand the ramifications of the
Navajo Generating Station and its key operating services to the
State of Arizona and to the Southwest? You are aware of those?
Mr. Pizarchik. Yes, I am.
Dr. Gosar. Very specifically?
Mr. Pizarchik. Yes.
Dr. Gosar. OK. Thank you, sir.
Mr. Lamborn. OK. I am assuming the Director could stay for
a shorter second round because there are fewer of us here?
Mr. Pizarchik. Yes, sir.
Mr. Lamborn. We appreciate that. Thank you so much. For my
five minutes, I am going to yield to the gentleman from Ohio,
Mr. Johnson.
Mr. Johnson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Director, I have
just a few more questions. First of all, have any states asked
for a rewrite of the Stream Buffer Zone Rule? Have they
expressed concerns about the quality of their streams?
Mr. Pizarchik. I do not recall receiving such a request.
Mr. Johnson. Have any of them expressed concerns about the
economic impact of the rewrite of this rule?
Mr. Pizarchik. I believe there may have been some concerns
expressed in some letters to me, yes.
Mr. Johnson. OK.
Mr. Pizarchik. I don't recall the specifics.
Mr. Johnson. All right. As I am sure you are aware, last
year OSM placed a request to the House Interior Appropriations
Committee to reprogram $7 million from state grant funding in
order to pay for the environmental impact study. Has Polu Kai
been paid for any of the work that they did up until the time
that contract ended?
Mr. Pizarchik. Yes.
Mr. Johnson. How much?
Mr. Pizarchik. I believe they were paid about $3.7 million.
Mr. Johnson. $3.7 million?
Mr. Pizarchik. Yes.
Mr. Johnson. And what was the total value of the contract?
Mr. Pizarchik. The contract was slightly under $6 million.
Mr. Johnson. OK. So over half of the funds that were to be
spent for the work that Polu Kai was to do has been paid to
them, and is it safe to say are you redoing the entire
environmental impact statement?
Mr. Pizarchik. First, I would like to correct I actually
believe the contract was almost $5 million, not $6. I made a
mistake on that.
Mr. Johnson. OK.
Mr. Pizarchik. We are evaluating the work product that we
have received from the contractor. They have provided some
materials and information and provided some good services. For
instance, in conducting the EIS scoping sessions and gathering
the data, we received valuable work product from them. Some of
the other work, we are evaluating on how best to proceed.
Mr. Johnson. Does OSM plan to ask for more funding either
through a supplemental budget request or reprogramming to do a
new EIS or complete the existing rework?
Mr. Pizarchik. We do not have plans at this time to ask for
more money.
Mr. Johnson. OK. I want to go back just briefly to another
line of questioning from earlier because I am not sure I
understood the answer. Have you or anyone in your Department
spoken to anyone in the Executive Office of the President about
the Stream Buffer Zone Rule rewrite and its implications?
Mr. Pizarchik. I can only speak for myself, and I have not
had discussions.
Mr. Johnson. Do you know if anybody in your upward chain in
the Department of the Interior, has anyone, Secretary Salazar
or anyone else, had any communication with the Executive Office
of the President in that regard?
Mr. Pizarchik. I don't know the answer to that,
Congressman.
Mr. Johnson. OK. Mr. Chairman, I think I yield back the
remaining on my time.
Mr. Lamborn. OK. Thank you, and I recognize the Ranking
Member for up to five minutes.
Mr. Holt. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Pizarchik, in the
Environmental Protection Division, you plan to have 25
additional employees at a cost of nearly $4 million. This is in
a division that is having a proposed spending reduction of
nearly 10 percent. Can you explain that reassignment?
Mr. Pizarchik. Yes.
Mr. Holt. What would these 25 employees be doing?
Mr. Pizarchik. The majority of those 25 employees would be
conducting oversight inspections for the Office of Surface
Mining. Over the years, the agency had been downsized either
through riffs or through attrition, and we were not in a
position that we were conducting oversight to be able to
address concerns or allegations that the states were or were
not doing a good job.
Mr. Holt. So where does this bring the staffing compared to
what it was in the heyday of that office if there was a heyday
of that office? In other words, how much are you restoring that
was lost, or are you going to a more robust office than
previously existed.
Mr. Pizarchik. It will not even come close to what
previously existed. If these are approved, 18 of the positions
are offsets from reductions in our abandoned mine land program
and will still leave us less than half of what the agency had
years ago, maybe even a fraction of that.
Mr. Holt. OK. Thank you. On the question of abandoned mine,
the AML, how do you determine what are the mines that most need
attention? How do you characterize the danger that they
present?
Mr. Pizarchik. There has been a process over the years.
Mr. Holt. And by the way, is it danger that it the primary
criterion?
Mr. Pizarchik. The primary criterion gets in the danger to
the health and safety of the public and adverse effects on
health and public safety, and then under the current ranking
system where there is evaluation, there are regulations that
lay out how sites are ranked. All of the states have
participated and created an inventory of the abandoned mine
lands, and so we look at the way they have been ranked by the
states in accordance with the Federal standards.
Mr. Holt. OK. I mean, could you tick off two or three? Give
us some idea of how you characterize them quickly, please.
Mr. Pizarchik. Some of the factors could be dangerous high
walls, impoundments with water slide area, open mine shafts
where people could fall into those portals, vertical openings,
clogged streams on lands.
Mr. Holt. OK. And I think you also said temporary dams that
would give way or makeshift dams and that sort of thing?
Mr. Pizarchik. Yes.
Mr. Holt. OK. Changing the subject, earlier this week, a
witness, Laura Skaer from Northwest Mining Association
advocated a good Samaritan law to allow mining companies with
no previous involvement to be involved in reclamation and
restoration of abandoned mines. This is through the BLM to
remove some of their liability. This might be worthwhile. I am
certainly willing to consider it, but my question for her was
well, what would entice a company, what would be the motivation
of a company to want to clean up even if we removed the threat
of liability? Do you see any merit in a good Samaritan law?
Might it apply to your work at all?
Mr. Pizarchik. Yes, I do see merit, and in the coal mining
area, there are amendments that were commonly referred to as
the Rahall amendment that deals with liability fore acid mine
drainage on mine sites, and it encourages reclamation of those
sites through remining by operators. In my personal experience
in Pennsylvania, it has been very successful.
Mr. Holt. Removing the liability is one thing. What would
provide the motivation for a company who no longer is liable to
undertake such work?
Mr. Pizarchik. It is opportunity to keep their people
employed and to make money, basic capitalism on that, and I
think we in the Federal Government deserve and have a
responsibility to structure our regulations in a way that helps
facilitate jobs for people in this country.
Mr. Holt. Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Lamborn. All right. Perfect timing. Thank you, and now
I think we only have one or two more questions from
Representative Gosar of Arizona, and then we will be done, and
I thank you in advance for having been here. Representative?
Dr. Gosar. Director, we have this large Navajo Nation where
we actually extracted uranium during the Atomic Energy
Commission's days which the government is responsible. We also
had the Bennett Freeze where particularly anything was
prohibited from being changed regardless of cleanup, changing a
window, rebuilding a house. Tell me what we are going to do
there? How are we going to clean that up?
Mr. Pizarchik. I am not familiar with what you are
referring on this. You say Bennett Freeze?
Dr. Gosar. Called the Bennett Freeze. What it was was an
arbitrary line drawn across the Navajo Nation that forbids
anybody to do anything of substance, replacing a window,
changing a house. These people are living in like the Third
World, and we have tailing piles everywhere that are direction
relation from Federal mining that are sitting out there
contaminating water. We have people living by these areas. I
want to know your priority aspects since the Bennett Freeze has
now been lifted last year where in the priority, and I hope I
hear it is number one that we are going to go back in there and
start clearing up.
Mr. Pizarchik. In this 2012 budget proposal, there is a
provision for creation of an abandoned hard rock mind land fee
program, and that would provide the resources for directly
addressing those types of problems on it.
Dr. Gosar. Well, I think it should be the direction of the
Federal Government to direct specifically to a such project,
that they direct that accordingly because their responsibility
is direct here.
Mr. Pizarchik. And there is legislation being drafted to
accomplish this, and I understand that is under development. It
is being worked on through the Bureau of Land Management. I am
not quite sure, and I don't have expertise in uranium mines or
hard rock abandoned mines and that, but that certainly sounds
like something that ought to be considered for being addressed
in that aspect of it.
Dr. Gosar. I would like to make this a real priority issue
because when we are looking at the quality of uranium, our
area--Breccia Pipes--has the highest concentration of uranium
in the whole country. We have the ability to mine our own and
to have actually some increased energy issues in providing that
type of ore for very substantive additions. The regular folks,
the mining folks, are being held accountable to a different
level than the Federal Government, and they are being held
back, and that is not something that I can stand for.
The Federal Government must answer the call here to make
sure things are put back right because if you are asking the
mining industry to hold to a standard, so should the Federal
Government.
Mr. Pizarchik. And again, sir, that is an area of which I
am familiar.
Dr. Gosar. I would like your answers submitted what we are
going to do and how we are going to do it and who the
authorities are.
Mr. Pizarchik. We will do what we can on that to provide an
appropriate response, yes.
Dr. Gosar. Thank you.
Mr. Lamborn. OK. That concludes the questioning. I want to
thank you, Mr. Pizarchik for being here. We have asked some
probing questions, but only because these are some very serious
issues, so we thank you for being here, and we appreciate your
time.
Mr. Pizarchik. You are welcome, and it is my understanding,
I just had a little note, that as far as what the Executive
Office of the President, including some of the offices, and I
guess maybe I didn't have a clear understanding on that
question on that, so as far as some of my discussions, I have
briefed folks at say the CEQ on where we were on our
rulemaking, provided some information on that, so that was
something I really just did not have a full appreciation of the
scope of the Executive Office of the President, so I wanted to
make that clarification and thank you all for the opportunity
to be here today.
Mr. Lamborn. OK. Thank you so much. That concludes our
first panel.
We will now bring up the four witnesses for our second
panel, and they are Mr. Eugene Kitts of the International Coal
Group, Senior Vice President of Mining Services testifying on
behalf of the National Mining Association; Ms. Loretta Pineda,
Director of the Division of Reclamation, Mining and Safety of
the Colorado Department of Natural Resources testifying on
behalf of the National Association of abandoned mine land
programs and the interstate mining compact. It is always good
to have someone from Colorado here.
Third, we have Mr. Butch Lambert, Deputy Director of the
Virginia Department of Mines, Minerals and Energy testifying on
behalf of the Interstate Mining Compact Commission, and also we
have Mr. Joe Lovett of the Appalachian Center for the Economy
and the Environment, so for all four of you, you maybe have
seen how this operates. You push the button to be able to be
heard on the microphone. It will turn green. After four
minutes, the light turns yellow, and then after five minutes it
turns red.
There is the possibility that we will have some votes
called here in the next 10 to 20 minutes. If that happens, I am
going to ask in advance your patience although I know it is an
imposition, but we will have to take a recess for the hearing
and go over to the chamber and come back, and depending on how
many votes, it could be anywhere from 30 to 60 minutes.
Hopefully, it will be shorter rather than longer, so I ask you
in advance to bear with us if that happens because I think we
are supposed to have a vote here pretty soon. That is the
prediction. That is what the oracles on high have said. OK. We
will start with you first, Mr. Kitts. Thank you for being here.

STATEMENT OF EUGENE KITTS, SENIOR VICE PRESIDENT, MINING
SERVICES, INTERNATIONAL COAL GROUP

Mr. Kitts. Thank you and good morning. My name is Gene
Kitts, and I am Senior Vice President of Mining Services for
International Coal Group, a leading coal producer in Northern
and Central Appalachia and the Illinois Basin. I am appearing
on behalf of the National Mining Association, which represents
ICG and other producers of most of America's coal, metals,
industrial, and agricultural minerals. Thank you for holding
this oversight hearing today. It is vital that this Committee
and others in Congress carefully review the Office of Surface
Mining's recent activities. Today, I will discuss two
initiatives by OSM, the ``Stream Protection Rule'' and the
agency's ``State Program Oversight'' activities.
With regard to the Stream Protection Rule, OSM worked from
2003 to 2008 developing the current Stream Buffer Zone
Regulation. Building a multi-agency programmatic EIS done in
2003 to 2005, OSM published adiscussion document and two
proposed rules before finalizing the regulation, included
public comment on each one, held four public hearings on the
subject and also completed another EIS to support the final
rule, which was finally published with EPA's written
concurrence in December 2008.
The 2008 Stream Buffer Zone Rule was a clarification of the
earlier rule, but it also added significant environmental
protections, including a requirement to avoid mining activities
in or near streams, if reasonably possible, and to use the best
technology currently available to prevent the contribution of
additional suspended solids to stream flow. Operators must also
minimize disturbances and adverse impacts on fish, wildlife and
related environmental values to the extent possible.
The current rule requires operators to demonstrate that
generation of excess spoil material has been minimized, all
practical alternatives for the disposal of that excess earth
have been considered, and the options showing at least overall
adverse impact on fish, wildlife and related environmental
values has been selected. However, despite five years of study,
millions of taxpayers' dollars spent, two environmental impact
statements and 43,000 public comments, OSM suddenly decided to
shelf it before it was ever implemented.
Instead of defending the rule when it was challenged by
environmental organizations, the Secretary asked the Judge to
vacate it so that OSM could reinterpret the old rule through a
guidance document. The Judge refused and required the Secretary
to follow the legal rulemaking procedures. OSM responded by
signing a back-door settlement agreement with environmental
groups promising to publish a proposed rule by February 28,
2011, and requiring taxpayers to pay for all the environmental
groups' attorneys' fees. OSM's Stream Protection Rule is not
occurring in a vacuum.
For example, EPA and the Corps have instituted an unlawful
de facto permit moratorium on Clean Water Act Section 404
permits. Since March 2009, 235 coal mining Section 404 permits
have been blocked, and in the ensuing two years, only eight of
those permits have been issued. These strategies were mapped
out in a memorandum of understanding between EPA, the Corps and
the Interior Secretary on June 11, 2009. That MOU explained how
such new policies have been designed to reduce the
``environmental consequences'' of Appalachian surface coal
mining operations, and ``diversify and strengthen'' the
Appalachian regional economy.
Only later did we discover that diversifying and
strengthening the Appalachian regional economy meant destroying
tens of thousands of coal mining and related jobs in their
region. The Stream Protection Rule is the most far-reaching
rewrite of OSM's regulations in the last 30 years. It provides
less clarity, and it changes the focus of the program from a
balance between environmental protection and coal production to
actually a punitive attack on coal mining.
OSM's own analysis predicts that the rule will destroy tens
of thousands of coal mining and related jobs across the
country, and we believe that this significantly understates
potential job losses. OSM has not justified the need to abandon
the 2008 rulemaking, but has admitted that we had already
decided to change the rule following the change of
Administrations on January 20, 2009. Both the rulemaking and
the process being used by OSM have been universally criticized
by states charged with administering SMCRA, including the
majority of the state EIS cooperating agencies, the Interstate
Mining Compact Commission and the Western Governors
Association.
I understand that Interior announced on March 31 that the
EIS contractor has been terminated. In 2010, OSM reprogrammed
$7 million in its budget to pay for this ill-advised Stream
Protection Rule and EIS with much of the money coming at the
expense of the states. OSM has already spent an estimated $4.4
million on the rule and EIS, yet has not completed a draft of
the proposed rule and then fired its contractor. Now the agency
is seeking an additional $3.9 million in Fiscal Year 2012 to
implement this job-killing regulation and increase state
program oversight.
We strongly urge you to reject any further funding for
these misguided efforts. Now, the state program oversight, in a
primacy state, exclusive regulatory authority rests with the
state, which is the sole issue of permits. OSM plays no role in
issuing permits, and it does not retain veto authority over
state permit decisions. Despite this clear statutory structure
language and court decisions, OSM's director issued a memo on
November 15, 2010, unilaterally asserting that the agency now
has the authority to interfere with change and as a practical
matter veto state permitting activities.
In fact, not only has OSM asserted that it has such
authority, but it has followed through with its threats against
two of my company's state-issued mining permits. The agency's
Fiscal Year 2012 budget requests an additional increase of $3.9
million for activities related to state program oversight and
for the Stream Protection rulemaking. At the same time, OSM is
proposing to slash by $11 million state Title V grants used by
states to run their programs.
We strongly urge this Committee and others in the Congress
to stop funding the agency's controversial state permit review
policy and Stream Protection Rule and restore the necessary
funding for the states to properly implement their SMCRA
programs as intended by Congress. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Kitts follows:]

Statement of Eugene Kitts, Senior Vice President, Mining Services,
International Coal Group, Inc., on Behalf of the National Mining
Association

Good morning. My name is Gene Kitts, and I am Senior Vice President
of Mining Services for International Coal Group, Inc. ICG is a leading
producer of coal in Northern and Central Appalachia and the Illinois
Basin. We have 12 active mining complexes located in Northern and
Central Appalachia and one in Central Illinois. We control over one
billion tons of high-quality coal reserves that are primarily high-BTU,
low-sulfur steam and metallurgical quality coal. Over the past three
years, ICG's mines and our 2,750 employees have been recognized an
average of seven times a year with environmental awards from state and
federal mining regulators.
I am appearing on behalf of the National Mining Association (NMA).
NMA represents ICG as well as other producers of most of America's
coal, metals, industrial and agricultural minerals.
I want to thank the Committee for holding this oversight hearing
today. It is vital that this Committee and others in Congress carefully
review the Office of Surface Mining's (OSM's) recent activities. Today
I plan to discuss two initiatives by OSM, the ``stream protection
rule'' and the agency's ``state program oversight'' activities.
Stream Protection Rule
OSM spent over five years, from 2003 to 2008, developing the
current ``stream buffer zone'' regulation. This was a collaborative
effort drawing on the October 2005 programmatic environmental impact
statement, which was sponsored by four federal agencies including OSM,
EPA, the Corps, and the Fish and Wildlife Service (FWS). It included 30
scientific and economic studies, comprising over 5,000 pages of
material. OSM published a discussion document and two proposed rules
before finalizing the regulation, including public comment on each one,
as well as four public hearings on the subject. OSM also completed
another environmental impact statement to support the final regulation.
OSM published the final rule, with EPA's written concurrence, in
December 2008.
While the 2008 stream buffer zone rule was a clarification of the
longstanding regulatory interpretation of the earlier rule, it also
added significant environmental protections that have been largely
ignored in the debate. These include a requirement to avoid mining
activities in or near streams if reasonably possible, and to use the
best technology currently available to prevent the contribution of
additional suspended solids (sediment) to stream flow or runoff outside
the permit area to the extent possible. Operators must also minimize
disturbances and adverse impacts on fish, wildlife, and related
environmental values, to the extent possible.
The current rule also requires that surface coal mining operations
be designed to minimize the creation of excess spoil and the
environmental impacts of fills constructed for the placement of excess
spoil and coal mine waste. Mine operators must do this by:

making a demonstration to the satisfaction of the
regulatory authority that the operation has been designed to
minimize, to the extent possible, the volume of excess spoil
that the operation will generate, thus ensuring that spoil is
returned to the mined-out area to the extent possible;

identifying a reasonable range of alternatives that
vary with respect to the number, size, location, and
configuration of proposed fills; and

selecting the alternative with the least overall
adverse impact on fish, wildlife, and related environmental
values, including adverse impacts on water quality and aquatic
and terrestrial ecosystems.
However, despite 5 years of study, millions of taxpayer dollars
spent, two environmental impact statements and 43,000 public comments
in developing the current regulation, OSM suddenly decided to shelve it
before it was ever implemented on the ground. The rule was challenged
by environmental organizations and instead of defending the rule, the
Secretary of the Interior asked a federal judge to vacate it so that
the new administration could reinterpret the old rule, through a
guidance document. The judge refused, and told the Secretary that if he
desired to make any changes to a valid regulation then he must follow
the legal requirements that afford full public participation through
notice and comment rulemaking. OSM responded by signing a back-door
settlement agreement with environmental groups promising to publish a
proposed rule by February 28, 2011, a very short timeframe. The agency
also agreed to pick up the tab for all of the environmental groups
attorneys' fees, at taxpayer expense, despite the fact that those
groups didn't win the case.
OSM's proposed changes to the stream protection rule are not
occurring in a vacuum. Other agencies, including the Environmental
Protection Agency (EPA) and the Army Corps of Engineers (Corps) have
implemented similar policies aimed at severely restricting coal mining
operations. EPA and the Corps have instituted an unlawful de-facto
permit moratorium on Clean Water Act Sec. 404 permits through guidance
documents and memorandum. Since March 2009, 235 coal mining Sec. 404
permits have been blocked, and in the ensuing two years only eight
permits out of those 235 permits have been issued.
All of these strategies were mapped out in a memorandum of
understanding between EPA, the Corps, and the Interior Secretary on
June 11, 2009. That document explained how such new policies have been
designed to reduce the ``environmental consequences of Appalachian
surface coal mining operations'' and ``diversify and strengthen the
Appalachian regional economy.'' Only later did we discover, through
news media reports, that ``diversifying and strengthening the
Appalachian regional economy'' meant destroying tens of thousands of
coal mining and related jobs in our region.
The stream protection rule is the most far reaching rewrite of the
agency's regulations in the last 30 years. Far from providing more
regulatory clarity, it fundamentally changes longstanding
interpretations of the law and prohibits widely accepted mining
techniques. In OSM's own words, this rule is ``much broader in scope
than the 2008 stream buffer zone rule,'' and will apply nationwide in
scope.
Despite OSM's statements to the contrary, its own analysis predicts
that the restrictions contained in the rule will destroy tens of
thousands of coal mining and related jobs across the country.
Specifically, the agency's draft EIS predicts that it would eviscerate
almost 1/3 of all surface coal mining production in Appalachia, over
20% in the Illinois Basin, over 25% of the production in the Gulf
Region, and 84% of Alaska's coal production. OSM's draft EIS predicted
that total job losses in the Appalachian region alone are expected to
exceed 20,000. NMA believes that this document significantly
underestimates the potential job losses, because it does not account
for any losses of underground mining jobs through the sterilization of
coal reserves and denial of permits to conduct highly efficient full
extraction underground mining operations.
Remarkably, OSM has offered little in the way of any real
justification for the need to abandon the 2008 rulemaking. Indeed, the
only explanation appears in the agency's candid admission that ``. .
.we had already decided to change the rule following the change of
Administrations on January 20, 2009.'' 75 Fed. Reg. 34,667 (June 18,
2010). Perhaps this pre-determination by the agency explains both the
absence of any meaningful opportunity for consultation with the States
and, in part, why the agency has had so many problems with the quality
of its environmental impact statement. Those problems were recently
acknowledged by Deputy Secretary David who testified that Interior is
so unhappy with the work on the EIS that they may terminate the
contractor. I understand that Interior announced on March 31 that the
contractor has indeed been terminated. Both the rulemaking and the
process being used by OSM have been universally criticized by states
charged with administering SMCRA including the majority of the State
EIS-cooperating agencies, the Interstate Mining Compact Commission, and
the Western Governors' Association.
In 2010, OSM reprogrammed $7 million in its budget to accommodate
development of this ill-advised stream protection rule and accompanying
EIS. Much of this money came at the expense of the States, who are the
primary regulators under SMCRA. In a recent letter to this Committee,
OSM indicated that it has already spent an estimated $4.4 million on
the rule and EIS, yet ``has not completed a draft of the proposed
rule.'' Now the agency is seeking an additional $3.9 million in fiscal
year 2012 to implement this job-killing regulation and increase state
program oversight. Based on what we have seen thus far, we strongly
urge you to reject any further funding for this misguided regulation
and we hope that you will continue to vigorously oversee this agency's
actions on the stream protection rule.
State Program Oversight
As part of the MOU on surface coal mining in Appalachia mentioned
earlier, OSM committed to reevaluate ``how it will more effectively
conduct oversight of State permitting, State enforcement, and
regulatory activities under SMCRA,'' and specifically agreed to remove
what it described as ``impediments to its ability to require correction
of permit defects in SMCRA primacy states.'' Although OSM is
inappropriately changing a number of its state program oversight
policies in response to this MOU, I would like to focus my remarks
today on the most objectionable aspect of those changes, the so-called
``ten-day notice'' policy.
SMCRA Sec. 503, grants a state exclusive jurisdiction over the
regulation of surface coal mining operations within its borders by
submitting a state program to the Secretary of the Interior and
securing the Secretary's approval of that program. Currently all coal
mining states, except Tennessee and the state of Washington, have
approved state programs and thus enjoy this exclusive regulatory
jurisdiction.
To all, with perhaps the exception of OSM, the statutory language
and structure is clear--``exclusive'' means just that, it does not mean
parallel or concurrent jurisdiction with OSM. Thirty years of case law
establishes the following principles of SMCRA: (1) the law sets out a
careful and deliberate allocation of authority of mutually exclusive
regulation by either OSM or the state, but not both; (2) in a state
with an approved program that authority rests with the state; (3)
states are the sole issuers of permits in which OSM plays no role; (4)
OSM does not retain veto authority over state permit decisions; and (5)
OSM intervention at any stage in a state permitting matter unlawfully
frustrates the deliberate statutory design and allocation of authority.
Despite the clear statutory structure, language and court
decisions, OSM's director issued a memorandum on November 15, 2010,
unilaterally asserting that the agency now has the authority to
interfere with, change and, as a practical matter, veto state
permitting decisions with which it disagrees. In fact, not only has OSM
asserted that it has such authority, but it has followed through with
its threats against two of my company's state-issued mining permits.
In Kentucky, OSM has improperly inserted itself into a state water
discharge permit controversy between ICG and the Sierra Club. OSM
issued a Ten Day Notice in response to a citizen's complaint that
directed the state regulatory agency to conduct water monitoring at our
mine and to allow the outside parties to participate. This essentially
provided free and federal agency assisted pre-lawsuit discovery to the
opponents of our twenty year old mining operation. Moreover, the
complaint relates to a permit that was not issued under the State SMCRA
program but the State Clean Water Act program. It is not a matter over
which OSM has any authority under SMCRA and is another example of
improper mission creep.
An ICG subsidiary in northern West Virginia was issued a state
surface mining permit in October 2010. Local opponents of this project
chose to not appeal the issuance of this permit to the West Virginia
Surface Mine Board but rather filed in February 2011 a lengthy
complaint with OSM alleging ``permit defects'' and asking OSM to
intervene. OSM dutifully responded by issuing a Ten Day Notice to the
West Virginia DEP, which in turn replied by stating its objection to
use of a Ten Day Notice in these circumstances. Not only has OSM
unlawfully frustrated the deliberate statutory design of mutually
exclusive state-federal jurisdiction, it has enabled a third party to
circumvent the exclusive avenue and the specific deadlines for permit
appeals under the state program. If the permit had been issued by OSM
in a non-primacy state such as Tennessee, it could not allow such a
back-door attempt to belatedly appeal that decision. Here OSM's actions
are doubly-wrong by facilitating this unlawful attempt to collaterally
challenge a state permit in a primacy state.
Permit delays and regulatory uncertainty are thwarting capital
investment that will create and sustain the high-wage jobs needed and
valued in our coal communities. At a time when our nation is recovering
from a deep recession and requires low-cost and reliable fuel to remain
globally competitive, agency policies are crushing these job-creating
enterprises that will be the engine for our economic growth and
prosperity.
The agency's fiscal year 2012 budget requests an additional
increase of $3.9 million for activities related to additional state
program oversight and for the stream protection rulemaking. At the same
time, OSM is proposing to slash by $11 million State title V grants,
used by States to run their SMCRA regulatory programs,. We strongly
urge this Committee and others in the Congress to stop funding the
agency's controversial ten day notice policy and stream protection
rule, and restore the necessary funding for the States to properly
implement their SMCRA regulatory programs as intended by Congress..
Thank you. I would be happy to answer any questions from members of
the Committee.
______

Mr. Johnson [presiding]. Thank you, Mr. Kitt. Ms. Pineda?

STATEMENT OF LORETTA PINEDA, DIRECTOR, DIVISION OF RECLAMATION,
MINING AND SAFETY, COLORADO DEPARTMENT OF NATURAL RESOURCES

Ms. Pineda. Thank you. My name is Loretta Pineda. I am the
Director of the Division of Reclamation Mining and Safety
within the Colorado Department of Natural Resources. I am
appearing today on behalf of the National Association of
Abandoned Mine Land Programs and the Interstate Mining Compact
Commission. The National Association of AML Programs represents
30 states and tribes with Federally approved abandoned mine
land programs authorized under the Surface Mining Control and
Reclamation Act.
The Interstate Mining Compact Commission represents some 24
states, many of whom implement programs regulating the active
mining industry under SMCRA. Based on SMCRA fee collections,
the Fiscal Year 2012 mandatory appropriation for state and
tribal AML grants should be $498 million. Instead, OSM has only
budgeted $313.8 million, a reduction of $184.2 million. This
would eliminate funding to those states and tribes that have
certified completion of their highest-priority coal reclamation
sites.
From the beginning of SMCRA in 1977 to the latest amendment
in 2006, Congress promised that at least half of the money
generated from the coal fees collected within the boundaries of
a state or tribe, referred to as state or tribal share, would
be returned for uses as described in the Act. For certified
states and tribes, the state and tribal share funds can be used
for environmental stewardship, cleaning up abandoned coal and
hard rock mines, sustainable development, infrastructure
improvements and alternative energy projects, all stimulating
economic activity, protecting health and safety, creating green
jobs for local communities and improving the environment.
Each of these specific goals has been embraced by the
Administration. Breaking the promise of state and tribal share
funding will upset 10 years of negotiation that resulted in the
balance and compromise achieved in the 2006 amendments to
SMCRA. We therefore respectfully ask the Committee to continue
funding for certified states and tribes at the statutory
authorized levels and turn back any efforts to amend SMCRA in
this regard.
The proposed budget would also eliminate $6.8 million for
the Federal AML emergency program. Section 410 of SMCRA was
unchanged by the 2006 amendments and requires OSM to fund the
emergency AML program. Additionally, the Act does not allow
states and tribes to fund an emergency program from their AML
grants. On the contrary, it requires strict compliance with
non-emergency funding priorities. If Congress allows the
elimination of the emergency program, states and tribes will
have to set aside large portions of their non-emergency AML
grant funds to be prepared for future emergencies. This will
result in funds being diverted from other high-priority
projects.
It will also present special challenges for minimum program
states since they may have to save up multiple years of funding
in order to address a single emergency thereby delaying work on
other projects. For these reasons and many others, we urge the
Committee to restore funding for the AML emergency program in
Fiscal Year 2012.
Finally, we oppose OSM's proposal to drastically reform the
distribution process for AML funds to non-certified states
through a competitive grant program. This proposal will
completely undermine the balance of interests and objectives
achieved by the 2006 amendments. Among other things, the
proposal would cede authority to both emergency and non-
emergency funding decisions to an advisory council. Aside from
the time delays associated with this approach, it leaves many
unanswered questions regarding the continued viability of state
and tribal AML programs where they do not win in the
competitive process.
It also upsets the predictability of AML funding for long-
term project planning. We urge the Subcommittee to reject this
unjustified proposal, delete it from the budget and restore the
full mandatory funding amount of $498 million. Resolutions to
this effect adopted by both the National Association of AML
Programs and the Interstate Mining Compact Commission are
attached to my testimony as well as a comprehensive list of
questions regarding the legislative proposal. I respectfully
request that they be included as part of the record of this
hearing.
To the extent that the Subcommittee does desire to pursue
changes to SMCRA to improve or clarify operation of the AML
program, the states and tribes would recommend looking at three
areas. First, is the use of the unappropriated state and tribal
share balances to address non-coal AML and acid mine drainage
projects; second, the limited liability protection at Section
405[l] of SMCRA; and third, an amendment to the Section 413[d]
regarding liability under the Clean Water Act for acid mine
drainage projects.
We would welcome the opportunity to work with the
Subcommittee on these initiatives, including H.R. 785 recently
introduced by Representative Pearce of New Mexico. Thank you
for the opportunity to present our views this morning, and I am
happy to answer any questions you may have.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Pineda follows:]

Statement of Loretta Pineda, Director, Division of Reclamation, Mining
and Safety, Colorado Department of Natural Resources on Behalf of the
National Association of Abandoned Mine Land Programs and the Interstate
Mining Compact Commission

My name is Loretta Pineda and I serve as the Director of the
Division of Reclamation, Mining and Safety within the Colorado
Department of Natural Resources. I am appearing today on behalf of the
National Association of Abandoned Mine Land Programs (NAAMLP) and the
Interstate Mining Compact Commission (IMCC). The NAAMLP represents 30
states and tribes with federally approved abandoned mine land
reclamation (AML) programs authorized under Title IV of the Surface
Mining Control and Reclamation Act (SMCRA). IMCC represents 24 states
that are responsible for operating both Title IV AML programs, as well
as regulatory programs under Title V for active mining operations. My
testimony today will focus primarily on the Title IV program under
SMCRA.
Title IV of SMCRA was amended in 2006 and significantly changed how
state AML grants are funded. State AML Grants are still based on
receipts from a fee on coal production, but beginning in FY 2008, the
grants are funded primarily by mandatory appropriations. As a result,
the states should receive $498 million in FY 2012. We adamantly oppose
the Office of Surface Mining Reclamation and Enforcement's (OSM)
proposed budget amount of $313.8 million for State AML grants, a
reduction of $184.2 million, and reject the notion that a competitive
grant process would improve AML program efficiency. The proposed
spending cuts would eliminate funding to states and tribes that have
``certified'' completion of their highest priority coal reclamation
sites. OSM has also proposed a $6.8 million reduction in discretionary
spending that would eliminate the federal emergency program under
Section 410 of SMCRA. I appreciate the opportunity to testify before
the Subcommittee and outline some of the reasons why NAAMLP and IMCC
oppose OSM's proposed FY 2012 budget.
SMCRA was passed in 1977 and set national regulatory and
reclamation standards for coal mining. The Act also established a
Reclamation Fund to work towards eliminating the innumerable health,
safety and environmental problems that exist throughout the Nation from
the mines that were abandoned prior to the Act. The Fund generates
revenue through a fee on current coal production. This fee is collected
by OSM and distributed to states and tribes that have federally
approved regulatory and AML programs. The promise Congress made in
1977, and with every subsequent amendment to the Act, was that, at a
minimum, half the money generated from fees collected by OSM on coal
mined within the boundaries of a state or tribe, referred to as ``State
Share'', would be returned for uses described in Title IV of the Act if
the state or tribe assumed responsibility for regulating active coal
mining operations pursuant to Title V of SMCRA. The 2006 Amendments
clarified the scope of what the State Share funds could be used for and
reaffirmed the promise made by Congress in 1977.
If a state or tribe was successful in completing reclamation of
abandoned coal mines and was able to ``certify'' under Section 411 of
SMCRA, then the State Share funds could be used to address a myriad of
other abandoned mine issues as defined under each state or tribes
approved Abandoned Mine Reclamation Plan. These Abandoned Mine
Reclamation Plans are approved by the Office of Surface Mining and they
ensure that the work is in accordance with the intent of SMCRA. Like
all abandoned mine reclamation, the work of certified states and tribes
eliminates health and safety problems, cleans up the environment, and
creates jobs in rural areas impacted by mining.
This reduction proposed by OSM in certified state and tribal AML
grants not only breaks the promise of State and Tribal Share funding,
but upsets the balance and compromise that was achieved in the
comprehensive restructuring of SMCRA accomplished in the 2006
Amendments following more than ten years of discussion and negotiation
by all affected parties. The funding reduction is inconsistent with the
Administration's stated goals regarding jobs and environmental
protection. We therefore respectively ask the Subcommittee to support
continued funding for certified states and tribes at the statutory
authorized levels, and turn back any efforts to amend SMCRA in this
regard.
In addition to the $184.2 million reduction, the proposed FY 2012
budget would terminate the federal AML emergency program, leaving the
states and tribes to rely on funds received through their non-emergency
AML grant funds. This contradicts the 2006 amendments, which require
the states and tribes to maintain ``strict compliance'' with the non-
emergency funding priorities described in Section 403(a), while leaving
Section 410, Emergency Powers, unchanged. Section 410 of SMCRA requires
OSM to fund the emergency AML program using OSM's ``discretionary
share'' under Section (402)(g)(3)(B), which is entirely separate from
state and tribal non-emergency AML grant funding under Sections
(402)(g)(1), (g)(2), and (g)(5). SMCRA does not allow states and tribes
to administer or fund an AML emergency program from their non-emergency
AML grants, although, since 1989, fifteen states have agreed to
implement the emergency program on behalf of OSM contingent upon OSM
providing full funding for the work. As a result, OSM has been able to
fulfill their mandated obligation more cost effectively and
efficiently. Ten states and 3 tribes continue to rely solely on OSM to
operate the emergency program within their jurisdiction.
Regardless of whether a state/tribe or OSM operates the emergency
program, only OSM has the authority to ``declare'' the emergency and
clear the way for the expedited procedures to be implemented. In FY
2010, OSM made 153 emergency declarations in Kentucky and Pennsylvania
alone, states where OSM had operated the emergency program. In FY 2011,
OSM issued guidance to the states that the agency ``will no longer
declare emergencies.'' OSM provided no legal or statutory support for
its position. Instead, OSM has ``transitioned'' responsibility for
emergencies to the states and tribes with the expectation that they
will utilize non-emergency AML funding to address them. OSM will simply
``assist the states and tribes with the projects, as needed''. Of
course, given that OSM has proposed to eliminate all funding for
certified states and tribes, it begs the question of how and to what
extent OSM will continue to assist these states and tribes.
If Congress allows the elimination of the emergency program, states
and tribes will have to adjust to their new role by setting aside a
large portion of their non-emergency AML funds so that they can be
prepared for any emergency that may arise. Emergency projects come in
all shapes and sizes, vary in number from year to year and range in
cost from thousands of dollars to millions of dollars. Requiring states
and tribes to fund emergencies will result in funds being diverted from
other high priority projects and delay certification under Section 411,
thereby increasing the backlog of projects on the Abandoned Mine Land
Inventory System (AMLIS). For minimum program states and states with
small AML programs, large emergency projects will require the states to
redirect all or most of their AML resources to address the emergency,
thereby delaying other high-priority reclamation. With the loss of
stable emergency program funding, minimum program states will have a
difficult, if not impossible, time planning, budgeting, and prosecuting
the abatement of their high priority AML problems. In a worst-case
scenario, a minimum program state would not be able to address a costly
emergency in a timely fashion, and would have to ``save up'' multiple
years of funding before even initiating the work to abate the
emergency, in the meantime ignoring all other high priority work.
OSM's proposed budget suggests addressing emergencies, and all
other projects, as part of a competitive grant process whereby states
and tribes compete for funding based on the findings of the proposed
AML Advisory Council. OSM believes that a competitive grant process
would concentrate funds on the highest priority projects. While a
competitive grant process may seem to make sense at first blush,
further reflection reveals that the entire premise is faulty and can
only undermine and upend the deliberate funding mechanism established
by Congress in the 2006 Amendments. Since the inception of SMCRA, high
priority problems have always taken precedence over other projects. The
focus on high priorities was further clarified in the 2006 Amendments
by removing the lower priority problems from the Act and requiring
``strict compliance'' with high priority funding requirements. OSM
already approves projects as meeting the definition of high priority
under its current review process and therefore an AML Advisory Council
would only add redundancy and bureaucracy instead of improving
efficiency.
We have not been privy to the particulars of OSM's legislative
proposal, but there are a myriad of potential problems and implications
for the entire AML program based on a cursory understanding of what OSM
has in mind. They include the following:

Has anyone alleged or confirmed that the states/
tribes are NOT already addressing the highest priority sites?
Where have the 2006 Amendments faltered in terms of high
priority sites being addressed as envisioned by Congress? What
would remain unchanged in the 2006 Amendments under OSM's
proposal?

If the current AML funding formula is scrapped, what
amount will be paid out to the non-certified AML states and
tribes over the remainder of the program? What does OSM mean by
the term ``remaining funds'' in its proposal? Is it only the
AML fees yet to be collected? What happens to the historic
share balances in the Fund, including those that were supposed
to be re-directed to the Fund based on an equivalent amount of
funding being paid to certified states and tribes each year?
Would the ``remaining funds'' include the unappropriated/prior
balance amounts that have not yet been paid out over the seven-
year installment period?

Will this new competitive grant process introduce an
additional level of bureaucracy and result in more funds being
spent formulating proposals and less on actual AML reclamation?
The present funding formula allows states and tribes to
undertake long-term strategic planning and efficiently use
available funds.

How long will OSM fund a state's/tribe's
administrative costs if it does not successfully compete for a
construction grant, even though the state/tribe has eligible
high priority projects? How will OSM calculate administrative
grant funding levels, especially since salaries and benefits
for AML project managers and inspectors predominantly derive
from construction funds? Would funding cover current staffing
levels? If not, how will OSM determine the funding criteria for
administrative program grants?

How does OSM expect the states and tribes to handle
emergency projects under the legislative proposal? Must these
projects undergo review by the Advisory Council? Will there be
special, expedited procedures? If a state/tribe has to cut back
on staff, how does it manage emergencies when they arise? If
emergency programs do compete for AML funds, considerable time
and effort could be spent preparing these projects for review
by the Advisory Council rather than abating the immediate
hazard. Again, how can we be assured that emergencies will be
addressed expeditiously?

One of the greatest benefits of reauthorization under
the 2006 Amendments to SMCRA was the predictability of funding
levels through the end of the AML program. Because state and
tribes were provided with hypothetical funding levels from OSM
(which to date have proven to be quite accurate), long-term
project planning, along with the establishment of appropriate
staffing levels and project assignments, could be made
accurately and efficiently. How can states/tribes plan for
future projects given the inherent uncertainty associated with
having to annually bid for AML funds?
Given these uncertainties and the negative implications for the
accomplishment of AML work under Title IV of SMCRA, Congress should
reject the proposed amendments to SMCRA as being counterproductive to
the purposes of SMCRA and an inefficient use of funds. We request that
Congress continue mandatory funding for certified states and tribes and
provide funding for AML emergencies. Resolutions to this effect adopted
by both NAAMLP and IMCC are attached, as is a more comprehensive list
of questions concerning the legislative proposal. We ask that they be
included in the record of the hearing.
One of the more effective mechanisms for accomplishing AML
restoration work is through leveraging or matching other grant
programs, such as EPA's 319 program. Until FY 2009, language was always
included in OSM's appropriation that encouraged the use of these types
of matching funds, particularly for the purpose of environmental
restoration related to treatment or abatement of acid mind drainage
(AMD) from abandoned mines. This is an ongoing, and often expensive,
problem, especially in Appalachia. NAAMLP and IMCC therefore request
the Subcommittee to support the inclusion of language in the FY 2012
appropriations bill that would allow the use of AML funds for any
required non-Federal cost-share required by the Federal government for
AMD treatment or abatement.
We also urge the Subcommittee to support funding for OSM's training
program and TIPS, including moneys for state/tribal travel. These
programs are central to the effective implementation of state and
tribal AML programs as they provide necessary training and continuing
education for state/tribal agency personnel, as well as critical
technical assistance. Finally, we support funding for the Watershed
Cooperative Agreements in the amount of $1.55 million because it
facilitates and enhances state and local partnerships by providing
direct financial assistance to watershed organizations for acid mine
drainage remediation.
To the extent that the Subcommittee desires to pursue changes to
SMCRA to improve or clarify the operation of the AML program, the
states and tribes would recommend looking at three areas: 1) the use of
unappropriated state and tribal share balances to address noncoal AML
and acid mine drainage (AMD) projects; 2) the limited liability
protections for noncoal AML work at section 405(l) of SMCRA; and 3) an
amendment to Section 413(d) regarding liability under the Clean Water
Act for acid mine drainage projects.
The reauthorization of the AML program in 2006 by Congress did not
in any way change the provisions that allow AML funds to be used to
ameliorate either coal or non-coal mine public health and safety
hazards. However, OSM adopted final rules implementing the 2006
Amendments (November 14, 2008 at 73 Fed. Reg. 67576), based on a
Departmental Solicitor's Opinion (M-37104), that would prohibit some of
this funding from being used to address many of the most serious non-
coal AML problems. As a result, NAAMLP and IMCC strongly support H.R.
765, a bill recently introduced by Rep. Pearce of New Mexico that makes
minor changes to SMCRA to correct the misinterpretation by the U.S.
Department of the Interior. H.R. 765 will return states and tribes to
their longstanding role under SMCRA of directing abandoned mine grant
funds to the highest priority needs at either coal or non-coal
abandoned mines.
NAAMLP and IMCC have worked closely with the Western Governors
Association in providing information to quantify the non-coal AML
cleanup effort. While the data is seldom comparable between states due
to the wide variation in inventory criteria, they do demonstrate that
there are large numbers of significant safety and environmental
problems associated with inactive and abandoned non-coal mines, and
that remediation costs are very large. Some of the types of numbers
that have been reported by NAAMLP and IMCC in response to information
we have collected for the General Accountability Office (GAO) and
others include the following: Number of abandoned mine sites: Alaska--
1,300; Arizona--80,000; California--47,000; Colorado--7,300; Montana--
6,000; Nevada--16,000; Utah--17,000--20,000; Washington--3,800;
Wyoming--1,700. Nevada reports over 200,000 mine openings and Minnesota
reports over 100,000 acres of abandoned mine lands.
States and Tribes are very familiar with the highest priority non-
coal problems within their borders and also have limited reclamation
dollars to protect public health and safety or protect the environment
from significant harm. States and tribes work closely with various
federal agencies, including the Environmental Protection Agency, the
Bureau of Land Management, the U.S. Forest Service, and the U.S. Army
Corps of Engineers, all of whom have provided some funding for non-coal
mine remediation projects. For states with coal mining, the most
consistent source of AML funding has been the Title IV grants received
under SMCRA. Section 409 of SMCRA allows states to use these grants at
high priority non-coal AML sites. The funding is generally limited to
safeguarding hazards to public safety (e.g., closing mine openings) at
non-coal sites.
The urgency of advancing this legislation has been heightened, Mr.
Chairman, by statements in OSM's proposed budget for Fiscal Year 2012.
Therein, OSM is proposing to further restrict the ability of states to
expend AML funds on noncoal reclamation projects. This will apparently
occur as part of a legislative proposal that the Administration intends
to aggressively pursue in the 111th Congress. While the primary focus
of that proposal will be the elimination of future AML funding for
states and tribes that are certified under Title IV of SMCRA (which we
adamantly oppose), OSM's proposal will also substantially restructure
the method by which AML funds are distributed to the states in an
effort to ``direct the available reclamation funds to the highest
priority coal AML sites across the Nation.''
H.R. 765 would also address a similar restriction on the use of the
unappropriated state and tribal share balances for the Acid Mine
Drainage (AMD) set-aside program under SMCRA. Congress expanded this
program in the 2006 Amendments to allow states and tribes to set-aside
up to 30% of their grants funds for treating AMD now and into the
future. AMD has ravaged many streams throughout the country, but
especially in Appalachia. The states need the ability to set aside as
much funding as possible to deal with these problems over the long
term. Again, OSM has acted arbitrarily in their interpretation of the
reauthorizing language by limiting the types of funds the state may use
for the set-aside program. H.R. 765 includes language that would
correct this misinterpretation and allow the states to apply the 30%
set-aside to their prior balance replacement funds.
In summary:

Since the inception of SMCRA in 1977 and the approval
of state/tribal AML programs in the early 1980's, the states
and tribes have been allowed to use their state share
distributions under section 402(g)(1) of the AML Trust Fund for
high priority noncoal reclamation projects pursuant to section
409 of SMCRA and for the set-aside program for acid mine
drainage (AMD) projects.

In its rules implementing the 2006 Amendments, OSM
has stated that these moneys cannot be used for noncoal
reclamation or for the 30% AMD set-aside.

Pursuant to Section 411(h)(1) of the 2006 Amendments,
the states and tribes assert that these moneys should also be
available for noncoal reclamation under section 409 and for the
30% AMD set-aside. There is nothing in the new law that would
preclude this interpretation. Policy and practice over the past
30 years confirm it.
Our second suggested amendment is needed to clarify a further
misinterpretation of SMCRA contained in OSM's final rules of November
14, 2008. Section 405(l) of SMCRA provides that, except for acts of
gross negligence or intentional misconduct, ``no state (or tribe) shall
be liable under any provisions of Federal law for any costs or damages
as a result of action taken or omitted in the course of carrying out a
state abandoned mine reclamation plan approved under this section.'' In
its rules, OSM concluded that because of the language of SMCRA,
including the generally unrestricted nature of the Title IV funds
provided to certified states and tribes in Sections 411(h)(1) and (2),
certified states and tribes can no longer conduct noncoal reclamation
or other projects under Title IV of SMCRA (73 Fed. Reg. 67613). Thus,
to the extent that certified states and tribes choose to conduct
noncoal reclamation, OSM asserts that they do so outside of SMCRA and
OSM's regulations, including the limited liability provisions of
Section 405(l) of the Act.
This strained reading of the 2006 Amendments is having severe
consequences for certified states and tribes conducting AML work
pursuant to their otherwise-approved state programs. Without this
limited liability protection, these states and tribes potentially
subject themselves to liability under the Clean Water Act and CERCLA
for their AML reclamation work. Nothing in the 2006 Amendments
suggested that there was a desire or intent to remove these liability
protections, and without them in place, certified states and tribes
will need to potentially reconsider at least some of their more
critical AML projects. We therefore recommend that the Subcommittee
consider an amendment to SMCRA that would clarify that the 2006
Amendments were not intended to affect the applicability of section
405(l) to AML projects undertaken by certified states and tribes. We
would welcome an opportunity to work with you to craft appropriate
legislative language to accomplish this.
Finally, we recommend an adjustment to Section 413(d) of SMCRA to
clarify that acid mine drainage projects which are eligible for AML
funding under Section 404 of the Act, including systems for the control
or treatment of AMD, are not subject to the water quality provisions of
the Federal Water Pollution Control Act. This amendment is necessary to
address a November 8, 2010 decision by the U.S. Court of Appeals for
the Fourth Circuit, which decreed that the Clean Water Act's NPDES
permitting requirements apply to anyone who discharges pollutants into
the waters of the United States, regardless of whether that entity is
private or public in nature. More specifically, the court noted that
``the statute contains no exceptions for state agencies engaging in
reclamation efforts; to the contrary, it explicitly includes them
within its scope.''
The result of this far-reaching decision by the Fourth Circuit will
be to require some, if not all, state AML reclamation projects to
obtain NPDES permits before work can commence. This will be
particularly problematic for acid mine drainage control and treatment
projects where water quality is already significantly degraded and is
unlikely to ever meet effluent limitation guidelines under the Clean
Water Act. Essentially, efforts by state agencies, and the watershed
groups who work cooperatively with the states, will be stymied. In some
cases, existing water treatment systems could be turned off and
abandoned to the inability to obtain NPDES permits. We do not believe
that this result was intended by either Congress or the courts, and
thus believe that an immediate legislative clarification should be
pursued. Again, we would welcome the opportunity to work with this
Subcommittee to craft appropriate legislative solutions to address this
conflict of laws situation.
Over the past 30 years, tens of thousands of acres of abandoned
mine lands have been reclaimed, thousands of mine openings have been
closed, and safeguards for people, property and the environment have
been put in place. Be assured that states and tribes are determined to
address the unabated hazards at both coal and non-coal abandoned mines.
We are all united to play an important role in achieving the goals and
objectives as set forth by Congress when SMCRA was first enacted--
including protecting public health and safety, enhancing the
environment, providing employment, and adding to the economies of
communities impacted by past coal and noncoal mining. Passage of these
suggested amendments will further these congressional goals and
objectives.
Thank you for the opportunity to testify today. I would be happy to
answer any questions you may have.
______

Resolution

Interstate Mining Compact Commission

BE IT KNOWN THAT:
WHEREAS, Title IV of the Surface Mining Control and Reclamation Act
of 1977 (SMCRA) established the Abandoned Mine Land (AML) reclamation
program; and
WHEREAS, the Interstate Mining Compact Commission (IMCC) is a
multi-state organization representing the natural resource and
environmental protection interests of its 24 member states, including
the elimination of health and safety hazards and the reclamation of
land and water resources adversely affected by past mining and left in
an abandoned or inadequately restored condition; and
WHEREAS, pursuant to the cooperative federalism approach contained
in SMCRA, several IMCC member states administer AML programs approved,
funded and overseen by the Office of Surface Mining Reclamation and
Enforcement (OSM) within the U.S. Department of the Interior; and
WHEREAS, SMCRA, Title IV establishes a reclamation fee on each ton
of coal mined in the United States to pay for abandoned mine land
reclamation; and
WHEREAS, SMCRA, Title IV mandates that fifty percent (50%) of the
reclamation fees collected annually are designated as state share funds
to be returned to the states from which coal was mined to pay for
reclamation projects pursuant to programs administered by the states;
and
WHEREAS, SMCRA, Title IV also mandates that a minimum level of
funding should be provided to ensure effective state program
implementation; and
WHEREAS, Congress enacted amendments to SMCRA in 2006 to address,
among other things, continued collection of AML fees and funding for
state programs to address existing and future AML reclamation; and
WHEREAS, the 2006 Amendments established new, strict criteria that
ensure states expend funds on high priority AML sites; and
WHEREAS, the proposed 2012 budget for the Office of Surface Mining
Reclamation and Enforcement within the U.S. Department of the Interior
would disregard the state-federal partnership established under SMCRA
and renege on the funding formula under the 2006 Amendments by, among
other things, eliminating mandatory funding for states who have
certified the completion of their coal reclamation work and adjusting
the mechanism by which non-certified states receive their mandatory
funding through a competitive bidding process; and
WHEREAS, if statutory changes are approved by Congress as suggested
by the proposed FY 2012 budget for OSM, reclamation of abandoned mine
lands within certified states would halt; reclamation of abandoned mine
lands in all states would be jeopardized; employment of contractors,
suppliers, technicians and others currently engaged in the reclamation
of abandoned mine lands would be endangered; the cleanup of polluted
lands and waters across the United States would be threatened by
failing to fund reclamation of abandoned mine lands; minimum program
state funding would be usurped; the AML water supply replacement
program would be terminated, leaving coalfield citizens without potable
water; and the intent of Congress as contained in the 2006 Amendments
to SMCRA would be undermined
NOW THEREFORE BE IT RESOLVED:
That the Interstate Mining Compact Commission opposes the
legislative proposal terminating funding for certified states and
altering the receipt of mandatory AML funding for non-certified states
contained in the FY 2012 budget proposal for the Office of Surface
Mining Reclamation and Enforcement and instead supports the AML funding
mechanism contained in current law.
Issued this 10th day of March, 2011
ATTEST:
Gregory E. Conrad
Executive Director
______

NAAMLP

National Association of Abandoned Mine Land Programs \1\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

\1\ ALABAMA ALASKA ARIZONA ARKANSAS CALIFORNIA COLORADO CROW HOPI
ILLINOIS INDIANA IOWA KANSAS KENTUCKY LOUISIANA MARYLAND MISSISSIPPI
MISSOURI MONTANA NAVAJO NEVADA NEW MEXICO NORTH DAKOTA OHIO OKLAHOMA
PENNSYLVANIA TENNESSEE TEXAS UTAH VIRGINIA WEST VIRGINIA WYOMING
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

RESOLUTION

OF

THE NATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF ABANDONED MINE LAND PROGRAMS

WHEREAS, Title IV of the Surface Mining Control and Reclamation Act
of 1977 (SMCRA) established the Abandoned Mine Land (AML) reclamation
program; and
WHEREAS, the National Association of Abandoned Mine Land Programs
(NAAMLP) was established as a nonprofit corporation to accomplish the
objectives of its thirty member tribes and states to eliminate health
and safety hazards and reclaim land and water resources adversely
affected by past mining and left in an abandoned or inadequately
restored condition; and
WHEREAS, NAAMLP members administer AML programs funded and overseen
by the Office of Surface Mining Reclamation and Enforcement (OSM), U.S.
Department of the Interior; and
WHEREAS, pursuant to the cooperative federalism approach contained
in SMCRA, all tribes and states who are members of NAAMLP have
federally approved abandoned mine reclamation plans; and
WHEREAS, SMCRA, Title IV, establishes a reclamation fee on each ton
of coal mined in the United States to pay for abandoned mine land
reclamation; and
WHEREAS, SMCRA, Title IV, mandates that fifty percent (50%) of the
reclamation fees collected annually are designated as state/tribal
share funds to be returned to the states and tribes from which coal was
mined to pay for reclamation programs administered by the states and
tribes; and
WHEREAS, SMCRA Title IV also mandates that a minimum level of
funding should be provided to ensure effective state program
implementation; and
WHEREAS, Congress enacted amendments to SMCRA in 2006 to address,
among other things, funding for state and tribal programs and fee
collection to address existing and future AML reclamation; and
WHEREAS, the 2006 Amendments established new, strict criteria that
ensures states and tribes expend funds on high priority AML sites; and
WHEREAS, the proposed 2012 budget for the Office of Surface Mining
Reclamation and Enforcement within the U.S. Department of the Interior
would abandon the 50/50 state-federal partnership established under
SMCRA and renege on the funding formula under the 2006 amendments by,
among other things, eliminating mandatory funding for those states and
tribes who have certified the completion of their coal reclamation work
and adjusting the mechanism by which non-certified states receive their
mandatory funding through a competitive bidding process; and
WHEREAS, if statutory changes are approved by Congress as suggested
by the proposed FY 2012 budget for OSMRE, reclamation of abandoned mine
lands within certified states and tribes would halt; failing to fund
reclamation of abandoned mine lands in some states; minimum program
state funding would be usurped; the AML water supply replacement
program would be terminated, leaving coalfield citizens without potable
water; and the intent of Congress as contained in the 2006 amendments
to SMCRA and its 2006 Amendments would be undermined
NOW, THEREFORE:
BE IT RESOLVED BY THE NATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF ABANDONED MINE LAND
PROGRAMS THAT ITS MEMBER TRIBES AND STATES:
Opposes the legislative proposal terminating funding for
certified states and tribes and altering the receipt of
mandatory AML funding for non-certified states contained in the
FY 2012 budget proposal for the Office of Surface Mining
Reclamation and Enforcement and instead supports the AML
funding mechanism contained in current law.

ISSUED THIS 22nd DAY OF FEBRUARY, 2011

ATTEST:

Michael P. Garner
PRESIDENT, NAAMLP
______

Mr. Johnson. Thank you, Ms. Pineda. Mr. Lambert, Mr.
Lovett, regrettably, the lights are on. We have to run vote, so
at this time, the Committee stands in recess until votes are
over. That is approximately 25 minutes from now. Thank you for
your patience.
[Recess.]
Mr. Lamborn [presiding]. OK. The Subcommittee will come
back to order. Thank you for your patience. We did finish the
votes, and we should be in good shape for the rest of the time,
and I think we are now to Mr. Lambert, and I look forward to
hearing your testimony.

STATEMENT OF BRADLEY C. LAMBERT, DEPUTY DIRECTOR, VIRGINIA
DEPARTMENT OF MINES, MINERALS & ENERGY

Mr. Lambert. Thank you. My name is Butch Lambert, and I am
the Deputy Director of the Virginia Department of Mines,
Minerals and Energy, and I am appearing today on behalf of the
Interstate Mining Compact Commission to present views of the
Compact's member states concerning the Fiscal Year 2012 budget
request for the Office of Surface Mining. In its proposed
budget, OSM is requesting $60.3 million to fund Title V grants
to states and Indian tribes with the implementation of the
regulatory programs, a reduction of $11 million or 15 percent
below the Fiscal Year 2010 enacted and the Fiscal Year 2011 CR
levels.
In Fiscal Year 2010, Congress approved an additional $5.8
million increase for states Title V grants over the Fiscal Year
2009 enacted levels for a total of $71.3 million. For the first
time in many years, the amount appropriated for these
regulatory grants aligned with the demonstrated needs for the
states and thereby eliminating the ever-widening gap between
the states' requests and what they received. In the Fiscal Year
2012 budget, OSM has once again reversed the course and
essentially unraveled and undermined the progress made by
Congress in supporting state programs.
This comes precisely at the wrong time. There are states
that are still in the process of putting the recent
improvements funding to work in their programs through the
filling of vacant positions and the purchase of much-needed
equipment. We trust that the recent increase approved by
Congress will remain the new base of which we build our
programs into the future. In this regard, it should be kept in
mind that a 15-percent cut in Federal funding translates to an
additional 15-percent cut for overall program funding for many
states since these states can only match what they receive in
Federal money.
For instance, in Virginia should OSM reduction prevail, we
would be looking at a $1.2 million cut. OSM's solution to this
drastic cut for state regulatory programs comes in a way of an
unrealistic assumption that these states can simply increase
user fees in an effort to eliminate the de facto subsidy to the
coal industry. OSM's proposal is completely out of touch with
the realities associated with establishing and enhancing user
fees. IMCC's recent polling of its member states confirms that
it would be difficult, if not impossible, for most states to
accomplish this fete at all let alone in less than one year.
We strongly urge this Subcommittee to reject this approach,
mandate that OSM work through the complexities associated with
the future user-fee proposal in close cooperation with the
states and approve not less than $71 million for the state and
tribal Title V regulatory grants for Fiscal Year 2012. If
Congress seeks to restrain OSM's budget, we suggest that this
Subcommittee look seriously at the OSM proposal to increase its
own budget by $4 million and 25 FTE's for Federal oversight of
state programming. OSM justifies this increase based on its new
strategic direction, most of which in turn is based upon a June
2009 MOU between Interior, EPA and the Army Corps of Engineers.
However, beyond the MOU itself, OSM has never justified or
explained its rationale for proceeding in this way. In fact,
OSM's own annual oversight evaluation reports indicate that the
states are doing a commendable job in implementing their
programs. In our view, OSM has adequately accomplishing its
statutory oversight obligations with current Federal program
funding and any increase in workloads are likely to fall upon
the states, especially given the potential permitting
requirements growing out of the OSM's anticipated Stream
Protection Rule.
While not alluded to or fully addressed in the OSM budget
justification document, the states also have serious concerns
with several aspects of OSM's enhanced oversight initiative,
especially three recent adopted directives on annual oversight
procedures, corrective actions and the issuances of 10-day
notices. IMCC has submitted extensive comments on these
directives over the past year. I would like to submit a copy of
those comments for the record here today.
We are particularly concerned about the potential of
Federal actions to duplicate and/or second guess state
permitting decisions. Aside from the impact on limited state
and Federal resources, these actions undermine the principles
of primacy that underscore SMCRA and are likely to have
debilitating impacts on the state-Federal relationship
envisioned by the Act. As Federal courts have made it clear,
SMCRA's allocation of jurisdiction was careful and deliberate
and that Congress provided for mutually exclusive regulation
either by the Secretary or the states, but not by both.
Thank you for the opportunity to appear before this
Subcommittee today, and I will be happy to answer any questions
you may have.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Lambert follows:]

Statement of Bradley C. Lambert, Deputy Director, Virginia Department
of Mines, Minerals and Energy on Behalf of the Interstate Mining
Compact Commission

My name is Bradley C. Lambert and I serve as Deputy Director of the
Virginia Department of Mines, Minerals and Energy. I am appearing today
on behalf of the Interstate Mining Compact Commission (IMCC). I
appreciate the opportunity to present this statement to the
Subcommittee regarding the views of the Compact's 24 member states on
the Fiscal Year (FY) 2012 Budget Request for the Office of Surface
Mining Reclamation and Enforcement (OSM) within the U.S. Department of
the Interior. In its proposed budget, OSM is requesting $60.3 million
to fund Title V grants to states and Indian tribes for the
implementation of their regulatory programs, a reduction of $11 million
or 15% below the FY 2010 enacted/FY 2011 CR level. OSM also proposes to
cut discretionary spending for the Title IV abandoned mine land (AML)
program by approximately $6.8 million, including the elimination of
funding for the emergency program, and a reduction in mandatory AML
spending by $184 million pursuant to a legislative proposal to
eliminate all AML funding for certified states and tribes.
The Compact is comprised of 24 states that together produce some
95% of the Nation's coal, as well as important noncoal minerals. The
Compact's purposes are to advance the protection and restoration of
land, water and other resources affected by mining through the
encouragement of programs in each of the party states that will achieve
comparable results in protecting, conserving and improving the
usefulness of natural resources and to assist in achieving and
maintaining an efficient, productive and economically viable mining
industry.
OSM has projected an amount of $60.3 million for Title V grants to
states and tribes in FY 2012, an amount which is matched by the states
each year. These grants support the implementation of state and tribal
regulatory programs under the Surface Mining Control and Reclamation
Act (SMCRA) and as such are essential to the full and effective
operation of those programs.
In Fiscal Year 2010, Congress approved an additional $5.8 million
increase for state Title V grants over the FY 2009 enacted level, for a
total of $71.3 million. This same amount was approved for FY 2011. For
the first time in many years, the amount appropriated for these
regulatory grants aligned with the demonstrated needs of the states and
tribes. The states are greatly encouraged by the significant increases
in Title V funding approved by Congress over the past three fiscal
years. Even with mandated rescissions and the allocations for tribal
primacy programs, the states saw a $12 million increase for our
regulatory programs over FY 2007 levels. As we noted in our statement
on last year's budget, state Title V grants had been stagnant for over
12 years and the gap between the states' requests and what they
received was widening. This debilitating trend was compounding the
problems caused by inflation and uncontrollable costs, thus undermining
our efforts to realize needed program improvements and enhancements and
jeopardizing our efforts to minimize the potential adverse impacts of
coal extraction operations on people and the environment.
In its FY 2012 budget, OSM has once again attempted to reverse
course and essentially unravel and undermine the progress made by
Congress in supporting state programs with adequate funding. This comes
at precisely the wrong time. The states are still in the process of
putting the recent improvements in funding to work in their programs
through the filling of vacant positions and the purchase of much needed
equipment. As states prepare their future budgets, we trust that the
recent increases approved by Congress will remain the new base on which
we build our programs. Otherwise, we find ourselves backpedaling and
creating a situation where those who were just hired face layoffs and
purchases are canceled or delayed. Furthermore, a clear message from
Congress that reliable, consistent funding will continue into the
future will do much to stimulate support for these programs by state
legislatures and budget officers who each year, in the face of
difficult fiscal climates and constraints, are also dealing with the
challenge of matching federal grant dollars with state funds. In this
regard, it should be kept in mind that a 15% cut in federal funding
generally translates to an additional 15% cut for overall program
funding for many states, especially those without federal lands, since
these states can only match what they receive in federal money.
OSM's solution to the drastic cuts for state regulatory programs
comes in the way of an unrealistic assumption that the states can
simply increase user fees in an effort to ``eliminate a de facto
subsidy of the coal industry.'' No specifics on how the states are to
accomplish this far-reaching proposal are set forth, other than an
expectation that they will do so in the course of a single fiscal year.
OSM's proposal is completely out of touch with the realities associated
with establishing or enhancing user fees, especially given the need for
approvals by state legislatures. IMCC's recent polling of its member
states confirmed that, given the current fiscal and political
implications of such an initiative, it will be difficult, if not
impossible, for most states to accomplish this feat at all, let alone
in less than one year. OSM is well aware of this, and yet has every
intention of aggressively moving forward with a proposal that was
poorly conceived from its inception. We strongly urge the Subcommittee
to reject this approach and mandate that OSM work through the
complexities associated with any future user fees proposal in close
cooperation with the states and tribes before proposing cuts to federal
funding for state Title V grants.
At the same time that OSM is proposing significant cuts for state
programs, the agency is proposing sizeable increases for its own
program operations ($4 million) for federal oversight of state
programs, including an increase of 25 FTEs. OSM justifies this increase
based on its ``new strategic direction,'' i.e. expanded and enhanced
oversight of state regulatory programs and strengthened stream
protections to maintain the hydrologic balance of watersheds pursuant
to the June 2009 Memorandum of Understanding with the U.S. Army Corps
of Engineers and the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. However, as
we have articulated on numerous occasions over the past 18 months in
comments submitted to the agency, OSM has never fully explained or
justified the basis for these new directions. In fact, OSM's annual
oversight reports indicate that, in general, the states are doing a
commendable job of implementing their programs.
In making the case for its funding increase, OSM's budget
justification document contains vague references to the need for
improvement in approximate original contour (AOC) compliance and
reevaluation of bonding procedures in 10 states with respect to bond
adequacy. OSM also notes a marked increase in the number of potential
violations pursuant to enhanced federal oversight inspections during FY
2010. However, when placed in context, neither of these two
explanations justifies the significant increase in funding for federal
operations. Increasing the number of federal inspections can logically
be expected to generate more Ten-Day Notices, especially where state
regulatory authorities are not invited to accompany federal inspectors
(as required by OSM's own regulations). The oversight process can also
be expected to identify areas of potential program improvement,
especially where OSM has designated certain areas for more intensive,
nationwide review, as it did in FY 2010 with regard to AOC and bond
adequacy. Again, the overall performance of the states as detailed in
OSM's annual oversight reports demonstrates that the states are
implementing their programs effectively and in accordance with the
purposes and objectives of SMCRA.\1\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ While not alluded to or fully addressed in OSM's budget
justification document, there are myriad statutory, policy and legal
issues associated with several aspects of the agency's enhanced
oversight initiative, especially three recently adopted directives on
annual oversight procedures (REG-8), corrective actions (REG-23) and
Ten-Day Notices (INE-35). IMCC submitted extensive comments regarding
the issues associated with these directives and related oversight
actions (including federal inspections) on January 19, 2010, July 8,
2010 and January 7, 2011.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
In our view, this suggests that OSM is adequately accomplishing its
statutory oversight obligations with current federal program funding
and that any increased workloads are likely to fall upon the states,
which have primary responsibility for implementing appropriate
adjustments to their programs identified during federal oversight. In
this regard, we note that the federal courts have made it abundantly
clear that SMCRA's allocation of exclusive jurisdiction was ``careful
and deliberate'' and that Congress provided for ``mutually exclusive
regulation by either the Secretary or state, but not both.'' Bragg v.
West Virginia Coal Ass'n, 248 F. 3d 275, 293-4 (4th Cir. 2001), cert.
Denied, 534 U.S. 1113 (2002). While the courts have ruled consistently
on this matter, the question remains for Congress and the
Administration to determine, in light of deficit reduction and spending
cuts, how the limited amount of federal funding for the regulation of
surface coal mining and reclamation operations under SMCRA will be
directed--to OSM or the states. For all the above reasons, we urge
Congress to approve not less than $71 million for state and tribal
Title V regulatory grants, as fully documented in the states' and
tribes' estimates for actual program operating costs.\2\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ We are particularly concerned about recent OSM initiatives,
primarily by policy directive, to duplicate and/or second-guess state
permitting decisions through the reflexive use of ``Ten-Day Notices''
as part of increased federal oversight or through federal responses to
citizen complaints. Aside from the impact on limited state and federal
resources, these actions undermine the principles of primacy that
underscore SMCRA and are likely to have debilitating impacts on the
state-federal partnership envisioned by the Act.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
With regard to funding for state Title IV Abandoned Mine Land (AML)
program grants, Congressional action in 2006 to reauthorize Title IV of
SMCRA has significantly changed the method by which state reclamation
grants are funded. Beginning with FY 2008, state Title IV grants are
funded primarily by mandatory appropriations. As a result, the states
should have received a total of $498 million in FY 2012. Instead, OSM
has budgeted an amount of $313.8 million based on an ill-conceived
proposal to eliminate mandatory AML funding to states and tribes that
have been certified as completing their abandoned coal reclamation
programs. This $184.2 million reduction flies in the face of the
comprehensive restructuring of the AML program that was passed by
Congress in 2006, following over 10 years of Congressional debate and
hard fought compromise among the affected parties. In addition to the
elimination of funding for certified states and tribes, OSM is also
proposing to reform the distribution process for the remaining
reclamation funding to allocate available resources to the highest
priority coal AML sites through a competitive grant program, whereby an
Advisory Council will review and rank AML sites each year. While we
have not seen the details of the proposal, which will require
adjustments to SMCRA, it will clearly undermine the delicate balance of
interests and objectives achieved by the 2006 Amendments. It is also
inconsistent with many of the goals and objectives articulated by the
Administration concerning both jobs and environmental protection,
particularly stream quality. We urge the Congress to reject this
unjustified proposal, delete it from the budget and restore the full
mandatory funding amount of $498 million. A resolution adopted by IMCC
concerning these matters is attached. We also endorse the testimony of
the National Association of Abandoned Mine Land Programs (NAAMLP) which
goes into greater detail regarding the implications of OSM's
legislative proposal for the states.
We also urge Congress to approve continued funding for the AML
emergency program. In a continuing effort to ignore congressional
direction, OSM's budget would completely eliminate funding for state-
run emergency programs and also for federal emergency projects (in
those states that do not administer their own emergency programs). When
combined with the great uncertainty about the availability of remaining
carryover funds, it appears that the program has been decimated.
Funding the OSM emergency program should be a top priority for OSM's
discretionary spending. This funding has allowed the states and OSM to
address the unanticipated AML emergencies that inevitably occur each
year. In states that have federally-operated emergency programs, the
state AML programs are not structured or staffed to move quickly to
address these dangers and safeguard the coalfield citizens whose lives
and property are threatened by these unforeseen and often debilitating
events. And for minimum program states, emergency funding is critical
to preserve the limited resources available to them under the current
funding formula. We therefore request that Congress restore funding for
the AML emergency program in OSM's FY 2012 budget.
One of the more effective mechanisms for accomplishing AML
restoration work is through leveraging or matching other grant
programs, such as EPA's 319 program. Until FY 2009, language was always
included in OSM's appropriation that encouraged the use of these types
of matching funds, particularly for the purpose of environmental
restoration related to treatment or abatement of AMD from abandoned
mines. This is a perennial, and often expensive, problem, especially in
Appalachia. IMCC therefore requests the Committee to once again include
language in the FY 2012 appropriations bill that would allow the use of
AML funds for any required non-Federal share of the cost of projects by
the Federal government for AMD treatment or abatement.
We also urge the Committee to support funding for OSM's training
program, including moneys for state travel. These programs are central
to the effective implementation of state regulatory programs as they
provide necessary training and continuing education for state agency
personnel. In this regard, it should be noted that the states provide
nearly half of the instructors for OSM's training course and, through
IMCC, sponsor and staff benchmarking workshops on key regulatory
program topics. IMCC also urges the Committee to support funding for
TIPS, a program that directly benefits the states by providing critical
technical assistance. Finally, we support funding for the Watershed
Cooperative Agreements in the amount of $1.55 million.
Attached to our testimony today is a list of questions concerning
OSM's budget that we request be included in the record for the hearing.
The questions go into further detail concerning several aspects of the
budget that we believe should be answered before Congress approves
funding for the agency or considers advancing the legislative proposals
contained in the budget. Also attached to our testimony is a copy of
comments recently submitted to OSM concerning the agency's most recent
oversight directives, which we also request be included in the record
for this hearing. Those comments explain in greater depth the states'
concerns with OSM's enhanced oversight initiative, especially as it
impacts the exclusive jurisdiction of the states under SMCRA.
Thank you for the opportunity to present this statement. I would be
happy to answer any questions you may have or provide additional
information to the Subcommittee.
______

Questions re OSM's Proposed FY 2012 Budget

1.  What does OSM plan to do with the additional $3.8 million
that has been budgeted for ``enhanced federal oversight of
state regulatory programs''? How much of this will be
designated for the ongoing development of the stream protection
rule and accompanying EIS? What portion of this money is
actually a re-designation of FTEs from the federally-managed
AML programs to Title V program oversight?
2.  How do you justify an increase in money for federal
oversight while decreasing money for state Title V grants? What
is the demonstrated need for an additional 25 FTEs to perform
federal oversight of state programs? Will this not simply lead
to duplication of effort, second-guessing of state decision-
making, undermining of state primacy and wasted resources? If
OSM needs additional resources to implement the anticipated
stream protection rule, what about the states, who are
responsible for implementing the rule through permit issuance,
inspection and enforcement? Will OSM be attempting to recoup
any of this discretionary funding for oversight via permit fees
of its own? How will OSM allocate the reduced amount of funding
to the states under its proposed reduction of $11 million for
state Title V grants? To what extent will OSM continue to
support technical training and technical support programs for
the states, especially for things such as mine mapping,
software enhancements and travel?
3.  If pressed by Congress, how expeditiously does OSM intend
to push the states to recover more of their regulatory costs
from the coal industry through user fees? Has OSM undertaken a
full analysis of the administrative and rulemaking complexities
inherent in such an undertaking?
4.  OSM's newest AML legislative proposal (to eliminate
payments to certified states and tribes and to utilize a
competitive bidding process for the allocation of remaining AML
reclamation funds for non-certified states) is the third time
that the agency has put forth potential legislative adjustments
to the 2006 amendments to SMCRA in its proposed budgets. To
date, no legislative proposal has been drafted that we are
aware, much less shared with the states, tribes or Congress.
When can we expect to see a draft of this most recent
legislative proposal? At this point, there are many more
questions than answers about how this process will work. (See
attached list) Do you intend to seek input from the states and
tribes during the early drafting stages, especially given the
role that the states and tribes will play in the bidding/
selection process and the significant impact this will have on
current program administration? What is the basis for OSM's
proposal to essentially upend the carefully crafted legislative
resolution related to future AML program funding and AML
reclamation work approved by Congress in 2006? Has OSM thought
and worked through the implications for AML program management
and administration that would result from its legislative
proposal?
5.  Why has OSM chosen to advocate for a hardrock AML
reclamation fee to be collected by OSM but not distributed by
OSM? Why bring another federal agency (BLM) into the mix when
OSM has the greater expertise in this area?
Specific Questions re Cost Recovery/User Fees
As it did last year, OSM has once again requested an amount of $60
million for state Title V regulatory program grants in FY 2012, which
reflects an $11 million decrease. And while OSM does not dispute that
the states are in need of an amount far greater than this, the agency
has suggested once again that the states should be able to make up the
difference between what OSM has budgeted and what states actually need
by increasing cost recovery fees for services to the coal industry.
What exactly will it take to accomplish this task?
Assuming the states take on this task, will amendments to their
regulatory programs be required?
How long, in general, does it take OSM to approve a state program
amendment?
It is my understanding that the state of Alabama submitted a
program amendment to OSM last year to raise current permit fees and
authorize new, additional fees but to date OSM has still not approved
these amendments, resulting in lost fees of over $50,000 to the state.
If OSM is unable to approve requested state program amendments for
permit fee increases at this time, how does the agency expect to handle
mandated permit increases for all of the primacy states within a single
fiscal year?
If OSM is not expecting to pursue this initiative in fiscal year
2012, why include such a proposal in the budget until OSM has worked
out all of the details with the states in the first instance?
Speaking of which, what types of complexities is OSM anticipating
with its proposal at the state level? Many of the states have already
indicated to OSM that it will be next to impossible to advance a fee
increase proposal given the political and fiscal climate they are
facing.
OSM's solution seems to be that the agency will propose a rule to
require states to increase permit fees nationwide. Won't this still
require state program amendments to effectuate the federal rule, as
with all of OSM's rules? How does OSM envision accomplishing this if
the states are unable to do it on their own?
Even if a federal rulemaking requiring permit fee increase
nationwide were to succeed, how does OSM envision assuring that these
fees are returned to the states? Will OSM retain a portion of these
fees for administrative purposes?
Specific Questions re Federal Program Increases
At a hearing before the House Interior Subcommittee on March 10
regarding the agency's budget, OSM Director Pizarchik stated, in
response to a question from the Chairman about how he would
characterize the permitting process for mining in the United States,
that permitting is primarily a state responsibility under SCMRA and
that OSM provides technical assistance to the states. In OSM's written
testimony, the agency also notes that the states permit and regulate 97
percent of the Nation's coal production and that OSM provides technical
assistance, funding, training and technical tools to the states to
support their programs. And yet OSM proposes in its budget to cut
funding to the states by $11 million while increasing OSM's own federal
operations budget by nearly $4 million and 25 FTEs. How does OSM
reconcile these seemingly contradictory positions?
Director Pizarchik also spoke about the various permitting
enhancements that OSM and other federal agencies hope to accomplish
pursuant to the 2009 MOU between Interior, EPA and the Corps. While
supposedly focused on Appalachia, this effort is clearly aimed at all
of the states based on recent actions taken by OSM, EPA and others.
Assuming OSM succeeds in developing these national permitting
enhancements, who is responsible for implementing them?
Mr. Pizarchik also noted in his statement, and in his recent
testimony, that OSM needs additional resources to implement a new
``strategic direction'' growing out of the 2009 MOU, which will include
enhanced oversight, stream protections, coordinated permitting, and
increased transparency. Again, assuming a new stream protection rule is
put in place, who will be responsible for implementing the rule and
issuing permits? Who will be responsible for assuring that permitting
is indeed better coordinated?
OSM's budget justification document points out in more detail why
it believes additional federal resources will be needed based on its
recent federal oversight actions during FY 2010, which included
increased federal inspections and special oversight studies on
approximate original contour and bond adequacy. Was OSM not in fact
able to accomplish this enhanced oversight with its current resources?
If not, where were resources found wanting? How much of the strain on
the agency's resources was actually due to the stream protection
rulemaking and EIS process?
What is the justification for OSM's enhanced oversight initiatives
and hence its federal program increase? The states have been requesting
opportunities to meet with OSM and Interior management to better
understand the basis for these actions since last January but still do
not have definitive answers. In light of recent annual oversight
reports over the past five years which demonstrate high levels of state
performance, what is the basis for these new initiatives?
Something has to give here--no doubt. There is only so much money
that we can make available for the surface mining program under SMCRA.
Both Congress and the courts have made it clear that the states are to
exercise exclusive jurisdiction for the regulation of surface coal
mining operations pursuant to the primacy regime under the law. It begs
the questions of whether OSM has made the case for moving away from
supporting the states and instead beefing up the federal program.
Unless the agency can come up with a better, more detailed
justification for this realignment of resources, how can Congress
support its budget proposal?
Specific Questions re Stream Protection Rule
During OSM Director Pizarchik's testimony on March 10 before the
House Interior Appropriations Subcommittee, in response to a question
from Rep. Moran regarding what OSM would do if restrictions on its
funding were enacted as part of the Continuing Resolution for FY 2011,
Director Pizarchik stated that because OSM would be unable to expend
any of its funding on the development of the stream protection rule and
EIS, pollution of streams would continue and OSM would not be able to
utilize the new science and the newest technologies that are now
available to protect streams. Aside from the question of whether this
``new science'' has in fact been peer reviewed and proven, this
response intimates that there is no one on the front lines responsible
for protecting streams and assuring the quality of our Nation's water.
Does this imply that the states are not doing the job?
If OSM believes the states are not doing a good job, why have the
states consistently received positive annual reports indicating that
they are effectively administering their programs? And again, assuming
new requirements are put in place based on new science, will it not be
the states who are responsible for implementing these requirements
through the issuance of permits?
Does SMCRA allow mountaintop mining? Does SMCRA allow steep slope
mining? Were impacts to streams anticipated as a result of these
authorized mining techniques? Have states been complying with the law
and OSM's regulations as currently written? If these laws or rules are
changed, does OSM have any reason to doubt that the states will not
enforce the laws as written? If the answer to all of these questions is
``yes'', why does OSM envision the need for enhanced oversight and
increased federal resources? Will it not in fact be the states that
will require enhanced resources to comply with any adjustments to
current law, especially if expanded monitoring, permitting and lab
analyses are required?
Specific Questions re OSM Oversight Initiative
In response to a question by Rep. Hinchey at the March 10 budget
hearing by the House Interior Appropriations Subcommittee, OSM Director
Pizarchik stated that if OSM did not increase its oversight presence in
the coalfields through increased federal inspections, there could be
more violations and citizen complaints in the future. It appears that
the basis for his position is the fact that there was an increase in
the number of Ten-Day Notices issued by OSM in FY 2010. Was there not a
40% increase in the number of federal inspections over those conducted
in FY 2009? Would that not, in and of itself, explain the increase in
TDNs?
What percentage of federal inspections during FY 2010 resulted in
the issuance of TDNs when a state inspector did not accompany the
federal inspector? Don't OSM's regulations at 30 CFR 842.11(a)(1)
mandate joint inspections when requested by the state? Does OSM's
recent oversight directive (REG-8) acknowledge and incorporate this
rule?
OSM has recently finalized a Ten-Day Notice directive (INE-35) that
had previously been withdrawn in 2006 based on a decision by then
Assistant Secretary of the Interior Rebecca Watson. The basis for
terminating the previous directive was several court decisions that
clarified the respective roles of state and federal governments
pursuant to the primacy regime contained in SMCRA. The Secretary's
decision also focused on the inappropriate and unauthorized use of Ten-
Day Notices under SMCRA to second-guess state permitting decisions.
OSM's new TDN directive flies in the face of both this Secretarial
decision and federal court decisions. Does OSM have a new Secretarial
decision on this matter? If not, how can its recent action overrule
this prior decision? Has the Solicitor's office weighed in on this
matter? If so, does OSM have an opinion supporting the agency's new TDN
directive? Will OSM provide that to the Committee?
In light of limited funding for the implementation of SMCRA, how
does OSM justify the state and federal expenses that will necessarily
follow from reviewing and second-guessing state permitting decisions?
States have complained that responding to a single OSM TDN, especially
with respect to state permitting decisions, can require the investment
of 2--3 FTE's for upwards of a week. How do you justify this?

Questions and Concerns re the AML Legislative Proposal
in OSM's FY 2012 Budget

The Proposed Competitive Allocation Process

What is the potential for this new review and ranking
process to reduce expenditures and increase efficiency without
being counter-productive? Will it introduce an additional level
of bureaucracy and result in more time being spent formulating
proposals and less on actual AML reclamation? The present
funding formula, while not perfect, at least provides some
direction on which to base long term strategic planning and
efficient use of available funds. The closest analogy to what
OSM is proposing by way of its competitive allocation process
is the way BLM and the Forest Service currently allocate their
AML funds through competitive proposals to various state
offices and regions. Because of the uncertainties of funding,
neither agency has been able to develop significant in-house
expertise, but instead often rely on SMCRA-funded states like
MT, NM, UT and CO to do a good portion of their AML work. Why
would OSM want to duplicate a system that has proven
problematic for other agencies?

Who would be the ``other parties'' potentially
bidding on AML grant funds? Would this include federal agencies
such as BLM, FS, NPS, etc? If so, in many cases, those agencies
already rely on the states to conduct their reclamation work
and also determine priorities based on state input or guidance.

What do the state project managers and inspectors do
if a state does not win a competitive bid for AML funds? How
does a state gear up if it receives funding for more projects
than it can handle with present staffing? Each state and tribe
has different grant cycles. Unless all are brought into one
uniform cycle, how will everyone compete for the same dollars?
In this regard, how can the competitive allocation process and
the use of the Advisory Council be more efficient and simple
than what we already have in place?

How long will OSM fund a state's/tribe's
administrative costs if it does not successfully compete for a
construction grant, even though the state/tribe has eligible
high priority projects on AMLIS? How will OSM calculate
administrative grant funding levels, especially since salaries
and benefits for AML project managers and inspectors
predominantly derive from construction funds? Would funding
cover current staffing levels? If not, how will OSM determine
the funding criteria for administrative program grants?

How do the states and tribes handle emergency
projects under the legislative proposal? Must these projects
undergo review by the Advisory Council? Will there be special,
expedited procedures? If a state/tribe has to cut back on
staff, how does it manage emergencies when they arise? If
emergency programs do compete for AML funds, considerable time
and effort could be spent preparing these projects for review
by the Advisory Council rather than abating the immediate
hazard. Again, how can we be assured that emergencies will be
addressed expeditiously?

What ranking criteria will be used to determine the
priority of submitted AML project grant requests? The number of
people potentially affected? The current priority ranking on
AMLIS? How would the Council determine whether a burning gob
pile near a city presents a greater hazard than a surface mine
near a highway or an underground mine beneath a residential
area? Would the winning bid be the ``most convincing''
proposal? The one with the most signatures on a petition? The
one with the most influential legislative delegation? Will
AMLIS continue to serve as the primary mechanism for
identifying sites and their priority status?

If the current AML funding formula is scrapped, what
amount will be paid out to the non-certified AML states and
tribes over the remainder of the program? What does OSM mean by
the term ``remaining funds'' in its proposal? Is it only the
AML fees yet to be collected? What happens to the historic
share balances in the Fund, including those that were supposed
to be re-directed to the Fund based on an equivalent amount of
funding being paid to certified states and tribes each year?
Would the ``remaining funds'' include the unappropriated/prior
balance amounts that have not yet been paid out over the seven-
year installment period? What about the amounts due and owing
to certified states and tribes that were phased in during FY
2009--2011?

Has anyone alleged or confirmed that the states/
tribes are NOT already addressing the highest priority sites
for reclamation within the context of the current AML program
structure under to the 2006 Amendments? Where have the 2006
Amendments faltered in terms of high priority sites being
addressed as envisioned by Congress? What would remain
unchanged in the 2006 Amendments under OSM's proposal?
The Nature and Purpose of the Advisory Council

Who would be on the AML Advisory Council and how
could they collectively have better decision-making knowledge
about hazardous AML sites than the state and tribal project
managers and administrators who work with these sites on a
daily basis?

What will be the criteria to serve on the Advisory
Council? Will the Federal Advisory Committee Act (FACA)
requirements apply to the formation and deliberations of the
Council? How long does OSM envision it will take to establish
the Council and when will it become operational?

Will the Advisory Council be providing
recommendations to OSM or will OSM make all final decisions?
Will these decisions by appealable? If so, to who? Does OSM
envision needing to develop internal guidance for its own
review process? If so, how long will it potentially take from
Advisory Council review and recommendation to final OSM
decision in order to complete the grant process so a state can
begin a project?

What degree of detail will be required in order to
review and approve competitive grant applications? Will the
Council review each project? What type of time constraints will
be placed on their review?

Will the Advisory Council consider partial grants for
projects that may exceed the allocation for a single year?
Would minimum program states be authorized to apply for a grant
that would exceed $3 million?

Will grant applications be based on an individual
project or will the grant be based on a project year? How will
cost overruns be handled?
Planning for AML Work

One of the greatest benefits of reauthorization under
the 2006 Amendments to SMCRA was the predictability of funding
through the end of the AML program. Because state and tribes
were provided with hypothetical funding levels from OSM (which
to date have proven to be quite accurate), long-term project
planning, along with the establishment of appropriate staffing
levels and project assignments, could be made more accurately
and efficiently. How can states/tribes plan for future projects
given the uncertainty associated with having to annually bid
for AML funds? NEPA compliance issues alone can take years of
planning. One state recently asked its State Historic
Preservation Office for initial consultation regarding project
sites that may be reclaimed over the next five years. This
process will also have significant impacts on those states that
utilize multi-year construction contracts that are paid for
with annual AML grants.

State and tribal AML projects are often planned 18
months to two years in advance of actually receiving
construction funds, based on anticipated funding under the 2006
Amendments. During that time, states and tribes are performing
environmental assessments, conducting archeology reviews,
completing real estate work and doing NEPA analyses. There
could be considerable effort and money wasted if a project does
not get approved during the competitive allocation process.

At what point does a State or Tribe seek approval
from the advisory council? Considerable investigation must take
place prior to developing most projects, whether they be acid
mine drainage projects or health and safety projects. How much
time should be spent in design prior to proceeding to the
Council? How accurate must a cost estimate be prior to taking a
project before the Council? The greater the accuracy, the
greater the design time expended, possibly for a project that
will be rejected.

State and tribes often seek and obtain considerable
matching funds from watershed groups, which take considerable
lead time to acquire. It will be difficult to commit to
partners if we don't know what level of funding, if any, will
be made available.

Several states have committed significant amounts of
money to waterline projects across the coalfields. Local
governmental entities have started designs and applied for
additional funds from other agencies to match AML funds in
order to make these projects a reality. Ending all AML funding
for these projects (assuming they are not considered ``high
priority'') could have significant consequences for local
communities. Our understanding is that these projects were
excluded under the 2006 Amendments from the priority scheme
contained in section 403(a) of SMCRA.

Does OSM's proposal allow acid mine drainage (AMD)
projects to be undertaken? Can these be designated as high
priority? (Our understanding is that those AMD projects
undertaken pursuant to the ``AMD set-aside program'' are not
subject to the priority scheme under Section 403(a) and that
those AMD projects done ``in conjunction with'' a priority 1 or
2 project are considered ``high priority''.) How do states
handle ongoing engineering, operating and maintenance costs for
existing AMD treatment systems? As the Administration works
diligently to develop a new rule to protect stream nationwide,
why would it advance a proposal to essentially halt the cleanup
of streams funded by the AML program?
Overarching Concerns

Given the original design of SMCRA by its framers
with regard to the allocation of AML funds to those states who
first agree to implement Title V regulatory programs for active
mining operations, to what extent can we expect that states
will continue to implement and fund their Title V programs if
Title IV funding is drastically cut or eliminated under the
proposal? Furthermore, since states and tribes will not know
what level of staffing to maintain from year to year under the
proposal, who would desire to work for a program that is in a
constant state of flux?

The SMCRA 2006 Amendments were the result of roughly
ten years of negotiations, discussions, and debates in
Congress. Since the legislative process to enact these changes
could take years, why didn't OSM begin with the legislation and
then follow with the budget proposal? Why weren't the states/
tribes or the NAAMLP included in discussions that led to this
budget proposal?

As OSM develops the legislative proposal for a
competitive bidding process, the agency should consider the
impacts on minimum programs and consider maintaining the
minimum allocation of $3 million for minimum program states.

What type of state AML plan amendments does OSM
foresee as a result of this new process?
Proposed Elimination of Funding for AML Emergencies

While amendments to Title IV of SMCRA in 2006 (P.L.
109-432) adjusted several provisions of the Act, no changes
were made to OSM's emergency powers in Section 410. Quite to
the contrary, Section 402(g)(1)(D)(2) states that the Secretary
shall ensure ``strict compliance'' with regard to the states'
and tribes' use of non-emergency grant funds for the priorities
listed in Section 403(a), none of which include emergencies.
The funding for the emergency program comes from the
Secretary's discretionary share, pursuant to Section 402(g)(3)
of the Act. This share currently stands at $416 million. OSM's
proposed elimination of funding for the emergency program will
result in the shift of approximately $20 million annually that
will have to be absorbed by the states. This is money that
cannot be spent on high priority AML work (as required by
SMCRA) and will require the realignment of state AML program
operations in terms of personnel, project design and
development, and construction capabilities. In most cases,
depending on the nature and extent of an emergency project, it
could preclude a state's ability to undertake any other AML
work during the grant year (and even following years),
especially for minimum program states. How does OSM envision
states and tribes being able to meet their statutory
responsibility to address high priority AML sites in light of
the proposed elimination of federal funding for AML
emergencies? How does OSM reconcile this proposal with the
intentions of Congress expressed in the 2006 amendments to move
more money out of the AML Fund sooner to address the backlog of
AML problems that continue to linger? If Congress were to
approve the elimination of funding for AML emergencies (which
in our view would require an amendment of SMCRA to accomplish,
not just a stroke of the budget pen), what type of transition
protocol does OSM envision putting in place to accomplish this
significant shift in responsibilities from the federal
government to the states?
Proposed Elimination of Funding to Certified States and Tribes

From what we can ascertain, OSM proposes to eliminate
all payments to certified states and tribes--in lieu of funds;
prior balance replacement funds; and monies that are due and
owing in FY 2018 and 2019 from the phase-in during the past two
fiscal years. Is this accurate? OSM says nothing of what the
impact will be on non-certified states as a result of
eliminating these payments to certified states and tribes--
especially the equivalent payments that would otherwise be made
to the historic production share that directly relate to ``in
lieu of'' payments to certified states and tribes under section
411(h)(4). Previously, OSM has stated that ``the amounts that
would have been allocated to certified states and tribes under
section 402(g)(1) of SMCRA will be transferred to the
historical production allocation on an annual bases to the
extent that those states and tribes receive in lieu payments
from the Treasury (through the Secretary of the Interior) under
section 402(i) and 411(h)(2) of SMCRA.'' By OSM's own admission
in its FY 2012 proposed budget, this will amount to $1.2
billion over ten years. If the in lieu payments are not made
(as proposed), how can the transfer to historic production
occur? The result, of course, would be a drastic impact on the
historic production allocation otherwise available to
uncertified states. Will OSM address this matter in its
proposed legislation? If so, how?

OSM recognizes (as does the Interior Department) that
a ``legislative proposal'' will be required in support of its
``assumption'' in the FY 2012 budget concerning the proposed
end to mandatory payments to certified states and tribes. More
specifically, OSM states the following on page 138 of its
Budget Justification Document: ``The budget proposes to
terminate the unrestricted payments to certified States and
Tribes. Certified States and Tribes have already completed
their coal reclamation projects [this is NOT true in all cases]
and now use their AML payments for general revenue [also NOT
true--a majority of these moneys are targeted as either
hardrock AML reclamation projects or at impacts associated with
coal development.] These payments rarely contribute to the
reclamation of abandoned coal mine lands [Congress clarified in
2006 that they didn't have to be]. Terminating these payments
will save the taxpayer $1.2 billion over the next decade.'' The
attempt by OSM to develop a legislative proposal in both FY
2010 and FY 2011 never materialized to the point that a formal
proposal was ever shared with Congress, much less the tribes or
the states. OSM has a fiduciary duty to consult with the Indian
tribes regarding any proposed legislation that potentially
impacts them given the Interior Department's trust
responsibilities for Native American communities. As a partner
with the states in the reclamation of abandoned mine lands, OSM
should also share any proposal with the states. Since we are
uncertain exactly what OSM and Interior have in mind with
respect to the legislative proposal, especially given the
language cited above, it is essential that the states and
tribes be brought into the legislative development process as
soon as possible. At least one draft proposal that we saw went
much further than simply eliminating payments to certified
states and tribes, and addressed such issues as: providing some
baseline funding for certified states and tribes; immediately
transferring unappropriated state and tribal share balances for
certified states and tribes into the historic coal production
account; ensuring that all future payments to certified states
and tribes are transferred to historic coal; clarifying the
``adjacent to'' provision in Section 403(a); modifying the ``in
conjunction with'' provision in Section 402(g)(7); clarifying
how uncertified states may use the various types of AML funds;
and modifying the certification standards in section 411(a).
Some of these were encouraging; others were very troubling. How
and when will OSM bring the states and tribes into the
legislative development process?

Has OSM considered the fiscal and programmatic
impacts that could result if the certified states and tribes,
who no longer receive AML monies, choose to return their Title
V regulatory programs to OSM (especially given the severe
reductions being proposed for FY 2012 in Title V grants)?

Finally, how do the cuts in the Title IV program line
up with the Administration's other economic, fiscal and
environmental objectives as articulated in the economic
stimulus plans and the jobs bills that have considered by
Congress? These objectives include environmental stewardship,
cleaning up abandoned mines (coal and noncoal) nationwide,
creating green jobs, pumping dollars into local communities,
putting money to work on the ground in an expeditious manner,
sustainable development, infrastructure improvements,
alternative energy projects, protecting public health and
safety, and improving the environment. It seems to us that
there is a serious disconnect here and we remain mystified as
to how these laudable objectives and OSM's budget proposal can
be reconciled.
______

Mr. Lamborn. Thank you for your testimony, and now if we
could hear from our next witness, Mr. Lovett I believe? Thank
you.

STATEMENT OF JOE LOVETT, DIRECTOR, APPALACHIAN CENTER FOR THE
ECONOMY AND THE ENVIRONMENT

Mr. Lovett. Thank you, and thank you for the opportunity to
testify here today. My name is Joe Lovett, and I am Executive
Director of the Appalachian Center for the Economy and the
Environment, a non-profit law and policy center located in West
Virginia. It is important for Congress to provide adequate for
Federal agencies like the Office of Surface Mining to enforce
the laws designed to protect the people and the environment
they depend on. Yet, without adequate oversight from Congress,
the Agencies will not do their jobs. This is particularly true
I think of OSM.
Since at least 2001, OSM has refused to enforce the Surface
Mining Act. The failure of OSM to carry out its duties has had
devastating impacts on Appalachia. Appalachian coal is cheap
because OSM ignores its duty to enforce SMCRA and it allows the
coal industry to pass its costs onto its workers, communities,
local and state economies and the environment. The mining
industry naturally takes advantage of the Federal regulator's
failure to enforce the law, and one of the worse consequences
of OSM's disregard for the law is the prevalence of mountaintop
removal mines in Central Appalachian.
Mountaintop removal mines are large strip mines with
attendant valley fills, and they have already destroyed many
hundreds of miles of streams in my region. Valley fills are
just large waste disposal areas created when mining companies
blow up mountains, so in my region, mining companies are
engaged every day in blowing up the mountains in my region and
filling the streams with the waste that comes from the blowing
the mountains up.
The coal-rich mountains of Central Appalachia are home to
generations-old communities and contain beautiful hollows
through which thousands of pristine and ecologically rich
mountain streams flow. The forests in our region are the most
diverse and productive, temperate hardwood forests in the
world. Yet, they are being laid to waste by the mining
industry. Though OSM is supposed to protect our environment and
our communities, it is not doing so. Valley fills are strongly
associated with violations of water quality standards and loss
of stream uses.
EPA recently stated that increasing levels of conductivity
that result from the valley fills have significant adverse
effects on biological communities in the streams. A recent EPA
study found that nine out of every 10 streams downstream from
surface mining operations are impaired and that they therefor
violate the Clean Water Act and also SMCRA. OSM's waste of
money appropriated by Congress, as well as illustrated in its
ongoing efforts to promulgate a new buffer zone rule, OSM
promulgated the Stream Buffer Zone Rule originally under
President Reagan to carry out the Congressional mandate to
protect the hydrologic balance of waterways in coal mining
regions.
The need for strong oversight by Congress is made even
clearer because of the way OSM has handled the Stream Buffer
Zone Rule over the years, and unfortunately, these problems
have continued during the Obama Administration. Until 2008, the
Buffer Zone Rule Protected intermittent and perennial streams
from incursions by mining. However, the last Administration,
the Bush Administration, rescinded the Reagan rule and replaced
it with a rule that provided really no protection for our
streams. OSM is engaged in an activity of replacing that rule
yet again.
However, I think the Subcommittee has heard and there has
been other testimony that EPA is bungling its rulemaking. In
fact, the rulemaking has become a fiasco, and I agree very
little with Mr. Kitts, but I think we are in agreement that
OSM's current rulemaking will lead to no good for anyone and in
fact is a waste of money. The present Administration is in the
process of promulgating this rule and is conducting an
environmental impact study, but I am not optimistic that it
will actually accomplish anything.
OSM appears once again to be failing in its duty to enforce
the law or protect our streams. Indeed, only the U.S. EPA, one
of the three Federal agencies responsible for regulating
mining, has taken any meaningful action to protect our streams
as OSM is supposed to do. I hope this Committee will use the
budget process to take action, to compel OSM to enforce SMCRA
rather than allow it to continue squander money and time on a
bungled rulemaking. Thank you for your time.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Lovett follows:]

Statement of Joe Lovett, Executive Director,
Appalachian Center for the Economy and Environment

Introduction
Good morning. Thank you for the opportunity to testify today. My
name is Joe Lovett and I am the Executive Director of the Appalachian
Center for the Economy and the Environment, a non-profit law and policy
center located in Lewisburg, West Virginia. I am also a lawyer who has
been attempting for over a decade to enforce surface coal mining and
other environmental laws that federal and state regulators refuse to
enforce in Appalachia.
From its inception in 2001, the Appalachian Center has been at the
forefront of the battle to end the abuses associated with the
devastating method of coal mining known as mountaintop removal. The
Center serves low-income citizens, generations-old communities, and
local and grassroots groups of central Appalachia.
It is important for the Congress to provide adequate funding for
federal agencies like the Office of Surface Mining Reclamation and
Enforcement (``OSM'') to enforce the laws designed to protect people
and the environment they depend upon from unacceptable harm caused by
surface coal mining. Yet without adequate oversight from Congress--and
due to a lack of political will within agencies like OSM to do their
job--no amount of money will achieve the goals of Congress.
Accordingly, real oversight by Congress is needed to ensure OSM uses
the money appropriated to the agency to enforce the law and do its job
to protect streams and mining communities.
Further, money provided by OSM to the state agencies in states in
which the Center works (West Virginia, Kentucky and Virginia) is too
often spent not on protecting the environment and the communities in
coal mining communities, but rather on protecting coal operators from
enforcement. For example, the cabinet secretary of West Virginia's
Department of Environmental Protection, Randy Huffman, recently sued
the United States Environmental Protection Agency for trying to raise
the level of protection given to streams in the region. This action was
taken to protect the coal industry from EPA and citizen enforcement of
environmental laws, including SMCRA. I would, therefore, suggest that
State agencies that are unwilling to enforce environmental laws should
not continue to be provided with operating funds from OSM.
In the abstract, the Surface Mining Control and Reclamation Act
(``SMCRA'') is an imperfect but useful law. Since at least 2001,
however, the Office of Surface Mining Reclamation and Enforcement has
refused to enforce the Act. The failure of OSM to carry out its duties
has had devastating impacts on Appalachia. Appalachian coal is
``cheap'' because OSM ignores its duty to enforce SMCRA and allows the
coal industry to pass its costs onto workers, communities, local and
state economies, and the environment. The mining industry naturally
takes advantage of federal regulators' failure to enforce the law. One
of the worst consequences of OSM's disregard for the law is the
prevalence of mountaintop removal mines, large strip mines with
attendant valley fills that have already destroyed 2000 miles of
streams in my region.
The coal-rich mountains of central Appalachia are home to
generations-old communities and contain beautiful hollows through which
thousands of pristine and ecologically rich mountain streams flow.
Mountaintop removal mining carelessly lays waste to our mountain
environment and communities. The deforestation is not only an
ecological loss, but a permanent blow to a sustainable forest economy
in a region in desperate need of long-term economic development.
Mountaintop removal has already transformed huge expanses of one of the
oldest mountain ranges in the world into a moonscape of barren plateaus
and rubble.
Mountaintop Removal Coal Mining
To show the need for strong oversight of OSM, I'd like to give the
Subcommittee some background on how devastating the particular mining
practice of mountaintop removal mining is in Appalachia and how little
the OSM has done to try to protect our waters or local communities from
these impacts, as they are required to do by law.
Disregarding human and environmental costs, mountaintop removal
coal mining as currently practiced in Appalachia eradicates forests,
razes mountains, fills streams and valleys, poisons air and water, and
destroys local residents' lives. Toxic mine pollution contaminates
streams and groundwater; hunting and fishing grounds are destroyed.
Because the large-scale deforestation integral to mountaintop removal
takes away natural flood protections, formerly manageable storms
frequently inundate and demolish downstream homes. The toll on
coalfield communities is tremendous, and for this reason, I joined with
other citizen groups in my region to petition EPA to take account of
the environmental injustice of this practice; other agencies, including
the OSM, also have the obligation to consider the human toll taken by
mountaintop removal on these communities. (See attachment 1.)
From 1985 to 2005 over 7000 valley fills were authorized in central
Appalachia for mountaintop removal and other strip mining operations.
This has led to the destruction of over 1700 miles of Appalachian
streams. Past, present, and future mining in Appalachia may
cumulatively impact 1.4 million acres. The destruction of these nearly
1.5 million acres of forest is profound and permanent Mountaintop
mining causes ``fundamental changes to the terrestrial environment,''
and ``significantly affect[s] the landscape mosaic,'' with post-mining
conditions ``drastically different'' from pre-mining conditions.
Valley fills are strongly associated with violations of water
quality standards and loss of stream uses. EPA in its 404(c) veto of
the Spruce No. 1 permit in West Virginia stated that increasing levels
of conductivity have ``significant adverse effects'' on biological
communities in streams. EPA's April 1, 2010 guidance on water pollution
downstream from mountaintop removal sites further outlines significant
water quality impacts from surface mining operation. ``A recent EPA
study found that nine out of every 10 streams downstream from surface
mining operations were impaired based on a genus-level assessment of
aquatic life. Another federal study found elevated levels of highly
toxic and bioaccumulative selenium in streams downstream from valley
fills. These impairments are linked to contamination of surface water
supplies and resulting health concerns, as well as widespread impacts
to stream life in downstream rivers and streams. Further, the estimated
scale of deforestation from existing Appalachian surface mining
operations is equivalent in size to the state of Delaware. Appalachian
deforestation has been linked to significant changes in aquatic
communities as well as to modified storm runoff regimes, accelerated
sediment and nutrient transport, reduced organic matter inputs, shifts
in the stream's energy base, and altered thermal regimes. Such impacts
have placed further stresses on water quality and the ecological
viability of watersheds. A 2008 seminal EPA study found that
mountaintop removal mining is strongly related to downstream biological
impairment.
The Surface Mining Control and Reclamation Act makes clear that the
Clean Water Act and other applicable laws take supremacy over any
provision in SMCRA:
``Nothing in this Act shall be construed as superseding,
amending, modifying, or repealing...the National Environmental
Policy Act of 1969 (42 U.S.C. 4321-47), or any of the following
Acts or with any rule or regulation promulgated thereunder,
including...(3) [the Clean Water Act], the State laws enacted
pursuant thereto, or other Federal laws relating to
preservation of water quality.'' 30 U.S.C. Sec. 1292. For the
same reason, that same Mining Act gives EPA the ability to
refuse to concur in any proposed regulation from OSM.
Despite all of these impacts, OSM is not enforcing SMCRA in the
region. SMCRA requires OSM and state agencies to prevent material
damage to the hydrologic balance. Both science and common sense show
that the hydrologic balance of our region is being decimated
mountaintop removal. Congress continues to direct funds to OSM to
enforce the SMCRA, but the agency does not carry out its duties to
protect central Appalachia. In fact, the environmental harm occurring
in our region today dwarfs the harm that was occurring when the Act was
passed in 1977.
Environmental Impact Statement on Mountaintop Removal
Because of litigation that I brought in 1998, a programmatic
Environmental Impact Statement on mountaintop removal was performed by
EPA, the Army Corps of Engineers and OSM.
The EIS concluded that mining could impact 244 terrestrial species,
including, for example, 1.2 billion individual salamanders, and that
the loss of the genetic diversity of these affected species ``would
have a disproportionately large impact on the total aquatic genetic
diversity of the nation.'' The EIS also observed that valley fills are
strongly associated with violations of water quality standards for
selenium, a toxic metal that bioaccumulates in aquatic life. All 66
selenium violations identified in the EIS were downstream from valley
fills, and no other tested sites had selenium violations.
OSM's response to these devastating conclusions was to further
weaken its enforcement of the Act in Appalachia.
In 2001 and 2002, the federal agencies responsible for regulating
mountaintop removal weakened the EIS and did not proceed with necessary
scientific studies when they realized that the science was showing that
mountaintop removal could not be practiced without devastating the
environment and economy of our region. The agencies simply halted the
economic study that was crucial to the EIS when it became apparent that
the results were not what OSM wanted them to be.
In sum, the EIS was supposed to demonstrate the environmental and
economic impacts of large scale strip mining on Appalachia and propose
ways to protect the environment and mitigate the impacts of mining on
the region. In spite of the fact that the environmental studies that
were performed all showed significant harm to the environment, OSM
guided the other agencies involved to make permits easier for mining
operators to receive. OSM ignored the science and turned the EIS on its
head.
Because of OSM's role in this process, we still desperately need an
adequate and impartial EIS to be performed to demonstrate the far
reaching impacts this form of mining is having on the Appalachian
region.
Stream Buffer Zone
One of the most important provisions of SMCRA requires that no
mines be permitted unless they prevent material damage to the
hydrologic balance off site and minimize disturbance on site. OSM
promulgated the stream buffer zone rule under President Reagan in 1983
to carry out the Congressional mandate to protect the hydrologic
balance of waterways in the coal mining regions.
The need for strong oversight by Congress is made even clearer
because of the way OSM has handled the Stream Buffer Zone rule over the
years--and unfortunately, these problems have continued during the
Obama Administration.
Until 2008, the buffer zone rule, 30 C.F.R. 816.57, stated that no
land within 100 feet of a perennial stream or an intermittent stream
may be disturbed by surface mining unless the regulatory authority
specifically authorizes surface mining activities closer to, or
through, such a stream. The regulatory authority may authorize such
activities only upon finding that surface mining activities will not
cause or contribute to the violation of applicable State or Federal
water quality standards, and will not adversely affect the water
quantity and quality or other environmental resources of the stream. On
its face, this rule prohibited valley fills in intermittent and
perennial streams and, in 1999, a federal judge in West Virginia agreed
that this is what the rule means. That decision was reversed on appeal
for purely procedural reasons--the Court of Appeals did not reach the
merits.
To protect the coal industry, OSM utterly failed to enforce this
law and instead as a last minute give away to the coal industry, the
previous administration changed the Stream Buffer Zone rule to remove
the ``buffer'' and expressly allow coal companies to dump their wastes
right into streams. It is absurd to allow, as OSM has, more than 2000
miles of mountain streams to be permanently buried beneath mining waste
and still claim to be protecting the hydrologic balance. Rather than
weakening the rule to accommodate the mining industry, a responsible
agency would force the industry to conform to the law. Yet the exact
opposite has occurred.
The present administration has pledged to conduct and Environmental
Impact Statement on this regulation and to propose a revised rule, but
I am not optimistic that it will actually accomplish anything, despite
the fact that OSM is spending several million dollars on the study.
In 2009, it appeared that the Secretary of Interior and OSM might
correct the rules and start protecting streams again. In the spring of
2009, the Secretary of the Interior asked a court to vacate the 2008
midnight rule, recognizing that it was unlawful and needed to be
removed.
In June 11, 2009, the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, the U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency, and the U.S. Department of Interior
issued a joint Memorandum of Understanding to address the environmental
impacts of surface mining in the Appalachian states. In this Agreement,
OSM and the other agencies recognized that:
``The mountains of Appalachia possess unique biological
diversity, forests, and freshwater streams that historically
have sustained rich and vibrant American
communities....[Surface mining] often stresses the natural
environment and impacts the health and welfare of surrounding
human communities. Streams once used for swimming, fishing, and
drinking water have been adversely impacted, and groundwater
resources used for drinking water have been contaminated. Some
forest lands that sustain water quality and habitat and
contribute to the Appalachian way of life have been fragmented
or lost.'' June 2009 MOU at 1.
The agencies jointly announced an interagency plan that said it was
``designed to significantly reduce the harmful environmental
consequences of Appalachian surface coal mining operations, while
ensuring that future mining remains consistent with federal law.'' Id.
As part of this plan, Interior specifically promised that OSM would
``issue guidance clarifying the application of the 1983 stream buffer
zone provisions to further reduce adverse stream impacts.'' Id. at 3.
This statement was widely interpreted as a decision finally to start
enforcing the 1983 rule, and finally start protecting Appalachian
streams.
Unfortunately, OSM appears to be failing again in its duty to
enforce the law or protect streams. Indeed, only the U.S. EPA, of the
three federal agencies responsible for regulating mining in the region,
has taken meaningful action to protect our streams or help local
communities avoid the environmental impacts of mountaintop removal
mining.
OSM's proposed rulemaking to replace the buffer zone rule is
shaping up to be an expensive fiasco. Here is what has happened so far
with OSM \1\:
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ http://www.osmre.gov/topic/StreamProtection/
StreamProtectionOverview.shtm
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
In November 2009, OSM issued an Advance Notice of Proposed
Rulemaking in November 2009 that included problematic statements about
the 2008 rule and the 1983 stream buffer zone rule. Then, in April
2010, OSM published a Notice of Intent to complete an environmental
impact statement for its new rule. At the same time, OSM also publicly
announced that it had agreed to propose a new rule ``in early 2011''
and would finalize it ``in mid-2012.'' It also stated that ``[a]s we
move forward, we are talking with citizen groups, conservationists,
coal industry representatives, state regulators, and others to seek
their input in order to write a better rule that will be more
protective of streams affected by mining.''
In February, the draft environmental impact statement (``DEIS'')
and OSM's proposed rule were both leaked to the public, although
reports indicated the drafts may have been leaked to industry earlier.
OSM then stated publicly that there were significant problems with the
draft environmental impact statement in progress for the new rule, and
that information contained in the proposed draft was not credible.
Then, on March 31, 2011, OSM announced that was terminating the
contract with the company preparing the DEIS.
OSM's rulemaking appears to be in complete disarray, and OSM has
yet to fully disclose the reasons it has encountered these obstacles,
how the draft of the DEIS got leaked to industry and the press, how the
draft already identified a preferred alternative under NEPA when all of
the work done to date has been discredited, or why they waited so long
to even acknowledge that it has encountered obstacles. We currently do
not know when the OSM will complete its work on the DEIS or draft rule,
but it is already many months behind its promised deadlines for
revising the rule.
Meanwhile, mountaintop removal continues to devastate Appalachia
and mining permits continue to be issued by the states; OSM does
nothing to prevent their issuance. Both the leaked draft environmental
impact statement and draft proposed rule suggest that OSM's process is
not following important legal requirements and will not fully protect
streams.
The draft EIS is a useless document. It has a section on
environmental impacts that does not recognize the basic science showing
the harm that occurs when mining waste permanently buries American
waterways. Both the environmental and economic analysis are incomplete,
inaccurate, and ignore the state of the art science that other
agencies, including EPA, are already using. A comparison between the
Spruce No. 1 Mine Veto, which includes an environmental analysis of
just one mine, reveals the inadequacies of OSM's work. (See attachment
2.)
The draft EIS does not even reach the level of the 2003 draft
programmatic EIS or final 2005 EIS that the prior Administration
issued. Apparently, OSM now recognizes how problematic the draft EIS is
and has ended the contract with its contractor and distanced itself
from the draft EIS. According to the Wall Street Journal on March 31,
2011,: Interior Deputy Secretary David Hayes told a House
Appropriations Subcommittee ``that Interior was unhappy'' with the work
of the contractor chosen to create the draft EIS.
The Appalachian region is historically one of the poorest in the
nation, particularly because the mining industry has cut jobs in order
to increase its profit at the expense of the environment and the law.
The law requires protection of waters, and policymakers need valid
economic data to assist communities transition from man economy based
on mountaintop removal to less harmful forms of mining and a
sustainable economy. As a presidential candidate, Mr. Obama expressed
``serious concerns about the environmental implications'' of
mountaintop mining,'' saying: ``We have to find more environmentally
sound ways of mining coal than simply blowing the tops off mountains.''
It is time for OSM to help make the President's commitment a reality.
Cumulative Hydrologic Impacts
OSM is also charged with protecting the cumulative hydrological
integrity of the mining region. Again, OSM utterly fails to discharge
its duty to assure that states are performing adequate cumulative
hydrological impact analyses as the Act requires. For example, more
than11.5 percent of the land area in the region encompassing eastern
Kentucky, southern West Virginia, western Virginia, and areas of
eastern Tennessee is being impacted by mountaintop removal. As a result
of this destruction of headwater streams, mountaintop removal mines
cumulatively devastate aquatic ecosystem. Recent studies, peer-
reviewed, support this conclusion. (See attachment 3.) OSM has not
attempted to analyze and minimize the environmental harm of past,
present, and reasonably foreseeable future surface mining operations in
the Appalachian. These impacts include total elimination of all aquatic
life in buried streams, negative impacts on the proper functioning of
aquatic ecosystems, including fisheries located downstream of
mountaintop removal mining operations, and impairment of the nutrient
cycling function of headwater streams.
For example, in the Coal River watershed in West Virginia, existing
and pending surface mining permits cover 12.8 % of watershed. In the
Laurel Creek watershed Coal River, existing and pending surface mining
permits cover 28.6 % of the watershed. Surface mining permit including
valley fills cover 14.5% of first order streams and 12 % of all streams
in Coal River and surface mining permits including valley fills cover
37.3% of first order streams in Laurel Creek and 27.9% of all streams.
The United States Fish and Wildlife Service recognize that
mountaintop removal mining results in forest loss and fragmentation
that is significant not only within the project area, but also
regionally and nationally. In particular, the mines cause a fundamental
change in the environment from forestland to grassland habitat, cause
significant adverse impacts to the affected species, cause loss and/or
reduced quality of biodiversity, and cause loss of bird, invertebrate,
amphibian, and mammalian habitat.
When Congress passed the Surface Mining Act in 1977, it thought
that it was enacting a law to protect the environment and citizens of
the region. OSM has used and has allowed the states to use the Act as a
perverse tool to justify the very harm that the Congress sought to
prevent. The members of Congress who voted to pass the Act in 1977
could not have imagined the cumulative destruction that would be
visited on our region by the complete failure of the regulators to
enforce the Act.
Approximate Original Contour
Also at the heart of the Surface Mining Control and Reclamation Act
is the requirement that mining companies must restore surface mines to
approximate original contour, or AOC. If mines are restored to AOC, the
disturbed area is smaller, valley fills and stream impacts are reduced.
The Act provides that approximate original contour is the surface
configuration achieved by backfilling and grading of the mined area so
that the reclaimed area closely resembles the general surface
configuration of the land prior to mining and blends into and
complements the drainage pattern of the surrounding terrain.
Remarkably, there are few, if any, large surface mines in
Appalachia that comply with this basic requirement. Instead, mining
operators, with the acquiescence of OSM, thumb their noses at the law
and create monstrous valley fills and sawed off mountains that more
closely resemble the surface of the moon than our lush, green hills.
There is nothing even close to ``approximate'' about it.
Mountaintop removal mines are not required to restore the post
mining site to AOC. The Act sanctioned mountaintop removal mining, but
only in very limited circumstances. The Act requires that all mines be
restored to AOC unless the mining company shows that it will restore
the site to an industrial, commercial, agricultural, residential, or
public facility (including recreational facilities) use.
Almost no post-mining land in Appalachia is put to any of these
uses. The post mining land is in isolated mountain areas, the land is
unstable for building and it will no longer support native vegetation.
There is no surface or groundwater available on the post mining sites
because the mountain has been blown to bits. In short, mountains and
valleys have been changed dramatically in contour so that they resemble
no surface configuration on Earth and the land is useless for future
development. Whether the mines are technically ``mountaintop removal
mines'' or not (and OSM has so bent the definition of ``mountaintop
removal'' that not all mines that have the affect of mountaintop
removal mines are classified as such), almost all Appalachian surface
mines fit this description. OSM has not lifted a finger to stop this
complete abuse of the most important provision of the Act.
Higher and Better Use and Topsoil
The Act requires that all post mining sites be restored to
conditions that are capable of supporting the uses they were capable of
supporting before any mining or higher or better uses. The Act also
requires operators to save and replace the topsoil found on the mining
site.
Again, OSM's record here is dismal. Our mountains have been reduced
to scrubland that will not support native hardwood tree species. Far
from requiring a higher or better use of that land, OSM has acquiesced
to allowing operators to turn the most productive temperate hardwood
forests in the world into useless and unproductive grasslands. One of
the reasons for the sham reclamation practices that are common practice
on Appalachian surface mines is OSM's failure to assure that operators
save and reuse the topsoil. Very few, if any operators, save the
topsoil as the law requires. Instead, they are permitted to use
``topsoil substitutes'' and dump the irreplaceable topsoil into bottoms
of valley fills, losing this valuable resource and destroying streams
in the process.
Economics
Mountaintop removal is also devastating the economy of the coal
bearing regions of Appalachia. In 1948, there were 125,669 coal mining
jobs in West Virginia and 168,589,033 tons of coal mined. In 1978,
there were still 62,982 coal mining jobs in West Virginia with only
84,696,048 tons mined. By 2010, however, only 20,452 of these jobs
remained despite the fact that coal production had again risen to
144,017,758 tons mined.
So, although coal production today is roughly the same as it was
sixty years ago, coal mining jobs have decreased by approximately 80%.
This job loss has been driven not by environmental production or
decreased production, but by coal operators themselves who have
replaced workers with machines and explosives. McDowell County, which
has produced more coal than any other county in West Virginia, is now
one of the poorest counties in the Nation. Far from being an economic
asset to communities, mountaintop removal devastates economies wherever
it occurs.
Conclusion
I hope that that this Committee it will use the budget process to
take action compel OSM to discharge its duties. I hope that it will
require OSM to follow the clear science and the law. The absence of
energetic oversight invariably leads to problems, particularly with
agencies, like OSM, that have close ties with the industries they
regulate. We saw this very same dynamic play out, with devastating
consequences, last year within another Department of the Interior
agency, the Minerals Management Service. The OSM situation is really no
different.
Finally, I would like to take this opportunity to invite members of
this Subcommittee and the full Committee and its staff to travel to
West Virginia to witness the devastation caused by mountaintop removal
to help you appreciate the incalculable harm that OSM's failure to
enforce the Act has done to our region. We would be pleased to provide
flyovers of mountaintop removal area and to arrange meetings with
community members whose lives and property are severely impacted by the
illegal mountaintop removal mines that OSM refuses to regulate.
______

Mr. Lamborn. Well, thank you for your testimony and thank
all four of you for being here. We are going to start our first
round of questions, and there may be another Member or two join
us if we could make sure they know we are doing questions now.
First, Mr. Kitts, I would like to ask you something. You may
have covered some of this when I was out of the room, but I
would like a little more detail if possible in case you have
already addressed it? Can you elaborate on what impact the
Stream Buffer Zone Rule as anticipated by OSM and the more
stringent regulations contained therein would have on industry,
on the Appalachian communities and on the U.S. economy?
Mr. Kitts. The documents that I have seen that are drafts
or work documents generated by OSM and its contractors indicate
that the rules affecting any activities near streams, such as
the development of valley fields for surface mining of all
types, not just mountaintop mining, would be severely
restricted. I understand that an OSM official stood on a large
surface mine in the Powder River Basin and pointed out that if
these regulations were passed, that mining of about half of
that reserve area would not be allowed because they could not
guarantee that they could reconstruct the stream as it existed
there even though it was essentially a dry wash.
That is one component of the proposed Stream Protection
Rule that would impact mining across the entire country. It
would have especially devastating effects in Appalachia where
any type of mining operation must create space on which to
operate whether it is a surface mine or a deep mine or a
processing plant or whatever. The streams that we are talking
about for the most part are simply ephemeral or in some cases
intermittent streams that are almost ditches running up these
steep hillsides. They are not flowing streams where we are
displacing people who like to fish or boat or anything like
that. These are very, very small streams, so it would make
mining in general in Appalachia extremely difficult.
Another provision of the proposed rule that is mentioned in
the draft EIS is that any effects on streams from underground
mining, the change of elevation of a streambed according to the
draft EIS would be considered something that was irreversible
and thus would not be allowed. That would eliminate long-wall
mining, which is the most productive means of mining in
Northern Appalachia, in Ohio and actually are the most
productive mines in the world, so this rule is far-reaching in
its scope. We really, really think that the estimate of job
losses and production impacts is vastly understated in this
document that we have reviewed.
Mr. Lamborn. Did the SMCRA Act ever contemplate the
possibility that there would be some valley fill, or is that a
new development that was not anticipated and needs to be
addressed for the first time?
Mr. Kitts. Actually, in the statute itself, it says when
placing a valley fill that the designer must address the flow
from springs, seeps and natural water courses. Underdrains must
be placed in those fields so that water is discharged to
provide for the long-term stability of the valley fill. The
Fourth Circuit Court in a decision on February 13, 2009,
clearly stated that SMCRA contemplated the placement of valley
fills in streams.
I was around in 1977 when the Act was passed, and the
requirement to backfill high walls when surface mining and
restore the ground to its original contour and to place the
excess spoil material in engineered valley fills was a
fundamental concept that all the other environmental
protections were based on, so it is ludicrous to think that
SMCRA could do all that it has done but not contemplate the
creation of valley fills.
Mr. Lamborn. OK. Thank you for your answers, and before I
turn it over to the next questioner, are you all able to stay
for another round or two, if necessary, of questions? There
aren't a lot of us here, so I don't think each round will take
a lot of time, but we would appreciate that opportunity. OK.
Thank you. Now I would like recognize Representative Johnson
from Ohio.
Mr. Johnson. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you
folks again for being with us today. Mr. Lambert, I understand
that your agency was one of several state agencies that are
cooperating agencies in the development of the draft
environmental impact statement for the OSM proposed stream
protection rule. Did OSM ever sit down with the states charged
with implementing SMCRA and ask their opinion whether such a
comprehensive rewrite of the 2008 Stream Buffer Zone Rule was
necessary?
Mr. Lambert. No, sir, they did not.
Mr. Johnson. In your opinion, has OSM provided those states
with a compelling reason to justify this rewrite of the rule?
Mr. Lambert. No, sir, they have not. Actually, in their
oversight report, they indicate that states are doing a
commendable job in applying their programs.
Mr. Johnson. OK. Mr. Lambert, also in your testimony you
expressed concerns about recent changes to OSM oversight
policies that are at odds with SMCRA state primary structure.
Does SMCRA give OSM authority to veto state permits issued by
the state?
Mr. Lambert. No, sir, we believe it doesn't.
Mr. Johnson. Have there been any legal challenges to their
trying to do so?
Mr. Lambert. I have been involved with the mine program in
Virginia for 20 years, and to my knowledge, no.
Mr. Johnson. OK. Mr. Kitts, can you briefly give an
overview of how your company ensures that water flows are
protected in the instances where you engage in surface mining?
Mr. Kitts. Yes. We follow a very detailed mine development
plant, a water management plan. We provide for sediment control
and drainage management before mining starts. We conduct mining
based on the geology of the particular site. For instance, if
there are materials that might potentially create acid mine
drainage, for instance, those materials are identified and
specially handled in the mining process, so as a result of all
the built-in controls over where materials go, where the water
goes and so forth, we have been able to successfully manage our
mining operations to avoid long-term water quality impacts.
Now, recently EPA has brought up issues about conductivity
in water, and OSM is apparently attempting to adopt many of
those theories into its program. Conductivity is just a measure
of impact, not of damage, so we think that is misguided and it
has severely impacted the industry, and it is something that
OSM should certainly stay away from in any regulation changes
that it anticipates.
Mr. Johnson. OK. It is my understanding that you
participated or your company participated in the 2008 rewrite
of the Stream Buffer Zone Rule, do I have that correct?
Mr. Kitts. Yes.
Mr. Johnson. Can you give us some idea of what your
experience was with that process?
Mr. Kitts. Well, me, personally, I was involved in the
litigation Bragg v. Robertson where the opponents of mining,
specifically Arch's Spruce Mine, claimed that valley fills were
a violation of the Stream Buffer Zone Rule, so despite to me
the clear reading of SMCRA that valley fills are anticipated,
the ambiguity in the regulations led the industry to propose
that this needs to be fixed. We don't need to be in court every
time we apply for a surface mining permits, so the process was
begun by OSM to clarify the rule, provide protections. I think
they accomplished that.
Not only did they define when activities could be done in
streams, but it also required alternatives analysis of what can
we do other than impact streams, and it required a minimization
analysis to say that if we have to be in a stream, then we have
to put in the fewest, smallest fills that allow us to conduct
our mining activity, so again we participated in terms of
comments in working with the state agencies to try to push that
in that direction.
After it was adopted, my company encouraged the State of
Kentucky and the various entities, stakeholders there in
advance of OSM actually implementing the 2008 rule to develop
their own fill minimization and AOC policy, which they did by
sitting down with the environmental groups, the regulators,
including OSM, the state agencies and the industry, and that
worked out very successfully.
Mr. Johnson. I have some additional questions, but I will
wait until the next round. Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Lamborn. OK. Thank you. At this point, we will start a
second round of questions, and for Ms. Pineda or Mr. Lambert,
how would your state be affected if this rule as proposed goes
into effect and it has the result that many of us are concerned
about, namely that jobs would be lost in the coal mining
industry, production would go down and prices would go up? What
would be the economic impact within your state if that happens?
Mr. Lambert. Yes, sir. Actually, it was made known that
Virginia is a cooperating agency participating in commenting on
the chapters of the rule, and some of our comments were
directed directly toward the economic impact on the state or
the Commonwealth of Virginia, and we estimated that could be up
to as many as 3,000 coal jobs. In addition, we used a
multiplier of either a three or a four of value attached to
those direct jobs which could mean upward of 7,000, 8,000 jobs
entirely.
Coal production would drop. From our state of this past
year, we produced 21 million tons of coal. It could drop to
somewhere between 15 and 16 million tons of coal if that rule
was to be implemented as proposed. In addition to just the jobs
loss, the tax revenue base for the counties would be reduced
significantly, which most of our counties depend on that as a
major source of their tax revenue, so the economic impact to
Virginia would be significant.
Mr. Lamborn. Ms. Pineda?
Ms. Pineda. Thank you. Colorado is not one of the
cooperating agencies on the EIS, and so I haven't fully
reviewed the economic impact, but there are significant coal
jobs in Colorado, so there would be the similar kind of impact
that you see in West Virginia or Virginia and the Appalachian
states, so I can certainly get back to the Subcommittee on
specifically what that impact would look like.
Mr. Lamborn. I would certainly appreciate that. Thank you.
Ms. Pineda. OK.
Mr. Lamborn. And, Mr. Kitts, looking at the macro level,
the national level, if production goes down, what does that do
to the cost of electricity and other kinds of economic impacts
in America?
Mr. Kitts. The ability to produce dependable, low-cost
electricity in this country I think it something that has
helped us build the strength that we enjoy, the middle class,
for instance, based on manufacturing jobs that again are
dependent on low-cost electricity. There was a new plant,
brought something like 400 new jobs to Louisville, Kentucky,
and the owners specifically stated it was because of the
electricity cost based on coal-fired electricity.
If you do such a misguided change to the regulations,
regulations that have worked well over 30 years, and have been
implemented on a state-by-state basis, if you change all that
up, try to standardize and such, take the authority and the
funding away from the states and then try to make SMCRA
essentially mimic the Clean Water Act in all the efforts that
are being made under it to restrict mining, the impact to the
overall economy in this country could be extremely damaging.
I mean, there are job losses, the increase in electricity
prices, the disruption of the transportation system, for
instance. If you say that we are going to lose Appalachian
production and Appalachian jobs, but coal could be moved in
from out west, our infrastructure is just simply not up to the
task. They are shipping what coal can be shipped out of the
Powder River Basin right now, so to say that we will make up
the deficit with coal from elsewhere I don't think is a
reasonable proposition, so it could have basically a trickle
effect throughout the entire economy, and none of it that I see
would be good.
Mr. Lamborn. OK. Thank you very much. At this point, I
would like to yield to the Ranking Member for up to five
minutes. Thank you.
Mr. Holt. Thanks. Mr. Lovett, I would like to ask several
questions. Let me just state them now and ask you to address
them. First of all, are you familiar with the EPA study that
found that water quality in nine out of every 10 streams
downstream from surface mining operations is impaired? If you
are familiar with it, how serious is this effect in your
judgment or in the judgment of the water quality scientists?
Second, the restoration that takes place in Appalachian
mountaintop mining is really of a different nature than what is
done for restoration and reclamation say in Powder River or
other areas. How many examples are there, how would you
describe the successful reclamation efforts in Appalachia, and
is the Office structured and funded and so forth well enough to
accomplish the kind of restoration that is needed there?
The third has to do with the famous rulemaking, the
midnight rulemaking. That has come under a lot of criticism
from the majority Members today. Do you think that the 2008
change of the two-decade-old rule was justified or does it need
revisiting I guess is the way I would describe it? If you could
take all three of those, and I am sorry. I have only given you
two or three minutes to do it.
Mr. Lovett. That is fine, thank you. I will move quickly as
I can. I will move backwards from your questions. The first
question about the 2008 rule change, I think I heard Mr. Kitts
just testify that he helped or his company helped with that
rule change, so you can imagine that the people living near the
mines weren't very satisfied with the rule change drafted by
the Bush Administration and coal industry lobbyists.
On the other hand, this rule change that OSM is proposing,
as much as I think it is not well-considered, is done by OSM. I
give it credit for that. It hasn't involved the environmental
community in the rulemaking at all. The other thing I would say
is what we think should happen is that the Reagan rule, the
original rule should be restored, and that is what we asked OSM
to do was just to go back to the Reagan rule. Instead, OSM on
its own took off on this rulemaking without any input from the
environmental community.
Mr. Holt. So the short answer to that question is you
thought the two-decade-old rule was fine?
Mr. Lovett. Yes.
Mr. Holt. Didn't need to be changed? OK. Got it. Thank you.
Mr. Lovett. We thought that rule should not have been
changed, and especially with the rewrite by the coal industry
it sounds like from Mr. Kitts' testimony.
Mr. Holt. OK. Thanks.
Mr. Lovett. In terms of familiarity with EPA studies and
the impairment levels, there is no question that all of the
streams below big valley fills are impaired. Now, Mr. Kitts
testified correctly that valley fills were anticipated by
SMCRA. They are, but not valley fills of the size we are seeing
today. There is a difference between a valley fill in an
ephemeral or a smaller stream and in a perennial stream, and
these valley fills have become so big, we are now challenging
one valley fill that is more than two miles long, so it is
filling a stream that is longer than two miles.
Those are the valley fills that we think are impermissible,
and there is no question that the fish populations, all of the
aquatic life populations beneath these filles are significantly
impaired and therefore violate the Clean Water Act and SMCRA.
In terms of restoration and reclamation, Appalachian streams
cannot be restored. Even during the Bush Administration, the
head of the Army Corps of Engineers' regulatory branch in
Washington testified that he had never seen a successful stream
restoration project in Appalachia. That is because our streams
are fed by groundwater.
This area is coursing with water. It is not like the Powder
River basis. If you blow up the mountain, you destroy the
source of the streams, the groundwater, and there are no more
streams. The streams can't be restored, haven't been restored,
and it is really a fiction to think that they can be, and it is
a fiction that the coal industry uses to continue to get
permits.
Mr. Holt. That is useful testimony. Thank you very much.
Mr. Lamborn. OK. Thank you. Representative Johnson?
Mr. Johnson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would like to ask
just a few quick questions, and I am not sure which of you
needs to respond. Have any of you been involved or been in
contact with Polu Kai, the contractor that was contracted to
write the EIS?
Mr. Lambert. Yes, sir. I think I can answer that question
for you. As a cooperating agency, we were not allowed to
contact the contractor.
Mr. Johnson. OK. So do you have a perception or an opinion
about why the Office of Surface Mining wanted to end that
relationship?
Mr. Lambert. Yes, sir. The opinion of Virginia would be
that they ended that relationship because of the false and
misinformation contained in the chapters that were being
released.
Mr. Johnson. And your assertion is that there is false and
misleading information in those chapters?
Mr. Lambert. Yes, sir. As a cooperating agency, we are
certainly of the opinion that there is some false and
misleading information. To carry that a step further, the
numerous hours that Virginia spent on providing comments on
that document, most of our comments were never even used or
never showed up in that document.
Mr. Johnson. OK. Mr. Kitts, I would like to give you the
remainder of my time, about three and a half minutes here, to
respond to the questions that the Ranking Member asked just a
few minutes ago about surface mining.
Mr. Kitts. Yes. Thank you. If you get your information from
websites put up by anti-mining organizations, you might think
that Appalachia is being devastated, that it is being leveled.
One of those organizations had on its website that mountaintop
mining had caused flooding, that it kills hundreds of people
and left thousands homeless. That was completely false, but
there is no way to measure the accuracy of those statements
unless you are on the ground, and you can see what is
happening, and what we see happening in Appalachia is well-
managed, well-controlled mining of the reserves that are left.
About 40 percent of the coal production from Appalachia
comes from surface mining jobs. Not all mountaintop removal
jobs, but all types of surface mining, which I guess is now
defined as mountaintop mining in steep terrain, so to come out
and change a regulation that would make such mining nearly
impossible if you can't put in fills, you can't mine through
these small, intermittent streams up on the side of a mountain
to do a contour mine because you can't prove that you will
restore it back to exactly its pre-mining condition with the
same type of insects living there and the same substrate and so
forth, then you are going to stop mining.
If the intent is to stop all impacts of mining, then the
answer is you stop mining, but mining by its definition has
impacts. It has impacts on the land. It has impacts on the
water. The conductivity issue with the change in insect
populations. That is considered impairment, a reasonable person
would not say that is the reason to abandon the fundamental
industry that supports the economy in Appalachia, the fact that
you may not have a certain genus of May Fly, but it is replaced
by a different insect that provides the downstream services
that the aquatic ecosystem requires.
There is research being done by others than EPA that
indicates that is the case.
Mr. Johnson. I want to ask one final question before I
finish here. It seems to me that there really is a very overt
attempt to basically stop mining in America and so seriously
restrict our ability to go after the natural resources that
will move our energy footprint forward that is being
collaborated by and bought into by this Administration and the
Department of the Interior and the OSM and others. Is my
perception valid in your opinion?
Mr. Kitts. That is my opinion. That is what I have seen.
That is what I derived from comments made. For instance, when
the June 2009 MOU was released, there was a press conference,
and the head of CEQ said that this was going to allow
Appalachia to move toward a sustainable green economy with
green jobs, and there were comments made at that time that
people could be put to work repairing the devastation left
behind by surface mining. It seems like there was no
realization or acknowledgment whatsoever that coal companies
post bond on these mined areas. They have a legal obligation to
do the reclamation up to standards, and it is measured over
time, and if we fail to do that, we lose the bond, and we lose
the right to obtain future permits.
Mr. Johnson. OK. Thank you very much. Thank you for
extending my time, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Mr. Lamborn. OK. Thank you, and we will have one last and
final round, and I just have basically one question and that is
for you, Mr. Kitts. Do you believe that the process was flawed
in how the Obama Administration and Secretary Salazar quickly
moved from the existing 2008 rule to pursuing another rule with
OSM?
Mr. Kitts. Yes, I certainly do. The 2008 rule with its
additional provisions for fill minimization, approximate
original contour and alternatives analysis was never given a
fair chance to be implemented on the ground to see what
environmental benefits that would bring. That would level the
playing field between the Appalachian states, for instance,
where West Virginia already had such a plan in place. Of
course, the Stream Buffer Zone Rule that existed from 1983 was
somewhat in conflict with the statute itself, so the desire was
not to write a new law but to remove that ambiguity, so we
think the 2008 rule accomplished that accomplished it very
well. Again, it was never given a chance to be put into place.
Mr. Lamborn. What about the court decision? Was there a
caving in to the other side as opposed to carrying out to a
more normal conclusion?
Mr. Kitts. There certainly was. The court decision in
February of 2009 basically said that valley fills were legal,
and the Corps of Engineers had the discretion that they should
receive deference in applying the Section 404 rules and so
forth. It was at that time that EPA specifically stepped up and
said that we have not had time to properly evaluate all these
pending permits, so we want to install essentially an extra
legal process for doing permit reviews, and as a result of
that, there have been virtually no mining permits, Section 404
permits specifically, issued in that time.
The regulatory program is all tied together, the Section
404 permits, the SMCRA permits, or the EPA or the NPDES
permits, so the tentacles of this effort to stop, slow down,
make mining so difficult that it simply can't be done is in all
of those programs. It is very difficult to get a water
discharge permit now. It is almost impossible to get a Corps
permit, so the SMCRA permit that is issued right now is almost
meaningless because it is sitting on the shelf.
Under the changes that are being proposed as per these
draft regulations and EIS, it would just essentially roll
everything into one, formalize it and make mining in Appalachia
extremely difficult, extremely expensive, and probably, in many
cases, not practical.
Mr. Lamborn. OK. Thank you so much. At this point, I will
see if Representative Johnson has any final questions?
Mr. Johnson. I do. I do have a couple of final ones. In
Director Pizarchik's testimony, he comments that state
permitting actions and inspection of mines are among the most
important ways to help ensure the law is being implemented and
to protect society and the environment. However, in their
budget, the Department proposes to decrease funding for these
state activities by $11 million. Can you explain to us how the
state permitting and inspections process will be affected by
this $11 million proposed cut? I am not sure which one of you
want to answer that. Probably, Mr. Lambert?
Mr. Lambert. Yes, sir, I will be happy to take that
question. You asked me a question a minute ago if primacy had
ever been challenged. What this additional oversight inspection
rule would do, actually OSM would have the ability now to come
in and challenge the states' permitting processes thereby the
states have that primacy right, right now, to review and
approve mining permits, and we are certainly concerned about
states' primacy if that happens.
Also, we are concerned about the additional oversight
inspections that they would be doing in addition permit
decisions. Additional inspections on the ground without state
inspectors who have the knowledge of the permitted area, who
has the knowledge of the permitted area, who has the knowledge
of the program would certainly put OSM in a position of second
guessing and additional resources that we would have to expend
to go out and take care of perceived or violations that will be
discovered by OSM, so the additional resources, second-guessing
our permit decisions, we can see the states' programs suffering
from those issues.
Mr. Johnson. And this reduction in budget authorization,
funding authorization of $11 million, that only serves to
exasperate that situation, right?
Mr. Lambert. You are correct. That would only increase the
reductions that we would have to take in our state program to
absorb that cut.
Mr. Johnson. OK. Let's see. From a state perspective, Mr.
Lambert, what are your thoughts on OSM no longer conducting
emergency abandoned line mine reclamation projects and the
closing of OSM state emergency offices? Do the states have
adequate resources in existing grants to carry out these
functions on their own, or will we see a decrease in abandoned
land mine reclamation projects?
Mr. Lambert. For Virginia, we do not have the resources to
absorb the emergency program. We are operating on a limited
staff at this point with a limited amount of money to reclaim
only the Priority 1 and Priority 2 sites that you heard talked
about from Director Pizarchik this morning. If you add in
having to take the emergency program, then those resources that
were dedicated to the Priority 1's and Priority 2's, which is
public health and safety, we would no longer be able to do
those and have to focus only on the emergency program. In
addition, if we go to the competitive bid process like is being
proposed, there is no way we could plan a budget from year to
year even to do Priority 1 and Priority 2 projects.
Mr. Johnson. Yes.
Mr. Lambert. We would be tied up in a competitive bid
process pitting Virginia, Kentucky, all the other states
against one another on who is going to get any money for that
particular year, and I think Ms. Pineda could probably address
that a little further than I could since she is directly
related to the AML program.
Ms. Pineda. Yes. Thank you. Yes, it would be a hardship,
particularly the emergency program on minimum program states
that only get between like $2 and $3 million a year. It is
specifically a hardship on them, and then in addition, OSM
still has some of the regulatory authority to declare
emergencies, so on one hand, they are going to cut the funding,
but on the other hand, they still want to have some say in
whether or not a site is an emergency and whether or not states
can do that work, so that certainly is an issue.
As Butch said, Mr. Lambert noted the competitive process of
these grants is also problematic because it takes several years
for us to develop AML projects going through the NEPA process,
going through our public participation process and all the
different communities and identifying these high-priority
projects, so going to a competitive process year to year would
certainly hamper our process.
Mr. Johnson. Sure. I appreciate your answers. Real quickly,
let me close with saying this. I appreciate the testimony from
all of you, and I am disturbed because I hear creative double
talk coming from the Department and from the Administration.
Out of one side they scream protect the environment, protect
the environment. Out of the other side, they handcuff the
states, reduce budgets and hamper your ability to respond to
cleanup activities, and then they want to use those as
justification for further regulatory outreach, over-reach. It
is just kind of sad. Thank you, and, Mr. Chairman, I yield.
Mr. Lamborn. OK. Thank you. That concludes our questions. I
want to thank each of you for being here and for your time and
for your testimony. Members of the Subcommittee may have
additional questions for the record, and I would ask that you
would respond to these in writing should you receive these, and
as a matter of final business, I have a letter here dated
February 27 of this year from the Western Governors Association
to Secretary Salazar detailing concerns about the proposed
rulemaking process, and I would ask that it be entered into the
record without objection. So ordered. Thank you for being here,
and this hearing is concluded.
[Whereupon, at 12:11 p.m., the Subcommittee was adjourned.]

[Additional material submitted for the record follows:]

[A letter submitted for the record by the Alabama Surface
Mining Commission, Indiana Department of Natural Resources,
Kentucky Department for Natural Resources, Railroad Commission
of Texas, Utah Division of Oil, Gas and Mining, Virginia
Department of Mines, Minerals and Energy, West Virginia
Department of Environmental Protection, and Wyoming Department
of Environmental Quality follows:]

November 23, 2010

The Honorable Joseph G. Pizarchik
Director
Office of Surface Mining, Reclamation and Enforcement
U.S. Department of the Interior
1951 Constitution Avenue, N.W.
Washington, DC 20240

Dear Director Pizarchik:

We are writing to you as cooperating agencies that are
participating in the Office of Surface Mining's development of a draft
Environmental Impact Statement (EIS) to accompany a soon-to-be-proposed
rule on stream protection. Our role as cooperating agencies, as defined
by the memoranda of understanding that each of us entered into with
your agency, is to review and comment on those Chapters of the draft
EIS that are made available to us (at present, Chapters 2 and 3). Based
on our participation to date, we have several serious concerns that we
feel compelled to bring to your attention for resolution.
Without rehashing our previously articulated concerns about the
need and justification for both the proposed rule and the accompanying
EIS, we must object to the quality, completeness and accuracy of those
portions of the draft EIS that we have had the opportunity to review
and comment on so far. As indicated in the detailed comments we have
submitted to date, there are sections of the draft EIS that are often
nonsensical and difficult to follow. Given that the draft EIS and
proposed rule are intended to be national in scope, we are also
mystified by the paucity of information and analysis for those areas of
the country beyond central Appalachia and the related tendency to
simply expand the latter regional experience to the rest of the country
in an effort to appear complete and comprehensive. In many respects,
the draft EIS appears very much like a cut-and-paste exercise utilizing
sometimes unrelated pieces from existing documents in an attempt to
create a novel approach to the subject matter. The result so far has
been a disjointed, unhelpful exercise that will do little to support
OSM's rulemaking or survive legal challenges to the rule or the EIS.
We also have serious concerns regarding the constrained timeframes
under which we have been operating to provide comments on these flawed
documents. As we have stated from the outset, and as members of
Congress have also recently noted, the ability to provide meaningful
comments on OSM's draft documents is extremely difficult with only five
working days to review the material, some of which is fairly technical
in nature. In order to comply with these deadlines, we have had to
devote considerable staff time to the preparation of our comments,
generally to the exclusion of other pressing business such as permit
reviews. While we were prepared to reallocate resources to review and
comment on the draft EIS Chapters, additional time would have allowed
for a more efficient use of those resources and for the development of
more in depth comments.
There is also the matter of completeness of the draft Chapters that
we have reviewed. In the case of both Chapters 2 and 3, there are
several attachments, exhibits and studies that were not provided to us
as part of that review. Some of these are critical to a full and
complete analysis of OSM's discussion in the chapters. OSM has
developed a SharePoint site that will supposedly include many of the
draft materials, but to date the site is either inoperable or
incomplete.
As part of the EIS process with cooperating agencies, OSM committed
itself to engage in a reconciliation process whereby the agency would
discuss the comments received from the cooperating agencies, especially
for purpose of the disposition of those comments prior to submitting
them to the contractor for inclusion in the final draft. The first of
those reconciliations (which was focused on Chapter 2) occurred via
conference call on October 14. The call involved little in the way of
actual reconciliation but amounted to more of an update on progress
concerning the draft EIS. There was talk about another reconciliation
session, but to date this has not occurred. There were also several
agreements by OSM during the call to provide additional documents to
the states for their review, including a document indicating which
comments on Chapter 2 from cooperating agencies were accepted and
passed on to the contractor, as well as comments provided by OSM. OSM
also agreed to consider providing us a copy of a document indicating
those comments that were not accepted. To date, neither of these
documents has been provided to us. And even though a draft of Chapter 3
has now been distributed and comments have been provided to OSM, we are
still awaiting a reconciliation session on this chapter. \1\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ We also understand that OSM had planned to contact the states
to provide estimates of the additional time and resources that would be
required to review/process a permit under the proposed rule. This
information would be used by OSM to prepare at least one of the burden
analyses that are required by various executive orders as part of
federal rulemakings. We now understand that OSM plans to generate these
estimates on its own. We are somewhat mystified about how OSM intends
to accomplish this without direct state input and urge the agency to
reconsider the methodology under which they are currently operating.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Frankly, in an effort to provide complete transparency and openness
about the disposition of our comments, we believe the best route is for
OSM to share with us revised versions of the Chapters as they are
completed so that we can ascertain for ourselves the degree to which
our comments have been incorporated into the Chapters and whether this
was done accurately. We are therefore requesting that these revised
Chapters be provided to us as soon as practicable.
We understand that OSM is considering further adjustments to the
time table for review of additional Chapters of the draft EIS. We are
hopeful that in doing so, the agency will incorporate additional time
for review by the cooperating agencies, especially given the size and
complexity of Chapter 4 and the full draft EIS. Pushing back the time
for the completion of these drafts by OSM without additional time being
provided for review by the cooperating agencies would be wholly
inappropriate. We request that you please provide us with these new
time tables as soon as possible so that we can begin our own internal
planning.
You should know that, as we continue our work with OSM on the
development of the draft EIS, some of us may find it necessary to
reconsider our continued participation as cooperating agencies pursuant
to the 30-day renegotiation/termination provision in our MOUs. Under
the NEPA guidance concerning the status of cooperating agencies, some
of the identified reasons for terminating that status include the
inability to participate throughout the preparation of the analysis and
documentation as necessary to meet process milestones; the inability to
assist in preparing portions of the review and analysis and help
resolve significant environmental issues in a timely manner; or the
inability to provide resources to support scheduling and critical
milestones. As is evident from much of the discussion above, these are
some of the very issues with which many of the cooperating agencies are
struggling given OSM's time schedule for the EIS and the content of the
documents distributed to date. We continue to do our best to meet our
commitments under the MOUs but based on our experience to date, this
has become exceedingly difficult.
Finally, as you have likely noted throughout the submission of
comments by many of the cooperating agencies, there is great concern
about how our comments (limited as some of them are due to time
constraints for review) will be used or referred to by OSM in the final
draft EIS that is published for review. While the MOUs we signed
indicate that our participation ``does not imply endorsement of OSM's
action or preferred alternative'', given what we have seen so far of
the draft EIS we want to be certain that our comments and our
participation are appropriately characterized in the final draft.
Furthermore, since CEQ regulations require that our names appear on the
cover of the EIS, it is critical that the public understand the purpose
and extent of our participation as cooperating agencies.
As it is now, the states are wrestling with the consequences of
their names appearing on the EIS, as it would assume tacit approval
independent of the comments that have/have not been incorporated into
the document. And while the cooperating agency has the authority to
terminate cooperating status if it disagrees with the lead agency
(pursuant to NEPA procedures and our MOUs), the states realize the
importance of EIS review and the opportunity to contribute to, or
clarify, the issues presented. We therefore request an opportunity to
jointly draft a statement with you that will accompany the draft EIS
setting out very specifically the role that we have played as
cooperating agencies and the significance and meaning of the comments
that we have submitted during the EIS development process.

Sincerely,

Randall C. Johnson
Director
Alabama Surface Mining Commission

Bruce Stevens
Director
Division of Reclamation
Indiana Department of Natural Resources

Carl E. Campbell
Commissioner
Kentucky Department for Natural Resources

John Caudle
Director
Surface Mining and Reclamation Division
Railroad Commission of Texas

John Baza
Director
Utah Division of Oil, Gas and Mining

Bradley C. Lambert
Deputy Director
Virginia Department of Mines Minerals and Energy

Thomas L. Clarke
Director
Division of Mining & Reclamation
West Virginia Department of Environmental Protection

John Corra
Director
Wyoming Department of Environmental Quality
______

[A letter submitted for the record by Gregory E. Conrad,
Executive Director, Interstate Mining Compact Commission, and
Douglas C. Larson, Executive Director, Western Interstate
Energy Board, on behalf of the WIEB Reclamation Committee,
follows:]

January 7, 2011

The Honorable Joseph G. Pizarchik
Director
Office of Surface Mining Reclamation and Enforcement
1951 Constitution Avenue, N.W.
Washington, DC 20240

Dear Director Pizarchik:

This letter represents the comments of the Interstate Mining
Compact Commission (IMCC) and the Reclamation Committee of the Western
Interstate Energy Board (WIEB) concerning three draft documents
recently released by the Office of Surface Mining (OSM) as part of its
Oversight Improvement Actions initiative. The documents consist of a
new directive on ``Ten Day Notices'' (INE-35), a revised directive on
``Corrective Actions for Regulatory Program Problems and Action Plans''
(REG-23) and a revised directive on ``Oversight of State and Tribal
Regulatory Programs'' (REG-8). Together, these three documents
represent the heart of OSM's oversight procedures and policies under
the Surface Mining Control and Reclamation Act of 1977 (SMCRA) and its
implementing regulations. Given the fact these are OSM directives, they
are binding on OSM only and cannot, in and of themselves, affect the
rights (or impose or alter obligations) of the states beyond the
requirements in SMCRA and the Secretary's regulations. Nonetheless,
given the nature and scope of these documents, they are of critical
importance to the state regulatory authorities that we represent.
Several of our member states implement approved regulatory programs
under SMCRA and are therefore subject to the federal oversight process
anticipated by the Act and addressed by these three draft documents.
We alerted OSM to our initial concerns with the direction and
approach that the agency was taking with respect to federal oversight
in comments we submitted to OSM on January 19th of last year. Since
that time, we have submitted additional comments on various components
of the oversight initiative (see our comments of July 8, 2010) and have
also had occasion to meet with OSM both formally and informally to
discuss the agency's actions. The most recent draft documents not only
fail to reflect the nature and substance of our comments and
discussions to date, but appear fully committed to a preconceived
decision regarding the need for a strong command and control approach
by the federal government to the implementation of SMCRA in ways not
supported by the Act and the Secretary's own regulations.
We are well aware of the fact that the majority of OSM's oversight
improvement actions have been in response to a June 2009 Memorandum of
Agreement between the Interior Department, the U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency and the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. These three
directives, in particular, represent commitments made by the Interior
Department under the MOU to ``remove [alleged] impediments to OSM's
ability to require correction of permit defects in SMCRA primacy
states'' and ``to reevaluate and determine how OSM will more
effectively conduct oversight of state permitting, state enforcement
and regulatory activities under SMCRA.'' However, nowhere during the
time since the MOU was released and over the course of OSM's release of
its various oversight improvement actions has the Interior Department
or OSM articulated exactly what its vision or philosophy is for
oversight. And while we have now seen a plethora of proposed approaches
for handling the specifics of oversight (such as the use of Ten Day
Notices, oversight inspections, and data collection and analysis), we
continue to be at a loss for OSM's overall objective for these various
approaches.
In the comments that follow, we present our perspective on what
oversight means and how it is to be conducted consonant with the
requirements of SMCRA and OSM's regulations. Much of our philosophy
regarding federal oversight is the result of a collaborative process
that began in the early 1990's through federal/state discussions and
negotiations about the meaning of oversight and our respective roles in
the process. Interestingly, where we ended up with the specifics of the
process (via Directive REG-8) is completely consistent with SMCRA and
OSM's regulations, as it obviously should be. However, OSM's new
direction, as evidenced by its various oversight improvement actions
and in particular the three directives that are the subject of this
letter, suggests that the agency has changed its philosophy about
oversight, and along with it, the specific approaches that align with
this significant policy shift.
We are extremely concerned that this cultural shift by OSM will
completely undermine the progress that we have made in this area over
the years. It will also stifle the innovative ideas and approaches that
have been the hallmark of our regulatory programs and the oversight
process in recent years, particularly as states put forth new ways of
dealing with what have often been viewed as intractable issues. A
heavy-handed approach to oversight, in which state permitting decisions
are second-guessed and differences of approach to environmental
challenges are rejected in favor of a one-size-fits-all criterion,
discourages new thinking about problems and inevitably makes a mockery
of primacy and all that it stands for.
While we set out many of our concerns in the comments that follow,
along with both legal and statutory support and suggested changes to
the directives, the issues and the procedures addressed by these
directives do not lend themselves well to paper arguments. We believe
it is therefore essential that we sit down with you, our federal
partners, and talk through our concerns and work through the details of
a realistic approach to oversight. We have done this in the past with
remarkable results. In fact, the current oversight directive (which is
still in effect) calls for the Oversight Steering Committee to
``analyze the implementation and results of oversight policies,
standards and procedures to ensure that the objectives of SMCRA are
achieved.'' This Committee should be convened to undertake a detailed
review of the proposed revisions to both REG-8 and REG-23. A separate
working group should be composed to address INE-35 and the implications
of reinstituting this directive. In the meantime, we urge your serious
consideration of the following comments as you contemplate next steps
in the federal oversight process.
Introduction and Background
The Surface Mining Control and Reclamation Act of 1977 (SMCRA) is
one of several laws passed in the environmental decade of the 1970s
that provided for a cooperative and somewhat unique blend of federal
and state authority for implementation of its provisions. One of the
law's key underpinnings was that the primary governmental
responsibility for developing, authorizing, issuing and enforcing
regulations for surface mining and reclamation operations subject to
the Act should rest with the states with an oversight role accorded to
OSM. It has taken a good portion of the past thirty years to sort out
the components of these often competing roles, but the result has been
a balance of authority that generally works.
The first attempt at designing a meaningful oversight program in
the early 1980's (following on the heels of primacy program approvals)
was primarily an exercise in data gathering or output measurement. We
were concerned then with numbers of inspections, numbers of permit
reviews and numbers of enforcement actions. However, the numbers that
were collected into oversight reports told us little or nothing about
whether the objectives of SMCRA were being met. OSM also tended to look
behind state permitting decisions to determine whether OSM would have
handled them in the same way. This type of paternal ``second-guessing''
generated significant conflict and even resentment between the states
and OSM. Rather than a statistics-gathering/second-guessing approach,
it made more sense to focus on the following: what was happening on the
ground?; how effectively were state programs actually protecting the
environment?; how well was the public being protected and how
effectively were citizens being served?; how well were we working
together as state and federal governments in implementing the purposes
of SMCRA?
Following an effort by OSM and the states in the late 1980's to
fashion a more effective state program evaluation process based on a
goal-oriented or results-oriented oversight policy and another review
of the process in the mid-1990's, a performance measurement approach
was adopted, based in large part on the requirements of the Government
Performance and Results Act (GPRA). The new outcome indicators focus on
the percentage of coal mining sites free of off-site impacts; the
percentage of mined acreage that is reclaimed (i.e. that meets the bond
release requirements for the various phases of reclamation); and the
number of federal, private and tribal land and surface water acres
reclaimed or mitigated from the effects of natural resource degradation
from past coal mining, including water quality improvement and
correction of conditions threatening public health or safety. These new
measurements are intended to provide Congress and others with a better
picture of how well SMCRA is working and how well the states are doing
in protecting the public and the environment pursuant to their
federally-approved programs.
From the time of initial state program approvals (from 1980 through
1982) until Robert Uram was confirmed Director in 1994, far more effort
and resources were spent arguing and litigating over the validity of
issues raised by OSM during oversight than in trying to find solutions.
Furthermore, the regulated coal industry was constantly caught in the
middle of disputes between OSM and states. By 1993, it had reached the
point where IMCC submitted a petition for rulemaking in order to return
some meaning to primacy as intended by SMCRA. (See 58 FR 54594, August
17, 1993, copy attached).
Before Director Uram arrived in March 1994, Secretary of Interior
Bruce Babbitt brought in outside leadership on a temporary basis and
launched a broad review of OSM in an effort to understand why there was
such a high level of controversy surrounding OSM and its programs.
Although Director Uram made organizational changes that partially
addressed this issue, the primary change he implemented was the
approach to oversight embodied in current Directive REG-8. Those
changes, and the work of the state/federal Oversight Steering Committee
that helped to direct them, were recognized by Vice President Gore with
a ``Hammer Award'' under the National Performance Review for helping
``to build a government that works better and costs less''. State
performance-based programs have also received national recognition for
their effectiveness and efficiency.
In addition to a re-examination of the oversight process, the
antagonistic environment between OSM and the states led to the
development of the ``Ten-Day Notice'' rule in 1988 (30 CFR Section
843.12). That rule was not fully and effectively implemented until the
Clinton Administration under the leadership of Director Uram following
the rule's validation in federal court in 1994. In response to the
continued tensions between OSM and the states, and partially in
response to IMCC's rulemaking petition on appropriate federal oversight
and enforcement action in primacy states, Director Uram developed
``Principles of Shared Commitment'' which served as the basis for the
joint development by OSM and the states of the oversight policy (REG-8)
that is still in operation today.\1\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ The TDN rule was also in partial response to a rulemaking
petition by industry on federal NOV authority. In addition to
clarifying the ``appropriate action'' and ``good cause'' criteria with
respect to state responses to TDNs, it also provided states an appeal
process as part of the TDN process within which to raise their
concerns.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
As a result, during the past fifteen years, the working
relationship between the states and OSM has been much more productive
and non-contentious. We have moved beyond the second-guessing of state
decisions that predominated the early years of state program
implementation and instead are engaged in more cooperative initiatives
where OSM strives to support the states through technical advice and
training and where the states and OSM work together to solve difficult
policy and legal questions. OSM's oversight program is more focused on
results, looking at on-the-ground reclamation success and off-site
impacts, which better reflect the true measure of whether the purposes
of SMCRA are being met.\2\ We articulated many of these perspectives in
a letter to the Obama/Biden Transition team dated December 4, 2008, a
copy of which is attached. It includes a resolution on state primacy
adopted by the IMCC member states, which we hereby incorporate by
reference.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ In the most recent official statement by OSM regarding federal
oversight of state programs, former OSM Director Brent Wahlquist stated
the following at an oversight hearing conducted on November 13, 2007 by
the Senate Committee on Energy and Natural Resources concerning ``The
Surface Mining Control and Reclamation Act of 1977: Policy Issues
Thirty Years Later'': ``The first years after SMCRA's passage were
filled with controversy, contention, litigation, and uncertainty. OSM
faced the challenge of striking the proper balance between oversight,
direct enforcement, and assistance, in order to promote both qulity
state programs and achieve a high level of industry compliance. Through
the years, efforts to clarify OSM's oversight role, increase
cooperation with states, develop a training program, provide technical
tools, and promote technology transfer have largely eliminated the
highly contentious relationship with states and other interested
parties that existed during the early years of SMCRA. We believe that
OSM has succeeded in its efforts to develop and implement a stable
regulatory structure that achieves the desired balance between
environmental protection and energy production, while respecting the
role of states as the primary regulators.''
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Unfortunately, almost everything OSM has laid out in its recent
Oversight Improvement Actions documents seems designed to undermine
these accomplishments and return us to a time when OSM was at its
maximum size and its ineffective worst. What is contemplated by OSM's
suggested approach is far more than a reexamination of the process to
improve/enhance oversight--it is closer to a complete reinvention, in
contravention of the Secretary's rules. It appears to be the
dismantling of a good oversight product and the replacement of it with
an older and much more expensive model that has already proven to be
ineffectual.\3\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ Nowhere in OSM's Oversight Improvement Actions document has OSM
suggested, much less substantiated, that is has missed something in its
evaluation of state programs, or been precluded from conducting
effective federal oversight. In contrast, a review of data submitted as
part of the state program evaluation process over the past 20 years
(and reported in OSM's annual reports to the public) demonstrates that
there has been a dramatic reduction in citizen complaints, TDNs and
federal enforcement in primacy states.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Draft Directive INE-35 re Ten-Day Notices
Overview
The primary premise behind OSM's newly revised directive on TDNs
rests on a decision by OSM Director Pizarchik that is contained in his
memorandum dated November 15. In that memorandum, Director Pizarchik
states that ``this guidance clarifies that OSM's TDN and pertinent
Federal enforcement regulations at 30 CFR Parts 842 and 843 apply to
all types of violations, including violations of performance standards
or permit conditions and violations of permitting requirements.''
Director Pizarchik notes the effect of this decision is to ``reject the
rationale set forth in the Metiki decision and to reaffirm OSM's
historic position on this issue.'' There are myriad problems with the
Director's memorandum and its rationale which we will address below.
Firstly, we do not believe that a Departmental decision rendered by
an Assistant Secretary on behalf of the Secretary of the Interior can
be summarily reversed by a Bureau Director with the concurrence of a
Deputy Assistant Secretary, as was done here. The letter decision of
October 21, 2005 rendered by then Assistant Secretary Rebecca Watson
was clearly designated as a ``final decision of the Department of the
Interior'' and was based on a substantive review of SMCRA provisions as
interpreted by Federal court decisions. Hence it remains the position
of the Secretary and is binding on OSM until such time as either the
Secretary chooses to reverse it or a federal court rules otherwise.
Secondly, Director Pizarchik states that his decision ``reaffirms
OSM's historic position on this issue.'' However, OSM's position is
irrelevant if it is in conflict with the Secretary's position regarding
SMCRA and the Secretary's own regulations. Further, history shows that
OSM has struggled with its position on whether TDNs should apply to
``all types of violations'', and specifically whether TDNs should be
issued to state regulatory authorities with respect to permit defects.
As far back as 1987, OSM has issued a series of directives, reports and
recommendations attempting to articulate the appropriate balance of
jurisdiction and programmatic responsibility with respect to federal
oversight of state permitting decisions. Letters from IMCC to OSM
concerning the matter over the period 1995--1997 during the Clinton/
Gore Administration are attached that evidence the wide range of
discussions that occurred during this period and that eventually led to
revised versions of INE-35 to accommodate state concerns. However,
occasional confusion and concern related to the oversight of state
permitting decisions continued and thus the Secretary rendered a final
decision on the matter in the Metiki case, which ultimately led to the
rescission of OSM's sixth iteration of INE-35 in 2006.
Interestingly, since the rescission of the last version of INE-35
in 2006, there have been few cases that we aware of where OSM felt the
need to rely on the use of a TDN to address state permitting issues.
The only exception is the recent TDN issued to the state of Oklahoma
involving Georges Colliers, Inc. (Permit 54/86-4105), which we will
discuss later in our comments. We believe that over the past five
years, to the extent that there have been OSM concerns regarding state
permitting matters, these have been appropriately handled under the
state program oversight process pursuant to OSM's Directive REG-8. This
is as it should be given OSM's limited statutory role to oversee the
administration of state regulatory programs, which includes the state
permitting process, but not individual permits. More on this later in
our comments.
Thirdly, there is the matter of legal support for Director
Pizarchik's November 15 memorandum. The memorandum references the legal
advice received from the Office of the Solicitor regarding the use of
TDNs in primacy states. However, short of the November 16 decision
document in the Oklahoma TDN case referenced above (which contains some
limited jurisdictional analysis), we have not seen this larger legal
analysis. Given the significance of the Director's reversal of the
Secretary's decision in the Metiki case, which included extensive legal
analysis of its own from the Solicitor's office, we believe it is
critical that the Director release this analysis for our review.
Importantly, beyond the lack of a rational basis in the Director's
November 15, 2010 memorandum refuting the carefully articulated legal
analysis laid out in Secretary Watson's decision, the changes being
contemplated in revised directive INE-35 dramatically affect the rights
of both state regulatory authorities and mine operators and thus
constitute rulemaking subject to the Administrative Procedures Act
(APA). Any significant adjustments to these rights must occur through a
formal rulemaking process that lays out a basis and purpose for the
rule demonstrating why it is needed and how it is consistent with
SMCRA--hurdles that, as explained in more detail below, cannot be met.
Secretary Watson's decision in the Metiki case laid out broad
principles of general application in reaching a case-specific decision.
However, despite its broad circulation, no one stepped forward in any
forum with jurisdiction to challenge the merits of the decision's
arguments or to claim that it reflected a change in policy. Rather, as
elaborated upon below, in 2007, the Secretary referenced this decision
and its rationale in support of removing Section 843.21 from the CFR
after receiving comments strongly supporting both the proposed removal
and the rationale for such a change in the proposed rule. No negative
comments were received on either the rule's removal or the rationale
behind doing so.
The Director's memorandum refers to the ``confusion'' that has
allegedly attended OSM's oversight and enforcement responsibilities
with respect to permitting issues arising under state regulatory
programs, purportedly attributable to the departmental decision in the
Metiki case. Based on our experience, there appears to be little in the
way of confusion at the OSM staff level that we aware of, especially
given the clear articulation of the department's position concerning
the use of TDNs to challenge state permitting decisions in the Metiki
decision document. To the contrary, we believe it is the Director's
memorandum that will lead to new confusion and potential controversy.
As we explain below, Section 521 of SMCRA and the agency's regulations
at 30 CFR Parts 842 and 843, when read in context with all relevant
provisions in SMCRA, were never intended to apply to state permitting
decisions.
But as importantly, OSM's decision to boldly declare in the
November 15 memorandum and the revised version of INE-35 that TDNs
apply to ``all violations of permitting requirements'' in primacy
states makes no practical sense and will lead to the very confusion OSM
hopes to avoid. There are several related problems here:

OSM intermixes the use of terms like ``permit
defect'' and ``permitting violation''. Clearly SMCRA and OSM's
implementing regulations are structured to assure that all
permit requirements and permit conditions are complied with by
mine operators and that violations of those requirements or
conditions lead to enforcement action by the regulatory
authority. However, where OSM determines that a state (as
opposed to a mine operator) is failing in some way to comply
with the permitting provisions of its approved program, the
only appropriate route for OSM to pursue is limited federal
intervention that is permissible after following the applicable
notice and hearing requirements set forth in sections 504 and
521 of SMCRA and further elaborated upon in Part 733 of OSM's
rules. If by its use of the term ``permitting violation'', OSM
means violations of a state-issued permit by a mine operator,
then the ten day notice requirements of section 521(a)(1) would
be applicable. If, however, OSM means differences of opinion
between itself and the state regarding appropriate
implementation of the state's permitting function, then the
notice and hearing provisions of section 521(b) come into play
(following an impasse between the state and OSM to resolve the
matter). It matters little whether this involves one permit
decision or a series of permitting decisions--in every case
where there is a difference of opinion between state and
federal regulatory authorities (whether self-initiated by OSM
as part of program oversight or triggered by a citizen
complaint), SMCRA sees this as a programmatic issue requiring
resolution through the Part 732 and 733 process, failing all
else.

The use of the term ``violation'' throughout SMCRA
and OSM's own regulations envisions an act of noncompliance by
a mining operator for which abatement is possible. (See
definition of ``violation'' at section 701.5). OSM's regulation
at 843.12 reinforces this understanding when it refers to OSM's
authority to issue NOVs ``during federal enforcement of a state
program under section 504(b) or 521(b) of the Act and Part 733
of this chapter'', meaning after the notice and hearing
required for federal takeover of all or part of a state
program, after which OSM then becomes the regulatory authority
responsible for enforcing the provisions of the state-issued
permit. Any other interpretation leads to absurd results. For
instance, let's assume that OSM believes a state did not follow
its program requirements for a cumulative hydrologic impact
analysis (CHIA) and thus asserts that the state ``violated''
this permitting component of its state program and that the
permit is therefore ``defective''. If OSM issues a TDN to the
state, and the state refuses to take further action (based on
its belief that it fully complied with its program
requirements), under OSM's reading of the Act and its rules, it
would be authorized to issue a notice of violation to the mine
operator. What would OSM require for abatement of the
violation? That the operator force the state RA to revise the
permit? What if the state refuses? The operator would then be
faced with a cessation order for something he had no ability to
control or abate. Would OSM further consider the permit
``invalid'', thereby subjecting the operator to a charge of
``mining without a permit''? If so, an imminent harm cessation
order would be the order of the day and a TDN wouldn't be
needed in the first place. Let's assume that the state agreed
from the outset to address the specific defect alleged by OSM.
If the state continued to abide by its view of CHIA
determinations under its approved program for other permits,
OSM would be faced with a continuing round of TDNs, rather than
focusing on the programmatic issue through oversight
discussions or, if all else fails, a federal takeover of this
aspect of the state program.

The definition of what types of ``violations'' lead
to TDNs is further complicated by the language used in OSM's
draft TDN directive (INE-35), wherein a ``permit defect'' is
defined as a type of ``violation'' consisting of ``any
procedural or substantive deficiency in a permit-related action
taken by the RA.'' Several examples follow, including the broad
criterion ``an error in the analysis of technical or other
information of plans.'' It was this very type of second-
guessing language that generated so much confusion and
controversy in the past. Essentially, any difference of opinion
between an OSM field office oversight inspector and a state
permit reviewer will result in a violation of SMCRA, thereby
leading to a TDN and eventual federal enforcement action. Not
only does this fly in the face of primacy under SMCRA, it will
also result in a monumental waste of government resources due
to intergovernmental squabbling. Furthermore, these types of
permit ``defects'' are not violations attributable to the
operator; they are programmatic issues between OSM and the
state that can only be addressed through direct interaction
between these two parties and outside a process that is focused
on enforcement against an operator. Clearly the situation begs
for a different approach to oversight, as eluded to above.
Legal and Statutory Framework
The Surface Mining Control and Reclamation Act establishes a two-
phased implementation scheme for the regulation of surface coal mining
operations. The first stage, or ``interim program'', involves the
promulgation of federal standards implementing certain aspects of SMCRA
with federal enforcement of those standards accompanied by continuing,
or concurrent, state regulation. 30 U.S.C. Sec. 1252. The second phase,
or ``permanent program'', is to be adopted in each state through a
state or federal program ``with enforcement responsibility lying with
either the State or Federal Government.'' Hodel v. Virginia Surface
Mining and Reclamation Association, 452 U.S. 264, 269 (1981) (emphasis
added). If a state receives approval of its program, it assumes
exclusive jurisdiction, or ``primacy'', over the regulation of surface
coal mining operations within its borders, 30 U.S.C. Sec. 1253(a) and
the ``statute does not provide for concurrent jurisdiction in the
states and federal government.'' Haydo v. Amerikohl Mining Co., Inc.,
830 F.2d 494, 497 (3d Cir. 1987). See also id. at 497 (``We have
encountered nothing...which leads us to believe that anything other
than the ordinary meaning of `exclusive' was intended.'')
In a primacy state, it is the state law, state regulations and a
state-issued permit which apply and establish an operator's
obligations. 30 U.S.C. Sec. 1253(a); Haydo, 830 F.2d at 498; In Re
Permanent Surface Mining Regulation Litigation, 653 F.2d 514, 519 (D.C.
Cir.) (en banc), cert. denied sub nom., Peabody Coal Co. v. Watt, 454
U.S. 822 (1981) (Surface Mining Regulation Litigation); National
Wildlife Federation v. Lujan, 928 F.2d 453, 464 n.1 (D.C. Cir. 1991)
(Wald, J., concurring). Neither SMCRA nor the federal permanent program
rules apply in a primacy state. Lujan, 928 F.2d at 455 n.1. See also
Hodel, 452 U.S. at 271 (permanent program is not self-implementing, but
becomes effective through the approved state or federal program under
Sections 503 or 504). At best, SMCRA and federal rules only establish
standards for the approval of state programs. Haydo, 830 F.2d at 498 n.
2. Pursuant to a state program, the state applies the national
standards to the local conditions in that state through the
implementation of its program requirements. Once the Secretary approves
the state program as capable of meeting the Act's requirements, he ``is
not directly involved in local decision making.'' Surface Mining
Regulation Litigation, 653 F.2d at 518. The state becomes ``the sole
issuer of permits...[and] permit decisions are matters of state
jurisdiction in which the Secretary plays no role.'' Id. at 519.
Just as the state program is the law in a primacy state, the state-
issued permit applies the law and establishes the permittee's
obligations. The primacy state, as the sole issuer of permits, decides:

Who will mine in what areas, how long they may conduct mining
operations, and under what conditions the operations will take
place. It decides whether a permittee's techniques for avoiding
environmental degradation are sufficient and whether the
proposed reclamation plan is acceptable. The state...inspects
the mine to determine compliance; [and] [w]hen permit
conditions are violated, the state is charged with imposing
appropriate penalties.
Surface Mining Regulation Litigation, 653 F.2d at 519 (citations
omitted). Thus, when it assumes exclusive jurisdiction over the
regulation of surface coal mining operations, the state, as the
``regulatory authority'', performs the duties and functions required
under SMCRA through state laws and regulations.
The primary means of guaranteeing ``effective state programs'' is
the state program approval process exercised by the Secretary. The
principal components required of a state program are:

A state law for the regulation of surface mining
operations in a manner consistent with SMCRA;

Sanctions for violations of state law, regulations,
and permit conditions;

State law which provides for effective
implementation, maintenance, and enforcement of a permit system
consistent with SMCRA.
30 U.S.C. Sec. 1253(a).
These requirements include a permitting system that provides
procedures, public participation, and appeals; citizen complaints; and
appeals of the state authority's decisions on those complaints. 30 CFR
Sec. 732.15(b)(10). In other words, state permits are issued under
state laws and are subject to state procedures and remedies the state
adopts in order to obtain regulatory authority under the Act. Cf.
Laurel Pipeline Co. v. Bethlehem Mines Corp., 624 F.Supp. 538, 539-41
(W.D. Pa. 1986); :Lujan, 928 F.2d at 464 n. 1.
The Secretary of the Interior maintains an oversight role once the
state has assumed jurisdiction and how this oversight is performed goes
directly to the issue of the allocation of authority under SMCRA
between the state and federal governments. Typically, this oversight
role is carried out through occasional federal inspections of ``surface
coal mining and reclamation operations...to evaluate the administration
of approved state programs.'' 30 U.S.C. Sec. 1267(a). In one of the
first opinions surveying the statute and its allocation of authority,
the U.S. Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia characterized
the state program approval process as the ``Secretary's primary means
of guaranteeing effective state programs,'' Surface Mining Regulation
Litigation, 653 F. 2d at 520 (emphasis added); and the court described
the federal takeover of a state program under Section 521(b) of SMCRA
as ``the Secretary's ultimate power over lax state enforcement.'' Id.
at 519.
As the federal courts have repeatedly held, and as the Interior
Department has confirmed, SMCRA's allocation of exclusive jurisdiction
was ``careful and deliberate''. Congress provided for ``mutually
exclusive regulation by either the Secretary or state, but not both.''
Bragg v. West Virginia Coal Ass'n, 248 F.3d 275, 293-4 (4th Cir. 2001),
cert. denied, 534 U.S. 1113 (2002). See also Pennsylvania Federation of
Sportsmen's Clubs, Inc., v. Hess, 297 F.3d 310, 318 (3d Cir. 2002).
The June 11, 2009 Memorandum of Understanding among the U.S. Army
Corps of Engineers, the Department of Interior, and the Environmental
Protection Agency obligates OSM to ``remove impediments to its ability
to require correction of permit defects in SMCRA primacy states.''
Frankly, we believe OSM has several options that it can legitimately
pursue when it has reason to believe that a state is not appropriately
implementing its permitting requirements. OSM simply lacks the
authority to take direct enforcement action against operators for
perceived defects in state-issued permits as well as the authority to
directly require changes in those permits without going through the
procedures outlined in 30 CFR Part 733 and Section 521(b) of SMCRA to
take over enforcement and permitting. That lack of authority cannot be
altered or overcome by issuance of a new Directive INE-35 since
Directives are only internal policy guidance to OSM staff and cannot
impose or create obligations on outside parties. That can only be done
by changing SMCRA and/or the Secretary's regulations.
In any discussion of alleged permit ``defects'', it is important to
reiterate an overriding principle that is often overlooked: namely, any
existing permit for a coal mining operation issued under SMCRA,
including those issued by state regulatory authorities, is, by
definition, in full compliance with SMCRA and the regulatory program
since, under 30 CFR Sec. 732.15, the duly authorized regulatory
authority has, after opportunity for public input, made written
findings to that effect before issuing the permit.
For those who disagree with a permitting decision (including a
permit recipient who may disagree with restrictions contained in that
permit), SMCRA (section 514) and its implementing regulations (30 CFR
Part 775) prescribe administrative and judicial procedures and
timeframes for challenging that decision. Further, the regulatory
authority, subject to administrative and judicial review, may, by order
(after preparing written findings to support the order), subsequently
require permit revisions ``to ensure compliance with the Act and the
regulatory program.'' 30 CFR Sec. 774.10(b). However, the revision
provisions serve to strengthen the view that an existing SMCRA permit
is, by definition, in full compliance with SMCRA and the regulatory
program unless and until a duly authorized body, under the limited
procedures identified above, concludes otherwise.
While the States feel this issue has always been clear, we
acknowledge that, because of a failure to look critically at SMCRA, its
own rules, and Court rulings, OSM has taken various positions on this
issue as reflected in, among other things, its six iterations of
Directive INE-35 from 1987 through 1995, before it finally rescinded
that directive in 2006. Years of frustration with OSM over its abuse of
the TDN process as reflected in INE-35 led IMCC to submit a petition
for rulemaking in 1993. The petition laid out our objections to using
the TDN process to raise alleged permit defects to a state regulatory
authority. (See 58 FR 43603--43608) That discussion is hereby
incorporated by reference into these comments. Some of the points made
in that discussion are also made below for emphasis.
The issue of using the TDN process in permitting oversight was
clarified for OSM in the October 25, 2005 letter decision in the Metiki
case by the Assistant Secretary for Land and Minerals Management in
response to a state request to review a decision by an OSM field office
to conduct a federal inspection in response to a citizen's complaint
alleging defects in a state-issued permit even though no activity had
yet been initiated on the ground. That letter decision was a final
decision on behalf of the Department of Interior and led OSM to rescind
INE-35 in 2006. That decision also caused OSM to reconsider its
regulations at 30 CFR Sec. 843.21 providing OSM enforcement authority
against improvidently issued state permits (the first two iterations of
this rule had been struck down by the Court of Appeals for the District
of Columbia Circuit and the third iteration was subject to further
revision as required by a settlement with the National Mining
Association to resolve pending litigation challenging it). After notice
and comment (no opposing comments were received) OSM removed 30 CFR
Sec. 843.21 in its entirety on December 3, 2007. In doing so it stated:

Its removal provides greater regulatory stability through
clarification of the State/Federal relationship related to
permitting in primacy States, which has been a source of great
confusion for many years. 72 FR 68024
Under SMCRA and the Federal regulations, permitting is an entirely
separate function from inspections and associated enforcement.
Regulatory provisions related to permitting are found in Subchapter G
of 30 CFR, while inspection and enforcement provisions are in
Subchapter L. The statutory and regulatory provisions related to permit
review and decisions are found at Section 510 of the Act and 30 CFR
Part 773. Review of permitting decisions is covered by Section 514 of
the Act and 30 CFR Part 775 respectively. Permit revisions, including
the authority to require a permit revision, are covered by Section 511
of the Act and within 30 CFR Part 774 respectively. By statute and
regulation, an order to revise a permit must be based upon written
findings and is subject to administrative and judicial review
requirements established by the State or Federal program. See Section
511(c) of the Act and 30 CFR Parts 773 and 775. In contrast to
inspection and enforcement provisions, there is nothing in any of these
statutory or regulatory provisions related to permitting that provide
for or authorize Federal intervention in state permitting decisions.
In its landmark en banc 1981 decision upholding OSM's authority to
promulgate permitting requirements not specified in the Act, the Court
of Appeals for the D.C. Circuit (the only Circuit with jurisdiction to
review the Secretary's national rules implementing the Act) laid the
groundwork for its holding with a discussion of the roles of the States
and the Secretary in administering the Act, including the States' role
under an approved program. In addition to ruling that ``the State is
the sole issuer of permit,'' the court also noted that
``[a]dministrative and judicial appeals of permit decisions are matters
of State jurisdiction in which the Secretary plays no role. Act
Sec. 514.'' Surface Mining Regulation Litigation, 653 F.2d at 519.
The following footnote was attached to the last sentence quoted
above.

The independence of a State administering an approved State
program under the Surface Mining Act may be contrasted with the
continuing role of the Environmental Protection Agency after a
State has assumed responsibility for pollution discharge
permits under the Federal Water Pollution Control Act,
33.U.S.C. 1251--1376 (1976 & Supp. II 1978). The EPA
Administrator retains veto power over individual permit
decisions under that statute. See id. 1342(d).
Surface Mining Regulation Litigation, 653 F.2d at 519 n. 7.
This discussion by the Circuit Court is plain and unambiguous and
leaves no room for debate. OSM simply does not retain authority to
require revision of an existing state issued permit or to issue
violations for actions expressly authorized by that permit without
going through the procedures of Sec. 521(b) of SMCRA.
The above quote from the Circuit Court was cited in the October 21,
2005 decision by the Assistant Secretary. It was also cited, along with
the Assistant Secretary's 2005 decision, in the December 3, 2007
Federal Register notice (72 Fed. Reg. 68000) removing 30 CFR
Sec. 843.21 as follows:

On October 21, 2005, the Department of the Interior's Assistant
Secretary for Land and Minerals Management (ASLMM) issued a
final decision concerning a citizen's group's request that OSM
conduct a Federal inspection in a case where the citizen's
group was dissatisfied with a State regulatory authority's
decision to issue a coal mining permit. (A copy of the ASLMM's
October 21, 2005, final decision is contained in the public
record for this rulemaking.) The citizen's group requested an
inspection even though mining on the permit had not yet
commenced and the citizen's group had failed to prosecute a
direct appeal of the State's permitting decision in State
tribunals.

In her decision, the ASLMM pointed out that ``OSM intervention
at any stage of the state permit review and appeal process
would in effect terminate the state's exclusive jurisdiction
over the matter and [would frustrate SMCRA's] careful and
deliberate statutory design.'' See also Bragg v. Robertson, 248
F. 3d 275, 288-289, 293-295 (4th Cir. 2001) (regulation under
SMCRA is ``mutually exclusive, either Federal or State law
regulates coal mining activity in a State, but not both
simultaneously''; primacy States have ``exclusive
jurisdiction'' over surface coal mining operations on
nonfederal lands within their borders).

The final decision also explained that in a ``primacy state,
permit decisions and any appeals are solely matters of the
state jurisdiction in which OSM plays no role.'' In support of
this statement, the final decision cited the U.S. Court of
Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit's landmark en banc
decision in In re Permanent Surface Mining Regulation Litig.,
653 F. 2d 514, 523 (DC Cir.) (en banc), cert. denied sub nom.,
Peabody Coal Co. v. Watt, 454 U.S. 822 (1981) (PSMRL). In that
case, the en banc court held that SMCRA grants OSM the
rulemaking authority to require States to secure permit
application information beyond the Act's specific information
requirements. Id. at 527. The court laid the groundwork for its
holding with a discussion of the relative roles of the
Secretary of the Interior and the States in administering the
Act.
After then quoting the Court's opinion listed above, OSM went on to
state in that same Federal Register notice:

The ASLMM's decision, and the materials cited therein, caused
us to look more carefully at the statutory and regulatory
scheme governing our oversight role related to State permitting
decisions and, in particular, the propriety of retaining
section 843.21. Inasmuch as section 843.21 authorized direct
Federal enforcement against State permittees based on State
permitting decisions, it was inconsistent with the ASLMM's
decision and PSMRL's admonition that a primacy State is the
``sole issuer of permits'' within the State.

Further, under SMCRA, State permitting is entirely separate
from Federal inspections and associated Federal enforcement.
The statutory provisions related to permit application review
and permit decisions are found at section 510 of the Act, 30
U.S.C. 1260, and appeals of permitting decisions are provided
for under section 514 of the Act, 30 U.S.C. 1264. There is no
mention in these statutory provisions of the need for an
inspection--the predicate to Federal enforcement under section
521 of the Act (30 U.S.C. 1271)--in connection with State
permitting decisions, and certainly nothing in these provisions
mandates Federal intervention in State permitting decisions.
Our regulations governing administrative and judicial review of
permitting decisions (30 CFR part 775) are likewise silent as
to the need for an inspection in the context of permitting
appeals. Moreover, nothing in our Federal inspection
regulations at 30 CFR parts 842 and 843 suggests that those
procedures can be used as an alternative to our permitting
appeal provisions.

The Act's provisions for Federal inspections expressly provide
that such inspections are of mining ``operations.'' See SMCRA
Sec. 517(a), 30 U.S.C. 1267(a) (referring to inspections of
surface coal mining and reclamation operations) and SMCRA Sec.
521(a) (referring to inspections of surface coal mining
operations). The definitions of surface coal mining and
reclamation operations and surface coal mining operations at
SMCRA Sec. 701(27) and (28), 30 U.S.C. 1291(27) and (28), do
not mention anything about permits or permitting decisions.
Instead, those definitions refer to activities and the areas
upon which those activities occur. In short, the purpose of a
Federal inspection is to determine what is happening at the
mine, and, thus, SMCRA's inspection and enforcement provisions
do not readily apply to State permitting decisions because they
are not activities occurring at the mine. See, e.g., Coteau, 53
F. 3d at 1473 (``Permitting requirements such as revelation of
ownership and control links are not likely to be verified
through the statutorily-prescribed method of physical federal
inspection of the mining operation * * *.'').

In summary, the statutory and regulatory provisions related to
inspections and enforcement are separate and distinct, both
practically and legally, from permitting actions. The Act and
our regulations provide specific administrative and judicial
procedures for persons adversely affected and seeking relief
from permitting decisions; our Federal inspection regulations
do not serve as an alternative to those procedures. Distinct
from the review of permitting decisions, Congress provided for
inspection and enforcement for activities occurring at the mine
and purposely excluded permitting activities from the
operation-specific inspection and enforcement process. In
short, Congress did not intend for OSM to second guess a
State's permitting decisions. Instead, the Secretary of the
Interior's ultimate power over a State's lax implementation of
its permitting provisions is set out in section 521(b) of the
Act, 30 U.S.C. 1271(b). PSMRL, 653 F. 2d at 519. The
Secretary's power under section 521(b) includes taking over an
entire State permit-issuing process. Id.
In past discussions regarding ``Review of Permits During
Oversight'', OSM cited 30 CFR Sec. 701.4(b)(1) as authority to conduct
reviews of state issued permits during oversight. However, 30 CFR
Sec. 701.4(b)(1) expressly distinguishes conducting inspections of
mining and reclamation operations from reviewing state issued permits
by placing an ``and'' between the two. Therefore, that rule is entirely
consistent with the discussion above and affirms that the permitting
process is entirely separate from the inspection and enforcement
process. Thus, 30 CFR Sec. 701.4(b)(1) does not support using the TDN
process to address concerns resulting from an OSM review of a state
issued permit. To the contrary, it supports the view that it would be
inappropriate to apply the TDN process to permitting issues, since that
process is, by law (through sections 517 and 521 of SMCRA and 30 CFR
Parts 842 and 843), expressly linked to inspections.\4\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\ Alleged deficiencies about the quantity and quality of either
information or technical analysis hardly provides what the Act requires
as reason to believe that ``any person is in violation of any
requirement of this Act or any permit condition required by this Act.''
Section 521(a)(1). Instead, these issues involve a difference of
opinion as to whether two people would make the same policy judgment
based upon a given set of facts and information. Such issues are not
amenable to the purpose of the enforcement procedures whereby the
inspector must set forth: The nature of the permittee's violation;
remedial action required; the period of time established for abatement;
a description of the surface coal mining operation to which the notice
applies; and a statement that the failure to meet the abatement date
leads to an order for the cessation of the operation. Section 521(a)(2)
and (5). These enforcement provisions contemplate that abatement is
within the power of the permittee. This simply is not the case where a
permittee is subjected to an action by the federal agency (which lacks
permitting authority) merely because of a continuing disagreement with
the state agency (which is vested with the permitting authority under
SMCRA).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Importantly, the 1988 TDN rule (53 FR 26728) does not support using
a TDN to address permitting disagreements between OSM and a State
regulatory authority. In fact one of the express purposes of the 1988
TDN rule was to avoid situations where operators are caught in the
middle because of disputes between OSM and States. The preamble
contains a discussion (at pages 26729 and 26730) of when OSM is
obligated under Section 521(a)(3) of SMCRA to issue a Federal NOV
during enforcement of a state program under 521(b). That discussion
notes:

Thus, where OSMRE takes over an inadequately enforced state
program, Congress clearly envisioned a time lag in the
suspension or revocation of permits in situations where an
operator was in violation because of a permit not requiring
full compliance with the State program. Rather than penalizing
the operator when the State is at fault, OSMRE must allow a
reasonable time for a permittee to comply with additional
permit conditions required by OSMRE when the permittee has been
complying with the original permit conditions. Although the
proviso expressly addresses suspensions and revocations, it
naturally follows that during the reasonable period for
compliance, OSMRE would refrain from issuance of NOVs and
cessation orders related to the problem being corrected. The
same principle is also established in Section 504(d) of SMCRA.
(53 FR 26730)
In litigation over the TDN rule, the National Wildlife Federation
claimed this discussion substantially eroded OSM's mandatory
enforcement obligation and represented an attempt to regulate through
preamble in violation of the APA because it stated that ``OSMRE would
refrain from issuance of NOVs and cessation orders related to the
problem being corrected.'' In dismissing the complaint, the Court
stated:

The Court concludes that the statements in the preamble to the
TDN rule are not inconsistent with the rulemakings concerning
this issue and therefore permissible under SMCRA. As repeatedly
mentioned above, it is not unfair not to punish a permittee if
it has fully complied with state permit obligations later
determined to be inadequate.
National Coal Association v. Uram, 1994 U.S. Dist. LESIX 16404 at *60
(D.D.C. Sept. 16, 1994).
In summary, OSM cannot, through any iteration of INE-35, give
itself authority to take direct action against operators for alleged
permit defects without going through the requirements of Section 521(b)
of SMCRA.
Finally, OSM's insistence on using TDNs to address permit defects
is simply unworkable, as we noted earlier. In most instances where OSM
disagrees with a state-issued permit, ad-hoc federal intervention in an
individual permit through direct enforcement action against the
permittee would have the same effect as commandeering the state
permitting process. The statute and case law would preclude such a
result since the grant of exclusive jurisdiction vests the state as the
sole issuer of permits ``in which the Secretary plays no role.'' In re:
Permanent Surface Mining Regulation Litigation (en banc), 653 F.2d 514,
519 (D.C. Cir. 1981) (hereinafter ``In Re: (en banc)''). An enforcement
action against the permittee based upon OSM's view of non-conformity of
a permit to applicable standards would be nothing less than exercising
a ``veto power'' over state permits, authority which Congress expressly
withheld from the Secretary. To allow OSM to accomplish at the back-end
what Congress forbade initially would essentially vest OSM with day-to-
day ``concurrent jurisdiction'' which does not exist under the
permanent program in a primacy state; Haydo v. Amerikohl Mining
Company, Inc., 830 F.2d 494, 497; and improperly allows the Secretary
to become ``directly involved in local decision making after the
program has been approved.'' In Re: (en banc), 653 F.2d at 518.
Furthermore, the use of SMCRA's inspection and enforcement
provisions as a means to dislodge state permitting decisions does not
fit well with the statutory scheme. Issues involving the non-
conformance of a permit to applicable standards are resolved through a
request by the state regulatory authority to the permittee for a permit
revision, and not enforcement action. See Section 511(c); 30 CFR
774.11(b). This process is accompanied by notice, findings supplying
the basis for the request, and an opportunity for a hearing before the
revision must be submitted.
Even when OSM is the regulatory authority, it must proceed to
correct permit problems through the revision process. It appears
incongruous for OSM to take direct enforcement action against a
permittee in a state where it has no direct jurisdiction, and lacks
permitting authority, when it could not conduct itself in such a manner
where it does have ``exclusive jurisdiction'' as in a federal program
state. Moreover, an enforcement action under Section 521(a) generally
requires the prescription of abatement measures to assure compliance
and presumes that such measures are within the power of the permittee.
However, if the enforcement action requires the submission of a
revision to a state-issued permit, the state regulatory authority is
the only one empowered under SMCRA to request and approve a revision.
If the state disagrees that a revision is warranted under the state
program, the permittee cannot fully comply with the federal enforcement
action and remains in jeopardy because of a continuing disagreement
between the state and OSM. Moreover, the permittee has been denied its
rights to prior notice, findings, and a hearing under SMCRA for permit
revisions.
It also appears incongruous with the statutory scheme to permit OSM
in its general oversight role to take action it could not otherwise
pursue even when it takes action to substitute either federal
enforcement or a federal program for all or part of the state program.
In two provisions which discuss direct federal intervention, the
statute requires that the Secretary, before issuing any enforcement
orders, first afford the permittee an opportunity to revise a permit it
finds does not conform to the requirements of the applicable regulatory
program. Section 504(d), 521(b). See also 53 Fed. Reg. 26730, 26735. A
permittee operating in a primacy state in which OSM has not completed,
let alone initiated, a proceeding to ``take over'' a state program has
ample ground for relying on the permit issued by the state permitting
authority without becoming subject to direct intervention or
enforcement by OSM in its oversight role.
However, this is not to say that OSM has absolutely no recourse.
The federal action, if OSM decides it is necessary, is captured in the
TDN rule's guiding principles for OSM's oversight role in these
circumstances: ``the regulatory focus shifts from individual situations
to a broader evaluation of a state's overall program.'' 53 Fed. Reg.
26731. See also 53 Fed. Reg. at 26738. In other words, OSM will use the
other mechanisms the law provides for ``resolving problems with state
implementation of the program; and, these mechanisms allow inadequacies
to be corrected without placing the mine operator in the middle of
conflicting orders from state and federal officials.'' Id.
One final legal matter: In the November 16, 2010 Decision for
Informal Review issued by OSM Regional Director Ervin Barchenger
regarding Georges Colliers, Inc., Permit 54/86-4105, there is legal
discussion of ``Jurisdiction'' on pages 3--5 of the document. There is
significant reliance on two Interior Board of Land Appeals decisions
and two U.S. Court of Appeals decisions. All of these are cited for the
proposition that ``OSM has jurisdiction to address state permitting
issues under its TDN authority.'' However, OSM misunderstands the
reasoning in these decisions and misapplies them to the question of
OSM's TDN authority in primacy states.
First, it is instructive to note that both IBLA decisions in the
Kuhn and Mullinax cases preceded OSM's regulatory decision regarding
the issuance of TDNs in primacy states in December of 2007. 72 Fed.
Reg. 68000. This regulation is the most recent and most definitive
ruling by the Interior Department concerning the use of TDNs in primacy
states and thus is the applicable and operative law. Furthermore, the
Kuhn case references the 1988 ten-day notice rule but fails to even
examine, let alone discuss, its possible application to the case at
hand, and instead sets forth erroneous premises citing a string of
cases all decided prior to the 1988 ten-day notice rule. For example,
the Board stated in Kuhn ``no definition of the phrase appropriate
action has been provided by OSM.'' 120 IBLA at 16, citing a 1982
version of 30 CFR 843.12. This is flatly wrong, and the opinion makes
no mention of the other consideration of whether the state showed good
cause for not taking action.
Kuhn also misstates some of the precedent that serves as the basis
for its decision as follows: ``where it is evident that a permit has
been issued in violation of state regulatory requirements, this Board
has declared such action inappropriate, and has ordered federal
enforcement. 120 IBLA at 20, citing W.E. Carter, supra. Not only was
W.E. Carter not decided under the ten-day notice standards that are now
applicable, the Board in W.E. Carter only ordered a federal inspection
but never reached the issue of what type of federal action should
follow the inspection. In many respects, Kuhn is advisory at best since
the Board chose to articulate its views despite the fact that the
permitting controversy was moot. 120 IBLA at 23, n. 9. Compare with
Hopi Tribe v. OSM, 109 IBLA 374, 381 (1989) (an appeal is moot if there
is no effective relief which the Board can afford to the appellant).
It should also be noted that all of these Board cases were
considered in the context of citizen complaints and the Board was
either never advised of or chose not to consider the issue (discussed
in other sections of our comments) that citizen complaints cannot
displace the more specific procedures to contest state permit
decisions. To the extent one construes these cases as rejecting this
view, the cases then simply remain contrary to applicable case law
because they would allow the Secretary to review state permitting
decisions, a matter in which ``the Secretary plays no role.'' In Re:
(en banc), 653 F.2d at 519.
Secondly, OSM completely misreads the two U.S. Courts of Appeals
decisions. In National Mining Ass'n v. Dep't of the Interior, 177 F.3d
1 (D.C. Cir. 1999), the U.S. Court of Appeals for the District of
Columbia Circuit pointed to the very construction of SMCRA which we
articulated above--that OSM may not take remedial action against a
state permittee until after the agency complies with the provisions of
Section 504(b) and 521(b) of SMCRA, which require that OSM first
provide notice to the state and hold a public hearing prior to taking
over that portion of a state's program that relates to the permitting
function (or any other function, for that matter). This process is
embraced by OSM in its regulations at 30 CFR Part 733 and is a
prerequisite to any federal enforcement action by OSM. While this
process may take more time than OSM and others would prefer, Congress
believed that meaningful concepts of state primacy and exclusive
regulatory authority require nothing less. Short of changes to the
underlying statute, this is the mechanism designed by Congress and for
good reason. And short of the Secretary articulating a rational basis
for departing from the Department's current regulatory position on this
matter (as set forth in the preamble to the final rule removing 30 CFR
843.21 at 72 Fed. Reg. 68024--68026), OSM must continue to abide by its
interpretation of SMCRA's requirements.
Recommended Changes to Draft INE-35
Based on the above discussion and rationale, IMCC and WIEB see no
need for INE-35 and urge the agency not to pursue it further. OSM
should, instead, simply follow its regulations. However, if OSM feels
compelled to guide its field personnel via directive, IMCC and WIEB
recommend several changes to draft INE-35 as follows:
Permit Defects--OSM should remove all references to the use of TDNs
to address permit defects and should clarify that any concerns with the
state permitting process or function should be handled as a
programmatic issue, utilizing the various mechanisms available to OSM
such as action plans, technical reviews, and the 732 or the 733 process
where appropriate. More specifically, OSM should delete sections 3(i)
(definition of ``Permit Defect''); section 4(g)(3) (regarding when a
TDN will not be issued for a permit defect); and sections 6(a)(5) and
(b)(5) (regarding the procedures for handling permit defects).
Citizen Complaints--OSM should either remove all references to the
use of TDNs to convey citizen complaints to states or, in the
alternative, define the term ``reason to believe'' to include an
investigation by OSM of the veracity of the complaint prior to
conveying the complaint to the state via TDN. Given the requirement at
30 CFR 732.15(b)(10) that a state program must contain a citizen
complaint mechanism in order for the program to be approved by OSM,
this mechanism must be given an opportunity to work prior to OSM
intervening in the process. This is further confirmed by 30 CFR 842.12,
which requires a person requesting a federal inspection to notify the
state regulatory authority in writing of the existence of a violation,
condition or practice. As a result, any federal action under Section
521 of SMCRA should be held in abeyance until the state has issued its
findings pursuant to its own citizen complaint process. If a citizen is
unsatisfied with this result, it may then approach OSM about the need
for a federal inspection. Following a ``reason to believe''
determination (including a review of the state's findings), OSM may
then issue a TDN to the state concerning the alleged violation as a
precursor to a possible federal inspection, in accordance with Section
521.
In conjunction with this change, OSM should also define the term
``reason to believe'', since the current standard (i.e. ``the facts
alleged by the citizen, if true, would constitute a violation'') is
unduly and inappropriately broad. As long as OSM holds to this
standard, the threshold established by the definition is unreasonably
and unworkably low and flies in the face of the legislative history
concerning the term. In its discussion of Section 521(a)(1) of the Act,
Congress stated that ``it is anticipated that `reasonable belief' could
be established by a snapshot of an operation in violation or other
simple and effective documentation of a violation.'' (H. Rep. No. 95-
218, 95th Cong., 1st Sess., at 129 (1975) (emphasis added). Obviously
Congress had something more in mind with regard to the ``reason to
believe'' determination than the mere filing of a complaint. OSM is
expected to go behind the bald allegations of the complaint and
determine, based on a ``snapshot'' (or, in our view, an investigation,
even if limited in scope) of the alleged violation at the surface
mining site, or some other effective documentation (such as the state's
analysis contained in its response to the complaint) establishing
whether to proceed with any further action (be it a TDN, or in the case
of imminent harm, a federal inspection followed by appropriate
enforcement action). This process would provide a degree of credence
and credibility to the primacy scheme contained in SMCRA by deferring
to the procedures in the approved state program. It would also provide
for serious and meaningful consideration by the federal government in
its oversight capacity whether to proceed with expanded federal
involvement in the state's business via a TDN. If OSM is unwilling to
do this via directive, then we would advocate for a rulemaking on the
matter, similar to what we advanced in our rulemaking petition of 1993.
OSM's reluctance to allow the states to first process citizen
complaints that are received by OSM reflects a mistrust of either our
procedures or our ability. In either case, the answer is not to
incorporate federal intervention in the process, but to assess whether
there are systemic or programmatic issues that must be addressed and
resolved from a larger perspective. If the states are truly to have
primacy, OSM must be wiling to allow the states to function
independently. The mere receipt of a citizen complaint by OSM, rather
than by the state, does not change this integral aspect of primacy.
Instead, it compels OSM to act in a way that respects the states' role
under SMCRA, which in this instance means forwarding the complaint on
to the state for initial review and action. Only after that opportunity
should a complaint be ripe for any type of OSM review, and then
pursuant to the approach suggested in our comments above.
Transmittal of a citizen complaint through a ten-day notice when
the state has not been previously apprised of the complaint by the
citizen triggers a federal process which is duplicative of the existing
state program procedures. Congress' intent was to avoid such federal-
state overlap. S. Rep. No. 128 at 90; See also section 201(c)(12)
(cooperate with state regulatory authorities to minimize duplication of
inspection, enforcement, and administration of the Act). Citizen
complaint procedures and the ten-day notice process must be reconciled
with the deliberate allocation of authority under SMCRA. If OSM
immediately invokes the ten-day notice process to intervene in a state
program matter when the citizen has never availed himself of the state
procedures and remedies, OSM undermines the statutory provisions for
primacy and the rationale for the requirement that state programs
provide the same opportunities found in SMCRA for citizen
participation.
To the extent a state persistently handles citizen complaints
inadequately, OSM's general oversight role provides the avenue to
evaluate the state's administration of its program. Citizens may also
petition the Director to evaluate the state's implementation of the
program if they believe the state is not effectively implementing,
administering or enforcing, 30 CFR 733.12(a)(2). The general oversight
function serves adequately to ensure that states will routinely handle
citizen complaints under their programs without OSM intruding upon the
state's jurisdiction on a case-by-case basis. The use of ten-day
notices upon receipt of a citizen complaint which has not been
previously made to and pursued with the state undermines the state
program and creates ``federal-state overlap'' which Congress expressly
intended to avoid.
Appropriate Action--OSM's definition of ``appropriate action''
incorrectly cites the applicable regulation in the Code of Federal
Regulations. It should be 30 CFR 842.11(b)(1)(ii)(B)(3).
Arbitrary, Capricious or Abuse of Discretion Standard--OSM's
definition of this standard at section 3(b) is confusing and overly
broad. What is the difference between the use of the term
``irrationally'' in (b)(1) and the words ``without a rational basis''
in (b)(4)? This seems unnecessarily duplicative. Furthermore, the
standard in (b)(4) is new and seems to line up more with NEPA than
SMCRA, especially the use of the term ``hard look''. We suggest that
(b)(4) be deleted. In addition, we recommend that the following
language be added to Section 4(d) regarding field office determinations
regarding whether an RA's response is arbitrary, capricious or an abuse
of discretion: ``The arbitrary, capricious or abuse of discretion
standard does not allow OSM as a reviewer to substitute its judgment
for that of the RA. Adherence to this standard mandates a finding of
appropriate action or good cause if the RA presents a rational basis
for its decision, even if OSM might have decided differently if it were
the RA. In reviewing TDN responses, OSM must determine whether the RA's
action or response is based on a reasonable consideration of the
relevant factors and is an exercise of reasoned discretion that does
not deviate from the approved state program. If OSM determines that the
RA's response to a TDN does not constitute appropriate action or a
showing of good cause for inaction, the written determination must
provide a reasonably detailed explanation of the basis for the
conclusion that the RA response is arbitrary, capricious or an abuse of
discretion.''
Authorized Representative - OSM should include the wording ``in
accordance with the right of entry requirements of 30 CFR 842.13'' at
the end of subparagraph (c)(1).
Definition of Federal Inspection--this definition at section 3(e)
includes an all-embracing catch-all phrase in subparagraph (3) that
reads: ``Any other inspection conducted by OSM or jointly by OSM and an
RA.'' Recent experience causes us to inquire what OSM has in mind with
this definition. Would a meeting between OSM and the state to discuss
an oversight issue constitute ``any other inspection'' for purposes of
this definition? If so, we believe it is overly broad. We recommend
that this paragraph be written to read: ``An inspection by OSM, either
individually or jointly with a state RA, under 30 CFR 842.11(a)(1).''
In addition to this change, OSM should also insert the words ``an
authorized representative of'' before the word ``OSM'' in subparagraphs
(1) and (2) when referencing inspections.
Section (4)(g)--When TDNs will not be issued--in conjunction with
our position that TDNs should not be issued for alleged permit defects,
we recommend the inclusion of the following subsection under this
Section so as to clarify OSM's options for programmatic issues. This is
also consistent with section 5(b)(9) of the draft directive:
``(5) Programmatic issues. OSM will not use a TDN once an issue has
been determined to be programmatic in nature. The following types of
issues have been determined to be programmatic:
(1) there is or may be a systemic implementation of an aspect of an
approved program which OSM believes is inconsistent with the approved
program; or
(2) the state program lacks a counterpart to a requirement of the
Act or federal regulations resulting in the RA's inability to take
enforcement action against certain types of violations or to perform
certain regulatory functions; or
(3) the RA and OSM disagree on the adequacy of permit information
or the adequacy of reviews required as part of the permitting
process.''
In conjunction with this suggested language, OSM should also add
the following in Section 6:
``(f) Programmatic issues--When there is a programmatic issue as
described in section (4)(g)(5), OSM will void any TDN, if the dispute
arises from issuing a TDN, and will
(1) enter into corrective action plans with the RA as part of
oversight work plans or performance agreements;
(2) initiate actions under 30 CFR Parts 732 or 733, as appropriate;
(3) initiate joint OSM/RA or other state/federal agency technical
reviews; or
(4) defer to the RA's technical expertise and judgment with the
understanding that, if a performance standard violation develops,
either a state enforcement action or a TDN will address it.''
Section 6(b)(4) regarding Field Office evaluation of an RA's
response to a TDN. In an effort to facilitate resolution of TDNs at the
state level, we recommend adding the following language at the end of
this section: ``When the Field Office Director anticipates that it will
decide that the RA's response is arbitrary, capricious or an abuse of
discretion, the Field Office Director is encouraged to inform the RA of
the basis for the conclusion before issuing a final written
determination to give the RA a final chance to take enforcement action
or to provide any final views. This process should not delay the time
it takes OSM to complete its evaluation of the RA's response.''
Section 6(c)(2)(d)--we recommend that the Field Office Director
should make available to the RA not only items I--V, but also item VI
so that the RA is fully aware of, and has an opportunity to respond to,
the synopsis of the case and the rationale for the Field Office TDN
determination, if the RA has not had the opportunity to do so
previously. Similarly, in section (6)(3)(c), the RA should be given an
opportunity to review and respond to information the Field Office
submits to the Regional Director that was not previously available to
the RA.
Draft Directive REG-23 re Corrective Actions for Regulatory Program
Problems
As with other elements of OSM's oversight actions, OSM is again
making false assumptions about the current progress of program
implementation and performance by the states. Nothing in the record
before OSM (i.e. recent annual oversight reports and OSM's budget
justification document and GPRA reporting) supports the assertion that
there are significant programmatic issues that have not been adequately
addressed by the states as part of the existing oversight protocol.
Furthermore, nothing in the record supports the assertion that states
need to be ``induced'' to take corrective action. The cooperative
working relationship that we are familiar with between OSM and the
states has led to effective problem solving and resolution of
outstanding issues. We are not dealing with a program that is broken or
bleeding; to the contrary, we have been a model of cooperative
federalism that is often commended by other state and federal agencies.
In terms of the options available to OSM to insure correction of
programmatic issues, while some may label them as ``severe'', we would
describe them as congressionally mandated and deliberately conceived to
preserve state primacy. And while the options may be limited in scope,
we believe this is also intentional. Congress did not intend for state
primacy to be easily undermined through a streamlined second-guessing
process by the federal government. Instead, Congress anticipated that
any adjustments or ``corrections'' to a state program or implementation
thereof be preceded by either an opportunity for public hearing and
comment (for programmatic changes) or an opportunity for the state to
take appropriate action or show good cause for not doing so (for
alleged violations of the state program).\5\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\ OSM appeared to understand and capture this important principle
of state primacy in the draft discussion paper that was provided to us
in August of 2009 where the agency said: ``OSM's primary role in a
State with an approved program is to monitor the State to ensure that
it maintains the capability to fulfill those SMCRA responsibilities, to
assist the State in implementing their responsibilities and to report
on its evaluation of the State program. OSM maintains its authority
under SMCRA to intervene when there is a clear breakdown in the States'
implementation.'' (Emphasis added). This is much closer to
congressional and judicial intent, as noted above.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
OSM's suggested resolution of this matter is to reinstate policy
and procedures previously contained in Directive REG-23 for the
development and implementation of process-oriented action plans to
address programmatic issues and/or to place a condition on state
regulatory program grants to require correction of issues. We are
uncertain what OSM has in mind with regard to its use of ``action
plans'', but this appears to hearken back to the days when oversight
was focused on the minutia of state program implementation, rather than
on-the-ground performance. OSM further tips its hat toward this
approach in draft Directive REG-8 where the agency states that it will
maintain ``to the extent possible'' the focus on on-the-ground results.
We are very uncomfortable with the direction that this ``enhancement''
is heading and urge extreme caution.
Whenever OSM references OSM's options for dealing with our failure
to complete the terms of an action plan (as in Subparagraph 5(a)), it
is critical that the directive reference the procedure set forth in
Section 521(b) of SMCRA and 30 CFR 733.12 of its regulations.
With regard to the suggestion in Section 6(a) of the draft
directive that states' Title V grants be conditioned to encourage
correction of issues, we are totally opposed to this approach. First,
we assert that this action is in contravention of SMCRA. Section 705
contains no suggestion that these ``support'' grants are to be
restricted or otherwise conditioned for any reason. Quite the contrary:
Section 102 of SMCRA anticipates that OSM will ``assist the states in
developing and implementing a program to achieve the purposes of this
Act.'' 30 U.S.C. Sec. 1202(g). Restricting the federal funding provided
in Section 705 flies in the face of Section 102. Additionally, OSM has
not received permission from either the authorizing or appropriating
Committees of Congress to proceed in this manner. We assert that both
of these bodies expect that OSM will use and apply the moneys
appropriated for state regulatory grants for the purposes intended and
without restriction or condition.
Secondly, it makes little sense to restrict the states' ability to
spend federal (and matching state) moneys to implement their regulatory
programs when the very reason for ``the issue being corrected'' may
result from limited resources in the first place. And even if this is
not the case, after working diligently for the past 10 years to secure
increases for Title V funding, it sends the wrong message to now
restrict, via conditions, the expenditures of those funds--especially
given the fiscal constraints within which states are operating. This
incredulous suggested approach by OSM leaves the states wondering what
the agency's true intentions are with regard to ``enhancing''
oversight. Are we back to the ``gotcha'' approach to oversight? We
trust not. Too much progress has been made over the years to recede to
this type of state/federal interaction.
We also question the process that OSM has in mind with respect to
grant conditioning. OSM notes in the draft directive that it will
target additional resources to correct identified problems or reduce
grants based on poor performance. Does OSM have specific criteria in
mind that will be used to target additional resources or reduce grants
based on performance? Will something other than the key performance
measures set out in REG-8 be utilized? If so, it will be incumbent on
OSM to work with the states to develop these criteria so that we are
aware of these new criteria for performance.
OSM's draft directive also seems to anticipate that problems will
inevitably be found when it uses language on page 3 under
``Responsibilities'' in subparagraph (5)(c)(1) that Field Office
Directors will ``identify regulatory program problems.'' Again, the
history of oversight, especially over the past 15 years, does not
support this conclusion. In fact, quite to the contrary, there have
been relatively few ``problems'' that have begged for the far-reaching
types of solutions and procedures that OSM is proposing in this draft
directive. This is one of the reasons that Directive REG-23 was
rescinded in the first place. If OSM continues to insist on the need
for a new directive, we suggest that the language in Subparagraph
5(c)(1) be changed to read ``Determine if Regulatory Program Problems
Exist.'' Similar adjustments should also be made in Subparagraph
(5)(c)(2), where the words ``if a regulatory program problem is
determined to exist'' should be added to the end of the sentence and in
Subparagraph (5(c)(3) where the word ``identified'' should modify
``Regulatory Program Problems''. We also suggest adding at the end of
subparagraph (5)(c)(3) the words: ``An opportunity should be provided
for the states or tribe to review and comment on the action plan''.
This will be consistent with paragraph 6(b) on page 4 of the draft
directive.
Finally, in subparagraph 5(b)(2), the directive should be amended
to provide an opportunity for the state or tribe to request appropriate
technical assistance, not just the Field Office Director.
Draft Directive REG-8
This directive has grown exponentially since the last version in
2006 (from 45 pages to 105 pages) and the primary explanation appears
to be the June 2009 MOU. Substantial new sections of the directive have
been added under oversight inspections, off-site impacts, stream
impacts, bond release, special category permits and regulatory program
problems--all of which trace their roots to obligations in the MOU
directed at OSM. Were it not for the MOU, it is unlikely that this
directive would have been revisited at all. It certainly would not have
undergone such a drastic facelift. Based on the annual oversight
reports received by the states over the past five years, there has been
no evidence to support such a major overhaul.
While we understand that OSM has struggled with the presentation of
certain data elements contained in REG-8 that are used to support
oversight reports, OSM's own annual report, and responses to requests
from Congress, the General Accountability Office (GAO) and others, what
OSM has undertaken with this revision goes well beyond that concern. We
have offered on numerous occasions to work with OSM on these data
needs, most recently during the summer of 2009. Rather than engage us
on this matter, OSM has chosen to move in a direction that once again
reverses much of the progress we have made over the years and sets up a
confrontational environment that will do little to meaningfully
evaluate and report on state program implementation. Instead, the
directive is structured to provide maximum leverage for OSM to
implicate the states for their failure to comply with commitments made
on our behalf by OSM in the June 2009 MOU. Some of those commitments
require rulemakings to accomplish, not internal directives. The section
on ``mitigating the impacts to streams'' is particularly egregious, as
it advances OSM's objectives under its stream protection rule prior to
actual promulgation.
It is difficult to know where to begin in providing comments on
this expanded directive. In addition to changes to the text of the
directive, there are significant adjustments to the various charts for
collecting data and information. We provided detailed comments on the
portion of the directive entitled ``Oversight Inspections'' on July 8
of this year but the draft reflects only a few of our suggested
changes. We believe the most effective process for reviewing and
sorting out our respective concerns with current and proposed oversight
procedures and requirements is through a collaborative effort, as has
been utilized in the past. The Oversight Steering Committee has
facilitated this process and the result has been an oversight directive
and evaluation process that reflects a meeting of the minds. We believe
that such an approach is critical and recommend that that Oversight
Steering Committee meet in the immediate future to begin an appropriate
review process.
In the meantime, below are a sampling of some of our concerns with
REG-8, all of which (in addition to others that will likely be
identified) require further review and discussion.

Page 3--item (h) Performance Agreement/Evaluation Plan and (j)
Action Plan--allows OSM to concoct a written plan with or
without the primacy State's concurrence. It basically
anticipates the State will sign, but notes that signing is not
mandatory for OSM to proceed as it wishes to conduct oversight.
This attitude undermines many years of State and OSM
cooperation and collaboration in implementing SMCRA.

Page 4--Subparagraph (5)(a)(2) indicates that the Director/
Deputy Director will appoint an Oversight Steering Committee
``when appropriate''. We cannot imagine a scenario where this
would not be appropriate. Part of the past success of OSM's
oversight policy and procedure has been attributable to the
work of this Steering Committee. As suggested above, we believe
this is the proper forum for discussing and resolving the many
issues associated with the new draft directive and we urge OSM
to rejuvenate this Committee as soon as possible.

Page 5--item (d)(4)--The States have no problem with public
participation as allowed under their approved programs, which
must be consistent with and as effective as that provided under
the federal regulations. OSM seems to be anticipating far more
public participation than that currently required by law and
regulation.

Page 6--item 5--preparing a Performance agreement/Evaluation
Plan ``to the extent possible'' cooperatively with the State
regulatory Authority--intent is explicit that OSM will prepare
the plan as it deems appropriate, even absent the regulatory
authority's cooperation and concurrence.

Page 8--OSM does not mention the effect that this new draft
directive will have on other REG-8 change notices, including
Transmittal Number 932 dated July 1, 2008 and Transmittal
Number 943 dated October 6, 2008.

Appendix--Page 1-2, last paragraph--This is a federal guidance
document and does not have the weight of regulation or statute.
While OSM may feel that the States have ``respective roles and
responsibilities'', those are set forth by law and regulation.
The States should not and are not bound by this federal
guidance document.

Appendix--Page 1-3--OSM notes in paragraph 2 that oversight
reviews, ``may be associated with evaluation of customer
service, actual or potential on-the-ground or permitting
problems, and end results.'' This sets up the classic second-
guessing scenario, especially with respect to permitting
issues. OSM's authority is restricted to review of the state's
permitting process and program, not individual permitting
decisions. The suggestion that ``potential'' problems are fair
game also unduly expands the reach of OSM's oversight review
and authority. And while OSM states that its oversight ``will
not be process-driven'', the draft directive allows OSM to
essentially review and second guess the regulatory authority's
decisions and actions at any time. In this regard, paragraph 2
on page 1-3 seems inconsistent with paragraph 4 that follows.
OSM sets percentages of the number of inspectable units it will
focus on, then provides a caveat that it may review more should
it so choose. Not only will this be duplicative of the
regulatory authority's processes, the additional record keeping
and reporting will further strain OSM and State resources and
foster uncertainty in the regulated community.

Appendix--Page 1-4--Outreach--OSM needs to be sure that it does
not confuse its oversight role with the jurisdictional role of
the state regulatory authority. To actively seek other federal
agency concerns is the role of the state regulatory authority
under its primacy program, either as part of the permitting
process or in the initial stages of program approval or later
program amendments. This is not and should not be a function of
OSM oversight. OSM's expansion of the role of other federal
agencies in the oversight process is a clear indication of the
far-reaching impact of the 2009 MOU.

Appendix--Pages 1-5 through 1-8--Oversight Inspections--This is
an entirely new section of REG-8, also driven by the 2009 MOU.
In it, OSM has decided upon a shotgun approach without a
statistical basis for selecting the types and percentage of
inspections it intends to conduct--with or without concurrence
of the regulatory authority. Independent inspections contravene
and usurp a State regulatory authority's primacy. If
independent inspections are conducted, OSM's inspections should
always be conducted with reasonable notice to the regulatory
authority. OSM's intent to give less than 24 hours notice is
unrealistic and unreasonable. OSM and the States have many
years of cooperation and trust in implementing SMCRA. OSM is
reverting back to the days of mistrust and confrontation with
the States. OSM's inspector should give his/her State
counterpart at least 5 working days notice of the inspection
date. OSM would not have to disclose the permit or site
location until the day of the inspection. OSM's intent to
conduct independent inspections without notice to the
regulatory authority is unacceptable and contrary to State
primacy.

Appendix--Page 1-6--Oversight Inspections--OSM states in the
second paragraph of this section that ``inspections that do not
specifically address the purpose of an oversight inspection
[such as citizen complaints and federal enforcement
inspections] will not be counted in meeting the targeted number
of inspections in the Performance Agreement/Evaluation Plan''.
The fact is, all OSM inspections have the effect of evaluating
the effectiveness of a state's program in some form or another.
As a result, all OSM inspections in primacy states should be
accounted for in determining the actual number of oversight
inspections for each respective state or tribe.

Appendix--Page 1-7--OSM notes with respect to the selection of
random and focused inspections that ``the final decision on the
types of inspections to be used for evaluation of any state or
tribal program will be at the discretion of the FOD.'' This
would seem to undercut any agreements that were reached between
the state and the FOD during the negotiation and development of
the state's annual performance agreement.

Appendix--Pages 1-9 through 1-13--Offsite Impacts--The current
REG-8 provisions addressing offsite impacts should remain in
place. The draft greatly expands the universe of offsite
impacts and goes far beyond the jurisdictional control of the
regulatory authority. Offsite impacts should be limited to
violations cited under SMCRA. OSM's draft would also consider
violations cited by other federal and state agencies that are
outside the scope of SMCRA. Several of the reporting
requirements are new and deserve further discussion before
being incorporated in the directive. Again, in many cases, OSM
is utilizing the directive to foist new requirements on state
regulatory authorities which do not find their support in
existing regulations. This is particularly true with respect to
the collection of information on unregulated off-site impacts
in addition to those regulated or controlled by the state
program and the identification of off-site impacts where no
violation was required or cited. In addition to the potential
confusion and controversy this could engender, spending limited
state and federal resources on these matters seems
inappropriate.

Appendix--Pages 1-13 through 1-18--Reclamation Success--The
decision to apply for a phase bond release is a business
determination of the permittee. While the regulatory authority
can encourage the permittee to submit a bond reduction
application, it cannot by regulation or law mandate this
result. The timeliness measurements of the approval of the
various bond release phases may not provide the most accurate
data.

Appendix--Pages 1-20 through 1-21. OSM is moving toward an
enhanced database for oversight, especially with the expanded
``Regulatory Program Data for States and Tribes'' (DST). It is
absolutely critical that OSM engage in discussions with the
states about the ability to provide the data being sought by
OSM before the agency moves forward with this aspect of
oversight. The states will likely face challenges associated
with both the availability of this data and the resources
required to provide the data. If OSM is to be successful in the
collection and analysis of this important program data, the
agency's state partners must be brought into the process.

Appendix--Page 1-23--OSM is proposing to place minutes from
meetings between OSM and the states in OSM's ``Evaluation
Files'', which in turn would be placed on OSM's website. These
oversight ``team meetings'' are often frank exchanges about
challenging issues, and may involve discussions about potential
future enforcements actions against operators. Making these
types of notes and discussions available to the public could
prove problematic. These materials should enjoy the same
protection as attorney-client privilege and work product.
Conclusion
We appreciate the opportunity to submit these comments on the three
oversight directives discussed above. We call upon OSM to reconvene the
Oversight Steering Committee to engage in further discussions
concerning both REG-8 and REG-23 to address the various concerns raised
in our comments. We also urge OSM to appoint a separate working group
composed of state and federal representatives to work through the
issues associated with the proposed reinstitution of INE-35. We stand
prepared to meet with you at your earliest convenience.

Sincerely,

Gregory E. Conrad
Executive Director
Interstate Mining Compact Commission

Douglas C. Larson
Executive Director
Western Interstate Energy Board
On behalf of the WIEB Reclamation Committee
______

[A letter submitted for the record by the Western
Governors' Association, to The Honorable Ken Salazar,
Secretary, U.S. Department of the Interior, dated February 27,
2011 follows:]

WESTERN GOVERNORS' ASSOCIATION

Headquarters:

1600 Broadway, Suite 1700

Denver, CO 80202

303-623-9378 -- Fax 303-534-7309

Washington, D.C. Office:

400 N. Capitol Street. N.W., Suite 388

Washington, D.C. 20001

202-624-5402 -- Fax 202-624-7707

www.westgov.org

February 27, 2011

The Honorable Ken Salazar
Secretary of the Interior
Department of the Interior
1849 C. Street, N.W.
Mail Stop 7060
Washington, D.C. 20240

Dear Secretary Salazar:

On behalf of the Western Governors' Association (WGA), we are
writing to express concerns over recent actions by the Office of
Surface Mining, Reclamation and Enforcement (OSMRE) to comprehensively
revise regulations regarding stream protection under the Surface Mining
Control and Reclamation Act (SMCRA). These proposed changes, called the
``stream protection rule,'' will apply nationwide and in the agency's
own words are ``much broader in scope than the 2008 stream buffer zone
rule.'' WGA is an independent, nonpartisan organization of Governors
representing 19 Western states and three U.S.-flag Pacific islands. The
states in our territory produce 599 million tons of coal annually,
representing 56% of the total U.S. coal production.
Several of our member states who are ``cooperating agencies'' have
delivered a letter (see attached letter dated November 23, 2010) to
your Director of OSMRE expressing serious concerns about the need and
justification for both the proposed rule and accompanying environmental
impact statement (EIS), as well as the quality, completeness and
accuracy of the chapters of the EIS that they had the opportunity to
review. WGA is also concerned by the procedures used by your agency in
developing the EIS to support this rule. Members who are ``cooperating
agencies'' on the EIS feel that they have not had a meaningful
opportunity to comment on its contents, given the constrained time
periods for reviewing and submitting comments.
WGA feels that the OSMRE has not provided a sufficient basis to
support the need for sweeping regulatory changes, hi fact, one of the
primary justifications put forward by the agency in its Federal
Register notice is a June 11, 2009 memorandum of understanding (MOU)
between the Administrator of the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency,
the Acting Assistant Secretary of the Army, and you. However, the MOU
was specifically targeted at ``Appalachian Surface Coal Mining,'' which
expressly refers to mining techniques requiring permits under both the
Surface Mining Control and Reclamation Act (SMCRA) and Section 404 of
the Clean Water Act (CWA), in the states of Kentucky, Ohio,
Pennsylvania, Tennessee, Virginia, and West Virginia.'' (See MOU at p.
1 [REMOVED ADVANCE FIELD] and fn 1). Despite this limitation in the
MOU, the OSMRE rules will be applied to coal mines throughout the
United States, including coal-producing Western states that we
represent.
Likewise, the agency has not provided objective data to support
such comprehensive regulatory changes. OSMRE's most recent annual
evaluation reports for Western states for 2010 strongly suggest
otherwise. For example, the report for Wyoming, which produces more
coal than any other state in the U.S. (almost 40% of the nation's
total), says that: ``...the Wyoming program is being carried out in an
effective manner.'' The report also demonstrates significant and steady
progress in reclamation, showing that the ratio of reclaimed to
disturbed acres has steadily increased from 10% in 1988 to 45% in 2010.
The report also stated that the state ensured that backfilled and
graded areas will be returned to approximate original contour, that
there have not been any public complaints about bonding, and that
Wyoming has not had any bond forfeitures in recent years. Finally,
despite OSMRE's insistence on a 78% increase in inspections, no
enforcement actions were taken by OSMRE during 2009 or 2010. hi OSMRE's
own words, ``this lack of additional enforcement actions, despite
increased inspection frequency, helps to illustrate the effectiveness
of the Wyoming's regulatory program.''
Similar statements can be found in OSMRE evaluation reports on
other WGA-member states. Here is a sampling of what OSMRE said about
some of the other major coal producing states in the West:

North Dakota: ``Overall, North Dakota has an
excellent coal regulatory program.''

Montana: ``...an off-site impact is defined as
anything resulting from a surface coal mining and reclamation
activity or operation that causes a negative effect on people,
land, water, or structures outside the permit area...Off-site
impacts were not identified during the reporting period.''

Utah: ``...site conditions indicated that the state
is effectively implementing and enforcing its program.''

Texas: ``...the Office of Surface Mining finds that
Texas is properly administering its regulatory and abandoned
mine lands programs.''

Alaska: the ``DMLW [Division of Mining, Land, and
Water] is effectively maintaining and administering the coal
regulatory program in accordance with the Alaska Surface Coal
Mining and Reclamation Act.''
WGA urges you to consider these reports on Western state coal
programs, evaluate the proposed regulatory changes, and consider
suspending further work on their implementation so that OSMRE can re-
examine the purpose and need for these rules, and provide appropriate
scientific and factual information to support rule changes of this
magnitude. If after such evaluation and consideration the agency
determines that rule changes are necessary, we request that OSMRE
engage our member states and members of the public in a meaningful and
substantial way.

Sincerely,

C.L. ``Butch'' Otter
Governor of Idaho
Chairman

Christine O. Gregoire
Governor of Washington
Vice Chair

Enclosure


