- DOI SPENDING AND THE PRESIDENT'S FISCAL YEAR 2012 BUDGET PROPOSAL

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

DOI SPENDING AND THE
PRESIDENT'S FISCAL YEAR
2012 BUDGET PROPOSAL

=======================================================================

OVERSIGHT HEARING

before the

COMMITTEE ON NATURAL RESOURCES
U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

Thursday, March 3, 2011

__________

Serial No. 112-5

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Natural Resources

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.fdsys.gov
or
Committee address: http://resourcescommittee.house.gov

----------
U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE

64-957 PDF                       WASHINGTON : 2011

For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800;
DC area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104 Mail: Stop IDCC,
Washington, DC 20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON NATURAL RESOURCES

DOC HASTINGS, WA, Chairman
EDWARD J. MARKEY, MA, Ranking Democrat Member

Don Young, AK                        Dale E. Kildee, MI
John J. Duncan, Jr., TN              Peter A. DeFazio, OR
Louie Gohmert, TX                    Eni F.H. Faleomavaega, AS
Rob Bishop, UT                       Frank Pallone, Jr., NJ
Doug Lamborn, CO                     Grace F. Napolitano, CA
Robert J. Wittman, VA                Rush D. Holt, NJ
Paul C. Broun, GA                    Raul M. Grijalva, AZ
John Fleming, LA                     Madeleine Z. Bordallo, GU
Mike Coffman, CO                     Jim Costa, CA
Tom McClintock, CA                   Dan Boren, OK
Glenn Thompson, PA                   Gregorio Kilili Camacho Sablan,
Jeff Denham, CA                          CNMI
Dan Benishek, MI                     Martin Heinrich, NM
David Rivera, FL                     Ben Ray Lujan, NM
Jeff Duncan, SC                      Donna M. Christensen, VI
Scott R. Tipton, CO                  John P. Sarbanes, MD
Paul A. Gosar, AZ                    Betty Sutton, OH
Raul R. Labrador, ID                 Niki Tsongas, MA
Kristi L. Noem, SD                   Pedro R. Pierluisi, PR
Steve Southerland II, FL             John Garamendi, CA
Bill Flores, TX                      Colleen W. Hanabusa, HI
Andy Harris, MD
Jeffrey M. Landry, LA
Charles J. ``Chuck'' Fleischmann,
TN
Jon Runyan, NJ
Bill Johnson, OH

Todd Young, Chief of Staff
Lisa Pittman, Chief Counsel
Jeffrey Duncan, Democrat Staff Director
Rick Healy, Democrat Chief Counsel
------

CONTENTS

----------
Page

Hearing held on Thursday, March 3, 2011..........................     1

Statement of Members:
Benishek, Hon. Dan, a Representative in Congress from the
State of Michigan, Prepared statement of...................    67
Flores, Hon. Bill, a Representative in Congress from the
State of Texas, Prepared statement of......................    67
Hastings, Hon. Doc, a Representative in Congress from the
State of Washington........................................     1
Prepared statement of....................................     3
Markey, Hon. Edward J., a Representative in Congress from the
State of Massachusetts.....................................     4
Prepared statement of....................................     5
Tipton, Hon. Scott R., a Representative in Congress from the
State of Colorado, Prepared statement of...................    68

Statement of Witnesses:
Salazar, Hon. Ken, Secretary, U.S. Department of the Interior     6
Prepared statement of....................................     9

OVERSIGHT HEARING TITLED ``DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR SPENDING AND THE
PRESIDENT'S FISCAL YEAR 2012 BUDGET PROPOSAL.''

----------

Thursday, March 3, 2011

U.S. House of Representatives

Committee on Natural Resources

Washington, D.C.

----------

The Committee met, pursuant to call, at 10:00 a.m. in Room
1324, Longworth House Office Building, Hon. Doc Hastings
[Chairman of the Committee] presiding.
Present: Representatives Hastings, Duncan of Tennessee,
Bishop, Lamborn, Wittman, Broun, Fleming, Coffman, McClintock,
Thompson, Denham, Benishek, Rivera, Duncan of South Carolina,
Tipton, Gosar, Labrador, Noem, Southerland, Flores, Landry,
Fleischmann, Runyan, Johnson, Markey, Kildee, DeFazio,
Faleomavaega, Napolitano, Holt, Grijalva, Costa, Sablan,
Heinrich, Lujan, Christensen, Sarbanes, Sutton, Tsongas,
Garamendi, and Hanabusa.

STATEMENT OF HON. DOC HASTINGS, A REPRESENTATIVE IN CONGRESS
FROM THE STATE OF WASHINGTON

The Chairman. The Committee will come to order. The Chair
notes the presence of a quorum. The Committee on Natural
Resources is meeting today to hear testimony on the Department
of the Interior Spending and the President's Fiscal Year 2012
Budget Proposal. Under Committee Rule 4[f], opening statements
are limited to the Chairman and the Ranking Member of the
Committee so that we can hear from our witnesses, or hear as
long as we can from our witnesses; however, I ask unanimous
consent to include any Member that would like to have an
opening statement in the record. Without objection, so ordered.
Let us get started right away. The Chair wants to mention, the
Secretary has been generous with his time. He is going to be
with us until 1:00 and we want to utilize all the time that we
possibly can, so I am going to be very, very strict on the
five-minute rule and I will advise you of that, and when we get
close, we all know how the lights work, and so I just want to
remind people we are going to be as strict as we possibly can.
Thank you, Secretary Salazar, for being here today. While
the Committee did not, unfortunately, get a chance to hear from
you on the last two of President Obama's budgets, we are very
pleased for you to be here today when there is certainly a need
to control Federal spending. The purpose of today's hearing is
to examine the spending programs of the Department of the
Interior and the President's proposed Fiscal Year 2012 budget.
As everyone is aware, our country is currently facing a $14
trillion debt. This debt is threatening our economy, our
nation's ability to remain competitive and the future security
of our children and our grandchildren. It is long past time to
get serious about cutting spending and addressing this debt
head on. This requires setting priorities and making tough
choices on how best to direct scarce taxpayer dollars.
When it comes to highlighting spending, the taxpayers
simply cannot afford it. I must bring attention, Mr. Secretary,
to the $900 million in the President's budget request for the
Land and Water Conservation Fund which is primarily used to
purchase Federal land. This represents a $553 million increase
over the 2008 levels. I say this because the Department of the
Interior has a maintenance backlog on public lands that is in
the billions of dollars. I believe the government has the
responsibility to maintain and care for existing lands before
spending money that we don't have on more, and more and more
land. In addition to spending, we will examine how several
Interior Department policies are directly costing American
jobs.
This includes the regulatory drought in California to the
San Joaquin Valley where the government has withheld valuable
water from communities, prioritizing the needs of a three-inch
fish over thousands of American workers and their families, and
the Department's Office of Surface Mining Reclamation and
Enforcement's pursuit of sweeping changes to stream regulations
that, by their own admission, will cost thousands of Americans'
jobs. Finally, no discussion about jobs is complete without
mentioning the President's de facto moratorium on the Gulf of
Mexico that has left thousands of workers without jobs.
Gasoline prices have risen nearly 20 cents last week. Higher
gasoline prices not only mean increased costs at the pump, but
families must pay more for groceries, and farmers' and small
businesses' costs will go up.
Higher gasoline prices have a substantial impact on every
American and every part of our fragile economy, but instead of
focusing on ways to produce our own American energy, this
Administration is deepening America's dependence on unstable
and hostile foreign countries. The de facto drilling moratorium
in the Gulf is simply the latest example of this. The official
moratorium on deepwater drilling was lifted over four months
ago, yet the Administration just this week, and I am glad they
did, issued their first permit. The people of the Gulf need
more than just one token permit. One permit will not put
thousands of workers back to work. I also hope to hear further
details on today's $358 million budget request for the Bureau
of Ocean Energy and Management, Regulation and Enforcement.
This is a $119 million increase above the Fiscal Year 2010
levels.
We all share the desire to make offshore drilling safe, but
we need to make certain that this money will be used to
actually improve and resume offshore drilling. I believe we can
agree that bigger government does not equate into better
government. The goal should be to make this agency better and
faster, not bigger and slower. In light of the current fiscal
crisis, it is important to remember that American energy
production offshore and on public lands generates billions of
dollars of revenue to the government. Not only do we create
jobs by producing energy, but we help lower the debt and our
deficit and our dependence on foreign countries. So I just have
to simply say in closing, Mr. Secretary, that your budget has a
$60 billion tax increase on American energy, and I do not
believe that is what Americans need at this point and we would
like to pursue that with you also. So, with that, I will yield
back what time I do not have and I will recognize the Ranking
Member for his opening statement.
[The prepared statement of Chairman Hastings follows:]

Statement of The Honorable Doc Hastings, Chairman,
Committee on Natural Resources

Thank you Secretary Salazar for being here today. While the
Committee didn't get a chance to hear from you on President Obama's
last two budgets, we're pleased to have you here this year at a time
when there is a great need to control spending.
The purpose of today's hearing is to examine the spending and
programs of the Department of the Interior and the President's proposed
Fiscal Year 2012 budget. As everyone is aware, our country is currently
facing a $14 trillion debt. This debt is threatening our economy, our
nation's ability to remain competitive, and the future security of our
children and grandchildren. It's long past time to get serious about
cutting spending and addressing this debt head-on. That will require
setting priorities and making tough choices on how best to direct
scarce taxpayer dollars.
When it comes to highlighting spending that taxpayers simply cannot
afford, I must bring attention to the $900 million in the President's
budget for the Land and Water Conservation Fund, which is primarily
used to purchase more federal land. This represents a $553 million
increase above Fiscal Year 2008 levels.
The Department of the Interior has a maintenance backlog on public
lands that measures in the billions of dollars.
I believe the government has a responsibility to maintain and care
for our existing lands before spending money we don't have to acquire
more and more and more land.
In addition to spending, we will also examine how several Interior
Department policies are directly costing American jobs.
This includes the regulatory drought in California's San Joaquin
Valley where the government has withheld valuable water from
communities, prioritizing the needs of a three-inch fish over thousands
of workers and their families.
And the Department's Office of Surface Mining Reclamation and
Enforcement's pursuit of sweeping changes to stream regulations that by
their own admission will cost thousands of American jobs.
Finally, no discussion about jobs is complete without mentioning
the President's de facto drilling moratorium in the Gulf of Mexico that
has left thousands of Americans out of work.
Gasoline prices have risen 20 cents in the last week. Higher
gasoline prices not only mean increased costs at the pump, but that
families will pay more for groceries, farmers will pay more for farm,
and small businesses will pay more to operate. Higher gasoline prices
have a substantial impact on every American and every aspect of our
already fragile economy.
But instead of focusing on ways to produce our own American energy,
the Administration is deepening America's dependence on unstable,
hostile foreign countries.
The de facto drilling moratorium in the Gulf is simply the latest
example of the Administration blocking access to our nation's energy
resources.
The official moratorium on deepwater drilling was lifted over four
months ago, yet the Administration just this week issued the first
permit. The people in the Gulf need more than just one token permit.
One permit will not put thousands of people back to work. We need to
see real progress and the immediate issuance of additional permits.
I also hope to hear further details today on the $358.4 million
budget request for the Bureau of Ocean Energy Management, Regulation
and Enforcement. This is $119.3 million above Fiscal Year 2010 levels.
We all share the goal of wanting to make U.S. offshore drilling the
safest in the world, and I don't doubt that additional funds will be
needed to hire more inspectors. But we need to make certain that this
money will be used to actually improve safety and resume offshore
drilling.
I believe most of us can agree that bigger government does not
generally equate to better government. This Committee is specifically
interested in how increased funding and staffing will improve the
process and foster increased American energy production. The goal
should be take make this agency better and faster, not bigger and
slower.
In light of the current fiscal crisis, it's important to remember
that American energy production offshore and on public lands generates
billions of dollars in revenue. Not only do we create jobs by producing
energy in the U.S., but we help lower the debt and deficit, and we
prevent our energy dollars from being sent overseas to foreign
countries.
But instead of increasing production and thereby reducing the
deficit, the Administration has proposed to increase the cost of
producing American energy by raising a multitude of taxes. The
President's budget includes over $60 billion in higher taxes and fees
on American energy production. This will lead to less energy, higher
costs and fewer American jobs.
If you increase the cost of producing gasoline, you raise the price
of gasoline at the pump. The last thing families and businesses need
right now is for gasoline prices to climb even higher.
These are just a few of the issues I hope to further discuss at
today's hearing and I look forward to hearing from the Secretary.
______

STATEMENT OF HON. EDWARD MARKEY, A REPRESENTATIVE IN CONGRESS
FROM THE STATE OF MASSACHUSETTS

Mr. Markey. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, very much, and thank
you, Mr. Secretary, for being here. I am struck by two facts
from your testimony, Mr. Secretary. First, Interior reports
that the programs and activities of the Department support more
than 1.3 million jobs and $370 million in economic activity
annually. Second, Interior is unique in that the Department
generates more revenue for the U.S. Treasury than its annual
appropriation. While our Federal deficit is in the red, your
Department is in the black. Given these tough economic times
and the enormous profits made by using public resources, I
welcome your proposal that the oil and gas industry should pay
a larger share of the government's costs for inspections and
permits following years of lax oversight. Even, I think, the
Members in the majority recognized in their spending bill that
more money should be diverted to robust inspections.
Some have criticized the slow pace of oil and gas leasing.
Of course, what the critics fail to mention is that oil
production last year on Federal lands was higher than in the
last year of the Bush Administration, and they do not disclose
that oil companies are not even producing on many of the leases
that they currently hold. While 80 million acres are presently
under lease, the oil and gas industry is only producing on
about 19.5 million of those acres. Last year the Bureau of Land
Management issued 4,090 permits to drill but operations began
on only 1,480 of those permits. It is as if the oil and gas
industry first asked for dessert, then ate one-fourth of their
dinner, and then complained to the manager about the service.
On top of that, they want to stiff you on the tip.
These charges are especially absurd considering this week
that the Interior Department approved the deepwater drilling
permit in the Gulf of Mexico. The permitted company was the
first to demonstrate that it had the resources and capability
to respond to an accident as part of their drilling request.
For those who say that this post-bill process has been
political, I think the irony of BP holding the largest stake in
the well for the permit you approved left everyone that was
questioning you on the question of whether or not you were
being political, that instead you have played it very straight,
and BP won that first lease. Mr. Secretary, I particularly
appreciate your commitment to renewable energy. When you took
office, there had been little effort in this area. Now you have
a goal of permitting 10,000 megawatts by 2012.
These efforts recognize that we can't just drill our way
out of our dependence on foreign oil. We need to develop clean
energy alternatives that create American jobs. The United
States uses 25 percent of the world's oil, yet we have just two
percent of the world's oil reserves. The world price is set by
OPEC and increases in oil production in the United States over
the last five years still cannot impact the price of oil. On
climate change and endangered species, there are those who
prefer to deny reality and ignore the warning signs of melting
polar ice, crop killing droughts and deadly floods, but I am
glad to see that Interior attempts to deal with climate change
before our iconic species become but a memory. Mr. Secretary, I
also welcome your proposal for full funding of the Land and
Water Conservation Fund. This fund is based on the simple
premise that as we deplete one resource, we should preserve
other natural resources. We thank you for your leadership and
visionary stewardship of the agency since you have been sworn
in. We welcome you here today.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Markey follows:]

Statement of The Honorable Edward J. Markey, Ranking Member,
Committee on Natural Resources

Mr. Secretary, I appreciate your presence here today.
I am struck by two facts from your testimony. First, Interior
reports that the programs and activities of the Department support more
than 1.3 million jobs and $370 million in economic activity annually.
Second, Interior is unique in that the Department generates more
revenue for the U.S. Treasury than its annual appropriation. While our
federal deficit is in the red, your Department is in the black.
Given these tough economic times and the enormous profits made by
using public resources, I welcome your proposal that the oil and gas
industry should pay a larger share of the government's costs for
inspections and permits following years of lax oversight. Even my
Republican friends recognized in their spending bill that more money
should be diverted to robust inspections.
Some have criticized the slow pace of oil and gas leasing. Of
course, what the critics fail to mention is that oil production last
year on federal lands was higher than in the last year of the Bush
Administration. And they won't disclose that oil companies are not even
producing on many of the leases they currently hold. While 80 million
acres are presently under lease, the oil and gas industry is only
producing on 19.5 million of those acres. Last year, the Bureau of Land
Management issued 4,090 permits to drill, but operations began on only
1,480 of those permits.
It's as if the oil and gas industry first asked for dessert, then
ate 1/4th of their dinner, and then complained to the manager about the
service. On top of that, they want to stiff you on the tip.
These charges are especially absurd considering that this week the
Interior Department approved a deepwater drilling permit in the Gulf of
Mexico. The permitted company was the first to demonstrate that it had
the resources and capability to respond to an accident as part of their
drilling request.
And for those who say this post-spill process has been political, I
think the irony of BP holding the largest stake in the well for the
permit you approved tells everyone you are not playing politics, you
are playing it straight.
Mr. Secretary, I particularly appreciate your commitment to
renewable energy. When you took office there had been little effort in
this area. Now, you have a goal of permitting 10,000 megawatts by 2012.
These efforts recognize that we can't just drill our way out of our
dependence on foreign oil. We need to develop clean energy alternatives
that create American jobs.
The United States uses 25 percent of the world's oil, yet we have
just 2 percent of the world's reserves. The world price is still set by
OPEC. And increases in oil production in the United States over the
past five years have done nothing to reduce the price of oil.
On climate change and endangered species there are those who prefer
to stick their head in the sand and ignore the warning signs of melting
polar ice, crop-killing droughts and deadly floods. I am glad to see
Interior attempt to deal with climate change before our iconic species
become but a memory.
Mr. Secretary, I also welcome your proposal for full funding of the
Land and Water Conservation Fund. This fund is based on the simple
premise that as we deplete one resource, we should preserve other
natural resources.
Mr. Secretary, I thank you again for your presence here today and I
look forward to your testimony.
______

The Chairman. I thank the Ranking Member, and I thank very
much his looking at the time, like I did not, so I thank him
for that. We are now ready to hear from our only witness today,
The Honorable Ken Salazar, the Secretary of the Interior. Mr.
Secretary, thank you very much for being here. I would just
remind you, like all witnesses, your written statement will
appear in the record. I would like you to obviously observe
that five-minute timeframe as much as you possibly can. The
clerk will start the timer, and, as you know, the green light
goes for four minutes, yellow light for one and the red light,
your time is up. If you could adhere to that, I would certainly
appreciate that. So, Mr. Secretary, thank you very, very much
for being here, and you may begin.

STATEMENT OF HON. KEN SALAZAR, SECRETARY, U.S. DEPARTMENT OF
THE INTERIOR; ACCOMPANIED BY HON. DAVID J. HAYES, DEPUTY
SECRETARY, U.S. DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR; AND PAMELA K. HAZE,
DEPUTY ASSISTANT SECRETARY, BUDGET, FINANCE, PERFORMANCE, AND
ACQUISITION, U.S. DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR

Secretary Salazar. Thank you very much, Chairman Hastings
and Ranking Member Markey and the distinguished members of this
Committee. It is an honor and a privilege to serve this nation
and to serve all of you as the Secretary of the Interior and to
be part of President Obama's cabinet. With me today is David
Hayes who is the Deputy Secretary of the Interior and Pam Haze
who is a Budget Director at Interior so that they are available
to answer questions as well. Let me start by saying that the
mission of the Department of the Interior is a mission which is
extraordinarily important to each and every one of you and to
this nation. It is a mission which makes the Secretary of the
Interior the custodian of America's natural resources and the
custodian of America's history. It is a mission which I very
much enjoy working on.
For those of you who are not as familiar as others with the
Department of the Interior, we manage 20 percent of the land
mass of the United States of America, 553 national wildlife
refuges and almost 400 national parks throughout the United
States of America. We also manage 1.75 million acres of the
Outer Continental Shelf where much of our oil and gas
production takes place and have important responsibilities,
trust responsibilities, for the Native Americans and the
reservations in our country. As we see the Department of the
Interior, and I think both the Chairman and the Ranking Member
got it right where they talked about some of the work that we
do in terms of job production, we see our efforts at the
Department of the Interior as being an economic generator for
our economy, and certainly the numbers that we have in terms of
the creation of millions of jobs from the outdoor industry, as
well as from energy production is something that we are very
proud of.
The budget that the President presented to the Congress for
2012 is a freeze budget. It is a budget that cuts $1.1 billion,
I think, in these times of fiscal austerity, and where everyone
in the country is saying that we need to be fiscally tough, it
is a budget that represents some tough choices. We have cut
$1.1 billion, including looking at administrative savings which
are important, such as travel, where we are cutting $42 million
from the budget, information technology $36 million,
procurement reform efforts that we have undertaken to make
government work better where we are saving $53 million, so
overall, cuts of $1.1 billion that are accounted for in the
budget that we have presented in front of you.
I want to briefly spend some time speaking about energy,
both conventional and renewable, because I know that is
important to the members of this Committee, the conservation
work, which includes the Land and Water Conversation Fund which
you raised in your opening statements, a brief comment about
water, and finally, a comment about youth and the efforts that
we have underway. First, with respect to energy, we recognize
the role that we play at the Department of the Interior in
terms of powering our economy through the energy that is
produced in America, and that is both conventional as well as
renewable energy. Our goal is simply to have a robust oil and
gas program for the United States in both America's oceans and
on America's lands. With respect to our goal in terms of having
that kind of program underway, we need to keep in mind the
protection of people and the protection of the environment.
Certainly for some it may seem like a distant memory, for
others it is not, and that is the blowup of the Macondo well
and the Deepwater Horizon last year on April 20 should remind
us all that that was an area where over 30 years of neglect
resulted in the kind of catastrophe that poured nearly five
million barrels of oil out into the ocean in the Gulf of
Mexico, and so how we move forward with safe production that
protects people and the environment is of the highest order,
and that is why in front of you there is a request to beef up
significantly the funding that is available for the Bureau of
Ocean Energy Management and Regulation. That money will go into
inspections and to improve permitting and a number of other
things that will help us get the job done.
With respect to onshore oil and gas production, we continue
to lease oil and gas throughout the United States on BLM lands
and lands that we manage on behalf of the Forest Service as
well and have issued over 5,000 permits in 2010. We will issue
about 7,000 permits in 2011 and have a robust program to move
forward with conventional energy. On the renewable energy side,
to Ranking Member Markey's point on renewable energy, I am
proud of the fact that the Department of the Interior over the
last two years has permitted over 3,700 megawatts of renewable
energy. It is a huge amount of energy which includes the
largest solar scale facilities in the world, as well as
capturing the power of the wind, and geothermal and other
renewable energies in places like Congressman Bishop's
district, in Milford, Utah, where I have been on different
occasions to look at some of the renewable energy efforts that
are underway in Utah, especially there, in Milford, Utah.
We expect in the 2012 budget that on the renewable energy
front we will be able to get to a level of 10,000 megawatts of
power from renewable energy. On conservation, just to make a
few points on conservation and what is included in the budget,
again, I think it is important for all of us, especially those
from the West, to recognize the importance of what tourism and
job creation occurs when we have places, such as my Colorado
colleagues here know, from Rocky Mountain National Park and so
many of the other places there, or whether it is in places like
the Everglades where you have a huge number of people who
actually come to our states because of the great tourism
opportunities that are there. Your state, Chairman Hastings, is
no exception to that, where we see ourselves as being a huge
economic generator because of the fact that people come there
to hunt, and fish, and bike, and hike and enjoy the outdoors of
your great state.
Indeed, the Outdoor Recreation Industry Foundation
estimates that there are 6.5 million jobs that are created
every year through these outdoor activities that occur here in
our country. Mr. Chairman, I know my time is up, but I would
respectfully request two more minutes to finish my statement.
The Chairman. Go right ahead, Mr. Secretary.
Secretary Salazar. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. So as we move
forward with the America's Great Outdoors Initiative which the
President announced, it is an effort to keep alive the
conservation legacy which was started by a great Republican
President, Abraham Lincoln, when he set aside Yosemite during
the midst of the Civil War, the conservation legacy of Teddy
Roosevelt and what he did at the beginning of the last century
and Franklin Roosevelt continuing that effort during the most
difficult times of The Depression and standing up the country
for World War II. The investments that we look to make in terms
of conservation do include full funding of the Land and Water
Conservation Fund.
When that program was created in the 1960s, it was thought
that the resources that we would be taking from our oceans
would provide a funding stream for conservation for the long
term. Sadly, over the last 50 years, that has not happened, and
instead, because of the appropriations mechanisms, only about
half of the money that should have gone to conservation has
actually gone to conservation. So the ups and downs really have
meant that the Land and Water Conservation Fund has not been
fully funded. This is an historic effort on the part of the
President to fund it in the context of making sure that we are
standing up the economy and looking ahead at the future in the
same way that President Teddy Roosevelt did 102, 103 years ago.
Finally, let me just make a quick comment about water. For
many of you, especially from arid states in the West, you know
the importance of water. We have a WaterSMART program which we
have started since I became Secretary of the Interior. This
last year alone, in 2010, through the funding of 37 projects we
were able to conserve 490,000 acre-feet of water through these
conservation programs. When we look at those of you who share
from the seven states of the Colorado River Basin, we are
looking at 20 percent declines of water in the Colorado River
Basin. We are doing the same thing in looking at some declines
in terms of water availability in many other parts of the
country, so it is important that we continue to invest in these
kinds of water conservation programs.
Finally, with respect to youth and the opportunities that
we create for young people of America and we address the jobs
issues of this country, we have in the Department of the
Interior hired about 21,000 people just in 2010. We hope to
continue to be able to do that because these are young people
who come and work in the Department of the Interior. (1) They
help us do the work that is necessary for our mission; and (2)
we provide training to young people who will become the
conservation leaders of our country in the future and the
workers of the Department of the Interior. In conclusion, Mr.
Chairman, I look forward to working, with you with Ranking
Member Markey, with members of this Committee on so many issues
that are important to the United States of America.
[The prepared statement of Secretary Salazar follows:]

Statement of The Honorable Ken Salazar, Secretary,
U.S. Department of the Interior

Mr. Chairman and members of the Committee, I am pleased to be here
today to present the details of the 2012 budget request for the
Department of the Interior. I want to thank the members of this
Committee for your support and interest in our Department.
The 2012 budget builds on that strong foundation with $12.2 billion
requested for the Department of the Interior. This is a freeze at the
2010 level, including significant reductions and savings totaling $1.1
billion, while funding key priorities. The budget demonstrates that we
can responsibly cut the deficit, while investing to win the future and
sustain the national recovery. Our budget promotes the actions and
programs that America told us are important in 50 listening sessions
across the Country. With that inspiration we developed a new 21st
Century conservation vision--America's Great Outdoors. The budget
continues to advance efforts that you have facilitated in renewable
energy and sustainable water conservation, cooperative landscape
conservation, youth in the outdoors, and reforms in our conventional
energy programs.
Introduction
Interior's mission is simple but profound--to protect America's
resources and cultural heritage and honor the Nation's trust
responsibilities to American Indians and Alaska Natives. Interior's
people and programs impact all Americans.
The Department is the steward of 20 percent of the Nation's lands
including national parks, national wildlife refuges, and the public
lands. Interior manages public lands and the Outer Continental Shelf--
providing access for renewable and conventional energy development and
overseeing the protection and restoration of surface-mined lands. The
Department of the Interior is also the largest supplier and manager of
water in the 17 western States and provides hydropower resources used
to power much of the country. Interior is responsible for migratory
wildlife and endangered species conservation as well as the
preservation of the Nation's historic and cultural resources. The
Department supports cutting edge research in the earth sciences--
geology, hydrology, and biology--to inform resource management
decisions at Interior and improve scientific understanding worldwide.
The Department of the Interior also fulfills the Nation's unique trust
responsibilities to American Indians and Alaska Natives, and provides
financial and technical assistance for the insular areas.
The Department makes significant contributions to the Nation
measured in economic terms. The Interior Department supports over 1.3
million jobs and over $370 billion in economic activity each year.
Parks, refuges, and monuments generate over $24 billion in economic
activity from recreation and tourism. Conventional and renewable energy
produced on Interior lands and waters results in about $295 billion in
economic benefits and the water managed by Interior supports over $25
billion in agriculture. The American outdoor industry estimates 6.5
million jobs are created every year from outdoor activities.
In measures that cannot be translated into dollars and cents, the
Department protects the Nation's monuments and priceless landscapes,
conserves wildlife and fisheries, offers unparalleled recreational
opportunities, protects and interprets the cultural collections that
tell America's history, and manages resources that help to fulfill the
Nation's demands for energy, minerals, and water. Through its trust
responsibilities on behalf of American Indians and Alaska Natives,
Interior supports tribal self-governance and the strengthening of
Indian communities. For affiliated island communities, the Department
fulfills important commitments providing much needed technical and
financial assistance.
2010--A Year of Challenge and Success
At the start of the Administration in 2009, I set Interior on a
course to create a comprehensive strategy to advance a new energy
frontier; tackle the impacts of a changing landscape; improve the
sustainable use of water; engage youth in the outdoors; and improve the
safety of Indian communities. These priority goals integrate the
strengths of the Department's diverse bureaus and offices to address
key challenges of importance to the American public. Interior has been
making progress in these areas, including:

Approving 12 renewable energy projects on public
lands that when built, will produce almost 4,000 megawatts of
energy, enough energy to power close to one million American
homes, and create thousands of construction and operational
jobs.

Designating more than 5,000 miles of transmission
corridors on public lands to facilitate siting and permitting
of transmission lines and processing more than 30 applications
for major transmission corridor rights-of-way.

Establishing three of eight planned regional Climate
Science Centers and nine of 21 Landscape Conservation
Cooperatives.

Issuing grants to water districts and other water
delivery authorities resulting in the conservation of 150,000
acre-feet of water.

Increasing the number of youth employed in
conservation through Interior or its partners increased by 45
percent over 2009 levels.

Reducing overall crime in four Indian communities as
a result of a concerted effort to increase deployed law
enforcement officers, and conduct training in community
policing techniques, and engage the communities in law
enforcement efforts.
The tragic events resulting from the explosion and sinking of the
Deepwater Horizon drilling rig in April of last year drew the attention
of the world to the Gulf of Mexico. Much of the focus of Interior's
bureaus and offices in 2010 was on oil spill response, Gulf Coast
restoration, strengthening safety and environmental standards for
offshore energy production, and re-organizing and reforming the former
Minerals Management Service (MMS). Nonetheless, the Department advanced
other key priorities and strategic goals that will improve the
conservation and management of natural and cultural resources into the
future:

Interior, along with the Department of Agriculture,
the Environmental Protection Agency, and the Council on
Environmental Quality, participated in the White House
Conference on America's Great Outdoors and held 50 public
listening sessions across the Country that have helped shape a
conservation vision and strategy for the 21st Century. We have
released a report, America's Great Outdoors: A Promise to
Future Generations, that lays out a partnership agenda for 21st
century conservation and recreation.

In the spirit of America's Great Outdoors, we
welcomed new national wildlife refuges in Kansas and Colorado
and proposed a new conservation area in Florida at the
headwaters to the Everglades. These refuges mark a new era of
conservation for the Department, one that is community-driven,
science-based, and takes into account entire ecosystems and
working landscapes.

The Department worked with others to develop an
action plan to bring relief for the drought-stricken California
Bay-Delta area, invested over $500 million in major water
projects over the past two years, and moved forward on long-
standing water availability issues in the Colorado River Basin.

In December, I issued my recommendation to Congress
to undertake an additional 5.5 miles of bridging on the Tamiami
Trail in the Everglades above and beyond the 1-mile bridge now
under construction. When combined with other planned work in
the Everglades Agricultural Area and water conservation areas,
this project should restore 100 percent of historic water
quantity and flow to Everglades National Park.

With the help of Congress, we brought about
resolution of the Cobell v. Salazar settlement and resolved
four long-standing Indian water rights issues through enactment
of the Claims Resolution Act of 2010. We also completed
negotiation of a new Compact of Free Association with the
island of Palau which awaits Congressional approval.

In December of last year, the President hosted the
second White House Tribal Nations Conference bringing together
tribal leaders from across the United States; we are improving
the Nation-to-Nation relationship with 565 Tribes.
Interior's Budget In Context
In his State of the Union address in January, President Obama spoke
of what it will take to ``win the future.'' He challenged the Nation to
encourage American innovation, educate young people, rebuild America,
and shrink the burden of mounting debt. Interior's 2012 budget request
responds to this challenge. The investments proposed in this budget are
balanced by reductions in other programs--recognizing the Nation's need
to live within its means to ensure a legacy of economic strength.
Taking Fiscal Responsibility - Interior's 2012 budget must be
viewed in context of the difficult fiscal times facing the Nation and
the President's freeze on discretionary funding. The 2012 budget
reflects many difficult budget choices, cutting worthy programs and
advancing efforts to shrink Federal spending. The budget contains
reductions totaling $1.1 billion or 8.9 percent of the 2010 Enacted/
2011 CR level. Staffing reductions are anticipated in some program
areas, which will be achieved through attrition, outplacement, and buy-
outs to minimize the need to conduct reductions in force to the
greatest extent possible. These reductions are a necessary component of
maintaining overall fiscal restraint while allowing us to invest
additional resources in core agency priorities.
This budget is responsible. The $12.2 billion budget funds
important investments by eliminating and reducing lower priority
programs, deferring projects, reducing redundancy, streamlining
management, and capturing administrative and efficiency savings. It
maintains funding levels for core functions that are vital to uphold
stewardship responsibilities and sustain key initiatives. The 2012
request includes $11.2 billion for programs funded by the Interior,
Environment, and Related Agencies appropriation. This is $69.2 million,
or less than one percent, above the 2010 enacted level and $87.6
million above the 2011 annualized CR level. The 2012 request for the
Bureau of Reclamation and the Central Utah Project Completion Act,
funded in the Energy and Water Development Appropriations Act, is $1.1
billion in current appropriations, $88.3 million or eight percent below
the 2010 enacted level and $78.3 million or seven percent below the
2011 CR level.
Permanent funding that becomes available as a result of existing
legislation without further action by the Congress results in an
additional $5.6 billion, for $17.8 billion in total budget authority
for Interior in 2012.
Program Reductions and Terminations--Interior's $12.2 billion
budget proposal includes $913.6 million in program terminations and
program reductions of which $188.0 million are featured in the
President's list of terminations and reductions. This also includes the
elimination of $47.6 million in congressional earmarks not related to
land acquisition or construction.
These cuts were identified as part of a top to bottom review that
considered mission criticality, the ability of partners to support the
function, duplication or overlap, relevance to key initiatives, program
performance, the relevance of timing and if the activity could be
deferred, and short- and long-term strategic goals.
Examples of the tough decisions made in 2012 include terminating
the $7.0 million Rural Fire Assistance program which is duplicative of
other fire assistance grant programs managed by the Department of
Homeland Security and Department of Agriculture. The National Park
Service's Save America's Treasures and Preserve America programs are
eliminated in 2012 to focus NPS resources on the highest priority park
requirements. The NPS Heritage Partnership Programs are reduced by half
to encourage self-sufficiency among well-established National Heritage
Areas while continuing support for newer areas. In the Bureau of Indian
Affairs, the Indian Guaranteed Loan Program is reduced 63 percent in
2012 pending an evaluation of the program's effectiveness and
alternatives to improve program performance.
Program reductions are proposed in every bureau and office in the
Department. One area that is reduced Interior-wide is construction. The
budget includes $178.8 million for the Bureau of Land Management, Fish
and Wildlife Service, and National Park Service construction programs;
in total this is a reduction of $100.2 million or 36 percent from the
2010 enacted/2011 CR level. To achieve these reductions, the Department
has frozen construction of new facilities in 2012 and deferred
construction of replacement facilities. Interior's 2012 request for
construction focuses on the highest priority health and safety and
mission critical projects and defers lower priorities. The Department
is committed to the repair and rehabilitation of current assets and
funding for facility maintenance is held nearly level. The 2012 budget
also slows the construction of major water management programs,
including the Central Utah Completion Act. The 2012 budget request for
CUPCA is $33.0 million, a reduction of $9.0 million.
Administrative Savings - The budget includes $99.4 million in
reductions reflecting administrative cost savings as part of the
Administration's Accountable Government Initiative. These reductions
will be generated by efficiencies throughout Interior, changing how the
Department manages travel, employee relocation, acquisition of supplies
and printing services, and the use of advisory services. These
reductions are in addition to $62.0 million in travel, information
technology, and strategic sourcing savings identified as part of the
President's 2011 request. These reductions are sustained in the 2012
request along with bureau-specific efficiencies.

The Department will achieve $42 million in savings in
travel and relocation through improved management at the
program level and re-examination of Departmental policies.

An estimated $53 million in savings will be achieved
through acquisition improvement initiatives including shared
contracts to use Interior-wide for the acquisition of
commodities, supplies, and services. In 2011, Interior is
implementing Department-wide strategic sourcing initiatives for
office supplies and copier-based multifunctional devices.
Savings from expanded strategic sourcing is one component of a
comprehensive plan to improve acquisition practices throughout
Interior.

Efficiency savings from expanded strategic sourcing
is one component of a comprehensive plan to improve acquisition
practices throughout Interior. Another component to reduce
advisory services spending will achieve an approximate $15
million in savings.

Through careful planning, strategic investments, and
unprecedented cooperation, significant opportunity exists to
realize efficiencies in the Department's IT infrastructure of
an estimated $36 million, including energy and cost savings.
The Department has identified five primary focus areas: risk-
based information security services, infrastructure
consolidation, unified messaging, workstation ratio reduction,
and radio site consolidation.

The Department's 2012 budget reflects a freeze on
Federal salaries for 2011 and 2012 and requirements to address
fixed cost increases are limited to anticipated changes in the
Federal contributions to health benefits, GSA rent increases,
changes in workers and unemployment compensation costs, and
specific contract requirements for P.L. 93-638 agreements.
Cost Recovery - The budget proposes to increase cost recovery to
offset the cost of some resource development activities that provide
clear benefits to customers.
The budget proposes to increase fees for offshore oil and gas
inspections from $10.0 million in the 2010 enacted budget to $65.0
million in 2012. These fee collections incorporate a more robust
inspection program and expand the scope of offshore inspection fees to
include offshore drilling rigs, given the need for greater scrutiny of
drilling operations as a core component of deepwater oil and gas
development. This is consistent with the National Commission on the BP
Deepwater Horizon Oil Spill and Offshore Drilling. The report states
that the oil and gas industry should be ``required to pay for its
regulators'' so that the costs of regulation ``would no longer be
funded by taxpayers but instead by the industry that is permitted to
have access to a publicly owned resource.''
Similarly, the budget proposes to collect $38.0 million for onshore
oil and gas inspection activities conducted by BLM. The budget also
proposes new fees totaling $4.4 million for coal and other minerals
inspections conducted by BLM to recover the costs of inspecting these
operations.
Likewise, the budget proposes to decrease OSM grants to state
programs that regulate the coal industry, to encourage those states to
increase cost recovery fees for coal mine permit processing.
Investments for the Future
America's Great Outdoors-Last year, the Administration initiated a
national dialogue at the White House Conference on America's Great
Outdoors. In 50 listening sessions held across the Country, the public
communicated their conservation and recreation priorities, and the
result is a report to the President, America's Great Outdoors: A
Promise to Future Generations. The report outlines how the Federal
Government can support a renewed and refreshed conservation vision by
working in collaboration with communities, farmers and ranchers,
businesses, conservationists, youth and others who are working to
protect the places that matter to them and by engaging people across
the country in conservation and recreation.
The report calls for the government and its partners to help
conserve and recreate on the lands and places that Americans care about
most. To this end, the report recommends expanding access to green
spaces for recreation, restoring and connecting open spaces and rural
landscapes to power economic revitalization and species conservation,,
and increasing our investment of revenue from oil and gas development
in the protection of open spaces. The report calls for the revision of
government policies to improve program effectiveness and alignment, and
leverage local, community driven efforts and asks the Federal
government to be a better partner with States, Tribes, landowners,
local communities, the private sector and others to meet shared
conservation goals.
The 2012 President's budget identifies resources that are targeted
on these outcomes with $5.5 billion for programs included in the
America's Great Outdoors initiative, an increase of $363.0 million over
the FY 2010 level. The components of this budget request include land
management operations, programs funded through the Land and Water
Conservation Fund, and grant programs focused on partnerships that
conserve natural resources, restore, rivers and trails, and preserve
the Nation's historic assets.
The 2012 budget for America's Great Outdoors includes $4.6 billion
for core operations, an increase of $13.5 million, in the land and
resource management bureaus--BLM, FWS, and NPS. Increases in Interior's
land management bureaus will enhance cultural and interpretative
programs throughout our network of national parks, refuges and public
lands. This funding will also support day-to-day operations, improve
the condition of facilities, and address natural resource management
needs. More than 285 million Americans and foreign tourists visited the
Nation's national parks in 2009, nearly 11 million more than in 2008, a
3.9 percent increase. This was the fifth busiest year for the national
park system, just missing the all-time visitation record set in 1987.
The increased visitation to the national parks reinforces the
importance and value Americans place on their treasured landscapes.
The initiative also includes $675.0 million for programs funded
from the Land and Water Conservation Fund. The components of this
request are: $375.0 million for Federal land acquisition, $200.0
million for an expanded LWCF State grants program including competitive
grants, and $100.0 million for Cooperative Endangered Species
Conservation Grants.
The 2012 budget for Interior and the U.S. Forest Service includes
full funding, $900 million, for the Land and Water Conservation Fund.
This funding is drawn from revenue generated each year from oil and gas
development. This fulfills the vision for the LWCF, with a dedicated
source of funding generated from the depletion of resources to be used
annually to advance resource conservation and recreational
opportunities. For the 2012 budget, the Department coordinates Interior
bureaus' and the Forest Service's land acquisition priorities and
presents a joint conservation strategy that maximizes conservation
outcomes in key geographic focal areas.
The 2012 budget also includes $150.0 million for fish and wildlife
conservation grants, an increase of $7.0 million, including $50.0
million for the North American Wetlands Conservation Fund, $95.0
million for State and Tribal Wildlife Grants, and $5.0 million for
Neotropical Migratory Bird Conservation Grants. An additional $72.4
million is proposed for NPS partnership programs, including $62.4
million for historic preservation grants to States and Tribes, an
increase of $6.5 million and $10.0 million for the Rivers, Trails and
Conservation Assistance program, an increase of $1.1 million.
The 2012 America's Great Outdoors initiative focuses on investments
that will lead to healthy lands, waters and resources while stimulating
the economy--goals that are complementary. Through strategic
partnerships, Interior will support and protect historic uses of lands,
restore lands and resources, protect and interpret historic and
cultural resources, and expand outdoor recreation opportunities. All of
these activities have significant economic benefits in rural and urban
communities. An economic impact analysis completed by the Department in
December 2009 estimates that in 2008 more than 400 million visits to
the Nation's parks, refuges, and public lands generated nearly $25
billion and over 300,000 jobs in recreation and tourism, contributing
significantly to the economic vitality of many communities.
New Energy Frontier--The 2012 budget continues the Department's New
Energy Frontier initiative to create jobs, reduce the Nation's
dependence on fossil fuels and oil imports, and reduce carbon impacts.
Facilitating renewable energy development is a major component of this
strategy along with effective management of conventional energy
programs.
The Department has made significant advances in its priority goal
to increase approved capacity for renewable energy production on
Interior lands by at least 10,000 megawatts by the end of 2012, while
ensuring full environmental review. To date, BLM has approved projects
that, when built, will generate approximately 4,000 megawatts of
energy. The budget requests $72.9 million for renewable energy programs
in 2012, an increase of $13.9 million above the 2010 enacted/2011 CR
level.
While we work to develop renewable energy sources, domestic oil and
gas production remain critical to our nation's energy supply and to
reducing our dependence on foreign oil. As was underscored by the
tragic explosion of the Deepwater Horizon and the oil spill that
followed, we must take immediate steps to make production safer and
more environmentally responsible. The recently-released report from the
National Commission on the BP Deepwater Horizon Oil Spill and Offshore
Drilling concludes that neither industry nor the government were
adequately prepared to respond to a blowout in deepwater. We have been
aggressively pursuing reforms to raise the bar on safety standards for
offshore drilling--including new standards for how well they are
drilled and for the safety systems to prevent blowouts, as well as
requiring operators to demonstrate that they are able to respond
promptly and effectively to a loss of well control in deepwater. We are
also making fundamental changes to improve the effectiveness of
government safety oversight and environmental protection.
The Commission's recommendations are, in many ways, a strong
validation of the reforms that we at the Department of the Interior
have been undertaking to promote safety and science in offshore oil and
gas operations. Moreover, the Commission's findings and recommendations
bolster the case for Interior's comprehensive reforms and the
reorganization of offshore oil and gas oversight that will remedy
conflicted missions, stand up a stronger regulatory framework, create
an internal review unit to investigate problems in a timely manner,
improve agency and industry management of safety and environmental
protection, and expand the team of inspectors, engineers and other
safety personnel. Many reforms have already been accomplished
including:

Implementation of strong new safety and environmental
standards including: a safety rule that raises standards for
everything from drilling equipment and well design to casing
and cementing; a requirement that companies establish
comprehensive risk management programs; a requirement that
operators demonstrate capability to deal with a catastrophic
blowout; limiting the use of categorical exclusions so that
proposed lease sales and drilling projects go through rigorous
environmental reviews under the National Environmental Policy
Act (NEPA); and requiring companies to put their signature on
the line to state that their rigs comply with safety and
environmental laws and regulations.

Termination of the controversial royalty-in-kind
program, which accepted oil and natural gas from producers in
lieu of cash royalty payments, in favor of a more transparent
and accountable royalty collection system.

Dissolution of the Minerals Management Service with
the transfer of minerals revenue management to the Office of
Natural Resources Revenue in the Office of the Secretary and
creation of the Bureau of Ocean Energy Management, Regulation
and Enforcement as an interim organization while further
structural changes are made.

Formulation of a plan for reorganization of the
former MMS that will separate the offshore resource management
and the safety and environmental enforcement programs into two
independent organizations--the Bureau of Ocean Energy
Management and the Bureau of Safety and Environmental
Enforcement.

Development and implementation of regulations and
guidance to operators to heighten standards for drilling
safety, including requiring operators to demonstrate the
ability to respond to a deepwater blowout.

Continuing to pursue changes responsive to the
recommendations of the Safety Oversight Board, the National
Academy of Engineering, and the National Commission on the BP
Deepwater Horizon oil Spill.

Completion of a review of ethics issues related to
the Department's management of the OCS program and creation of
the Investigations and Review Unit.

Implementation of a recruitment strategy for BOEMRE
to expand the field of inspectors and engineers including
recruitment tours of petroleum engineering programs at
universities across the country.

Establishment of the Offshore Energy Safety Advisory
Committee to advise BOEMRE on issues related to offshore energy
safety, including drilling and workplace safety, well
intervention and containment, and oil spill response.
The 2012 budget includes $506.3 million for the components of the
former Minerals Management Service to continue our efforts at
reorganization and reform of both offshore energy development
activities and mineral revenue collection. This includes a total
program of $358.4 million for the Bureau of Ocean Energy Management,
Regulation and Enforcement, an increase of $119.3 million, or 50
percent, over the 2010 enacted level, after adjusting for the transfer
of mineral revenue collections to the new Office of Natural Resources
Revenue. The budget proposes to offset BOEMRE program funding with
$160.2 million in offsetting rental receipts and cost recoveries and
$65.0 million from oil and gas inspection fees.
The budget makes investments to increase capacity for leasing and
environmental review, safety and environmental enforcement, and oil
spill research. This request will enable Interior to hire over 100
inspectors, engineers, and other safety and enforcement staff by the
end of 2012. The 2012 budget includes funding for the Investigations
and Review Unit to respond to allegations or evidence of misconduct and
unethical behavior; oversee and coordinate internal auditing,
regulatory oversight and enforcement systems and programs; and ensure
the organization's ability to respond to emerging issues and crises,
including spills and accidents. Funding is also included to support the
use of sound science in all of the Department's offshore energy
activities.
The 2012 budget request also includes $147.9 million for the Office
of Natural Resources Revenue located in the Office of the Secretary.
The proposed $38.7 million increase over the 2010 enacted level will
allow us to strengthen auditing and compliance efforts for royalty
revenue collections and to complete the transition of the royalty-in-
kind (RIK) program to royalty-in-value collections.
Youth in the Great Outdoors--Furthering the youth and conservation
goals of the America's Great Outdoors initiative, the 2012 budget
proposes to continue engaging youth by employing and educating young
people from all backgrounds. The 2012 budget includes $46.8 million for
youth programs, an increase of $7.6 million above the 2010 enacted/2011
CR level.
Interior is uniquely qualified to engage and educate young people
in the outdoors and has programs that establish connections for youth
ages 18 to 25 with natural and cultural resource conservation. These
programs help address unemployment in young adults and address health
issues by encouraging exercise and outdoor activities. For example,
Interior is taking part in the First Lady's Let's Move initiative to
combat the problem of childhood obesity. The Bureau of Land Management,
National Park Service and Fish and Wildlife Service have Let's Move
Outside programs to promote physical activity for children and families
on the Nation's public lands. Interior has long-standing partnerships
with organizations such as the 4-H, the Boy Scouts, the Girl Scouts,
the Youth Conservation Corps, and the Student Conservation Association.
These programs leverage Federal investments to put young people to work
and build a conservation ethic.
In 2010, Interior met its high priority performance goal to employ
15,900 in conservation-related careers through the Department or its
partners. This is a 45 percent increase from 2009. The 2012 goal is to
increase this youth employment by 60 percent.
Cooperative Landscape Conservation--The 2012 budget realigns
programs and funding to better equip land and resource managers with
the tools they need to effectively conserve resources in a rapidly
changing environment. Significant changes in water availability, longer
and more intense fire seasons, invasive species and disease outbreaks
are creating challenges for resource managers and impacting the
sustainability of resources on public lands. These changes result in
bark beetle infestations, deteriorated range conditions, and water
shortages that negatively impact grazing, forestry, farming, as well as
the status of wildlife and the condition of their habitats. Many of
these problems are caused by or exacerbated by climate change.
The 2012 Budget includes $175.0 million for cooperative landscape
conservation, an increase of $43.8 million. The budget funds the
completion of the Climate Science Centers and Landscape Conservation
Cooperatives, the organizing framework for the Department's efforts to
work collaboratively with others to understand and manage these
changes. These efforts will allow the Department to meet its priority
goal to identify resources vulnerable to climate change and implement
coordinated adaptation response actions for 50 percent of the Nation by
the end of 2012.
The request for USGS climate variability science is $73 million,
which includes $14.3 million for carbon sequestration research. USGS is
conducting cutting edge research in biological and geological carbon
sequestration, to investigate the potential of removing carbon dioxide
from the atmosphere for storage in vegetation, soils, sediments, oil
and gas reservoirs and saline geologic formations. The 2012 budget will
advance USGS research to assess rates and potential capacity for carbon
storage in ecosystems, and evaluate the Nation's potential resources
for geological storage.
Water Challenges--Interior is working to address the 21st Century
pressures on the Nation's water supplies. Population growth, aging
water infrastructure, changing climate, rising energy demands, impaired
water quality and environmental needs are among the challenges. Water
shortage and water use conflicts have become more commonplace in many
areas of the United States, even in normal water years. As competition
for water resources grows, the need for information and tools to aid
water resource managers also grows. Water issues and challenges are
increasing across the Nation, but particularly in the West and
Southeast due to prolonged drought. Traditional water management
approaches no longer meet today's needs.
Reclamation proposes to fund WaterSMART at $58.9 million, $11.0
million below 2011 levels. The three ongoing WaterSMART programs
include: the WaterSMART Grant program funded at $18.5 million; Basin
Studies funded at $6.0 million; and the Title XVI Water Reclamation and
Reuse program funded at $29.0 million. Two programs are being added to
WaterSMART in 2012, the continuing Water Conservation Field Services
program, funded at $5.1 million, and participation by Reclamation in
the Cooperative Watershed Management program, funded at $250,000. This
is a joint effort with the USGS. The USGS will use $10.9 million, an
increase of $9.0 million, for a multi-year, nationwide water
availability and use assessment program. Other significant programs and
highlights include:
In 2010, I issued a Secretarial Order establishing a new water
sustainability strategy to coordinate Interior's water sustainability
efforts, create a clearinghouse for water conservation best practices,
implement a water footprint reduction program to reduce consumption of
potable water by 26 percent by 2020. We are in dialogue with Mexico on
the management of the Colorado River and we are actively pursuing
workable solutions to regional issues such as in the California Bay-
Delta.
The Bay-Delta is a source of drinking water for 25 million
Californians and sustains about $400 billion in annual economic
activity, including a $28 billion agricultural industry and up until
recently supported a thriving commercial and recreational fishing
industry. Our efforts in the Bay-Delta are focused on co-leading an
inter-agency effort with the Council on Environmental Quality (CEQ) to
implement the December 2009 Interim Federal Action Plan for the
California Bay-Delta Conservation Plan. In coordination with five other
Federal agencies, we are leveraging our activities to address
California water issues, promote water efficiency and conservation,
expand voluntary water transfers in the Central Valley, fund drought
relief projects, and make investments in water infrastructure. Over the
past two years, we have invested over $500 million in water projects in
California. We have also, in close coordination with NOAA and the state
of California, worked on the California Bay-Delta Conservation Plan, a
long-term plan aimed at restoring both reliable water supplies and a
healthy Bay-Delta ecosystem.
On February 18 we announced the initial 2011 Water Supply
Allocation for Central Valley Project water users. We were pleased to
report that some of the CVP contractors and waters users will receive a
100 percent allocation due to the precipitation and snowpack in the
Sierra Nevada Mountains and improved carryover reservoir storage.
Agricultural water service contractors South-of-Delta have an initial
allocation of 50 percent but this is an improvement on the 46 percent
initial allocation they've averaged over the past 20 years. These
allocations represent good news given recent years, but many challenges
remain. We will continue to work with our Federal, State and local
partners to improve water supply reliability while addressing
significant ecological issues.
Our 2012 budget for the Bureau of Reclamation includes $53.1
million for the Central Valley Project Restoration Fund that is offset
by collections estimated at $52.8 million. The 2012 budget for
Reclamation includes $39.7 million for the California Bay-Delta
Restoration account and $35.1 million for San Joaquin River
restoration. An additional $6.9 million is included in the budget for
the FWS and USGS activities in support of Bay-Delta ecosystem
restoration.
Strengthening Tribal Nations--The 2012 Budget for Indian programs
is $2.5 billion, a decrease of $118.9 million. The reduction includes
completion of a one-time $50.0 million forward funding payment to
tribal colleges, completion of $47 million in public safety projects
normally funded by the Department of Justice, and $ 14.5 million for
completed water settlements.
The BIA budget includes reductions that are tougher choices,
including reductions of $27.0 million in Trust Real Estate Services,
$14.2 million in central oversight programs, and $5.1 million in the
Indian Guaranteed Loan Program.
The 2012 budget provides $89.6 million in increases including:
$42.3 million for programs that advance the Nation-to-Nation
relationship; $20.0 million to enhance public safety and justice
programs; $18.4 million to improve trust land management; and $8.9
million for education programs. The 2012 budget includes an increase of
$29.5 million for contract support and the Indian Self-Determination
Fund--this was the highest priority of the Indian Tribes. These funds
will enable Tribes to fulfill administrative requirements associated
with operating programs.
The 2012 budget supports achievement of a priority goal to reduce
violent crime by at least five percent within 24 months on targeted
tribal reservations through a comprehensive and coordinated strategy.
The budget includes $354.7 million, an increase of $20.0 million, for
law enforcement operations, detention center operations and
maintenance, tribal courts, and conservation law enforcement officers.
Indian Land and Water Settlements - The 2012 budget includes $84.3
million in the Bureau of Reclamation and Bureau of Indian Affairs to
implement land and water settlements.
The Bureau of Reclamation's budget includes $51.5 million, an
increase of $26.7 million, for the initial implementation of four
settlements authorized in the Claims Resolution Act of 2010. The
legislation included water settlements for the Taos Pueblo of New
Mexico and Pueblos of New Mexico named in the Aamodt case, the Crow
Tribe of Montana, and the White Mountain Apache Tribe of Arizona.
The Claims Resolution Act of 2010 establishes trust funds for
Tribes to manage water systems and settlement funds to develop
infrastructure. The primary responsibility for constructing these water
systems was given to the Bureau of Reclamation, while the Bureau of
Indian Affairs is responsible for the majority of the trust funds,
which includes $207.2 million in mandatory funding in 2011.
These settlements will deliver clean water to the Taos Pueblo and
the Pueblos of Nambe, Pojoaque, San Ildefonso, and Tesuque in New
Mexico, the Crow Tribe of Montana, and the White Mountain Apache Tribe
of Arizona. In addition to funding for the initial implementation of
these four settlements, Reclamation's budget includes $24.8 million for
the Navajo-Gallup Water Supply project. In the 2012 budget, Reclamation
is establishing an Indian Water Rights Settlements account to assure
continuity in the construction of the authorized projects and to
highlight and enhance transparency.
The Bureau of Indian Affairs 2012 budget includes $32.9 million for
ongoing Indian land and water settlements, a reduction of $12.9
million, reflecting completion of the Pueblo of Isleta, Puget Sound
Regional Shellfish, and Soboba Band of Luiseno Indians settlements.
Land Remote Sensing - For forty years, Landsat satellites have
recorded the global landscape, creating an archive of both natural and
man-made changes. This imagery generates $935 million in value for the
U.S. economy by driving innovation in the agricultural, water
management, and disaster response sectors. For example, foresters
around the country use Landsat imagery to remotely map and monitor the
status of woodlands in near real-time. This allows them to track the
devastation caused by the pine bark beetle in the Rocky Mountains and
monitor drought and fire-prone areas.
Landsat fills an essential need for data that is refreshed on a
time scale and with a level of resolution and granular detail that is
otherwise not available. Commercial data is not available that fill a
void that could be created in the absence of continuous Landsat
coverage.
The 2012 budget for the U.S. Geological Survey includes $48.0
million to begin planning activities with the National Aeronautics and
Space Administration for an operational Landsat program. Consistent
with the Administration's National Space Policy, the 2012 budget
enables the USGS to assume management responsibility for a new
operational Landsat program that will ensure continuity of Landsat data
in the future. USGS will provide data requirements and funding, while
NASA, drawing on its historic expertise, will build the Landsat
satellites on a reimbursable basis for the USGS. This new operating
structure is consistent with the approach used for NOAA's JPSS weather
satellites, and will ensure sufficient oversight while avoiding
duplication.
The 2012 budget will enable USGS to gather and prioritize Federal
user community requirements for land image data, conduct trade studies
on key design alternatives related to the development of the imaging
device, initiate the procurement process through NASA for the Landsat 9
and 10 instruments and spacecrafts, and establish a science advisory
team, in order to launch Landsat 9 in FY 2019 and Landsat 10 in FY
2024.
Also included within a new separate account for National Land
Imaging is an increase of $13.4 million to complete the retooling of
the ground receiving stations to be able to receive data from the new
instruments on Landsat 8, expected to be launched in December of 2012.
Mandatory Proposals
Interior continues to generate more revenue for the U.S. Treasury
than its annual discretionary appropriation. In 2012, Interior will
generate revenue of approximately $14.1 billion and propose mandatory
legislation estimated to generate another $3 billion in revenue and
savings over ten years. The budget assumes the enactment of legislative
proposals that we plan to submit to Congress in the coming weeks. These
proposals will reform abandoned mine reclamation and hardrock mining on
Federal lands, and collect a fair return to the American taxpayer for
the development of Federal resources.
Reform Abandoned Mine Land Reclamation-The Administration proposes
to reform the Abandoned Mine Lands program to reduce unnecessary
spending and ensure that the Nation's highest priority abandoned coal
and hardrock sites are reclaimed. First, the budget proposes to
terminate the unrestricted payments to States and Tribes that have been
certified for completing their coal reclamation work as these payments
are no longer needed for reclamation of abandoned coal mine lands.
Second, the budget proposes to reform the distribution process for the
remaining reclamation funding to competitively allocate available
resources to the highest priority coal abandoned mine lands sites.
Through a competitive grant program, a new Abandoned Mine Lands
Advisory Council will review and rank the abandoned mine lands sites,
so that the Office of Surface Mining can distribute grants to reclaim
the highest priority coal sites each year.
Third, to address the legacy of abandoned hardrock mines across the
U.S., Interior will create a parallel Abandoned Mine Lands program for
abandoned hardrock sites. Like the coal program, hardrock reclamation
would be financed by a new abandoned mine lands fee on the production
of hardrock minerals on both public and private lands displaced after
January 2012. The BLM would distribute the funds through a competitive
grant program to reclaim the highest priority hardrock abandoned sites
on Federal, State, tribal, and private lands.
Altogether, this proposal will save $1.3 billion over the next ten
years, focus available coal fees on the Nation's most dangerous
abandoned coal mines, and hold the hardrock mining industry responsible
for cleaning up the hazards left by their predecessors.
Reform Hardrock Mining on Federal Lands - The budget proposes to
provide a fair return to the taxpayer from hardrock production on
Federal lands. The proposal would institute a leasing program under the
Mineral Leasing Act of 1920 for certain hardrock minerals including
gold, silver, lead, zinc, copper, uranium, and molybdenum, currently
covered by the General Mining Law of 1872.
After enactment, mining for these metals on Federal lands would be
governed by the new leasing process and subject to annual rental
payments and a royalty of not less than five percent of gross proceeds.
Half of the receipts would be distributed to the States in which the
leases are located and the remaining half would be deposited in the
Treasury. Existing mining claims would be exempt from the change to a
leasing system, but would be subject to increases in the annual
maintenance fees under the General Mining Law of 1872. The Office of
Natural Resources Revenue will collect, account for, and disburse the
hardrock royalty receipts. This proposal would generate an estimated
$100 million in revenue over ten years.
Fee on Non-producing Oil and Gas Leases - The Administration will
submit a legislative proposal to encourage energy production on lands
and waters leased for development. A $4.00 per acre fee on non-
producing Federal leases both onshore and offshore would provide a
financial incentive for oil and gas companies to either get their
leases into production or relinquish them so that the tracts can be
leased to and developed by new parties. The proposed $4.00 per acre fee
would apply to all new leases and would be indexed annually. In October
2008, the Government Accountability Office issued a report critical of
past efforts by Interior to ensure that companies diligently develop
their Federal leases. Although the report focused on administrative
actions that the Department could undertake, this proposal requires
legislative action. This proposal is similar to other non-producing fee
proposals considered by the Congress in the last several years. The fee
is projected to generate revenues to the U.S. Treasury of $25 million
in 2012 and $874 million over ten years.
Net Receipts Sharing for Energy Minerals - The Administration
proposes to make permanent the current arrangement for sharing the cost
to administer energy and minerals receipts, beginning in 2013. Under
current law, States receiving significant payments from mineral revenue
development on Federal lands also share in the costs of administering
the Federal mineral leases from which the revenue is generated. In
2012, this net receipts sharing deduction from mineral revenue payments
to States would be implemented as an offset to the Interior
Appropriations Act, consistent with the provision included in 2010 and
continued under the 2011 CR. Permanent implementation of net receipts
sharing is expected to result in savings of $44 million in 2013 and
$441 million over ten years.
Repeal Oil and Gas Fee Prohibition and Mandatory Permit Funds - The
Administration proposes to repeal portions of Section 365 of the Energy
Policy Act, beginning in 2013. Section 365 diverted mineral leasing
receipts from the U.S. Treasury to a BLM Permit Processing Improvement
Fund and also prohibited BLM from establishing cost recovery fees for
processing applications for oil and gas permits to drill. Congress has
implemented permit fees through appropriations language for the last
several years and the 2012 budget proposes to continue this practice.
Starting in 2013, upon elimination of the fee prohibition, BLM will
promulgate regulations to administratively establish fees for
applications for permits to drill. In combination with normal
discretionary appropriations, these cost recovery fees will then
replace the permit fees set annually through appropriations language
and the mandatory permit fund, which would also be repealed starting in
2013. Savings from terminating this mandatory funding are estimated at
$20 million in 2013 and $57 million over three years.
Geothermal Energy Receipts - The Administration proposes to repeal
Section 224(b) of the Energy Policy Act of 2005. Prior to passage of
this legislation, geothermal revenues were split between the Federal
government and States, with 50 percent directed to States, and 50
percent to the Treasury. The Energy Policy Act of 2005 changed this
distribution beginning in 2006 to direct 50 percent to States, 25
percent to counties, and for a period of five years, 25 percent to a
new BLM Geothermal Steam Act Implementation Fund. The allocations to
the new BLM geothermal fund were discontinued a year early through a
provision in the 2010 Interior Appropriations Act. The repeal of
Section 224(b) will permanently discontinue payments to counties and
restore the disposition of Federal geothermal leasing revenues to the
historical formula of 50 percent to the States and 50 percent to the
Treasury. This results in savings of $6.5 million in 2012 and $74
million over ten years.
Deep Gas and Deepwater Incentives - The Administration proposes to
repeal Section 344 of the Energy Policy Act of 2005. Section 344
mandated royalty incentives for certain ``deep gas'' production on the
OCS. This change will help ensure that Americans receive fair value for
federally owned mineral resources. Based on current oil and gas price
projections, the budget does not assume savings from this change;
however, the proposal could generate savings to the Treasury if future
natural gas prices end up below current projections.
Repeal of Authorities to Accept Royalty Payments In Kind - The
Administration proposes to solidify a recent Departmental reform
terminating the Royalty-in-Kind program by repealing all Interior
authorities to accept future royalties through this program. This
change will help increase confidence that future royalty payments will
be properly accounted for. The budget does not assume savings from this
change because the Administration does not anticipate restarting the
program; however, if enacted, this proposal would provide additional
certainty that a new Royalty-in-Kind program would not be initiated at
some point in the future.
Federal Land Transaction Facilitation Act - The Administration
proposes to reauthorize this Act, eliminating the 2011 sunset date and
allowing lands identified as suitable for disposal in recent land use
plans to be sold using the Act's authority. The Act's sales revenues
would continue to be used to fund the acquisition of environmentally
sensitive lands and the administrative costs associated with conducting
sales.
Federal Migratory Bird Hunting and Conservation Stamps - Federal
Migratory Bird Hunting and Conservation Stamps, commonly known as Duck
Stamps, were originally created in 1934 as the annual Federal license
required for hunting migratory waterfowl. Today, 98 percent of the
receipts generated from the sale of these $15.00 stamps are used to
acquire important migratory bird areas for migration, breeding, and
wintering. The price of the Duck Stamp has not increased since 1991,
while the cost of land and water has increased significantly. The
Administration proposes to increase these fees to $25.00 per stamp per
year, beginning in 2012. Increasing the price of Duck Stamps will bring
the estimate for the Migratory Bird Conservation account to
approximately $58 million. With these increased receipts, the
Department anticipates additional acquisition of approximately 7,000
acres in fee and approximately 10,000 acres in conservation easement in
2012. Total acres acquired for 2012 would then be approximately 28,000
acres in fee title and 47,000 acres in perpetual conservation
easements.
Compact of Free Association - On September 3, 2010, the U.S. and
the Republic of Palau successfully concluded the review of the Compact
of Free Association and signed a 15-year agreement that includes a
package of assistance through 2024. Under the agreement, Palau
committed to undertake economic, legislative, financial, and management
reforms. The conclusion of the agreement reaffirms the close
partnership between the U.S. and the Republic of Palau. Permanent and
indefinite funding for the compact expired at the end of 2010. The 2012
budget seeks to authorize permanent funding for the Compact as it
strengthens the foundations for economic development by developing
public infrastructure, and improving health care and education. Compact
funding will also undertake one or more infrastructure projects
designed to support Palau's economic development efforts. The Republic
of Palau has a strong track record of supporting the U.S. and its
location is strategically linked to Guam and U.S. operations in
Kwajalein Atoll. The cost for this proposal for 2012-2021 is $188.5
million.
Extend Service First Authority - The budget includes legislative
language to extend authority for the Service First program. The laws
creating Service First give Interior and Agriculture the authority to
establish pilot programs that leverage joint resources. Service First
allows certain land management agencies to conduct activities jointly
or on behalf of one another; collocate in Federal offices or leased
facilities; make reciprocal delegations of respective authorities,
duties, and responsibilities; and transfer funds and provide
reimbursements on an annual basis, including transfers and
reimbursements for multi-year projects. This authority is currently set
to expire at the end of 2011. The extension included in the budget will
make the Service First authority permanent to continue these
arrangements that have saved costs and improved effectiveness.
Conclusion
Thank you for the opportunity to testify on the President's 2012
budget request for the Department of the Interior. We have a tremendous
opportunity to improve the future for our children and grandchildren
with smart investments. This budget has fiscal discipline and
restraint, but it includes forward looking investments. For America to
be at its best and win the future, we need lands that are healthy,
waters that are clean, and an expanded range of energy options to power
our economy. I look forward to working with you to implement this
budget. This concludes my written statement. I am happy to answer any
questions that you may have.
______

The Chairman. Thank you very much, Mr. Secretary, and thank
you for your testimony. We will now begin the questioning
process and I will recognize myself for five minutes. Mr.
Secretary, as we all know, gasoline prices are climbing and
Americans could be paying an average of $4 per gallon very soon
and maybe even higher. Back in 2008 when gas prices did reach
$4 a gallon, the American people responded by asking Congress
and the President to lift the OCS moratoria and open new areas
to drilling and that happened at the end of 2008. Since
President Obama has taken office, your Department and this
Administration has systematically, in my view, reclosed these
areas to possible energy production. Onshore lease sales have
been canceled in the West, no progress has been made in
advancing new production in Alaska. In the Gulf of Mexico, the
de facto moratorium imposed by this Administration has further
hindered our domestic energy production and increased our
reliance on foreign oil.
In fact, as part of the interim safety report issued by BLM
last October, the Interior Department stated, and I quote out
of this manual, your manual, ``There is sufficient spare
capacity in OPEC to offset a decrease in Gulf of Mexico
deepwater production that could occur as a result of this rule.
This rule came from Interior.'' The Administration is not only
admitting, but seems complacent to the fact that they are
deepening Americans' dependence on OPEC and foreign countries
for our energy. The American people understand that we cannot,
and should not, rely on OPEC for energy security. The
responsibility to produce America's energy resources, as you
alluded to just a moment ago, rests squarely with the
Department of the Interior. It has the authority over America's
vast energy resources, yet America energy production, both
onshore and offshore, is declining. So, Mr. Secretary, I have
to ask you very pointedly, what responsibility does the
President, and you, as Secretary of the Interior, take for
these rising gas prices?
Secretary Salazar. Chairman Hastings, we are very well
aware of what is happening in the world relative to rising fuel
prices and very well aware of our responsibility here in the
United States and we are watching the situation very carefully.
I would respectfully, Chairman Hastings, disagree with your
characterization of what we have done in this Administration
with respect to our energy portfolio. We are strongly
supportive of a comprehensive energy portfolio that does
include, yes, clean energy and renewable energy, but at the
same time, oil and gas. I think if you will take a frank and
honest look, and I would ask both Republicans and Democrats on
this Committee to take an honest look at what we have done over
the last two years, you would find the fact that we have done
some things that I think are moving us in the right direction
where there is agreement. Let me just point out, if I may, two
or three facts.
Since 2008, our oil and natural gas production has
increased while imports of foreign oil have decreased. That may
be surprising to you, but we have taken our imports from 60
percent in the 2004, 2008 time period to 50 percent in 2010.
That is a significant reduction in the importing of foreign
oil. We have increased more than a third the number of barrels
of oil that are being produced from the Outer Continental Shelf
to 600 million barrels of oil. Oil production on the onshore,
and I know many of you from the West are concerned about the
onshore, has increased five percent during that same timeframe.
We have expanded, Chairman Hastings, the amount of public land
and Federal waters that are available for oil and gas
production. Just in 2010, and I know there is criticism about
what we have done in 2010, but the BLM held 29 oil and gas
lease sales for public lands, and, as a result of that, we have
41 million acres of public lands that are leased for oil and
gas development.
The Chairman. Mr. Secretary, I only have a minute here and
I do want to follow-up, and while those figures are there, and,
frankly, I think they are basis for dispute, but nevertheless,
I appreciate your answer, let me be more very, very specific
then. What specific actions would the Administration take if
gasoline gets to $4 or $5 a gallon? What specific actions would
the Administration take?
Secretary Salazar. We are looking at a number of different
things and there are no options that have been ruled out. In
terms of enhancing production from our domestic resources, we
have moved forward in the Gulf of Mexico, notwithstanding the
fact that we had to deal with the Deepwater Horizon tragedy,
and have permitted 37 wells in the shallow waters of the Gulf
of Mexico. Production in the Gulf of Mexico has remained robust
throughout the last year, even after the Deepwater Horizon, and
just on Monday of this week we permitted the first of the
deepwater wells, which is a very deep well, and there are more
of those to come.
The Chairman. Thank you very much. Listen, I just want to
say in conclusion that we believe, I certainly believe, more
production is part of the answer to that, and to the extent
that you are willing, the Administration is willing to do that,
you will find an ally with us. I respectfully disagree, and we
can discuss this in the future, that that has been the action.
So my time has expired and I recognize the distinguished
Ranking Member.
Mr. Markey. I thank you so much. The most immediate thing
that can be done is to deploy the strategic petroleum reserve.
We have more than 700 million barrels of oil in the strategic
petroleum reserve. It has been used in the past, we know it is
very effective, and I think when we do reach that crisis point,
I think it should be a weapon which we use in order to make
sure that this uprising in the Middle East does not have a
catastrophic impact on our own economy. We have enough to
protect us against those kind of impacts. Mr. Secretary, you
are requesting a budget of $12.2 billion for the coming fiscal
year, but you are proposing to return $14.1 billion in revenue
to the United States Treasury during that same time, and you
have requested legislative changes that if enacted would
generate an additional $2.5 billion for American taxpayers, so
if the Congress simply did what you have proposed in your
budget, your agency would actually generate nearly $4.5 billion
in a surplus next year that could be used to reduce the
deficit.
Now, one of your proposed reforms is the establishment of a
fee on nonproducing oil and gas leases in order to encourage
energy companies to produce more oil and gas and increase the
revenue reflected by the Federal government. Today,
Representative Holt and I will be introducing legislation to
establish just such an escalating fee on the tens of millions
of acres of public land that oil companies have under lease but
on which they are not producing. Would you support
congressional action to establish a fee on nonproducing oil and
gas leases?
Secretary Salazar. The answer to that is yes, Congressman
Markey, and it is part of the President's budget. Onshore
acreage, we have 41.2 million acres of land that we have leased
for oil and gas production, but we only have 12.2 million that
is currently producing. Offshore acreage, 38 million acres that
we have subjected to leases which are leased, only 6.3 million
acres of those are producing. So we would be happy to work with
you on the specifics of the legislation knowing that when we
talk about diligence it is going to be important that it just
not be a direct requirement, but that we recognize that there
are companies that are out there diligently attempting to
develop their leases and that has to be recognized.
Mr. Markey. Thank you. Earlier this week The New York Times
reported that wastewater from hydraulically fractured wells in
Pennsylvania and West Virginia have been sent to sewage plants
that are not able to remove the radioactive radium from it even
though these levels could be as high as 2,000 times the EPA's
drinking water standards. The radioactive water was then
released into waterways at times within a mile of drinking
water intake locations. Are you examining the manner in which
drilling wastes are being managed on Federal lands and ensuring
that similar problems do not exist there?
Secretary Salazar. Yes, and Deputy Secretary David Hayes
pulled together a forum on hydraulic fracturing, so if I could
have him answer that just for a minute. Thank you, Committee
Member Markey.
Mr. Markey. Yes.
Mr. Hayes. Congressman Markey, we are working with EPA.
EPA, of course, has the primary jurisdiction over water
quality. They have a study that they have under way. We are
talking with the industry about the Federal lands. As you know,
the Federal estate in terms of gas shale is a small percentage
of the overall resource, perhaps 15 percent, but we are looking
to make sure that the operators on public lands are not using
hydraulic fracturing in a way that is harmful to the
environment.
Mr. Markey. I think that is very important. I think the
public really wants this to be resolved in a way in which the
water which people are drinking is not contaminated by those
processes. By the way, I want to congratulate you on the
announcement that you made here about the 10,000 megawatts of
new permitting for renewable energy resources on public lands.
I think that is a huge step forward, building upon what you
have already done in the past. In the last Administration there
were no solar permits granted on public lands and only four
permits for wind energy on public lands. I just think we have
to open this thing up very broadly. It is a vast expanse, as
you were saying, 20 percent of the land mass of our country,
and just tremendous potential, especially off of our coastlines
as well. The GAO issued a report earlier this week which
concluded that the American people may not be getting a fair
return on Federal oil and gas resources, oil companies are
drilling for free on public land in the Gulf of Mexico. What
reforms are you putting in place to ensure that American
taxpayers receive the billions of dollars which they are owed
by the oil industry?
The Chairman. Fifteen seconds, Mr. Secretary. We are over
time here.
Secretary Salazar. Representative Markey, we are working
very hard in implementing the recommendations from the GAO.
Many of those have already been implemented and we actually
have a study underway in BLM to understand how it is that we
might be able to better improve to make sure that the American
taxpayer gets a fair return on the property that is being
leased to oil and gas companies.
Mr. Markey. Thank you for your service, Mr. Secretary.
The Chairman. The time of the gentleman has expired. The
gentleman from Tennessee, Mr. Duncan, is recognized for five
minutes.
Mr. Duncan of Tennessee. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
I first want to say that I second everything that you have said
in your opening statement, especially about land purchases. The
Federal government now owns or controls 30 percent of the land
in this country and state and local governments and quasi
governmental agencies own another or control another 20
percent, so you have already got half the land in some type of
public ownership, and USA Today reported about three or four
years ago on its front page one day that land trusts and
conservancies, and there are over 2,000 of them, are purchasing
land equivalent to half the size of the State of New Jersey
every year. We are very rapidly doing away with private
property in this country, making it much more expensive and
harder for young families to buy homes.
I am concerned also about the San Joaquin Valley even
though I live in Tennessee because I have read that
unemployment reached 40 percent there and it was helping drive
up food prices all across the country. Then another USA Today
story last week said that gas prices were going to go to $5 a
gallon or higher. We have seen some evidence of sort of a
recovery, but if we let gas prices go to $5 or $6 a gallon, it
is going to really stop this recovery and maybe even throw us
back into another recession and it is going to hurt a lot of
poor and lower income and working people. It has been said many
times we can't drill our way out of the problem, but I can tell
you that if we would just start producing a little bit more,
these other countries wouldn't be able to keep raising their
prices as fast as they do.
I have sat on this Committee for many years and I keep
hearing about Teddy Roosevelt. Well, I can tell you, Teddy
Roosevelt, the government at all levels didn't own nearly as
much as high a percentage of the property as they do now and we
didn't have nearly as many people, and so it is a little bit
ridiculous to keep talking about Teddy Roosevelt because I
think he would be shocked at how much government land is owned
today. Mr. Secretary, I want to ask you this. You heard the
Chairman say that your budget would result in a $60 billion tax
increase on the gas and oil industry. Assuming, or guessing,
that you might disagree with that, what figure would you put on
that as increased costs for the gas and oil industry? Because
some of us are concerned that those will have to passed on to
the consumer.
Secretary Salazar. Congressman Duncan, that number is not
one that I am aware of. Indeed, when you look at the entire
budget of the Department of the Interior, that vastly exceeds a
number of the budget. We are proposing in the President's
budget is that industry pay its weight in terms of inspection
and regulation, both offshore as well as onshore, and that is
reflected in the requests that we have made with respect to the
Bureau of Ocean Energy Management and Enforcement. If I may,
wanted just to address two of the points you raised, one on
conservation. I would like for all the members of the Committee
to recognize that what we are attempting to do here is to move
forward with a conservation agenda that is appropriate for the
21st Century.
We are not living in the days of Teddy Roosevelt, and we
all recognize that, but if you look at one example where we
have worked with Kansas and the government of Kansas, but also
the Kansas Livestock Association, the Kansas Farm Bureau and so
many others to preserve the 1.1 million acres of the last
remaining tall grass prairie ecosystem through a national
conservation effort which we announced about two months ago,
that is an effort which will preserve the working landscapes
and the ranches of the Flint Hills area for generations to
come. Fourth, and fifth and sixth generation ranchers will be
able to stay on those ranches. So we are not buying those
places for government ownership. Those are conservation areas
where through easements and management programs we will be able
to manage that 1.1 million acres and then you and those for
conservation. That is what you will see embedded in the way
that we want to move forward. I could give you lots of other
examples.
Mr. Duncan of Tennessee. Well, I am about to run out of
time but I will say we are causing a problem for state and
local governments that when we take so much land off of the tax
rolls at the same time the schools and the police are coming to
us wanting more money, and I am concerned, also, as the
Chairman said, about the fact that we have, that your
Department keeps telling us they have such a huge, multibillion
dollar maintenance backlog, and I think most of us on this side
feel you should do more to take care of the property you have
instead of buying additional properties. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
The Chairman. Time of the gentleman has expired. Chair
recognizes the gentleman from Michigan, Mr. Kildee.
Mr. Kildee. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Secretary, your
proposal includes focusing on seven initiatives for Fiscal Year
2012. One of those areas is strengthening tribal nations. This
is a follow-up on President Obama's commitment to Native
Americans and Alaska Natives. Can you speak a little more about
the importance of this initiative?
Secretary Salazar. Congressman Kildee, we take the trust
responsibility that we have for the United States in connection
with the 564 tribes in the United States very seriously.
Fulfilling that trust responsibility means paying attention to
the issues that are being faced in reservations around the
country, including addressing rampant violence and law and
order issues on those reservations. So we have a robust program
moving forward to deal with public safety on the reservations,
we have a robust program moving forward to create educational
opportunity for Native American children who live on those
reservations through the more than 130 schools that we oversee,
we are working with tribes to help them develop their economic
ability, including the development of their natural resources
in oil and gas and renewable energy resources on tribal
reservations, so many of those things that are priorities to
the President, to tribal nations and to the Department of the
Interior are included in this budget.
Mr. Kildee. I stood behind the President when he signed a
bill to help reduce the violence on the Indian lands and saw
his own sensitivity to the woman who spoke of how she had been
treated violently. It was very touching because it came from
his head, but from his heart, too. He really was concerned
about that violence. I am glad that you and the President are
working on that and that Congress passed some good legislation
on that. Are you working on something to respond to the
Carcieri decision of the U.S. Supreme Court?
Secretary Salazar. Congressman Kildee, we are indeed, and
David Hayes who has had the lead both on Cobell as well as
Carcieri, I am going to have him quickly respond to that
question.
Mr. Hayes. Congressman, we continue to urge the Congress to
pass a clean Carcieri fix to ensure that all tribes have the
right to have land in trust. The President's budget explicitly
requests that the Congress act in that regard.
Mr. Kildee. I am glad to hear that. The House passed
legislation last year, but that did not clear the Senate. Was
that language basically in the right direction, the language
that we used last year?
Mr. Hayes. Yes, Congressman, and thank you for your
leadership in that regard.
Mr. Kildee. Thank you very much. I am encouraged by the
fact that the Chairman has done a good job in trying to bring
that to our attention again this year. We appreciate your
cooperation over there. You have a special obligation to the
Native Americans. When I talk to Native Americans, especially
young ones, I tell them that I, for example, and you, too, Mr.
Chairman, we have two types of citizenship. I am a citizen of
the sovereign State of Michigan and I am a citizen of the
United States. Those Native Americans I speak to I say you have
a third citizenship based upon your sovereignty. You are a
citizen of the Navajo Tribe, the Sault Ste Marie Tribe, and
that is a very important citizenship. We have to be careful. I
know you, under your leadership, Mr. Secretary, have done a
very good job to make sure we don't slice away at that
sovereignty. We will probably never come with a meat axe and
try to do anything, but we have to be careful not to slice away
a bit at their sovereignty. You have been very sensitive on
that and I personally appreciate it. I yield back the balance
of my time, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. I thank the gentleman very much for yielding
back. The Chair recognizes the gentleman from Utah, Mr. Bishop.
Mr. Bishop. Secretary, thank you for coming here. This is
an infrequent opportunity that we get to speak to you and I
appreciate your willingness to do that. I have three quick
questions for you. I will try and go through the first two as
quickly as possible to give you maximum amount of time for the
third one, if that is it. First question is, is there a line
item in your proposed budget for the Wildlands Initiative? Just
Yes or No. We couldn't find one.
Secretary Salazar. No.
Mr. Bishop. OK. That is smart thinking. Second one, on the
RMP process, resource management plans, that were done in the
State of Utah obviously averaged between six to eight years in
doing so. They did the coordination mandated in FLPMA, which
was not done for the wildland policy, in which talked to
locally elected officials, as well as having public hearings.
They spent two years specifically on wilderness studies for
those public lands and the decision was 2.8 million acres in
Utah that had some characteristics, 2.4 million did not have
enough characteristics, but 400,000 did, to be managed for
their wilderness characteristics. Your wildlands proposal
overturns that, so unless you want to interpret that the
professionals on the ground were wrong, which I would highly
doubt, or that the process, which was correct, and the analysis
was done by experts, what specifically about those RMP
proposals is wrong in their answer? Their answer was 400,000.
What was wrong in that answer? I want a specific, and very
brief one, if you could.
Secretary Salazar. If I may, Congressman Bishop, because I
know you have a major concern on the wildlands policy and I
think it is good, because of Utah being a great example to talk
about this, I am going to have David Hayes who spent time in
Vernal, Utah, and a number of different times, as have I, talk
about how it applies to Utah.
Mr. Bishop. Got to be specific for me. Mr. Hayes,
specifically.
Mr. Hayes. The issue, Congressman, is that the 2.4 million
acres that have wilderness characteristics in Utah, the RMP
process provided no guidance whatsoever to BLM, to industry or
any party as to----
Mr. Bishop. Mr. Hayes, let me go to the question.
Mr. Hayes. Yes.
Mr. Bishop. I am not talking about process. The process was
done.
Mr. Hayes. Yes.
Mr. Bishop. What specifically about the answer was wrong?
What was wrong with their answer?
Mr. Hayes. There is no clarity in the RMPs about how to
manage the 2.4 million acres that have wilderness
characteristics. We are proposing to simply go back to that
process and ask and answer that question through the RMP
amendment process.
Mr. Bishop. So what was wrong with their decision by the
professionals on the field in what you called a rush to
judgment?
Mr. Hayes. The inventory was excellent.
Mr. Bishop. OK.
Mr. Hayes. It identified 2.4 million acres of wilderness
characteristics and it provided no guidance to industry, to BLM
folks or anyone as to how those lands could be----
Mr. Bishop. So the answers of 2.4 without enough
characteristics, that was accurate?
Mr. Hayes. We think the inventory was good, was well done.
Mr. Bishop. The 2.4 was the accurate answer?
Mr. Hayes. The problem is that there was no guidance in the
RMP for how those lands should be managed.
Mr. Bishop. We are still only looking at 400,000 that
potentially be guided as wilderness, managed as wilderness. You
are not changing that.
Mr. Hayes. No.
Mr. Bishop. All right. Fine. Then there is no need for
going through the process. Let me then go to the real one, Mr.
Secretary.
Mr. Hayes. No. No.
Mr. Bishop. Thank you. You answered it. Let me try the real
one, Mr. Secretary. You have received a great deal of
congratulations for the management style of the Department of
the Interior, often by people who aren't really impacted by it.
I mean, the Ranking Member is a great person, but to be honest,
he has to go on a road trip to find BLM land close to his home
town. We have others that really still think of the West as
their personal playground or as a nice backdrop for John Wayne
movies. Mr. Grijalva once jokingly said that he wished his
state had as much public land as my state. I agreed with him,
but for different reasons. So it is true of all the public land
that is owned and managed by the Department of the Interior, 93
percent is found west of Denver, correct?
Secretary Salazar. I am not sure of the number, but in
general.
Mr. Bishop. I am close. Four percent is found east of
Denver. So the question I have to have, sir, especially after
the wildlands proposal which has no statutory requirement to do
it, nor, as we found out two days ago in our hearing, has a
statutory authority to do so, then here is the question. These
are the letters from the locally affected, locally elected
officials in our state. Why is the overwhelming majority of
locally elected officials, why is the overwhelming majority of
elected Governors in the western states, which has 93 percent,
and I am having to tell you the elected officials who are in
Congress are not that crazy, too, why are they opposed to what
you are trying to do? Why are the people directly impacted by
these decisions are the ones who are complaining time and time
again about your decisions? That is why I wanted to give you
enough time to do that one.
Secretary Salazar. Well, with 19 seconds left let me just
say, Congressman Bishop, that I think there is a
misunderstanding on your part and the part of many others with
respect to the wildlands policy, and so we will communicate
with the citizens of Utah, as well as with others, about the
specific consequence of the BLM wildlands policy.
Mr. Bishop. Mr. Secretary, that is a perfect thing to say
and I appreciate you doing it. I just wish you had done it
before you made the announcement.
Secretary Salazar. Let me finish. First, it is very
important for you to recognize that this is a requirement of
the law. In fact, the Circuit Court of Appeals have recognized
that this is a mandamus responsibility that we have in the
Department of the Interior. Second of all, there is no acre
that has been made or designated as wildlands, and we recognize
that wilderness designation is ultimately an authority of the
Congress. Third, that as we move forward with the RMP process
and moving forward with how we manage public lands----
The Chairman. Mr. Secretary?
Secretary Salazar.--we will seek the local input of people
to provide us guidance on how we move forward.
The Chairman. Mr. Secretary and my friend from Utah, we are
going to have more hearings on this. As was alluded to when we
had the hearing earlier, we will pursue this. Thank you very
much. Next I would recognize my colleague from Oregon, Mr.
DeFazio.
Mr. DeFazio. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you for being
here, Mr. Secretary. I guess I would strike a little different
tone and say that, you know, in my state, particularly with the
problem that has been prevalent for more than 20 years through
both, starting with the first Bush Administration, the Clinton
Administration, the Bush Administration, and then extending
into your tenure, we have been deadlocked on the management of
some unique forest lands, the O&C lands in Oregon. I want to
thank you for the individual attention that you have put into
trying to help break that deadlock and I want to encourage you
and your Department, and Mr. Hayes and others who are
knowledgeable and working on this, to continue to move forward
thoughtfully on these pilot projects where we can look at
getting into our forests again, making them more healthy and
removing a viable commercial product where appropriate.
I just really want to thank you for that. I know it is
tough budgetary times but if we break this gridlock there will
be revenue for the government, revenue for my counties, there
will be jobs, we will have healthier forests. I think these
pilot projects for the first time in four administrations hold
some promise of giving us a path forward. So I just, I wanted
to set a little different tone because there are others who,
you know, get different concerns that they want to raise with
you. So thank you, and I, you know, really need to respond to
that. You are doing a great job. I would like to go back to
something the Chairman raised about Land and Water Conservation
Funds. Now, my understanding is that there are no general fund
dollars in the Land and Water Conservation Fund, is that
correct? These are dedicated revenue sources that are channeled
into LWCF.
Secretary Salazar. That is correct.
Mr. DeFazio. Yes. And right now under law those are
required to be spent in a very limited way in terms of the
acquisition of land to mitigate for other impacts elsewhere,
depletion of resources elsewhere, or things that are desirable
in terms of, you know, communities and Federal priorities, is
that correct?
Secretary Salazar. It is correct. The Land and Water
Conservation Fund statute when it was written back in the 1960s
provided guidance to where that money should go, but it
ultimately, when you look at the United States of America,
there have been land and water conservation projects in every
single state of America. What I would say about that as well is
that I think it is a kind of incentivization that has brought
about much of the conservation legacy that we have today here
in this country. I think, as you well know, Congressman
DeFazio, it is a broken promise. Stewart Udall and Robert
Kennedy, Henry Dime and others who worked on that back in the
1960s really felt that it would be fully funded, and yet 50
years and it has never been fully funded because although the
money is credited in the Treasury to go into Land and Water
Conservation Fund, only about half of the money has ever gone
into Land and Water Conservation Fund. The rest has never
reached the goal.
Mr. DeFazio. Right. It is used as a phony deficit offset
since the money can't legally be spent on general fund
government activities, but we make, we on the books say, well,
gee, there is $450 million less deficit because we didn't spend
those on what is legally authorized. I am not familiar with,
and I don't know if the Department keeps, but I know in my
state we have a backlog of projects with willing sellers and
community support, often county commissioners, city councils
and others, hoping for land, water conservation acquisitions.
Is there any sort of national list that you maintain? Because I
imagine that most Members here aren't aware that they have
communities or projects in their districts or their states
where there is tremendous support where we just haven't made
the money available because we are using it as a phony offset
to make the deficit look smaller.
Secretary Salazar. The answer to that is that these
projects exist in every one of the states of the country and
they are local and state projects, as well as some projects
from our agencies. The National Park Service alone has about $2
billion in terms of acquisitions, and some of them are
expensive. Grand Teton. There are in holdings in the Grand
Teton where we worked with the State of Wyoming to try to
figure out how we could buy out some of those in holdings to
preserve the Grand Tetons for the future, but the needs are
huge. They are in the multi billions of dollars.
Mr. DeFazio. So we could productively, with community and
state support and tremendous consensus, spend these funds for
their lawfully authorized purpose if we stopped using them as a
phony budget offset, and that is what you are proposing this
year.
Secretary Salazar. Indeed, and I would offer this, too. If
you want to put it into a historical context, in 1999 the House
of Representatives actually passed what would have been a $3.2
billion package that essentially would have funded most of the
components of Land and Water Conservation Fund, and so coming
in and looking at a $900 million request, which is the current
authorized level, I think, in my view, is a humble and modest
request given the need that is out there.
Mr. DeFazio. Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Secretary. Thank
you, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. Time of the gentleman has expired. The Chair
recognizes the gentleman from Colorado, Mr. Lamborn.
Mr. Lamborn. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you for
being here today, Mr. Salazar. Mr. Secretary, as you know, a
number of environmental groups in Colorado and elsewhere have
pressured you to cancel oil and gas leases that were signed and
issued to the successful high bidders following BLM public
auctions. You were asked about this issue during an interview
you gave with the editorial board of the Grand Junction Daily
Sentinel in August of 2009. You were quoted as saying that you
would not withdraw, could not withdraw the Roan Plateau leases
in Colorado because once these leases were signed, they
provided the buyers with a property right that you and your
agency were bound to protect. Since I have a short period of
time, I would appreciate it if you could answer the following
few questions with a yes or no. Do you still stand by this
statement that you have made to the Grand Junction Daily
Sentinel in 2009?
Secretary Salazar. That statement was accurate then. It
would be accurate today if those leases were, in fact, issued
and signed.
Mr. Lamborn. OK.
Secretary Salazar. There is litigation on the Roan Plateau,
Congressman Lamborn, and efforts to try to create a program
forward that will allow the development of oil and gas on the
Roan Plateau, but to do it with the best practices available
from the oil and gas industry. Those have been part of the
negotiations that have been underway.
Mr. Lamborn. OK. And then, as Secretary of the Interior, do
you and your agency, and I am assuming the answer is yes, but
just to verify that you intend to protect the private property
rights of companies that are holding Federal oil and gas leases
that have been signed and issued.
Secretary Salazar. The answer is we will protect private
property rights and follow the law in terms of what the law
requires us to do.
Mr. Lamborn. OK. And are you aware that the Mineral Leasing
Act requires the BLM to issue oil and gas leases within 60 days
following payment by the successful high bidder of the
remainder of the bonus bid, if any is owed, and the first
year's annual rental?
Secretary Salazar. I believe that there is language in the
statutes that make those requirements, but I will also tell
you, Congressman Lamborn, that most of the leases that have
been issued frankly have been protested and gone into
litigation, which essentially is what has caused, if you will,
the backlog of much of the activity, and much of it happened
because of the rush to judgment to lease everything, everywhere
without approaching it in the way that we are approaching it,
which is to be smart from the start. Once you are into
litigation, you can point the specific statute out to me as
many times as you can but you are not going to get a lease
essentially that is going to get into production----
Mr. Lamborn. I understand the Courts may interfere, as you
point out, and tell you to do something. Yes. I am talking
about activity by your Department separate from whatever a
Court might say pursuant to litigation. So here is what I am
concluding with. A local forest supervisor in Wyoming recently
signed a record of decision in which she decided that the
government should cancel oil and gas leases that have already
been issued. Now, since BLM leases out Federal oil and gas
resources underlying national forests, how and when do you
intend to notify the Forest Service that the Department of the
Interior cannot, and will not, cancel Federal oil and gas
leases that have been issued for Forest Service parcels?
Secretary Salazar. Congressman Lamborn, we will follow the
law, but I think the results speak for themselves. I think in
2010, the fact that we issued 5,200 leases in 2010, that we
project that in 2011 we will issue 7,200 leases in the onshore,
the fact that we have 41 million acres have already been leased
out to oil and gas development, I think those statistics speak
for themselves.
Mr. Lamborn. Those are good statistics but in this instance
we see a possibility that according to what one local forest
supervisor in Wyoming would like to do, the result would be the
cancellation of existing leases that have been issued. You told
the Grand Junction Sentinel in another case, in the Roan
Plateau case, that would be a violation of private property
rights. Wouldn't that also apply here?
Secretary Salazar. Congressman Lamborn, I would be happy to
take a look at the specific case that you are referencing here
and get back to you on the specifics. I don't have the
information in front of me with respect to the specific case
you speak about.
Mr. Lamborn. Do you agree that that would be a violation
of, apart from whatever a Court might say, that is a violation
of private property rights?
Secretary Salazar. I don't know. I will look into the case
that you raise if you get that information to my staff and we
will get back to you with the specifics of the particular case.
I am not going to speculate based on this conversation and your
questions here.
Mr. Lamborn. OK. Thank you.
The Chairman. Time of the gentleman has expired. I would
ask, too, Mr. Secretary, because I know this will come up,
other Members will have questions, and if you could respond in
a very timely manner to those questions, that would be very,
very helpful to us. I know that request has been made of you in
the past. Chair recognizes the gentleman from American Samoa,
Mr. Faleomavaega.
Mr. Faleomavaega. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want to offer
my personal congratulations for your attainment of the
Chairmanship, Mr. Chairman, and also our Ranking Member of the
Committee. Welcome to the Committee, Mr. Secretary. As the
President's point man to care for our country's natural
resources, I do want to commend you for your leadership and
services to our nation. Mr. Secretary, on the eve of the
current crisis in the Middle East, especially with oil
producing countries like Libya, and I believe the Chairman has
touched on this issue, the fear among the American consumers is
that the price of gas may be going up as high as $5 a gallon by
this summer. Is the Administration currently making contingency
plans in anticipation of something as critical as this in terms
of lessening the price of gas in the coming months?
Secretary Salazar. Congressman, everything is on the table
and everything is being looked at in terms of potential
actions. The President has made it clear and many Members of
Congress have made it clear that obviously working on the
economy and standing this economy up is of highest priority for
the American people, and obviously the price of fuel is one of
those factors, and so every option will be looked at.
Mr. Faleomavaega. Mr. Secretary, you perhaps more than
anyone in the Administration has had a more in-depth
understanding of the oil spill caused by the British Petroleum
Company. Can I ask what was the total damage as a result of
this oil spill? Because it has been months now. I don't know
what the bottom line is in the cause of the oil spill. What is
the total damage that was caused by the oil spill by British
Petroleum, may I ask?
Secretary Salazar. Congressman, those issues are still
being evaluated. There is a natural resource damage assessment
program which is underway which involves the five states of the
Gulf Coast and the Department of the Interior, and the
Department of Commerce and the Department of Justice, there are
other issues that we are looking at, but it will be some time
before there is a more exact calculation of the total amount of
damage that was caused from the BP oil spill.
Mr. Faleomavaega. All right. How is it that a foreign
company, like British Petroleum, and I don't know if the media
reports have been accurate of this, British Petroleum was found
in violation of so many of the regulatory regulations, and yet
ironically most of all our major American oil companies were in
compliance with the oil spill, you know, standards, how is it
that a foreign company, like British Petroleum, got away with
all this?
Secretary Salazar. My own view of that, Congressman, is
that there was a complacency that included the U.S. Congress,
Republican and Democratic Presidents and Secretaries of the
Interior for a long time. The consequence of that was a lack of
keeping up with the technology that was going into the deeper
and deeper waters in the Gulf, and the consequence of that
today, and the responsibility and duty, which I believe we all
share both as an Administration and as a Congress, is to make
sure that if our policy of the United States is to promote oil
and gas development in the Outer Continental Shelf, which is a
policy of this President and I am implementing that in the
Department of the Interior, that we do it in a safe way that
protects the environment and protects the people. That is why
the budget that is in front of you that would fund the Bureau
of Ocean Energy Management and Regulation is such an important
component of our energy future for the country.
Mr. Faleomavaega. In your opinion, has British Petroleum
properly compensated the many small businesses, the people that
were affected negatively by the oil spill?
Secretary Salazar. Congressman, that process is underway.
There is a claims process which is being executed and it is
still far from being complete.
Mr. Faleomavaega. I do want to commend my good friend from
Michigan, as well as members of our Native American
Congressional Caucus, for your successful negotiations not only
of the Cobell issue, as well as the Carcieri. We are going to
continue following this. I think my time is about up, Mr.
Chairman. Thank you, Mr. Secretary.
Secretary Salazar. Thank you, Congressman.
The Chairman. Thank the gentleman. Had some time to yield
back and I appreciate that. The gentleman from Virginia, Mr.
Wittman, is recognized for five minutes.
Mr. Wittman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you, Mr.
Salazar, Secretary Salazar, for joining us today. We appreciate
this opportunity. Want to begin by letting you know my concerns
about the Fiscal Year 2012 budget as it relates to domestic
energy production. I think we need to do more there. I
appreciate the efforts that are being put forth to promote wind
energy in the mid-Atlantic, I think that is a critical part of
this, but I also want to offer that I hope that you re-examine
the cancellation of leases off of Virginia for oil and gas. I
think those are critical and I know Virginia stands ready,
willing and able to assist in making sure that we do all we can
to get that energy production going off of our coast. Want to
talk a little bit about the Chesapeake Bay Executive Order. As
you know, the President signed that last year and that is an
effort to restore habitat within the Chesapeake Bay.
I wanted to ask you a couple of questions there. One is
where is the Department of the Interior currently in
implementing that particular Executive Order? Can you talk
about the critical programs in your Fiscal Year 2012 budget
recommendation that that would enhance the implementation of
the President's Executive Order. I want to piggyback a little
bit on that talking about the North American Wetlands
Conservation Act funding. As you know, that is also a critical
element of preserving habitat for migratory bird populations,
and that does have a specific economic impact. Those wildlife-
related recreation in those areas generates about $120 billion
a year and about 4,000 jobs, many of those in rural areas.
In my district and throughout the State of Virginia, those
are critical elements of what we are dealing with. As an avid
water fowl hunter and a member of the Migratory Bird
Conservation Commission, we all know how important those
dollars are. I wanted to get you to comment about why these
North American Wetlands Conservation Act funding dollars are
important, and how is the funding there at that level leveraged
with private dollars in order to set some of these lands aside
and preserve these critical habitats both through purchase, but
also more predominantly these days with conservation easement
purchases.
Secretary Salazar. Congressman, wait a minute. Let me first
thank you for your service on the commission along with Senator
Thad Cochran, and now Senator prior, and others who serve on
that commission from the states, as well as the Department of
the Interior. Let me say first on the Chesapeake Bay, there is
a significant amount of money, I think $33.6 million, that is
proposed in the President's budget for the Chesapeake. We do
view as an Administration the Chesapeake Bay as being one of
those landscapes of national significance for the country. We
know there is a lot of work that needs to be done there. The
National Park Service and the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service
are working closely with Virginia, with local communities, to
try to identify how we can be helpful in terms of the
restoration of the Chesapeake. It will remain a high priority
for us.
Finally, what I would just say to you I think in terms of
the North American Wetlands Conservation Act funding, I think
it is a great example of the kind of conservation effort that
we need to embark upon, and it underlies the America's Great
Outdoors and underpins the Land and Water Conservation Fund.
Sitting with me in those committees over the last two years,
often you have seen how much it is that we are able to leverage
for wetlands, which are totally supported by the hunters and
anglers of America and conservationists because there is a
shortage of money, and so when we are able to put out a little
bit of money through NAWCA funding, we are able to triple or
quadruple the amount of money that comes in from Ducks
Unlimited, and Trout Unlimited and state governments and so
many others to really do a lot for conservation. So I think it
is a good template.
Mr. Wittman. Thank you. I think that is a great example of
how we can take that source of income there and, as you said,
leverage it in some pretty powerful ways and with partners who
not only by themselves promote those efforts, but in
conjunction with the government are out there making sure that
we are preserving those critical habitats. Let me ask a little
bit about the Land and Water Conservation Fund. The Fiscal Year
2012 budget request obviously enhances some of that, but I
wanted to get your thoughts on how those efforts are going to
provide continued outdoor recreational activity access to
folks, and specifically in districts like mine, where those
activities are a critical part of the economies of many areas
here in the United States. I just want to get your thoughts
about how those dollars are there to promote and to enhance
those activities.
Secretary Salazar. Congressman Wittman, what we will do is
to work very closely obviously with the states and with local
governments and nongovernmental organizations to identify those
places that are the economic generators of our communities in
terms of outdoor recreations, whether those are urban parks in
communities in Virginia, or whether it is the protection and
restoration of wetlands which are important for hunters and for
anglers, but that is where that money would go. The amount
really that is needed for doing what would be an appropriate
job for Land and Water Conservation Fund is in the billions of
dollars, and indeed, I think some estimates are somewhere
between $5 billion and $10 billion, and so the amount that we
have requested here, the $900 million, which is essentially
what is authorized under the law, I think is a good investment
relative to moving the economics around. As I said earlier,
when we think about it, it is, you know, 6.5 million jobs that
are just created through the outdoor recreational activities,
and this is according to the Outdoor Recreation Foundation.
The Chairman. Time of the gentleman has expired. The
gentleman from California, Mr. Costa.
Mr. Costa. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, for holding
this important hearing. Thank you, Mr. Secretary, for the good
job that you are doing on a host of issues. You see me and of
course you see water in California. Obviously, that is where I
am going to focus my comments and questions. The Bay Delta
Conservation Plan and the efforts that you folks are putting
together are critical. If it is going to have any success and
if the locals are going to continue to support it and
participate financially, and the state, the consolidation and
the efforts and the Federal participation is critical, and
there has to be an end to the process. We have been processed
to death on these issues for over a decade, and so I want to
reiterate and get your quick response to the commitment on that
Bay Delta Conservation Plan.
Secretary Salazar. Congressman Costa, let me commit to you
that we will continue to focus like a laser beam on the issues
in the California Bay Delta. We appreciate your leadership and
that of Congresswoman Napolitano and so many others who have
helped on that effort. I want David Hayes, because he is
leading this effort on the BDCP, to quickly give you a quick
update on what we are doing on the Bay Delta Conservation Plan.
Mr. Costa. Quickly, because I want to get back to the San
Joaquin River and water allocations this year. Quickly, David.
Mr. Hayes. I will be very quick, Congressman. We are
working very closely with the new Administration in California.
This is a state driven process. We are full partners with the
new resources secretary, John Laird, and Jerry Merrill, who is
in charge of this for the Governor, and we will look forward to
working with you and other members of the California Delegation
as we move forward.
Mr. Costa. Mr. Secretary, I provided you a letter on
February 18 and actually hand delivered it as well when I saw
you in the Valley last week. Thank you again for your
participation at that historic dedication. In the letter we
talked about a number of issues with regards to interim
projects. Give credit where credit is due. We had difficulty
two years ago on getting administrative flexibility in the
operation of the project south of the Delta. Last year you came
forward and did so. As a result, we got a 50 percent water
allocation, we got $54 million in local projects, we got the
construction of the Intertie Project that had been delayed for
almost two decades. It is under construction, it will mean
35,000 acre-feet of additional yield, so I want to credit you
on those points.
Today we have a situation where a number of districts are
at 100 percent of their allocation, and I commend that we did
an early announcement at 50 percent, but we have continued to
get rain this week and more snow in the mountains and it just
seems to me before the new reductions kick in on April 1 and
May that could provide additional allocation above 50 percent
on the San Louis unit, that we need to take action. Mr. Connor
said yesterday he is working on that. Is the issue within the
Department of the Interior or Department of Commerce with NOAA
as it relates to that specific flexibility?
Secretary Salazar. Let me see if David knows the answer to
that question. I would just say to you that we have spent a
huge amount of our time working on a number of the projects
that you spoke about, and also dealing with improving how we
are projecting the water availability to the agricultural
community.
Mr. Costa. And that is important. You, as a farmer, know
you make plans in February and March and you talk to your
bankers, and if we are talking about May and June, forget about
it because it is not going to do any good.
Secretary Salazar. As a direct result of that and our
conversations of last year, that is why we have the kind of, I
hope, a better timeliness relative to giving farmers that kind
of direction. On the specific question, David, do you have the
answer to the Congressman?
Mr. Hayes. Yes, Congressman. Last week, as you know, we had
a collaborative settlement of the litigation surrounding the
occupation of the system for the balance of this year. The
water users came together with the environmental groups, with
the state and with us, and together we agreed on how to operate
to maximize how much water can be available through the next
few months. That, together with the wet winter puts us in an
extraordinarily good position in California. Also, that
settlement, I think, demonstrated that everyone is working
together here to reach a long term solution, which of course is
what the Bay Delta Conservation Plan is all about.
Mr. Costa. Right. Quickly, before my time is up, there have
been damages on third party agreements on the San Joaquin River
settlement agreement. What efforts are you going to make to
respond to those damages by third parties? I know you are
familiar with it. Also, the timelines on the restoration. They
are important, but, you know, Mr. Garamendi and I have
discussed there are problems on channel clearing and all sorts
of stuff that needs to be done, has to be paid for before we
can even begin to talk about reintroduction of Salmon on 2013,
that timeline. My time has expired, but I don't know, Mr.
Chairman, if you will allow him to answer the question.
The Chairman. I would prefer to try to keep this going,
but, Mr. Secretary, if you would respond to Mr. Costa in
writing, and Mr. Hayes, that would be very, very beneficial.
Thank you for your consideration. Chair recognizes the
gentleman from Colorado, Mr. Coffman.
Mr. Coffman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Secretary,
welcome to the Committee and thanks for your service to our
country. You know, I am very concerned about the overall
economy. Having had four military overseas assignments in my
career, four of which took me to the Middle East, I understand
the instability there and its resulting impact potentially on
oil prices and that unfortunately we are still reliant a lot on
imported oil, and that, my concern is in this fragile recovery
that we have right now, that a prolonged spike in oil prices
will set this country back and will cause a double dip
recession. I think that families in our home state and across
the country are already feeling the effects of rising prices at
the pump right now.
I mean, if prices go north of $4, in Colorado go north of
$5, that is not simply going to hurt families directly, but it
is going to raise the transportation cost that is going to
impact all of the goods that they buy from groceries to
everything else. So I am very concerned that we are really
going to be caught flat on our feet on this issue, and
everything you talked about today is going to raise the cost of
oil and natural gas in the United States to the consumers. I
understand that, you know, you have this new energy frontier
that you are working on where you say that the Department's New
Energy Frontier Initiative to create jobs reduces the nation's
dependence on fossil fuels and oil imports, and reduce carbon
impacts facilitating renewable energy development is a major
component of this strategy, along with effective management of
conventional energy programs, and so more solar projects, more
wind projects.
That is electrical generation and that doesn't impact
really our foreign imports because those are primarily used as
transportation fuels and manufacturing processes. So, you know,
I am sure that the truth lies somewhere in the middle, but from
what you are saying and what folks like the Western Energy
Alliance are saying, the producers of oil and gas are two very
different things and they seem to suggest that you are throwing
up every bureaucratic obstacle that you can find to develop oil
and gas in the United States. That is certainly their view. I
think that they say a number of things in terms of the decline
of oil and gas production on public lands, on shore in the
United States.
So one question that I have--you also talked about
increasing fees on oil and gas development in order to pay for
the regulatory burdens that they impose and you talk, in your
statement you mentioned that the Department has made
significant advances in its priority goal to increase approved
capacity for renewable energy production on Interior lands by
at least 10,000 megawatts by the end of 2012 while ensuring
full environmental review, and then you go on and talk about,
you know, how you are going to increase that production. I
guess one question I have for you, and let me tell you, I am an
all of the above person when it comes to energy strategy for
this country, but are you going to require on the renewables
side that they also pay the regulatory costs of the burdens
that they impose as you do on oil and gas side?
Secretary Salazar. Congressman Coffman, the basic principle
that we have is that we want a fair return to the American
taxpayer, and so that is what we will do with solar and other
renewable energy projects as well. I appreciate the fact that
you are supportive of an all of the above kind of energy kind
of program, and I appreciate your service to our country. Our
own view of this, the President's view and my view, is we need
to have a robust domestic production. We also need to embrace
alternative energy, including nuclear, and clean coal, and
solar, and wind and geothermal, and we also need to embrace
efficiency. Indeed, some of the efficiency measures that we now
have with the higher CAFE standards are saving a significant
amount of energy that we are importing into this country, and
so, frankly, I think there is in this area of energy and the
energy future for America a place where there may be an
opportunity to find common ground between the Republican
majority in the House of Representatives and the
Administration.
The Chairman. Time of the gentleman has expired. Gentleman
from New Jersey, Mr. Holt, is recognized for five minutes.
Mr. Holt. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you, Mr.
Secretary. I am sure some days it doesn't seem that you have
such an exhilarating job, but you have a wonderful opportunity
to show the common ground between a vibrant economy and
environmental protection and I thank you for how you are doing
it. Earlier this week, as Mr. Markey pointed out, The New York
Times had a series of articles about gas drilling and they
reported that in 2009 Wyoming failed to meet air quality
standards for the first time in history and that one county in
Wyoming with a population of less than 10,000 people but with
one of the highest concentrations of drilling wells experienced
ozone levels that were higher than those found in Houston or
Los Angeles. Now, as part of the environmental assessment and
permitting process does the Department of the Interior require
monitoring or limitations on emissions from drilling activities
on Federal lands?
Secretary Salazar. The answer to that is Yes, and we are
aware of some of the challenges that we face.
Mr. Holt. So you do require monitoring, and you do require
limitations on those emissions.
Secretary Salazar. On emissions, yes.
Mr. Holt. OK. Do you have sufficient statutory authority to
do what you think needs to be done?
Secretary Salazar. Let me have David Hayes answer part of
the question.
Mr. Holt. OK.
Mr. Hayes. Congressman, you are pointing out a very serious
and important issue that is affecting a lot of folks, the air
quality in some areas in Utah, Colorado and the four corners
area generally. We are working with EPA to address monitoring
needs in the area. BLM also has underway an examination of
fugitive emissions to help reduce those emissions. We think we
have the current authority required to help tighten up fugitive
emissions and to reduce ozone-forming releases.
Mr. Holt. I hope you will report to me in more detail in
writing of kind of what you are doing in those areas. There has
been a lot of talk in the past year about standards for safety
for offshore drilling. Has the Department revised its onshore
regulations to make sure that the best practices are being
observed? There are some new techniques, in particular,
hydraulic fracturing, that are rapidly gaining prevalence in
the industry. Has the DOI revised the regulations for best
practice?
Secretary Salazar. We have had a number of revisions to
regulations trying to move forward with an onshore domestic
production program that is efficient. We are looking at ways in
which we can improve that beyond where we are today, and we
know that there are companies out there that are very involved
in best practices kinds of programs, including in hydraulic
fracturing.
Mr. Holt. When were the regulations last updated?
Secretary Salazar. It depends on which specific regulations
you are speaking about.
Mr. Holt. Well, when were any new regulations promulgated
for onshore gas extraction?
Secretary Salazar. We have had a number of regulations that
we have issued, including some this year, with respect to
master leasing programs for oil and gas so that we can have a
better way and a more understandable way of how we are going
about our leasing programs in the onshore and those rules were
promulgated within the last year.
Mr. Holt. OK. Thanks. I will look forward to a fuller
discussion of that also because it is a rapidly developing
field and companies, producers, are learning a lot and I think
we want to make sure that is reflected in any of the
regulations that the government promulgates. I think with the
limited time I will skip my next question but I just wanted to
express my interest in your pursuing the idea of acquiring
ongoing royalties for licensed areas that are not used in
production. We have talked about that earlier this morning with
Mr. Markey. I think it is only fair to taxpayers. It is not an
undue burden on the producers, and I think it is something we
really should move forward with. Thank you.
The Chairman. Time of the gentleman has expired. The
gentleman from Louisiana, Mr. Fleming, is recognized for five
minutes.
Mr. Fleming. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Secretary, I
represent the 4th District of Louisiana. I want to lay the
foundation for my question here and it revolves around the Deep
Horizon incident. First we had the spill, then we had a
moratorium despite the fact that the President's hand picked
counsel recommended against it, then we had a de facto
moratorium, and then we had a contempt of Court as a result of
that, and I do want to quote the Judge, Judge Feldman, on that.
He says, ``The government continually reaffirmed its intention
and resolve to restore the moratorium. It even notified
operators that though a preliminary injunction had issued, they
could quickly expect a new moratorium.'' He went on to say that
there was clear and convincing evidence of the government's
contempt of this Court's preliminary injunction.
It is kind of interesting because I know a lot of times,
and you have testified before us before that you use following
the law and court orders as the defense of your position, but
it appears to me, and I will let you respond in a minute, that
there is often selective enforcement. Finally, after the
contempt was issued, we got one token permit. Now here is what
the results have been so far. Loss of 20 percent of our
deepwater rigs, we have 33 shallow-water rigs that are stacked
which was not even part of the incident to begin with, Seahawk
Drilling, a major player, has now filed bankruptcy, and we have
thousands of good jobs now of very fine Louisiana citizens that
have been lost, but the impact is worse than that.
In a time when we are not doing anything in ANWR, at a time
when hydrofracking is under attack, we have an estimate from
the American Petroleum Institute that as much as 680,000
barrels of oil equivalent Gulf production a day could be at
risk in 2019, that is to say if we don't get back to drilling
in the deep water we are going to find ourselves by 2019, the
equivalent of 12 percent of the total U.S. current production
being lost. So the impact is very significant and we well can't
really, in a time of a terrible economy and gas prices going up
very quickly, we well cannot really I think afford this.
Finally, those six rigs that have left the area now, they have
gone to countries like Brazil and Egypt where the regulations
and the oversight are much less than they are here.
So my question is this. Considering all of those points,
isn't this really an overall policy by the Administration to
allow gas prices to go up, to allow energy prices, fossil
fuels, to go up by constricting fossil fuel production in order
to allow alternative fuels, which are not really cutting it in
the marketplace, to allow those prices to come in parity and
become more competitive? We have had, in fact, some testimony
to suggest that, and, in fact, Steven Chu, Obama's Energy
Secretary, said that a gradual increase in gasoline taxes could
coax customers into dumping their gas guzzlers and finding
homes closer to where they work, suggesting that it could be
actually a positive thing to see gas prices go up. So is this,
sir, really attempt in order to drive the prices up so
alternative fuels will be more competitive?
Secretary Salazar. Congressman Fleming, with all due
respect, I disagree with your characterization and your
foundation, and the fact of the matter is that we have moved
forward with drilling, both onshore and offshore. We have
issued 37 shallow water permits. Indeed, your numbers are wrong
relative to what is happening with rig activity in the Gulf of
Mexico. In 2009, there were 116 rigs in the Gulf of Mexico, in
2010, February, 120, in February 2011 it is 126. You should ask
the question why is the number of rigs going up in the Gulf of
Mexico? The fact of the matter is that people are aware, we are
aware at the Department of the Interior, this Congress is
aware, that there are significant oil and gas resources within
the Gulf of Mexico. It is a policy of this Administration to
explore and to develop that oil and gas as we have been doing
over the last several years.
Mr. Fleming. Well, of course we can quibble over the
numbers, but the point is, at least from what we are seeing
there, perhaps there are other things that organically were
increasing underneath, but we are definitely seeing at least
off the Coast of Louisiana a substantial decrease in new rig
activity and without any real justification. With that, I yield
back, sir.
The Chairman. Time of the gentleman has expired.
Secretary Salazar. The statistics, Mr. Congressman, are
absolutely wrong. When you look at the production within the
Gulf of Mexico, even in the midst of the national crisis of the
Deepwater Horizon, the production has remained at an all time
high and we expect that it will continue as we bring new
production on line.
The Chairman. This will clearly be a matter that will be
pursued, I am sure. The gentleman from Northern Marianas, Mr.
Sablan, is recognized for five minutes.
Mr. Sablan. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, and thank
you, Secretary Salazar, for your service to the country and for
the attention that you and your Department, especially the
Office of Insular Affairs, the attention they give to the
territories, and in particular, the Northern Mariana Islands.
We had a hearing yesterday and so there are issues that I
brought up there that we will continue to pursue. I would like
for you to know so, Mr. Secretary, that I do have some very
serious concerns with the President's proposal, including the
language that the CIP money, which is under Title Covenant 702,
CIP money, which started 100 percent for the Northern Mariana
Islands in the past 33 years, because we had no representation
here kept getting shaved away.
We are now two-thirds--doesn't come to the Northern Mariana
Islands. Now there is some language there that proposes it
could eventually erase it entirely for the Northern Mariana
Islands. I will be working with the Assistant Secretary on
trying to fix that situation, but I think I object to that.
Having said that, also, Mr. Secretary, as you know, I come from
a district 14 islands and where gasoline is approaching $5 a
gallon, electricity is over 40 cents a kilowatt hour, people
make the lowest minimum wage in the country, and from a
territory whose GDP has decreased by over four percent in the
last report that came out, I am concerned, sir, that the
President's budget is requesting for a decrease in money for
assistance to the territories or that some of the monies being
provided is going to fund the military viewed upon Guam when we
have no idea when the first boots are going to land.
We are going to buy money for public safety equipment to
prepare for that eventuality, and we are, respectfully, sir,
where I come from, we only have three patrol cars that is
running and crime continues to increase, so I am going to need
your help on that. Again, I will also in all fairness thank
you, sir, and the attention that we, the Northern Mariana
Islands, continues to receive from your Department continues to
get better. We need to do more, but it continues to get better.
I also would like to bring to your attention, and I brought
this up to Director Gould yesterday, where, the issue of the
Mariana Straits marine monument. There is no thought of that in
the Fiscal Year 2012 budget, but maybe in future budgets we
would have some movement on that because this is an area that
is almost the size of Arizona and we, it is a great proposal I
think, you know? It is going to be conserved. Three island
units are involved in this and we need to eventually look at
how to approach this and move forward with some of the promises
that was made by the White House during negotiations for the
establishment of this monument. Otherwise, Mr. Secretary, thank
you very much for all that you do, sir.
Secretary Salazar. Thank you very much, Congressman, and
thank you for bringing the attention to us on the issues of the
territories and the islands. It is part of the jurisdiction of
Interior and we take it very seriously. Assistant Secretary
Lovato is working on all of the issues which you raised and we
will continue to try to make sure that we are honoring the
partnership and the historic relationship that we have had with
the Mariana Islands.
Mr. Sablan. Thank you.
The Chairman. Gentleman yields back? Appreciate that very
much. Gentleman from California, Mr. McClintock, is recognized
for five minutes.
Mr. McClintock. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Secretary,
welcome. The Gulf oil disaster, as you have already testified,
and its aftermath have been economically devastating to the
region, and, for that matter, to the country. Ultimately, that
disaster was caused by the catastrophic mechanical failure of
the blowout preventer stack. This Committee received the report
of the Graham Commission. I was astonished to learn that this
Commission had not only not determined the cause of the BP
stack preventer failure, but had not even bothered to look at
the blowout preventer. Has this Administration yet determined
the reason for the failure of the blowout preventer?
Secretary Salazar. Well, the Deepwater Horizon and the
Macondo well blowout was caused by problems relating to
cementing, and casing and other issues that were very
appropriately identified by the Deep Water----
Mr. McClintock. Had the blowout preventer functioned
properly, we would not have had the disaster, correct?
Secretary Salazar. Let me finish the answer to my question.
The blowout preventer is supposed to be the fail safe, which is
a last resort to shut in a well.
Mr. McClintock. And it failed. Have you yet determined the
cause of that mechanical failure?
Secretary Salazar. Congressman McClintock, there is a joint
investigation that is underway, we are getting close to the
very end of that investigation and there will be a report, and
we will be happy to share that report with you.
Mr. McClintock. Moving to wind and solar, don't we have to
have a megawatt of reliable standby power for every megawatt of
wind and solar that we place on line?
Secretary Salazar. You know, the interruptability issues
are a reality when you are dealing with wind and solar energy,
of course, and that is part of what you deal with----
Mr. McClintock. So the answer is yes, for every megawatt of
wind or solar we put on line we also have to then have an
additional megawatt of standby reliable power for those moments
when the clouds pass over a solar array or the wind drops off,
correct?
Secretary Salazar. I don't have the information to argue
with your statistics. I don't believe your statistics are
correct, but I would be happy to look into them.
Mr. McClintock. Well, it is an integrated grid. We have to
constantly match the power being drawn off the grid with power
being placed on the grid. Wind and solar are not reliable
sources of power and we have to keep a megawatt of back up
power for every megawatt of wind and solar. It is not that
complicated a situation, but it is extremely expensive. My
question is at a time of skyrocketing electricity prices,
shouldn't we be focusing on the cheapest forms of electricity
rather than subsidizing the most expensive, and that expensive
forms of electricity generation that also have to include an
additional back up supply.
Secretary Salazar. Congressman McClintock, I respectfully
disagree because I think as you look at one of the central
issues, which is our national security, as well as our economic
security here in the country, we need to develop multiple
sources of energy, including the clean energy resources, many
of which have been developed in your state. We are very hopeful
that that will be part of the clean energy future of America.
We are falling far behind where Germany, and Spain, and China
and a lot of other countries are because we have not opened up
the door to this new energy world that we have worked on----
Mr. McClintock. Actually, photovoltaic technology was
invented 175 years ago in 1836, and in 175 years of
technological research and advancement have we yet invented a
more expensive way of generating electricity?
Secretary Salazar. There are a number of technologies that
are underway, including a number of technologies which we are
standing up with solar power plants that we have authorized in
the deserts of the southwest.
Mr. McClintock. So we are pouring untold billions of
dollars, certainly hundreds of millions of dollars, into
subsidies for the most expensive way that we have yet invented
to produce electricity and have to require an additional back
up supply to boot. Sir, with all due respect, I don't think
that is an intelligent energy policy. If I could just move to
land for a second. Is the Department still considering the
Modoc Plateau for monument designation under the Antiquities
Act?
Secretary Salazar. The what plateau?
Mr. McClintock. The Modoc Plateau in northeastern
California.
Secretary Salazar. Not to my knowledge. With all due
respect, again, I think you are wrong on your energy policy and
I don't think we can be living in an energy policy that is----
Mr. McClintock. Yes, I understand we disagree on that. So
the Department has no further plans to designate the Modoc
Plateau as a monument under the Antiquities Act?
Secretary Salazar. I don't have any specific information on
that.
Mr. McClintock. Last year in this Committee, you testified
that you had the discretion to waive the Endangered Species Act
when it came to unemployment caused by the Delta Smelt
regulation but that by doing so it would be admitting failure.
After all of the economic dislocation that has occurred in the
valley, have you reconsidered that position?
Secretary Salazar. Well, that is an incorrect statement of
what I said, but I would be happy to take a look at it. The
fact is that ESA issues are very difficult and very complex,
and as members of the California Delegation, and Governor
Schwarzenegger and others----
The Chairman. Mr. Secretary, wait. Could I ask you to
respond to that question in writing? Because we are out of time
on that particular question.
Secretary Salazar. Absolutely, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. OK. Thank you very much. The gentlelady from
Ohio is recognized for five minutes, Ms. Sutton.
Ms. Sutton. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Secretary Salazar,
thank you for your testimony today. In my district I am proud
to have the Cuyahoga Valley National Park. It is a large
economic driver for our area with many communities benefitting
directly from the success of the park. The Park Service in fact
reported that in 2009 local spending at the park exceeded $50
million and added nearly 600 local jobs. Likewise, Lake Erie is
also an economic engine of my region and I noticed in your
opening statement you had mentioned being the guardian of
Americans' oceans and Americans' lands, but we cannot forget
the great lakes. So Lake Erie, you know, an economic engine
from manufacturing, to boating, to drinking water, the health
of that lake is critically important to the people that I
represent, and I think to our nation as a whole.
Lake Erie supports nearly 10 percent of Ohio's jobs and
generates $750 million in state and local taxes, so I am
extremely concerned that the budget, your budget, calls for
$125 million cut to the Great Lakes Restoration Initiative and
I would like to have you talk a little bit more about that. I
understand that funding is a critical issue for the future;
however, Lake Erie supports so very many jobs and the Cuyahoga
Valley is such an important economic asset, as well as natural
asset, to our area. So my questions are this. I know that you
are aware that the continuing resolution that the House passed
two weeks ago decimated the funding for the Land and Water
Conservation Fund, providing the lowest level of this funding
since 1965. You visited the Cuyahoga Valley National Park in
2009 so I know you are also familiar with the acquisition of
land around the Blossom Music Center by the park, and that
Blossom acquisition was funded through the appropriations
process.
The first piece in Fiscal Year 2010 and the second and
final piece was in the original Fiscal Year 2011 budget, but
there are no funds for this project in the Fiscal Year 2012
budget because it was assumed that the project would be
concluded with funds in Fiscal Year 2011. This funding is
critical to the national park in our district and critical to
that acquisition project. Can you talk a little bit about the
consequences of the cuts to the LWCF funding and the House
passed continuing resolution on the Blossom project, and then
talk a little bit more about what the budget going forward will
mean for parks like ours that, it is the only national park in
Ohio, it is a rare gem in the middle of what people think of
oftentimes as a very industrialized area, and if you could also
just talk a little bit more about the Great Lakes Restoration
initiative which has been so incredibly important to our
region's broader strategy to create jobs. It has been conveyed
to me repeatedly by communities throughout our area that it was
that park that kept them going through these tough times.
Secretary Salazar. Representative Sutton, I appreciate your
energy and your enthusiasm for Cuyahoga National Park. It was
my honor to be there and to help push along some of the
renovations that are so important to that community, and I
think you so eloquently hit the point in terms of the economic
nexus between our outdoors and our national parks and local
communities. Indeed, in most states when you think about
tourism and the jobs that are created through tourism, it is a
very significant part of our economy, and so as we deal with
the difficult economic times of getting America back on solid
economic footing, I think these kinds of investments are
exactly appropriate. I am a strong supporter of the Blossom's
expansion project there at Cuyahoga, as well as other
improvements that we have there. I don't know the specifics on
the budget with respect to Cuyahoga, but I would be happy to
get back to you with that information. On the Great Lakes, if I
may, because that was your other question, it is a signature
landscape of the United States of America and I know how
important it is to all of you in Ohio and to the states who
share that. We have a major initiative interdepartmental where
we are involved through a number of our different agencies at
Interior and there is significant funding for the Great Lakes
Initiative and we hope to be able to continue to make progress
on the Great Lakes.
Ms. Sutton. I thank you, Mr. Secretary, and I look forward
to working with the Department to make sure that we are taking
care of both the park and of course our Great Lakes. Thank you.
The Chairman. Thank you. Time of the gentlelady has
expired. The gentleman from South Carolina, Mr. Duncan.
Mr. Duncan of South Carolina. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you, Secretary Salazar, for being here today. The events
in the Middle East magnify the need for American energy
independence. We have heard already this morning about the
rising gas and fuel prices and the effect on the American
economy. America is blessed with abundant resources. I have
traveled all over the country, I have seen and visited national
parks, wilderness areas and enjoy the outdoors, but the
abundant resources I want to talk about this morning include
oil and natural gas resources and what we have on Federal
lands. We have seen the policies of this Administration
continue to thwart the efforts for more domestic production at
a time when we need it the most through policies such as the de
facto moratorium on deepwater drilling permits being issued and
the post-Deep Water Horizon era, as well as limitations on
hydraulic fracturing, or fracking as its know.
The new budget proposal proposes cutting, or ending, nearly
$1 billion in existing programs such as those to fight wildland
fires and economic development loans for Native Americans,
shifting these funds to areas like increased land acquisitions
and the controversial national ocean policy, as well as climate
change adaption. There is $14 million in the proposal for New
Energy Frontier Initiative which mandates increasing capacity
for renewable energy production on Interior managed lands. In
addition, the budge seeks $73 million for approval of wind,
geothermal and solar projects on public lands, a $14 million
increase over last year. American energy independence is a
national security issue. We have the resources here in this
country. A lot of the Federal land has been taken off the
table.
What I would like to hear from you this morning is the
agency's opinion on increasing production of energy sources on
Federal land, the de facto moratorium on offshore drilling
permits and what is being done. I appreciate that one permit
was issued this week and hopefully we will see more of those,
but the de facto moratorium on issuing those permits, the
expiring oil and natural gas leases that are affected by those
guys not being able to get out there and go to work. What are
we going to do about those leases? Are there going to be an
extension on those? Because they have been prohibited from
going to tap that. Then also future lease sales. If you could
answer those questions for me.
Secretary Salazar. Thank you, Congressman. We have moved
forward, as I said in my opening statement, with a robust oil
and gas and energy program, both onshore as well as offshore,
both conventional as well as renewable. I am proud of the
record that we have and disagree with the conclusions that you
state. With respect to what we are doing to increase production
onshore, as I said, we have issued 5,200 leases in 2010, we
expect that there will be an additional 2,000 leases issued
this next year. There are 40 million plus acres have been
issued and are under lease for oil and gas development on the
onshore. With respect to your second question on what you call
the de facto moratorium, there is no moratorium. We are moving
forward in a robust way to stand up oil and gas drilling. The
policy of the President has been to move forward with the
development of oil and gas in the Gulf of Mexico and in the
deep waters.
Mr. Duncan of South Carolina. Excuse me. Don't mean to
interrupt you there, but by not issuing permits for those guys
to get back out there and go to work even after they have met
all the safety requirements in the post-Deep Horizon era is a
de facto moratorium.
Secretary Salazar. David Hayes and Michael Bromwich and I
were in Houston on Friday and what we did was went out there to
inspect firsthand what was going on with the oil spill
containment mechanisms that are being built by both the Helix
and the Marine Well Containment Corporation. As I said during
that trip, and as I will say in front of this Committee, I am
pleased with the progress that industry is making at dealing
with the threat of another type of Macondo well blowout. There
is still significant progress to be made, but it is on the
basis of the oil spill containment, as well as the safety
regulations that we have put into place for cementing, and
casing, and third party inspection and a whole host of other
things that we are now able to move forward with some assurance
that we will be able to have safe drilling in the deep oceans
of America.
Mr. Duncan of South Carolina. In the remaining time could
you address future lease sales for me?
Secretary Salazar. We are very hopeful and we are pushing
hard to be able to meet the requirements so that we can have a
lease sale in the Gulf of Mexico yet this year.
The Chairman. Time of the gentleman has expired. Gentlelady
from Massachusetts, Ms. Tsongas.
Ms. Tsongas. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you,
Secretary Salazar. I would like to follow up on an issue that
Congresswoman Sutton just raised. I think the Administration's
request for full funding of the Land and Water Conservation
Fund in Fiscal Year 2012 is a positive step forward in securing
some of our nation's most sacred and historic places, but I am
concerned, as was she, that the recently passed continuing
resolution will put critical projects proposed for the current
fiscal year at serious risk and that there will continue to be
further aggressive steps to cut the LWCF. I am especially
concerned that further cuts to the LWCF will eliminate funding
for Minute Man National Historical Park's proposed acquisition
of the Barrett Farmhouse.
I am fortunate to represent that park located in Concord
and Lexington. Recently there was legislation passed that
brought the Barrett farm within the outlines of the Minutemen
National Historic Park. This may seem like a very local issue
but, in fact, Barrett's farm is an important piece of American
Revolutionary War history. It was the farm at which the
minutemen stored their munitions and when the British Army
learned about that, it prompted their march on Lexington and
Concord, and Paul Revere road to alert the minutemen that the
British were coming, leading Col. Barrett and his colleagues to
hide the munitions so that when the British arrived the
munitions were not, they could not find them, and then led to
the shot heard around the world. So it is a very important
piece of American history.
The cut in the LWCF really does put at risk the park's
ability to acquire this farm for further preservation. It has
been held over its many years by two families who finally made
it available for the park to include it within their boundaries
and now is in need of great restoration. So in addition to
threatening Minutemen Park's capacity to acquire and preserve
Barrett's farm, what other nationally significant places will
be put at risk by the funds, the cuts that are being proposed
in the continuing resolution should the LWCF not be fully
funded in 2012?
Secretary Salazar. Representative, there are projects like
the one you speak about all over the United States of America
that would be impacted, and the fact of the matter is that I
think you hit the nail on the head, and that is that these
investments are investments that create jobs here in America.
There are tourists that come from throughout the world to visit
places, like many of our revolutionary places, and there are
people throughout the country that go to communities, from the
west to your state, to all the states of the country, and it is
part of the huge economic activity which is a sustainable job
creation program here in the country, and so LWCF, in my view,
has to be looked through that lens.
Ms. Tsongas. Well, and the reality is also that it does
have great economic benefit. We have heard the figures given,
the way the tourism, the generation of jobs and all the other
economic activity that it promote, but it also is a way in
which we protect our past and there is nothing like visiting
some of these spaces and places to have a deep appreciation of
what we have accomplished as a nation. I am also fortunate to
represent a historical national park in Lowell, Massachusetts.
It is the first urban national park. The recently released
Americas Great Outdoors report highlighted the importance of
urban parks and community green spaces and stated that the
establishment of urban parks was a priority of the initiative.
Again, to address the issue of the economic development
role of parks, not only did this park protect the cultural and
historic legacy of a place that was the birthplace of the
American Revolution, led to the preservation of architectural
treasures, but it led to the revitalization of a city. Because
of that steady stream of Federal funding that has come in, has
really jump started significant investment through the private
sector, through the nonprofit sector, through state and local
initiatives that might not otherwise have taken place. So it
played a critically important role. I would love to invite you
to come visit it, especially as you undertake the American
Great Outdoors Initiative, and encourage you to think about
urban settings for those outdoors initiatives as well. Thank
you, and I yield back.
The Chairman. I thank the gentlelady for yielding back.
Ms. Tsongas. But not if you are going to say you would come
visit.
Secretary Salazar. Lowell is one of the great examples of a
great urban park. You find them at St. Louis with the arch
where we have a great vision for what we can do there to
connect up three million people to that park and that every
community around the country frankly has those kinds of
opportunities. So I will come to Lowell to illustrate what you
have done at Lowell because we can do it everywhere else in the
country as well.
Ms. Tsongas. Thank you so much.
The Chairman. I take that as being a yes.
Ms. Tsongas. I take it as a yes, too. Thank you so much.
The Chairman. Gentleman from Colorado, Mr. Tipton, is
recognized for five minutes.
Mr. Tipton. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you, Mr.
Secretary, for being here. We come from common areas. My third
congressional district has your ancestral home over on San
Louis Valley, and I just completed a tour, my third, throughout
the third CD since being elected. We have a lot of challenges
that we face. On the western slope of Colorado better than 70
percent of our property is either Federal, state or tribal
lands. Going through and visiting in our district, we have
multiple issues that people are concerned about. The wildlands
policy. There was great offense and concern that there were no
public hearings that were held in terms of addressing some of
these issues. We have in Mesa County, the county that had the
highest per capita unemployment at one point last year in the
entire United States, relies an awful lot on the development,
responsible development, of our natural resources in the third
congressional district to be able to benefit America.
We also have a lot of senior citizens, young families, that
are struggling right now to be able to pay their bills and they
are seeing regulatory tax increases that are coming through
from policies out of the Federal government that are impacting
those electric bills, their ability to be able to meet their
families' needs. So I appreciate you taking the time to be here
today and have just a few questions that I would like to be
able to hear some of your thoughts on. First of all, in regards
to some of the wildlands issues that we are going through, I
did visit with ranchers, the oil and gas industry, local
governments, the mineral industry, motorized recreational
users, and they have all voiced strong opposition to the
wildlands policy that is coming out. I just wanted to question
you. Did you give a directive out to the BLM officials in the
various districts, say in the third congressional district, to
reach out to these groups prior to developing this concept?
Secretary Salazar. We have been in significant
communications with affected communities and those
communications will continue. I think it would be useful for
you, Congressman Tipton, maybe to hear from David Hayes who has
been helping in the development of this policy and its
implementation for just a minute or so. David?
Mr. Hayes. Congressman, fundamental to the policy is in
fact that no wildlands will be identified until there is a
robust discussion at the local and state level through the
amendment process, or if there are special projects proposed
through a special discussion. So there has been a fundamental
misunderstanding along those lines, but the----
Mr. Tipton. Great. Mr. Hayes, I apologize, but we are kind
of short on time. I did visit with the field office and one of
the concerns I think we had is seeing an industry that is
trying to be able to create jobs, trying to meet America's
energy needs and one of the problems that they are facing right
now, some of the new technologies to be able to do some of the
lateral drilling. Under the wildlands policy they are already
without public input, they are already enforcing policy that,
no, we aren't going to allow you to drill underneath those
public lands to be able to extract that natural resource, never
disturbing the surface. So you might want to visit with some of
your local folks because I think that whether or not nothing is
supposed to be done at this point, it is starting already to be
able to happen. If I may kind of move on here. When we were
talking a little bit, and I apologize, I had to step out, when
you were talking about doing a good job and getting a fair
return for the American taxpayer, have you run a cost benefit
analysis when we are increasing the budget by approximately $14
million for some of the renewables going, I think the budget
request now is about $73 million. Have you done a cost benefit
analysis in terms of that return?
Secretary Salazar. Congressman Tipton, we have not done,
that I am aware of, a cost benefit analysis with respect to the
investments in renewable energy. We have, and I am very proud
of the fact that we have made significant progress in
demonstrating the viability of wind, and solar and geothermal
energies in many places, but in particular, in the southwestern
part of the United States, and communities, for example, in
Milford, Utah, where we have a huge wind project, and the
potential solar project and transmission line, and there are
places in Colorado as well that can benefit.
Mr. Tipton. Great. Yes. And one thing, I think I would
really encourage you to take a look at this, you know, because
I think it is important in these tough economic times because I
have literally walked the streets of Alamosa, of a lot of towns
that a number of people here have not heard of, and people are
struggling right now. Some of these costs, we need to do these
cost benefit analyses because that will go to the electric
bill. One of the problems we have also is some of the
hydroelectric. We release in artificial floods out of the Glen
Canyon Dam--I am sorry. We ran out of time. May I submit some
questions to you?
Secretary Salazar. Absolutely.
Mr. Tipton. Appreciate that. Thanks.
Secretary Salazar. Feel free to call me any time.
The Chairman. Thank you very much. I appreciate the
gentleman. His time has expired. The gentleman from New Mexico,
Mr. Lujan.
Mr. Lujan. Mr. Chairman, thank you very much. To Mr.
Secretary Salazar and Deputy Secretary Hayes, I want to thank
you for being here. You know, oftentimes, sometimes we can be
tough with you, but we appreciate the compassion and the
passion that you share for our nation, for the people and for
the responsibilities that you have. I think sometimes we need
to sit back and truly understand how we have to come together
to work together as a team. In light of many of the things that
have taken place across the country, that time is now, and we
have to get there. So again, I appreciate your patience today,
Mr. Secretary, and your indulgence. Mr. Chairman, I want to
thank you again for holding this important hearing and for
inviting Secretary Salazar and for the team to be with us
today.
New Mexico is a very special place with a very close
connection to the Department of the Interior. Like many other
states in the West, we rely on the support for projects from
the Department of the Interior to make critical investments in
rural and oftentimes disadvantaged areas. My district in New
Mexico includes 15 pueblos, the Hickory Apache Nation and a
portion of the Navajo Nation, two national forests,
approximately 2.5 million acres of BLM land, two wildlife
refuge, four Bureau of Reclamation dams and seven national
parks and monuments. You can see this is important to me. So
you can see how closely attached the Department of the Interior
is to the people of New Mexico and to our public lands.
Often the need for adequate funding within the Department
of the Interior is clear and present in the daily lives of my
constituents. The investments the Department of the Interior
makes are critical to my state and our nation. As I said
yesterday in our Subcommittee with the BOR, these investments
strengthen the backbone of America by making resources
available for economies to grow, and without them critical
infrastructure resource management would be virtually
nonexistent for the people of New Mexico, so the funding levels
in the budget request for the 2012 fiscal cycle are important
to maintain our public lands. Mr. Secretary, before I ask a few
questions, and whatever I don't get to I am going to submit
them for a response in writing, there has been a lot of
discussion about the cost of oil today and I think that we all
need to be aware of this because back home this is hurting
people.
It is going to drive up the cost of eggs, milk, bread,
every part of everybody's life. There was a question that you
were asked early on and your response included some information
about where we were in the United States in 2010 and I was
curious if you could please share that information with us
again, if you can find it. One thing I want to point out is
that, and I don't know if it has been talked about, Mr.
Chairman, but in today's Financial Times there was an article
that said that U.S. oil production last year rose to its
highest level in almost a decade. As a result, analysts believe
the U.S. was the largest contributor to the increase in global
oil supplies last year, over 2009, and is on track to increase
domestic production by 25 percent of the second half of the
decade.
According to the U.S. government's Energy Information
Administration, domestic production of crude oil and related
liquids rose three percent last year to an average of 7.51
million barrels a day, its highest level since 2002. I think
that there are some options that we have, Mr. Secretary. I know
that Senator Binghamton, along with Chairman Markey, have asked
for the President to consider using strategic oil reserves, and
I think that is something that we need to take seriously
because these prices are being driven up by speculation of what
is happening in the Middle East and we don't have a seat with
those OPEC cartels. We need to make sure that we are solving
these problems domestically, but again, that we are paying
credit where credit is due. It is important that we look at
this closely.
This is one of those areas where we have to come together
as a Congress, as a nation, to make sure that we are going to
provide the necessary relief to the American people during
these very fragile economic times. So, Mr. Secretary, the first
question that I would ask, and if you could include the
response that you have there, and I see my time has quickly run
out, Mr. Chairman, so most of my questions, Mr. Secretary,
involve funding for our tribes, not only with concerns that I
have with BIE schools, with funding that has been allocated but
sometimes may take up to a decade to get out to our
communities, and I am hoping that we can visit some of those
issues, and I will submit those into the record.
I certainly look to make sure that also as we take into
consideration some of the cuts that are being recommended, and
I know they are tough ones, that tribes are not hit more than
anyone else. Tribal leaders have told me that we don't mind the
reductions, as long as we are treated fairly. So, Mr.
Secretary, I apologize for taking up the time there without
giving you a chance to respond, I will submit these to the
record, but I thought it was important that we shed some light,
especially on what is happening with the price of oil and that
there are true answers that are amongst us to be able to
provide relief to the American people. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. I thank the gentleman, and we have
established a precedent of when a question is asked and time
runs out, the Secretary will respond, so, but I appreciate the
gentleman's looking at that. Gentleman from Arizona, Mr. Gosar,
is recognized for five minutes.
Dr. Gosar. Good afternoon, Secretary Salazar, and thank
you. I represent Arizona's 1st Congressional District, one of
the largest congressional districts in the country. The
district is comprised of 26.1 million acres of Federal and
tribal lands, close to 70 percent of the total land. I have
particular concerns about the millions of dollars proposed in
the President's budget for the proposed purchase for more
Federal lands, particularly in light of the estimated billions
of dollars of maintenance and management backlogs that are
existing on Federally owned lands. Proper forest maintenance
and management is very important to me and my community,
particularly in light of a tragedy that occurred last year in
my hometown of Flagstaff, Arizona, and it is to this that I
would like to highlight the need for proper management and
maintenance of existing inventory.
As you know, last June a wild fire destroyed more than
15,000 acres of steep terrain in the Coconino National Forest
known as the Schultz Pass. The wild fire scorched earth on this
steep, volcanic terrain leaving little ground vegetation to
absorb and hold back rain water. In addition, unusually high
concentrations of forest fuels that had built over decades
ignited and baked the unusually crumbled volcanic dacite into a
crystal-like impervious substance which takes decades to be
broken down just to grow grass. On July 6, 2010, the Forest
Service Burn Unit Emergency Response Team issued a report to
the residents living near the base of the peaks stating they
would face a constant daily flooding threat from summon monsoon
storms and publicly urged them to purchase flood insurance.
Two weeks later, before insurance could be enacted, nearly
two inches of rain fell in less than an hour causing flash
flooding to the communities downstream from the Schultz Pass
fire. Widespread flooding and debris disrupted and destroyed
public infrastructure, damaged approximately 32 homes in the
community and tragically led to the death of a 12 year old
girl. There are some great long term ideas and projects in the
works for maintenance and stewardship of our forests such as
the Four Forests Restoration Initiative which works with local
communities to manage them, and it is time that we got people
back to work. However, my community has an urgent need for
short term protection measures to be implemented before the
summer monsoon seasons begin. Up to 1,200 homes are now
considered to be in a flood zone and owners are living with
uncertainty about their personal safety, financial risk and the
inability to obtain flood insurance.
Coconino County is making progress on developing an
engineering flood plain control plan and getting as many
parties to the table as possible to assist in their efforts.
Members of the community have taken desperate measures to
mitigate short term flood risks, digging trenches, canals,
placing sandbags around their homes. A group of homeowners in a
high risk area have built a coalition and have volunteered to
build check dams on the Federal land but have been denied
access to the land by the Forest Service. The Forest Service
has not committed to mitigation projects on the national
forests such as diversion channels, retention basins, even
water barriers constructed from the remains of cut, burned
trees locked behind existing stumps.
The Forest Service, because of the wilderness designation
that existed for this area prior, will not allow county
equipment on site to repair a water pipeline damaged by the
fire and flooding that the city desperately needs. We need your
help now. Another disaster could occur if actions are not taken
before July, the beginning of the monsoon season. It is
critical the Forest Service and other relevant government
agencies under your jurisdiction coordinate together and with
local communities to expedite the flood protection measures to
address the immediate threat posed by the post-fire and flood
land conditions. I invite you to join me in Flagstaff at your
earliest convenience and my community will show you the urgency
of the situation. We have a pending emergency and we need your
direct assistance. Will you help us?
Secretary Salazar. Congressman Gosar, I would be happy to
find out more about it and see what it is that we can do and
have conversations with my colleague Tom Vilsack and members of
the Forest Service to see how, if there is anything that we can
do to be helpful. You describe a situation which obviously I am
sure is not only of concern to you, but to a lot of other
people.
Dr. Gosar. I would look to your earliest response, please.
Thank you. Yield back my time.
The Chairman. I thank the gentleman for yielding back. The
gentleman from California, Mr. Garamendi, is recognized for
five minutes.
Mr. Garamendi. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Secretary and
Deputy Secretary, thank you very much for your patience and for
your answers. Repeatedly, my colleagues on the other side of
this horseshoe have tried to blame you for the rapidly
increasing price of oil. Seems to me beyond ludicrous to do so
unless one were to think that somehow you are responsible for
the uprisings in Libya and Egypt, the war in Iraq, the rise of
China and India and their demand for oil. Having said that, I
might recommend that next time you come, you come with a Power
Point and present to us all of the information that you have
not been allowed to present, specifically what you have done to
increase the production of oil and gas in the United States.
You have a remarkable story. You have gotten some of it out. I
am going to give you the rest of this time, except for the last
minute, to put those facts into this record. What have you
done, and what has happened with regard to oil and gas
production in the United States over the last couple of years?
Secretary Salazar. Thank you very much, Congressman
Garamendi. Let me just say I think that we all need to put this
in the context of the overall comprehensive energy program
which the President has advocated which he addressed in the
State of the Union. First, we need to continue to move forward
with conventional oil and gas production, as well as other
energy resources. Second, we need to open the door to new
energy resources, such as solar, and geothermal and wind, which
we have spoken about. Third, we also need to address the issue
of efficiency and major progress which we have made in the last
two years to reduce the consumption of oil within our country.
So all of those things have to be done. Focusing specifically,
though, on just the oil and gas facts, to me, the top lines are
very interesting.
I mean, the fact that we have gone from importing 50
percent of our oil, or 60 percent of our oil, just a few years
ago and now we are importing only 50 percent of our oil, the
fact that we have increased by more than a third the amount of
oil that we are bringing from the Outer Continental Shelf, the
fact that we have increased by five percent the amount of oil
that we are producing from our public lands onshore, the fact
that we are increasing the amount of natural gas that is being
produced onshore. So the statistics speak for themselves in
terms of the amount of oil and gas that is being produced
domestically, as well as the acreage that is being made
available, both offshore as well as onshore, to increase
production.
Mr. Garamendi. Thank you for that. If you could provide the
additional detail for the record, it would be very helpful to
us. Sometimes facts make inconvenient arguments when one wants
to be on ideology rather than facts. With regard to wildlands,
Deputy Secretary Hayes, for several times you have attempted to
explain the wildlands policy. If you could lay out why the
Secretary order has been promulgated and how you are
implementing it, it would be helpful to all of us.
Mr. Hayes. Thank you, Congressman. The order has been laid
out to provide more clarity to all parties with interests in
public lands regarding the availability of lands for different
purposes. As you know, the Secretary has a legal obligation to
consider multiple uses of lands. One of those uses authorized
and required by law is to consider conservation and for some
lands it makes sense that that is the use that is identified
for those lands. Right now there is enormous confusion on many
public lands about what lands are available or what are not, or
what are appropriate for leasing or what are not. Utah is the
perfect example. 2.4 million acres of land have been identified
as having wilderness characteristics, but because there has
been no guidance to BLM folks about whether those lands are
appropriate for specific uses or not, no review, no discussion.
Where leasing has gone ahead, many of the leases have been
protested. In Utah, more than 50 percent of all leases are
protested, in part because of the conservation groups and
others are just now routinely filing protests since there is no
clarity as to whether certain lands are appropriate for oil and
gas leasing or not. The idea here is simply to improve the
process, the public process, that will answer that question so
that there is clarity on all sides as to the areas. It is not
true that all lands with wilderness characteristics will be
characterized as wildlands. As Bob Abbey, the BLM Director,
just testified two days ago, in Utah, the first example that
came forward of proposed potash facility on lands with
wilderness characteristics was determined to go forward under
that policy. So we are looking forward to a robust dialogue
through the process of RMPs and active public involvement to
determine whether some of those lands should be identified as
wildlands.
The Chairman. Time of the gentleman has expired. The
gentleman from Texas, Mr. Flores.
Mr. Flores. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you, Secretary
Salazar, and the rest of your team for joining us today. I have
an opening statement that I have prepared that will be
submitted for the record separately. I would like to start with
the preamble that our domestic energy resources are an
important component of being able to grow a strong domestic
economy, to be able to provide good private sector jobs and to
promote our national defense. Department of the Interior's
activities to affect drilling permit moratoria, drilling permit
slow downs, are hurting all of those. I would also submit that
our best strategic energy reserves are not those in the
strategic petroleum reserves, they are those on the public
lands that our taxpayers own, the public lands and offshore
areas.
We are one of the few countries in the world, if not the
only country in the world, that puts our domestic resources off
limits so that we are forced to import from other countries.
Since 2008, the energy royalties and lease income from the
Federal government, and before you try to rebut my facts, this
comes from the Office of Natural Resources' revenue, says that
our revenues from offshore in 2008 have gone from $16 billion
to $8 billion. That certainly is not a good way to handle a
taxpayer resource. In the alternative, we should be
capitalizing on the trillions of dollars of taxpayer owned
natural resources that we have to grow our economy, fuel
domestic job growth and assure our national security. Not only
did the Department of Energy enact a drilling moratorium in
deep water, it is also engaged in dramatic slow down in issuing
shallow water permitting, which has operated in an
environmentally safe manner for over 30 years.
Before we try to rebut those facts, the average number of
new well permits in the years 2006 to 2008 was 330 a year. Last
year it was 104, this year it has been 13. That comes from the
BLM RE database. What is next? The actions of the Department of
the Interior is an integral component of the current increase
in gasoline prices, which began before the Middle East
uncertainty, and each $1 increase in gasoline prices is $120
billion tax on the consumers of this country. I would submit to
you that that dwarfs the 10,000 megawatts of power that the
Department of Energy is trying to produce, or the impact of the
entire budget of the Department of the Interior.
Historically, the U.S. has always been a country that
companies wanted to do business in because we followed the rule
of law, and we also had a transparent permitting process that
was not arbitrarily followed. I have been involved with
offshore drilling all around the world, and I have seen both
models, where we follow the rule of law and where we have
arbitrary and capricious regulatory models, and what I have
seen, particularly in shallow water drilling in the last few
months, has been the latter. That is not the way to make
ourselves more energy secure. So my question is this. How do
the Department of the Interior's actions serve to grow the
American economy, to help promote private sector job growth, to
assure our national security not only for current generations,
but for future generations?
Secretary Salazar. Congressman Flores, I appreciate the
question. First, in terms of what we do relative to be part of
the economy of this country, we do it both with respect to oil
and gas, as well as with respect to other energy resources, as
well as with respect to many of the outdoor recreational
programs that we have spoken about this morning.
Mr. Flores. And those can co-exist, I believe, can't they?
Secretary Salazar. They can, and we believe that that is
part of what we are attempting to do within the Department of
the Interior. Couple of points. With respect to the revenue
issue that you raised, 2008 was a year in which oil and gas
prices were high so that was an abnormal amount of revenue that
we received that year. On average we get $9, $10, $11 billion a
year and we are on track to do that for this year from oil and
gas production. In terms of permits, I think you would
understand being from the energy world that after the Deepwater
Horizon and the expectation that you would never see a Macondo
well style blowout, that we had to take action to make sure
that we are protecting people, like those 11 people that were
killed on the rig, as well as----
Mr. Flores. Yes, but do you look at shallow water drilling?
Secretary Salazar. Yes.
Mr. Flores. We haven't had issues in shallow water drilling
for 30 years and we have had a dramatic slow down in the
issuance of shallow water drilling permits.
Secretary Salazar. Congressman, we have moved forward with
shallow water permitting. There were additional requirements on
safety that we impose on the shallow water drillers. There are
37 permits that have already been issued, and we expect to have
a robust oil and gas production coming out of the Gulf. I
think, and I would ask you, Congressman Flores, to think about
this, that our policy program and objective here is the same.
The President of the United States and I support a strong oil
and gas production in the Gulf of Mexico. I would expect that
you, as well as other members of the industry, would want us to
do it in a safe way that protects people and protects the
environment. That is why the budget that is in front of you is
a part of that effort, to make sure that we are able to do
that. I would hope that we, in America, can create the gold
standard for safe oil and gas production in the oceans of this
world.
The Chairman. Time of the gentleman has expired. The
gentleman from Arizona, Mr. Grijalva.
Mr. Grijalva. Thank you, Mr. Chairman and, Mr. Secretary,
thank you for, let me extend my appreciation for the job that
you are doing, the very difficult job of balancing extraction
from our public lands and waters and balancing that with the
preservation, conservation and recreational needs of those
lands and waters as well. It is a difficult job and let me
extend my appreciation for the fine job you are doing with
that. Just for the record, there was seven shallow water
permits issued in December which matches the monthly total from
the year before the spill occurred, so in reference to the
point that you made, Mr. Secretary, facts do come into play in
this whole discussion and I hope as we go forward with this
discussion, as the Chairman indicated, that facts and science
play a role in the deliberations.
You know, as the Middle East, and Libya in particular,
struggle to form some form of democratic governance in their
own countries, those are terrific challenges, I hope that
struggle doesn't become an opportunity to shield, for the oil
and gas industry to go back to some unregulated winner take all
policy with regard to extraction from our lands and waters.
There is prudence involved here and there is the safety and the
health of the American people as well. Land and Water
Conservation Fund. My colleagues on the other side of the aisle
took the President's $900 million recommendation, drove it
down, cut it down to $60. Implications in terms of what that--
if that figure were to hold, what would be the implications for
the work of the Interior Department and the work of communities
in terms of that fund? We have already established the fact
that we are not cutting, we are not saving and it is not
costing the taxpayer any money in the Land and Conservation
Fund. That was established earlier in this hearing. So I just
want to know, what would be the implications of that? Then I
have a couple of other quick questions.
Secretary Salazar. Well, first, Congressman Grijalva, thank
you for your leadership, especially working on so many issues
that are important to Interior and to the Nation in your
district in Arizona. With respect to oil and gas leases, you
are correct. The numbers are out there and we would be happy to
get the specifics, but we have moved forward as quickly as we
can when we were at a point in time where we could assure that
we were moving forward in a safe way in the issuance of permits
and so that is why you have seen the additional shallow water
permits issued, and we hope to be able to move forward with
additional deepwater permits as well in the relatively short
future. With respect to the Land and Water Conservation Fund,
it is a modest investment in the future of America because the
dollars that we are putting in to buying in holdings and
connecting up wildlife corridors and the rest of the things to
get American people into the outdoors are important to the
hunters and anglers of this country, they are important to the
bikers of this country and they are a huge part of the economic
engine of the United States of America. As I said earlier, just
the outdoor industry alone independently will tell you that
there are 6.5 million jobs created a year in this country.
Those are not jobs that can be exported. So the kinds of
investments that we make with LWCF are, and have, seen that
economic future for the U.S.
Mr. Grijalva. Thank you. The Clear Act passed the House,
didn't go anywhere in the Senate, and part of that was some of
the reforms that you had recommended after the spill and things
that needed to be done internally and externally. Now that we
are talking about this budget, are you still going to have the
capacity internally, you did some administrative changes, to
carry out some of those administrative changes given the
resources that might or might not be available to the
Department so that we can continue to prevent what happened in
the Gulf from not happening again?
Secretary Salazar. The request that we have in the
President's budget for offshore oil and gas activities for the
Bureau of Ocean Energy Management are essential for us to move
forward with the robust oil and gas permitting program in the
nation's oceans. Without those resources, frankly, we are not
going to be able to move forward with the permitting process in
the way that we want to because you need to have people to be
able to go out and do the jobs, issue the permits, do the
inspections, do the monitoring.
Mr. Grijalva. Thank you.
Secretary Salazar. All that needs to happen, and so that is
one of the initiatives that is at risk if that part of this
budget is not funded.
Mr. Grijalva. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The other questions
that I have, everything from bats to wild horses, the wild
horses being something that I know the Secretary likes to hear
about from me, I will submit those in writing, sir.
The Chairman. And please be sure to share the response with
all the other Members.
Mr. Grijalva. Depends what it is. No. Of course I will.
The Chairman. The gentleman from Louisiana, Mr. Landry, is
recognized for five minutes.
Mr. Landry. Mr. Secretary, I will dispute some of your
facts, which I am sure you will go back and dispute, but the
Department of Energy shows that we have about a 300,000-barrel
loss in Gulf of Mexico production, but the one fact that is
undisputable is that Americans have been paying more at the
pumps since January of 2009 until today. The price at the pump
has continued to increase. I am going to give you an
opportunity to explain this robust energy policy that you all
are trying to lay out for me. You implemented the drilling
safety rule for offshore to enhance safety in upstream oil and
gas business, is that correct?
Secretary Salazar. That is correct.
Mr. Landry. OK. Does this rule apply to drilling activity
on onshore Federal lands?
Secretary Salazar. There are different realities on shore.
Mr. Landry. And would you say that those realities are
based on past history and safety aspects?
Secretary Salazar. The realities are based on experiences,
as well as just the differences of regulating in the offshore
and the onshore, and let me be specific. When you start dealing
with the Gulf of Mexico, which I know you are very concerned
about, and you start drilling in places that are 5,000, 6,000--
--
Mr. Landry. OK. Whoa, whoa, whoa! But I don't want to go
there yet because what I want to show you is that based upon
the history on the shelf, with over 40,000 wells drilled on our
shelf we have not had an accident on that shelf in any
magnitude in the deep water, and yet our shallow water permits
continue, continue to lag. In fact, a three year permit average
from 2007 to 2009 had an average of 28 permits per month that
were issued. In the first quarter of 2010 that average was 21,
in the second quarter of 2010 it was 12, the third, 13, the
fourth, 18. The average for this year is six. Now, what I want
you to explain to me is that if you are saying that the onshore
drilling is safe and you are using a history, which I think is
correct, but yet the shelf has that same history and safety
record, but yet you are treating it different, to me, that is
not robust.
In fact, not only are your drilling permits and your
construction permits lagging, but I have oil and gas companies
who are trying to keep people to work in my district doing P&A
work, plugging and abandoning, at a time when I think it was
your agency who had made some comments back after the Deepwater
Horizon incident that the industry should be cleaning up some
of its idle iron. Well, I want you to know that the permit
process in New Orleans is at a dead standstill when it comes to
P&A work. Now, this is work that the Administration claims
needs to be done. When I look at the budget I wonder if you are
actually utilizing your resources, because if I am not
mistaken, the BLM offices, if you give me a second, are
scattered out from Houston to New Orleans, I think there is one
in Lake Charles. Well, there is one in New Orleans, Homer,
Lafayette, Lake Charles and Lake Jackson. It seems to me that
we could do some consolidation and get some streamlining at
least for P&A permits so that we can keep people to work while
you all continue this robust energy policy that we are moving
forward. Wouldn't you agree?
Secretary Salazar. If I may, on your comments, just
quickly, two points. The first is on the issue of gas prices.
The fact is that the price of oil is set worldwide and we are
able to influence that in terms of domestic production. The
experts, the economists, tell us that we don't have an
influence on that.
Mr. Landry. Well, but if that is the case, then how can the
gentlemen on the other side of this aisle claim that utilizing
the strategic reserve would give us some relief at the pump?
Because all that is increasing the supply.
Secretary Salazar. Well, the strategic petroleum reserve is
a tool that was set up to deal with disruptions in the market
after incidents like OPEC and perhaps the incident now.
Mr. Landry. And for incidents of national security. But we
have a great strategic reserve in the Gulf of Mexico----
Secretary Salazar. I agree.
Mr. Landry.--that is a lot cheaper than utilizing that one.
I don't understand. At first you said it is set, the price is
set on the world market, and I agree with that, but what
affects that price is supply and demand, don't you agree?
Secretary Salazar. That is true, including the demand from
China, and India and the rest of the world.
Mr. Landry. But there is also a reason why brand crude oil
prices are higher than U.S. crude prices, and sometimes it has
to do with delivery options. So my point is that when we drill
domestically, the ability to get that resource into our
refineries comes at a much lesser cost because of the
transportation costs out there. So all of those things come
into a factor when you should be considering your energy
policy. That is why I think that its failed, that you are
treating the Gulf of Mexico and you are painting it with one
brush.
Secretary Salazar. Let me just say the fact is that we have
increased production in the country. Those facts are
indisputable over the last two years. Second, your legitimate
question which you asked which isn't just a political diatribe
is the question of how we are doing the new Bureau of Ocean
Energy Management and the consolidation. There are legitimate
questions that you raise there and we are looking at those very
seriously. What we want to do is to establish a robust agency
that can, in fact, do the job that it has to do and it may
include some of the consolidations and some of the moves that
you raised in your question.
The Chairman. Time of the gentleman has expired. The
gentlelady from California, Mrs. Napolitano, is recognized.
Mrs. Napolitano. Thank you, Mr. Chair. Good to see you
again, Mr. Secretary, Mr. Hayes. There are some questions that
I am going to have to submit for the record. If you wouldn't
mind returning them in writing to this Committee. I certainly
want to kind of dovetail some of the comments on the
hydrofracking for the fact that there are some issues in my
backyard that are beginning to affect the residents' concerns
over the contaminated water that hydrofracking leaves behind. I
am not sure whether we can address or whether we can maybe help
those folks be able to understand it. California crude is
heavier than most of the other crude. Second, I want to
congratulate Commissioner Connor for working heavily with us on
Title 16, especially with the error money, to make real water
and put people to work. That is just absolutely a must in the
West.
Then, moving into the Native American focus, the tribal
recognition, moving forth on that and putting a lot more focus
on some of their issues. The Bureau of Indian Affairs received
a budget increase for energy initiatives and I know that IBEW,
electrical workers, and NECA, the electrical contractors, have
submitted a white paper, including some of the reservations in
my area, that are looking at placing on site manufacturing of
solar panels and training of Native Americans for jobs into the
electrical contracting, or electrical manufacturing, electrical
contracting, so that develops not only jobs, it brings back
manufacturing to the U.S., brings solar panel manufacturing to
the U.S. provides electrical journeymen training to Native
Americans as they get job development, and economic
development. There are 20 tribes actually lined up to work with
these two organizations that are moving forth on this, and I
would love to see where the Department is on this and if there
is going to be any focus to help Native Americans be able to
have that ability to do this.
Second, the budget request includes a new account for
National Land Imaging Program overseeing the operation of the
Landsat satellites, providing global land cover data used by
academia, agriculture, researchers, the world, in fact. Like to
congratulate the Department on the work done so far and the
Water and Science Agency and the Landsat. One of the concerns I
have is that it is essential to the imaging environment,
impacts the ground and aquifer imaging. The DOI budget request,
will it be sufficient to ensure that the land-based operations
are ready to handle the thermal infrared sensoring, the TIRS,
T-I-R-S, when Landsat launches in December of next year? We
have been told by many of the water agencies, they utilize this
information, that it is critical for them, it is critical for
farmers. Then third, the water challenges, the water shortages
and water use conflicts is one of your seven initiatives for
2012. How will the proposed reductions in spending for these
basic data gathering, of course the USGS stream gauging and the
ground water monitoring specifically that affect the work that
we do on water, impact DOI's ability to fulfill its statutory
mandates, affect decision support and impact states and other
nonFederal partners? I could go on, but those are the ones that
I really have and you can take any one of them and the rest I
will submit for the record because I will be yielding. Well, in
fact, all of them for the record and I yield one minute to Mr.
Garamendi.
Mr. Garamendi. Thank you. A lot of discussion going on here
about energy but I would point out that the oil market is an
international market and whatever happens here in the United
States with drilling and the like is not going to change that
price of oil very much. We should also note that the oil
industry, the big five, in the last decade had just short of $1
trillion in profits. As this price rises, the world is going to
see that $18 or $16 billion go back up from whatever it is
today, as was discussed. I want to commend the Department for
every effort you are making to become less dependent on grid
energy and more dependent on renewable energy. You are doing a
lot. What you have done in the deserts with your renewables,
very good. More needs to be done. We know we have a series of
problems and I know that you are trying to attack those
problems so that we can move away from our dependency on
foreign oil. Your record is very good. You should stay with it.
The Chairman. Time of the gentleman has expired. The
gentleman from Ohio, Mr. Johnson, is recognized for five
minutes.
Mr. Johnson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Secretary Salazar,
Ohio is very dependent upon the coal industry. We get about 87
percent of our energy from coal. The industry supports more
than 30,000 direct and indirect jobs and the majority of these
jobs are in my district in eastern and southeastern Ohio. As
you know, the Office of Surface Mining, Reclamation and
Enforcement is preparing a complete rewrite of current
regulations regarding surface mining in the stream buffer zone.
According to your Department's own environmental impact
statement, this proposed regulation could cost more than 20,000
coal mining and related jobs, cut coal mining production by 50
percent and increase the cost of electricity for families and
small businesses. What is your justification for such a
significant rewrite of existing regulations that would result
in such significant job losses and jeopardize our domestic
energy security?
Secretary Salazar. I will have Deputy Secretary Hayes
respond.
Mr. Hayes. Congressman, we are looking fresh at the rule
because a Court intervened and expressed concern about the rule
that came out at the end of the prior Administration. I should
say that the rulemaking has only started. You referenced the
environmental impact. There is no draft environmental impact
statement that is out yet. What you are referring to was a
draft that was prepared by a contractor and that was not
approved by the Department. We are very concerned and want to
make sure that this rulemaking proceeds and the environmental
impact statement proceeds with full public input. We have made
no judgments about what the final rule will look like and we
look forward to working with you and others to make sure that
it is a good rule and it makes sense in coal country.
Mr. Johnson. Well, I am very concerned because the 2000
rule that you reference followed a five-year rulemaking process
supported by 5,000 plus pages of environmental analysis and
40,000 public comments. I am just very concerned why OSM is in
such a rush to rewrite this rule that has already codified 30
years of industry practice.
Mr. Hayes. We are not in a rush. We are acting under Court
supervision. The Court has established some deadlines for us to
proceed, but we will make sure that we proceed in a deliberate
way. Again, there is no draft environmental impact statement
out yet. When it comes out, we will look forward to input,
along with the rulemaking itself.
Mr. Johnson. Shifting gears just a bit, I am a little bit
confused, Mr. Secretary. You talked about the increased funding
required in your budget submittal in order to create this
robust permitting process, yet you have testified and my
colleagues have pointed out the decreases in permits in
previous years. Why do you need so much money to get back to an
acceptable level of permitting? We were there before. Why is it
different now?
Secretary Salazar. Congressman Johnson, I think there is a
reality that the American Public and the American Congress and
I think all of us should take into account and that is there is
a pre-Macondo timeframe and a post-Macondo timeframe. I think
if you look at the 30 years before Macondo there was not the
right kind of caution that was taken, and the right kind of
inspection and oversight, and technology that allowed us to get
into deeper and deeper waters essentially got ahead of our
ability to deal with safety issues, environmental issues and
other kinds of issues, and so what we want to do is to achieve
a goal, which I think we can agree on, and that is that we want
to have oil and gas production in the nation's oceans, and have
specified the area as the Gulf of Mexico as the area which is
the most promising which already contributes about 30 percent
of the domestic production of oil to the United States, but we
want to do it in a way that is going to be safe. In order to do
that, you need an agency that can do the job. The former MMS
simply did not have the capacity to do the job.
Mr. Johnson. I don't mean to cut you off, Mr. Secretary. I
can see that my time is about to expire. You testified, and I
have heard other colleagues here mention it, oil is an
international market, and according to your testimony, the
United States, we have very little influence over the price of
oil. I will submit to you that I think that is exactly what
terrifies the American public, that we seem to have our hands
behind our back, and this lack of permitting, this lack of
going after resources that we have right here in America and
falling prey to that philosophy is indicative of a failed
energy policy. So, with that, I yield back my time.
The Chairman. Time of the gentleman has expired. The
gentleman from Florida, Mr. Rivera.
Mr. Rivera. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Secretary, thank
you so much for being here today. As your know, the Everglades
and Big Cypress in my district are national treasures, I am
sure you would agree, and important economic resources for my
state, for the State of Florida. Everglades restoration is a
huge priority for me and for my entire Florida Delegation and I
personally feel a tremendous responsibility to this issue
because so much of the national park and the Big Cypress
preserve fall within my congressional district. As we go
forward, I also think it is important that all the stakeholders
are involved in determining what prudent steps can be taken now
and in the future, particularly with the current economic
climate, to achieve the goal that everyone I am sure wants to
achieve of restoring water flow in these areas. You have placed
a great deal of emphasis on the Everglades as a special
landscape.
Last year you broke ground on a one mile bridge along an
artery through the Everglades, the Tamiami Trail, as a first
step to restoring water flow to Everglades National Park, and
you also announced the selection of a plan for additional
bridging to restore that water flow. I also, as you well know,
represent the Miccosukee Tribe of Indians. I know you have
recently met with them, and I have met with them as well. The
Miccosukee Tribe in my meetings have raised some concerns with
regards to the construction of the Tamiami Trail Bridge and the
additional proposed bridging. They have told me they strongly
support Everglades restoration, but they also have some
concerns regarding the environmental soundness of the project
and they are concerned that it might cause harm to culturally
sensitive, and archeological, and sacred and religious sites,
so in order to perhaps bridge some of those concerns or allay
some of those concerns I am wondering if you could tell me what
considerations were given to alternate plans, perhaps presented
even by the Miccosukee Tribe of Indians, for the bridge and the
proposed additional bridging. What alternatives were
considered?
Secretary Salazar. Congressman Rivera, let me first say to
you that I appreciate the leadership that you bring to the
Everglades restoration project. It is a project which has
received strong bipartisan support in the past, and in my view,
is one of the most important ecosystem restoration projects not
only in the United States, but literally in the entire planet
as a world heritage site. Some of the parts of the budget that
we are dealing with now, including Land and Water Conservation
Fund, will help us get to reality of restoring the river of
grass in the Everglades. With respect to alternatives on the
Tamiami Trail, those were all looked at in a very extensive way
through all the environmental impact analyses that went into
the construction on the Tamiami Trail and the proposed
additions. There have been robust conversations with the tribes
to make sure that their input is being heard and that robust
consultation with the tribes will continue.
Mr. Rivera. Well, I appreciate that. I know your Department
has had meetings with them, I have as well, and I am wondering,
perhaps one of the most robust ways we can encourage that
communication perhaps would be communication or a meeting
directly between the Chairman of the Tribe, Colley Billie, and
perhaps yourself. I am wondering if you would be open to a
direct meeting or direct communication perhaps here in
Washington that I could maybe help facilitate. Would you be
open to meeting with the tribe?
Secretary Salazar. Yes.
Mr. Rivera. Also, finally, can you tell me going forward as
we plan for Everglades restoration in the years ahead and
ensuring that the national park and other areas you manage are
preserved, what do you envision, what else can be done to make
sure that not only water flow is restored, but that this
treasure is preserved for generations to come?
Secretary Salazar. Congressman Rivera, I think that what
had happened, frankly, until two years is that for about an 80-
year timeframe there was literally very, no progress being made
in terms of Everglades restoration. We have done a lot in the
last two years and we have done it by getting the House of the
Federal family in order and have invested significant resources
in getting the Everglades to where they should be today.
However, that has depended on the partnership that we have had
with farmers, and land owners, and ranchers, and the State of
Florida, and local governments, and the South Florida Water
Management District, which has been a great partner as we have
moved forward.
Mr. Rivera. And the tribe.
Secretary Salazar. And the tribe. The most important thing
that we can do to bring the project across the finish line in
success is to continue that partnership that has been underway
for the last two years.
Mr. Rivera. Thank you. I appreciate those remarks. I yield
back, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. I appreciate that. Chair would note, Mr.
Secretary, that we have only two more questioners and that will
coincide perfectly with your timeframe of 1:00, so the timing
is everything on this. At this time, I would recognize the
gentleman from California, Mr. Denham, for five minutes.
Mr. Denham. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you, Mr.
Secretary. Let me first start by thanking you. I know you have
spent some time in the Central Valley looking at the
devastation with the water policy we have had. Know there have
been a number of questions on that and I have a number of
questions as well, but I would like to get your full attention
and detailed answers on it so I will submit those to you. So
let me just address a couple of funding questions that I have
concerns with. I also represent not only the Central Valley,
but Yosemite and some of the mountain areas, and specifically
in Tuolumne County, one of the concerns that we have is the
cuts to the Secure Rural Schools Program. I guess I would be OK
with the cuts if we were going to start doing more logging
again and, you know, they would have that additional revenue,
but absent new policy, we certainly would need some type of
plan on keeping those schools obviously open and funded. First,
I would ask you to address that area of cut and the phase out
of that. I know the President's new proposal has a phase out in
it.
Secretary Salazar. Congressman, my understanding is that
within the Department of Agriculture there is an amount, I
believe it was $328 million from testimony that I gave
yesterday in the Department of Agriculture, and we will work
closely with them in terms of the Secure Rural Schools funding.
It is something that I have been aware of and have worked with
the California and Oregon Delegations on in the past, so I am
aware of the issue. I don't know the specifics with respect to
the area that you speak about, but we will look into it. On
your other issues, on the Central Valley and the water issues,
I would say the Deputy Director of the Department of the
Interior has probably spent more time working on that issue
than any single other issue. It is exceedingly complex, but
there is great possibility and great hope that if we can keep
the water users and the other interests together, that we can
make some major breakthroughs on the California water issues in
the Central Valley this year. So we are very hopeful. We are
working on it together. Just a quick comment on Yosemite.
Yosemite has a special place in the heart of the conservation
community in this country because it was set aside by President
Lincoln right in the midst of the Civil War and it is what
makes our country, as Ken Burns of Dayton Duncan would say in
their movie or in their film, America's best idea. So what
Abraham Lincoln started in 1865 with Yosemite is a tradition
that I hope we are able to continue working together in a
bipartisan way for a lot of reasons, but also because it
contributes so significantly to the economy of our country,
whether it is the Everglades, or whether it is Yosemite, or
whether it is Olympic, or Rainier, or other of our great
national parks.
Mr. Denham. Thank you. Thank you. Just a couple quick
questions on purchasing property. One of the things that I am
seeing now, we just finished duck season. My duck license was
very expensive and now I see $25 going up. First of all, do we
really need to buy more land right now? Are the hunters not
doing a good job of protecting the conservation of that area?
Specifically on the wildlands piece, I know BLM is talking
about greater resources and benefits and being able to use
properties and it seems like it is somewhat in conflict with
wildlands. I mean, there are a number of policies that I am
seeing move forward where we are actually going out and buying
more property, and at the same time we have the President who
now is putting together a new commission to sell property. So
in a time of fiscal crisis it would seem that, you know, we
would agree with the President's direction to sell properties.
The question is how do we do that? Then second, why would we be
going out and buying more property at a time that we are going
through today?
Secretary Salazar. First, let me say that on the
acquisition of properties, I know for a fact that hunting
organizations from the National Riflemen's Association to Ducks
Unlimited and Trout Unlimited are strongly supportive of
protecting those areas that are a special place for hunters.
Hunting adds a huge amount to the economy of this country. It
is a sport which I strongly support. When you have lands that
over the last 10 years have been disappearing which have been
prime hunting and wildlife habitat at a rate of the size of
Connecticut every year, it should call us to action to invest
in the protection of these lands that are special lands for
hunting and----
Mr. Denham. Disappearing? Are they vanishing? Disappearing?
Secretary Salazar. They have moved over to development in
very significant ways. I mean, our population as it has grown
and is projected to continue to grow will continue to have
these lands diminished, and so having a proactive conservation
program in a partnership way that respects private property
rights is something that we very much support, and it is the
heart of the America's Great Outdoors concept. It is at the
heart of this budget. I said earlier one of the great examples
is what the ranching community. These are working ranchers,
fourth, fifth generation ranchers that took the lead creating
the Flint Hills National Conservation Area to protect 1.1
million acres of the last remaining tallgrass prairie in North
America. These are ranchers who said they want their way of
life preserved in ranching. It is good for the economy of
Kansas, and it is good for the environment. So I think we can
move forward with that agenda.
The Chairman. Time of the gentleman has expired. The
gentleman from Florida, Mr. Southerland.
Mr. Southerland. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Secretary,
thank you very much for being here today. I think you have been
Secretary for a little over two years, that correct?
Secretary Salazar. Yes, sir, that is correct.
Mr. Southerland. How many employees are under your
direction?
Secretary Salazar. Around 70,000.
Mr. Southerland. And your budget for 2010 was somewhere I
think a little over $12 billion, correct?
Secretary Salazar. That is correct.
Mr. Southerland. I congratulate you. That is an enormous
responsibility. I mean, I am a small business owner. I can't
imagine having that much responsibility. I wanted to ask you,
you know I live in Florida. We were affected. My district had
eight counties on the Gulf. I wanted to ask you some questions
regarding the Deepwater Horizon. You know, the President formed
the commission on BP in the Deepwater Horizon oil spill. Did
you participate in that report? Do you have any work or
consultation responsibilities in that report?
Secretary Salazar. I appeared before the commission,
provided excessive testimony, along with Deputy Secretary David
Hayes and a number of other people from the Department of the
Interior.
Mr. Southerland. OK. So your input was included. Obviously
it had an effect on the report that Senator Graham and Mr.
Riley came and presented before this body about a month ago.
Secretary Salazar. They were an independent commission but
we did provide them whatever information they requested from
us.
Mr. Southerland. They had nine findings that they presented
before us, 400 pages, and none addressed any government's
responsibility in the exasperation of that disaster in the wake
of that. I am just curious. Do you feel from your vantage point
over 70,000 people, $12 billion, does the government bear any
responsibility having issued 720 violations in the wake of that
disaster? Any?
Secretary Salazar. Congressman Southerland, I think that
the Deepwater Horizon was a tragedy that was brought about by a
huge number of circumstances, including government inattention
and government inaction.
Mr. Southerland. I'm curious--if I may. I am the last one
here so time is a precious commodity. As far as a percentage,
does the government bear five percent? Ten percent? You are a
smart man. They don't give this position to somebody that can't
speculate a little bit. What do you think?
Secretary Salazar. I would say to you that the honest
answer that is not at all a political answer, I think it is
just the fact, is that the former agency, MMS, simply was not
given the tools by the Congress, nor overseen by the Executive
Branch of government to do the job that was so critical. At
this table and in this Committee several years ago, we
testified about the need to have organic legislation for MMS
and what you have in front of you with this budget is an effort
to try to stand up a robust agency that can accomplish these
very significant missions that we have assigned to this
particular bureau.
Mr. Southerland. OK, but clearly, if you had the ability to
issue 720 violations and we seem to be not be able to rescind
the Jones Act when we had offers from around the country to
bring in skimming ships to help us at least contain the
disaster, clearly you have to be a smart man. Seventy thousand
people, that is mind-boggling to me. You have to be able to
agree that the Administration, government, could have done
more. I know you keep throwing it on Congress, but I am talking
about you. You don't get 70,000, $12 billion without having
some ability to make a difference, correct?
Secretary Salazar. Well, first----
Mr. Southerland. That is just a yes or no. I am running out
of time here.
Secretary Salazar. Let me say we did I think a Herculean
job in responding to the tragedy. Was it perfect? No. Was it
anticipated and all the problems foreseen? No. Have we learned
from it? I would hope we have learned from it. Part of the
lessons learned are incorporated into the budget request that
we have----
Mr. Southerland. Can I ask you, now I am on the yellow
light, after 720 findings, and again, that is amazing to me,
have there been any disciplinary actions that have led to
firings or dismissals from any of the individuals that were a
part of citing those violations and issuing those citations?
That is just yes or no. Anyone fired?
Secretary Salazar. Over the last two years there have been
a number of disciplinary actions.
Mr. Southerland. Anyone fired, though?
Secretary Salazar. There have been people fired, people who
have been prosecuted, people have, appropriate action has been
taken as we have cleaned up MMS over the last two years.
Mr. Southerland. OK. I know when Mr. Costa was questioning
you, you stated that you have the ability to focus like a laser
beam. I mean, that was your words about an hour and a half ago.
I would just encourage you, being in the position you are with
70,000 people, $12 billion, obviously a great skill set to be
given that and you have the ability to focus like a laser beam,
that at some point in time someone from your Administration, or
you even yourself, would be able to say, you know what, we
screwed up. I think the American people would appreciate--and I
am not ignoring the fact that BP----
The Chairman. Time of the gentleman has expired. If there
is a question there, I would ask the Secretary to respond to
that question.
Secretary Salazar. I would just say there is a collective
responsibility that has to be shared over what happened in the
Gulf of Mexico.
The Chairman. Thank you very much. I think that all of us
on this Committee have always felt that that issue as brought
up by the gentleman from Florida was legitimate to be
discussed. Secretary Salazar, thank you very much for being
here. I want to thank all the Members for adhering as closely
as we could possibly do to the five-minute rule. If there are
further questions from any Members of the Committee, Mr.
Secretary, I would ask you to respond to those questions in as
timely a manner as you possibly can. If there is no further
business before the Committee, the panel is dismissed and the
Committee stands adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 1:35 p.m., the Committee was adjourned.]

[Additional material submitted for the record follows:]

[The prepared statement of Mr. Benishek follows:]

Statement of The Honorable Dan Benishek, a Representative
in Congress from the State of Michigan

Thank you Mr. Chairman and I thank you Mr. Secretary for coming
today.
I am new to the Committee and new to Congress. I'm looking forward
to working with you.
My Northern Michigan district includes three Great Lakes, Isle
Royle National Park, large forests and my favorite place in the world--
my small camp in the Ottawa National Forest.
I am an outdoorsman and someone who truly appreciates the need to
preserve our land for the future. However, I want to convey a message
that I hope we can work together on in the next two years.
People in my district want to be able to enjoy the land. They want
access for recreation. They want to hunt, fish and ride vehicles. I am
asking to work together to curb the abusive lawsuits that are only
meant to delay the ruling process and prevent access. Let this
committee give you the tools you need to complete your job.
At the same time, this Committee is looking for you to take the
lead in tackling high gas prices. The unrest in the Middle East only
underscores the need to increase our domestic supply. Mr. Secretary you
hold the keys to the kingdom. It's time to expedite permits, open up
land and start drilling.
______

[The prepared statement of Mr. Flores follows:]

Statement of The Honorable Bill Flores, a Representative
in Congress from the State of Texas

Mr. Chairman, thank you for holding today's important hearing and
thank you Secretary Salazar for appearing before us today.
Last week, I had the opportunity to hear from my constituents
during four town halls and there was a persistent theme--what can we do
to promote private sector job growth in our nation and reduce the
uncertainty in our economy. Gasoline prices are on the rise, both due
to declining Gulf of Mexico production and unrest in the Middle East.
Concerns over higher energy costs slowing our economic recovery are
also being reflected in the stock market. Despite these warnings, the
Obama Administration's actions continue to ignore these significant
issues. Instead of pursuing energy independence, the Administration
further restricts access to our domestic supplies by imposing billions
in tax and fee increases that will raise the cost of energy for all
consumers, damage our fragile economic recovery, cause additional job
losses, and hurt our national security. To add to this Administration's
fiscal nonsense, the declining Gulf of Mexico production and
uncertainty in the permitting process is costing the Treasury millions
of dollars per day in royalty revenues. In addition, the lock-ups of
huge areas of prime acreage for domestic energy exploration makes us
the only country in the world which seems to be intent on putting our
own strategic domestic resources off limits.
There are measures that the federal government can take to secure
oil and gas supplies and offset rising prices. Regulators should end
the slowdown in the permitting process in both the deepwater Gulf of
Mexico and the shallow water Gulf of Mexico, and move ahead with
issuing additional drilling permits. In addition, the lock-ups of huge
areas of prime Secretarial Order 3310, issued last December,
establishing the Wild Lands policy that locks up vital domestic energy
sources at a time of much need should be reversed. We also need an
``all of the above'' view towards energy that uses a combination of all
energy sources including traditional fuels such as coal, oil, and gas,
as well as emission free nuclear, wind, and solar power. If the
Administration would take these common sense steps, our economy would
continue to recovery, hundreds of thousands of good paying American
jobs would be created, and we would assure our children of a future of
economic opportunity, energy security, and national security.
I look forward to hearing from Secretary Salazar today and to
discussing how we can ensure a reliable supply of American energy that
will contribute to our economic recovery.
______

[The prepared statement of Mr. Tipton follows:]

Statement of The Honorable Scott R. Tipton, a Representative
in Congress from the State of Colorado

Thank you Chairman Hastings for convening today's hearing. I would
like to join my colleagues in welcoming Secretary Salazar as we examine
the budget and priorities of the Administration and the Interior
Department.
There are approximately 8,686,842 acres of land controlled by the
Department of the Interior in the 3rd Congressional District of
Colorado. It's no surprise that the budget and priorities of this
Department is of great concern to me and my constituents, and that the
policies of the Interior Department affect our everyday lives and our
livelihoods. The Interior Department needs to look closely at ways to
trim excessive spending and to implement policies that will help rather
than hinder the job market. As oil approaches $100 a barrel and
gasoline prices are expected to go above $4.00 a gallon, it is
absolutely imperative that the Interior Department prioritize domestic
oil and natural gas exploration. We also need to focus on facilitating
innovative technologies in oil shale development and avoid excessive
regulations which discourage the exploration of this potentially
massive source of domestic energy. Doing so is a matter of national
security as well as critical source of jobs in my district and across
the country.
We also need to ensure that multiple use management is continued on
BLM lands and that the designation and protection of valued wilderness
areas is determined through local consensus and a vote of Congress, not
through Administrative order. There are 250,949 acres of wilderness in
the 3rd Congressional District and 520,000 Wilderness Study Areas. Many
of these areas are properly designated and the level of protection they
receive is appropriate. However, with so much of my district already
restricted by the wilderness designation, it is irresponsible to allow
the federal government to further restrict lands by administrative fiat
when doing so acts in derogation of the Federal Lands Management Policy
Act which requires BLM lands to managed for multiple use and sustained
yield. This was a common sense policy when it was developed and remains
so today. The Administration's Wild Lands order acts contrary to this
policy and threatens jobs in Colorado's Third Congressional District.
It is imperative that the Department of the Interior prioritize
domestic energy production and concentrate on job grow in Colorado and
throughout the country. Again, Chairman Hastings, thank you for holding
today's hearing.


