- OVERSIGHT HEARING ON THE ``OBAMA ADMINISTRATION'S ACTIONS AGAINST THE SPRUCE COAL MINE: CANCELED PERMITS, LAWSUITS AND LOST JOBS.''

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

OBAMA ADMINISTRATION'S ACTIONS AGAINST THE SPRUCE COAL MINE: CANCELED
PERMITS, LAWSUITS AND LOST JOBS

=======================================================================

OVERSIGHT HEARING

before the

SUBCOMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND
MINERAL RESOURCES

of the

COMMITTEE ON NATURAL RESOURCES
U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

Friday, June 1, 2012

__________

Serial No. 112-113

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Natural Resources

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.fdsys.gov
or
Committee address: http://naturalresources.house.gov

_____

U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE

74-441 PDF                WASHINGTON : 2013
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800; DC
area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104  Mail: Stop IDCC, Washington, DC
20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON NATURAL RESOURCES

DOC HASTINGS, WA, Chairman
EDWARD J. MARKEY, MA, Ranking Democratic Member

Don Young, AK                        Dale E. Kildee, MI
John J. Duncan, Jr., TN              Peter A. DeFazio, OR
Louie Gohmert, TX                    Eni F.H. Faleomavaega, AS
Rob Bishop, UT                       Frank Pallone, Jr., NJ
Doug Lamborn, CO                     Grace F. Napolitano, CA
Robert J. Wittman, VA                Rush D. Holt, NJ
Paul C. Broun, GA                    Raul M. Grijalva, AZ
John Fleming, LA                     Madeleine Z. Bordallo, GU
Mike Coffman, CO                     Jim Costa, CA
Tom McClintock, CA                   Dan Boren, OK
Glenn Thompson, PA                   Gregorio Kilili Camacho Sablan,
Jeff Denham, CA                          CNMI
Dan Benishek, MI                     Martin Heinrich, NM
David Rivera, FL                     Ben Ray Lujan, NM
Jeff Duncan, SC                      Betty Sutton, OH
Scott R. Tipton, CO                  Niki Tsongas, MA
Paul A. Gosar, AZ                    Pedro R. Pierluisi, PR
Raul R. Labrador, ID                 John Garamendi, CA
Kristi L. Noem, SD                   Colleen W. Hanabusa, HI
Steve Southerland II, FL             Paul Tonko, NY
Bill Flores, TX                      Vacancy
Andy Harris, MD
Jeffrey M. Landry, LA
Jon Runyan, NJ
Bill Johnson, OH
Mark Amodei, NV

Todd Young, Chief of Staff
Lisa Pittman, Chief Counsel
Jeffrey Duncan, Democratic Staff Director
David Watkins, Democratic Chief Counsel
------

SUBCOMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND MINERAL RESOURCES

DOUG LAMBORN, CO, Chairman
RUSH D. HOLT, NJ, Ranking Democratic Member

Louie Gohmert, TX                    Peter A. DeFazio, OR
Paul C. Broun, GA                    Madeleine Z. Bordallo, GU
John Fleming, LA                     Jim Costa, CA
Mike Coffman, CO                     Dan Boren, OK
Glenn Thompson, PA                   Gregorio Kilili Camacho Sablan,
Dan Benishek, MI                         CNMI
David Rivera, FL                     Martin Heinrich, NM
Jeff Duncan, SC                      Betty Sutton, OH
Paul A. Gosar, AZ                    Niki Tsongas, MA
Bill Flores, TX                      Paul Tonko, NY
Jeffrey M. Landry, LA                Vacancy
Bill Johnson, OH                     Edward J. Markey, MA, ex officio
Mark Amodei, NV
Doc Hastings, WA, ex officio
------

CONTENTS

----------
Page

Hearing held on Friday, June 1, 2012.............................     1

Statement of Members:
Benishek, Hon. Dan, a Representative in Congress from the
State of Michigan, Prepared statement of...................    47
Hastings, Hon. Doc, a Representative in Congress from the
State of Washington I606...................................
Prepared statement of I607...............................
Holt, Hon. Rush D., a Representative in Congress from the
State of New Jersey........................................     3
Prepared statement of....................................     5
Lamborn, Hon. Doug, a Representative in Congress from the
State of Colorado..........................................     1
Prepared statement of....................................     3
Markey, Hon. Edward J., a Representative in Congress from the
State of Massachusetts.....................................    32
Prepared statement of....................................    34

Statement of Witnesses:
Darcy, Hon. Jo-Ellen, Assistant Secretary of the Army (Civil
Works), U.S. Army Corps of Engineers--Invited--did not
testify....................................................
Eisenberg, Ross, Vice President, Energy and Resources Policy,
National Association of Manufacturers......................    17
Prepared statement of....................................    19
Gunnoe, Maria, Organizer, Boone County, West Virginia........    24
Prepared statement of....................................    25
Harbert, Karen A., President & CEO, Institute for 21st
Century Energy, U.S. Chamber of Commerce...................    12
Prepared statement of....................................    14
Jackson, Hon. Lisa P., Administrator, U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency--Invited--did not testify................
Kirkendoll, Hon. Art, Senator, West Virginia State Senate....     8
Prepared statement of....................................    10
Pizarchik, Hon. Joseph, Director, Office of Surface Mining
Reclamation and Enforcement--Invited--did not testify......

OVERSIGHT HEARING ON THE ``OBAMA ADMINISTRATION'S ACTIONS AGAINST THE
SPRUCE COAL MINE: CANCELED PERMITS, LAWSUITS AND LOST JOBS.''

----------

Friday, June 1, 2012

U.S. House of Representatives

Subcommittee on Energy and Mineral Resources

Committee on Natural Resources

Washington, D.C.

----------

The Subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:09 a.m. in
Room 1324, Longworth House Office Building, Hon. Doug Lamborn
[Chairman of the Subcommittee] presiding.
Present: Representatives Lamborn, Broun, Thompson,
Benishek, Duncan of South Carolina, Flores, Johnson, Hastings,
Holt, Tonko, and Markey.
Also Present: Representative McKinley.
Mr. Lamborn. The Committee will come to order. The Chairman
notes the presence of a quorum, which under Committee Rule 3(e)
is two Members.
The Subcommittee on Energy and Mineral Resources is meeting
today to hear testimony on the ``Obama Administration's Actions
Against the Spruce Coal Mine: Canceled Permits, Lawsuits, and
Lost Jobs.''
Under Committee Rule 4(f), opening statements are limited
to the Chairman and Ranking Member of the Subcommittee.
I ask unanimous consent to include any other Members'
opening statements in the hearing record if submitted to the
Clerk by close of business today. Hearing no objection, so
ordered.
Mr. Lamborn. I also ask unanimous consent to have
Congressman David McKinley of West Virginia's First District
with us on the dais today and to participate in today's
hearing. Hearing no objection, so ordered.
I now recognize myself for five minutes.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. DOUG LAMBORN, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF COLORADO

Mr. Lamborn. Today we will hear an update on the ongoing
legacy, that is the Spruce Coal Mine in Logan County, West
Virginia. This saga is one of the most disappointing legacies
of Federal bureaucracy in American history.
This is the story of how one agency, the Obama
Administration's Environmental Protection Agency, can attempt
to single-handedly decide to retroactively pull permits, which
destroys jobs and cripples our economy, and try to do this
without consequence.
At the heart of this issue is the lack of confidence in
permitting by the Federal Government.
If without cause an agency can retroactively veto issued
permits, then how can any company, contractor or concessioner
have confidence to invest in America when their permit is not
worth the paper it is written on?
Fortunately, U.S. District Judge Amy Jackson found that the
EPA's actions in this matter were essentially a stunning power
grab, not justified by the statute.
Yet, even with such a staunch rejection by the Court, the
Obama Administration is committed to a war on coal and is
appealing this clear decision.
This appeal will consume tax dollars and time in our courts
and for what? To destroy good and important jobs for Americans.
Yes, that is the goal of this Administration's appeal. They
want to destroy jobs and expand the power of the EPA to have
extra legal new power to revoke permits.
This Subcommittee frequently hears discussion about
certainty, how domestic investment requires certainty in order
for investors to create jobs.
Should the Administration win this case and grant EPA the
power to retroactively revoke permits, it would destroy all
certainty in permitting for projects across the United States.
This would be terribly destructive for the American economy.
Unfortunately, this permit is not the only one the EPA has
withdrawn that has cost jobs and destroyed the livelihood of
hard working Americans.
In 2009, the EPA withdrew the permit issued to the Desert
Rock Energy Plant on the Navajo Nation. That $4 billion
investment would have created thousands of jobs, generated tens
of millions in revenues for the Navajo Nation, and supplied
power to the hundreds of thousands of homes in the West.
One added bonus would have been the electrification of a
broad section of the Navajo Nation where people currently live
without electricity.
That permit, after being issued, was withdrawn by the EPA.
The Obama Administration's war on coal can be felt
throughout the country, East, West, Appalachia, Rocky
Mountains, Logan County, West Virginia, and Farmington, New
Mexico.
Americans should be deeply concerned with this trend and
the Administration's ongoing effort to retroactively pull
permits, destroy jobs and hurt the economy.
Today we will hear from folks who are interested in talking
about other topics then the reckless disregard for the law, as
demonstrated by the EPA in this instance.
There will be discussions about selenium, water quality,
and the general process of mining. None of that is the topic of
today's hearing.
Today is about a reckless Administration and an agency that
believes it is above the law as they crusade against domestic
jobs and domestic energy. I will now recognize the Ranking
Member from New Jersey, Representative Holt, for five minutes
for his opening statement.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Lamborn follows:]

Statement of The Honorable Doug Lamborn, Chairman,
Subcommittee on Energy and Mineral Resources

Today we will hear an update on the ongoing legacy that is the
Spruce Coal Mine in Logan County West Virginia. This saga is one of the
most disappointing legacies of federal bureaucracy in American history.
This is the story of how one agency--the Obama Administration's
Environmental Protection Agency--can attempt to singlehandedly decide
to retroactively pull permits, destroy jobs, and cripple our economy
without consequence.
At the heart of this issue is the lack of confidence in permitting
by the federal government. If without cause an agency can retroactively
veto issued permits, then how can any company, contractor or
concessionaire have confidence to invest in America when their permit
is not worth the paper it is written on. Fortunately, U.S. District
Judge Amy Jackson found that the EPAs actions in this matter were
essentially a stunning power grab not justified by the statute.
And yet, even with such a staunch rejection by the courts, the
Obama Administration is committed to their ``war on coal'' by appealing
this clear decision. This appeal will consume tax dollars and time in
our courts and for what? To destroy good, important jobs for Americans.
Yes that is the goal of this Administration's appeal, they want to
destroy jobs and expand the power of the EPA to have ``extra-legal new
power'' to revoke permits.
This subcommittee frequently hears discussion about certainty, how
domestic investment requires certainty for investors to create jobs.
Should the Administration win this case and grant EPA the power to
retroactively revoke permits, it would destroy all certainty in
permitting for projects across the country. This would be terribly
destructive for the American economy.
Unfortunately,this permit isn't the only one the EPA has withdrawn
that has cost jobs and destroyed the livelihood of hard working
Americans. In 2009 the EPA withdrew the permit issued to the Desert
Rock Energy Plant on the Navajo Nation. That $4 billion investment
would have created thousands of jobs, generated tens of millions in
revenues for the Navajo Nation, and supplied power to the hundreds of
thousands of homes in the West. One added bonus would have been the
electrification of a broad section of the Navajo nation were people
currently live without electricity. But that permit, after being issued
was withdrawn by the EPA. The Obama Administration's ``war on coal''
can be felt throughout the country, east--west, Appalachia-Rocky
Mountains, Logan County, West Virginia and Farmington, New Mexico.
Americans should be deeply concerned with this trend and the
Administration's ongoing effort to retroactively pull permits, destroy
jobs and our economy.
Today we will hear from folks who are interested in talking about
other topics than the reckless disregard for the law as demonstrated by
the EPA in this case. There will be distractions about selenium (sa-LE-
ne-um), water quality, and the general process of mining. None of that
is the topic of today's hearing. Today is about a reckless
Administration and an agency that believes they are above the law as
they crusade against domestic jobs and domestic energy.
______

STATEMENT OF THE HON. RUSH HOLT, A REPRESENTATIVE IN CONGRESS
FROM THE STATE OF NEW JERSEY

Mr. Holt. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mountaintop removal
mining can be one of the most destructive practices on earth
for the health of local communities, our climate, and our
environment.
According to the Environmental Protection Agency, since
1992, nearly 2,000 miles of Appalachian streams have been
filled with debris resulting from mountaintop removal mining.
Streams in Appalachia are being buried at a rate of 120
miles per year. Mountaintop removal mining has also de-forested
an area the size of Delaware.
The proposed Spruce No. 1 Mine in West Virginia would cover
an area roughly seven times the area of the National Mall, just
to give you a sense of the scale.
It would be one of the largest individual surface mines
ever authorized in West Virginia, and waste from the mining
operation would bury more than six-and-a-half miles of a couple
of streams that according to the EPA ``represent some of the
last remaining, least disturbed, high quality stream and
riparian resources'' in the region.
The EPA has concluded that this mine will ``transform these
headwater streams from high quality habitat into sources of
pollutants.''
Since the Bush Administration approved the permit for
Spruce Mine in 2007, which may have been unwise then,
additional peer-reviewed scientific information has become
available, which according to the EPA, ``reflect a growing
consensus of the importance of headwater streams and a growing
concern about the adverse ecological effects of mountaintop
removal mining.''
We increasingly understand the effects, the impact, that
this sort of mining has on our environment and on the health of
local communities.
This morning, scientific understanding of the impacts of
this mine and others like it--I beg your pardon--this mounting
scientific understanding of the impacts led the EPA to withdraw
the permit for filling these streams with mining waste under
the Clean Water Act.
The coal company, a subsidiary of Arch Coal, challenged the
EPA decision, and a District Court sided with the coal company
by ruling that the EPA's interpretation was illogical.
In reading the Clean Water Act text, it seems clear that
what is really illogical is the Court's interpretation of the
statute and EPA's authority.
EPA has appealed this decision and agreed to an expedited
schedule to resolve the appeal and remove any uncertainty, for
example, that the Chair refers to.
The Majority may claim that EPA's effort to protect the
environment and the health of communities in Appalachia from
mountaintop removal mining are somehow evidence of a larger
attack on the coal industry, but the reality is that the threat
to coal use right now in today's economy is not coming from the
Administration, it is coming from the market.
Surging domestic natural gas production, including from
shale formations, has caused U.S. natural gas prices to
plummet, low natural gas prices are good for American
consumers. They are good for American manufacturing and for
other American industries, such as agriculture and steel.
Fallen natural gas prices have, as one might expect, had an
impact on our electricity mix. Over the last four years, the
amount of electricity produced from coal has fallen from
roughly half to a little more than a third.
Meanwhile, over the last five years, we have added more
than 41,000 megawatts of natural gas generation as a nation. We
have added more than 36,000 megawatts of wind. The shift is not
the result of the EPA or anyone else in the Administration, it
is simple economics.
Indeed, just this week, American Electric Power abandoned
plans to ask state regulators in Kentucky to approve a 30
percent increase in electricity rates from consumers to pay for
a $1 billion retrofit to keep a coal plant that is nearly 50
years old in operation.
Our domestic natural gas production is at an all time high.
That is a fact, and that is what is going on here.
Utilities are increasingly moving to natural gas and
renewables to generate electricity, yet the majority continues
to support destructive mountaintop removal mining, a process
that produces a product that companies are not choosing at this
time, and it makes no sense.
I yield back.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Holt follows:]

Statement of The Honorable Rush D. Holt, Ranking Member,
Subcommittee on Energy and Mineral Resources

Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mountaintop removal mining is one of the most destructive practices
on Earth for the health of local communities, our climate and our
environment. According to the Environmental Protection Agency, since
1992, nearly 2,000 miles of Appalachian streams have been filled with
debris resulting from mountaintop removal mining. Streams in Appalachia
are being buried at a rate of 120 miles per year. Mountaintop removal
mining has also deforested an area the size of Delaware in the
Appalachian region.
The proposed Spruce No. 1 Mine in West Virginia would cover an area
roughly seven times the size of the National Mall. It would be one of
the largest individual surface mines ever authorized in West Virginia.
Waste from the mining operation would bury more than 6.5 miles of two
streams that according to the EPA ``represent some of the last
remaining, least disturbed, high quality stream and riparian
resources'' in the region. The EPA has concluded that this mine ``will
transform these headwater streams from high quality habitat into
sources of pollutants.''
Since the Bush Administration approved the permit for the Spruce
Mine in 2007, additional peer-reviewed scientific information has
become available which ``reflect a growing consensus of the importance
of headwater streams'' and ``a growing concern about the adverse
ecological effects of mountaintop removal mining.'' We increasingly
understand the impacts that this sort of mining has on our environment
and the health of local communities in the region.
This mounting scientific understanding of the impacts of this mine
and others like it led the EPA to withdraw the permit for filling these
streams with mining waste under the Clean Water Act. The coal company--
a subsidiary of Arch Coal--challenged the EPA's decision, and a
District Court sided with the coal company by ruling that the EPA's
interpretation was illogical. But in reading the Clean Water Act text,
it seems clear that what is really illogical is the court's
interpretation of the statute and EPA's authority. EPA has appealed
this decision and agreed to an expedited schedule to resolve the
appeal.
The Majority may claim that the EPA's efforts to protect the
environment and the health of communities in the region from
mountaintop removal mining is somehow evidence of a larger attack on
the coal industry. But the reality is that the threat to coal use in
our country is not coming from the Administration, it is coming from
the free market.
Indeed, surging domestic natural gas production, largely from shale
formations, has caused U.S. natural gas prices to plummet. Low natural
gas prices are good for American consumers, for American manufacturing,
and for other American industries such as agriculture and steel.
Falling natural gas prices have also had an impact on our electricity
mix. Over the last four years, the amount of electricity we produce
from coal has fallen from roughly half to a little more than one-third.
Meanwhile, over the last five years we have added more than 41,000
megawatts of natural gas generation. We have added nearly 36,000
megawatts of wind. That shift is not the result of the EPA, it is the
result of economics.
Indeed, just this week, American Electric Power abandoned plans to
ask state regulators in Kentucky to approve a 30 percent increase in
electricity rates from consumers to pay for a $1 billion retrofit to
keep a coal plant that is nearly 50 years old in operation.
Our domestic natural gas production is at an all-time high.
Utilities are increasingly moving to natural gas and renewables to
generate electricity, yet the Majority continues to support destructive
mountain top removal mining--a process that produces a product that
fewer and fewer energy and power companies are choosing to invest in.
This makes no sense.
I yield back.
______

Mr. Lamborn. Thank you. Also, as is our practice, whenever
the Chairman or Ranking Member of the Full Committee are here,
they are invited to give a five minute statement also, so I
will now recognize the Chairman of the Full Committee,
Representative Hastings of Washington.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. DOC HASTINGS, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF WASHINGTON

Mr. Hastings. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. Thank you
for your courtesy as you have given that to me several times
this year.
There is no question that over the course of President
Obama's term in office, he and his Administration have taken
aim at shutting down coal production and coal fired electricity
plants across the country.
These direct attacks on America's hard working coal
families have threatened tens of thousands of jobs and promise
to increase the cost of energy for millions of Americans at a
time when they can least afford it.
While some of the Administration's action against coal
mining have been deliberately slow to develop, such as the
unnecessary rewrite of coal regulations known as the ``Stream
Buffer Zone Rules,'' others have been more bold and direct.
The Obama Administration's EPA decision to retroactively
withdraw a previously issued permit was certainly a bold and
direct assault on American coal production.
In fact, a Federal Court ruled, and I quote, ``EPA exceeded
its authority,'' under the Clean Water Act to revoke an already
issued coal permit, and such action required ``Magical
thinking.''
Yet, after such a strong rebuke from the EPA's reckless
decision making, the Obama Administration is appealing the
Judge's ruling and once again trying to inflict economic damage
on an already struggling region.
The Spruce Coal Mine in Logan County, West Virginia is a
great opportunity for coal mining families who are desperate
for job creation. It is also an opportunity for more American
energy production that will help support other American
industries.
Unfortunately, this Administration has tried everything to
take this opportunity away from these hard working American
families.
This hearing was supposed to give Committee members an
opportunity to question Obama officials about the ``magical
thinking'' and better understand their decision making process.
Unfortunately, the Obama Administration officials that were
invited to testify refused the invitation and refused to send
anyone in their place.
We have heard a lot about openness and transparency from
this Administration. To me, it is very disappointing to see
high ranking officials or any officials for that matter from
his Administration ignore the opportunity to keep the public
informed.
I would like to thank the second panel that will be called
for taking time out of their busy lives and busy schedules to
be here today to answer questions about this important topic.
I just wish that the Obama Administration had shown the
same courtesy.
Mr. Chairman, I would like to take a moment to express how
saddened we were to hear of the passing of your father, Mr.
Robert Lamborn, on Tuesday.
I understand your father served with honor in the Second
World War and was one of the five guards that participated in
the Nuremberg trials. Clearly, his public service was passed on
to the second generation. Know that our thoughts and prayers
are with you and your family as you go through this difficult
time.
I yield back my time.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Hastings follows:]

Statement of The Honorable Doc Hastings, Chairman,
Committee on Natural Resources

There is no question that over the course of President Obama's term
in office, he and his Administration have taken aim at shutting down
coal production and coal fired electricity plants across the country.
These direct attacks on America's hardworking coal families have
threatened tens of thousands of jobs and promise to increase the cost
of energy for millions of Americans at a time when they can least
afford it.
While some of the Administration's actions against coal mining have
been deliberately slow to develop, such as the unnecessary rewrite of a
coal regulation known as the Stream Buffer Zone Rule, others have been
more bold and direct. The Obama Administration's EPA's decision to
retroactively withdraw a previously issued permit was certainly a bold
and direct assault on American coal production.
In fact, a Federal Court ruled that the EPA ``exceeded its
authority'' under the Clean Water Act to revoke an already issued coal
permit and that such an action required ``magical thinking.'' Yet, even
after such a strong rebuke of the EPA's reckless decision making, the
Obama Administration is appealing the judge's ruling and once again
trying to inflict economic damage on an already struggling region.
The Spruce Coal Mine in Logan County West Virginia is a great
opportunity for coal mining families who are desperate for job
creation. It's also an opportunity for more American energy production
that will help support other American industries, small businesses,
family farms and jobs creators through affordable energy.
Unfortunately, the Obama Administration has tried at every turn to take
this opportunity away from these hardworking American families.
This hearing was supposed to give Committee Members an opportunity
to question Obama Administration officials about the ``magical
thinking'' and better understand their decision making process.
Unfortunately, the Obama Administration officials that were invited to
testify refused the invitation and refused to send anyone in their
place. We've heard a lot about openness and transparency from President
Obama, so it's very disappointing to see high ranking officials, or any
officials, from his Administration ignore the opportunity to keep the
public informed.
I would like to thank our second panel for taking the time out of
their lives and busy schedules to be here today to answer questions
about this important topic--I only wish the Obama Administration had
shown the same courtesy.
______

Mr. Lamborn. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Moving on, at this point I would like to introduce the
invited first panel, which was The Honorable Lisa Jackson,
Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency, The
Honorable Joseph Pizarchik, Director of the Office of Surface
Mining Reclamation and Enforcement, and The Honorable Jo-Ellen
Darcy, Assistant Secretary of the Army for Civil Works
representing the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers.
Unfortunately, it appears that not a single individual from
the Obama Administration could take the time out from their
ongoing work of laying burdens on the American economy to
attend our hearing today.
It is extremely disappointing that they declined our
invitation to speak and answer questions on an important issue
that directly impacts the jobs and livelihood of many
Americans.
Even if they are extremely busy today, which I would
understand, they could have sent someone in their place.
Since the Obama Administration has no time for us today to
answer questions, we will call forward the second panel.
State Senator Art Kirkendoll, a West Virginia State
Senator, The Honorable Karen Harbert, President and CEO,
Institute for 21st Century Energy of the U.S. Chamber of
Commerce, Mr. Ross Eisenberg, National Association of
Manufacturers and VP for Energy and Resources Policy, and Ms.
Maria Gunnoe, Boone County, West Virginia organizer.
As you come forward, I will lay out the ground rules. Like
all our witnesses, your written testimony will appear in full
in the hearing record, so I ask that you keep your oral
statements to five minutes as outlined in our invitation, and
under Committee Rule 4(a).
Our microphones are not automatic so you have to press the
button to start. I also will explain how the timing light
works. You see the clock in front of you that starts at five
minutes. When it is down to one minute, a yellow light appears,
and after the five minutes are all up, the red light comes on.
Senator Kirkendoll, you may begin. Thank you for being
here.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. ART KIRKENDOLL,
STATE SENATOR, STATE OF WEST VIRGINIA

Mr. Kirkendoll. Mr. Chairman, I want to thank you and the
Committee for the opportunity. My name is Art Kirkendoll. I am
a Senator from West Virginia representing the 7th Senatorial
District, which is in the deep south, including Logan, Boone,
Lincoln, Mingo and Wayne Counties.
Prior to being nominated to the Senate, appointed to the
Senate, and I am the Democrat nominee this year, I was on the
County Commission of Logan for 30 years.
So disturbing, regarding the law permit back in 1998, we
had a real tussle about the opportunity to mine coal. As a
Commissioner, you set the budget for all the constitutional
office holders in the county. The Sheriff, everybody else, all
the public depends on you, the school kids, everybody depends
on the ability to have life in a rural county.
When this permit was disbanded, Dal-Tex shut down, and we
lost 400 quality jobs, $29 million back in 1998 in direct
payroll.
If you take into account the other jobs that support the
coal industry, we probably lost $100 million total in that
particular area.
Our coal severance at that time was about $400,000 a
quarter. I had to start cutting the budget and tighten things
up because we got down to $72,000 one quarter.
When 20 percent of your budget is derived from coal tax in
an energy producing county, it is pretty, pretty tough.
During the years--we are in almost the 14th year, we are
still not mining coal. There are still 230 jobs today in
question that would be mining the surface mine.
When we talk about the devastation of surface mining, let's
look at the plus side of surface mining. We are in a challenged
terrain in Logan County. I think they say 20 degrees slopes. We
have no flat land.
By having post-mined land, some of the parcels where we
extracted the coal, we now have a jail, an industrial park, an
airport, a shopping mall, and other things that give us a
little diversification and ability to be something other than
just coal.
I want to tell you, I do not know about some of the other
counties, but Logan has done a pretty good job with parcels of
post-mined land.
Being also on the Commission, we set up what they called a
master land usage program. What that meant was we could put in
language in a mine permit to where we could take people out of
flooded areas and put them upon a surface mine and leave the
power and sewage there instead of taking it all out and
starting over.
That is where you need to get when you mine coal in areas
that need to be surface mined.
Take care of people's livelihood. Let these people have a
life. We have gone through two tremendous floods in Logan
County in the last few months. Millions of your dollars come
into our area, Army Corps, everybody, the troops, cleaning up
our area. If those people had been on some of these surface
mined areas that we have, that would not have happened.
If you think you cannot get killed, go back to the Buffalo
Creek flood a few years ago, 124 people.
What we are talking about today is the ability to (1)
produce energy that keeps America safe; (2) gives us the
ability to compete with other markets financially.
When you cannot get a permit, guess what happens? A lot of
people do not understand. A few years from now, it is going to
be supply and demand.
When we start depending on coal coming across the Atlantic
and Pacific like we do oil, they are going to have the supply
and we are going to have the demand. We are 20 years away from
alternative energy and fuel to where we do not need coal. We
may not have domestic coal, that is the problem.
We are going to sit back and watch the rest of the world
flourish economically. They laugh at what we do. We are sitting
here putting our own selves out of business.
We know how to do it environmentally sound. I am an
environmentalist, too. I want to do it the right way.
It used to be AOC. That is original contour. Plan out what
you want to do with that property after extraction of the coal.
Beautify it. Put a school on it. Put a community on it.
What people do not realize, if we mined all the coal in
Southern West Virginia mountaintop removal that needs to be
mined, it would be three percent. I am telling you we could
make it on 97 percent of the mountains.
Second fact, I chair one of the most instrumental groups in
America, the ATV Hatfield-McCoy Trail System. We occupy that
trail system in the same mountains that we mine coal on a daily
basis.
If it is so devastating, then why have we had visitors from
all 50 states and almost 30 foreign countries.
We are trying to diversify. We want to be a tourist area
and mine coal, too. The way we do it, with the environmental
soundness we are doing it with now, we can do both.
Do not be duped. Come down to West Virginia and see how we
can do it and what we do. Do not take data and get in a
committee and put the onus back on us where we cannot compete.
Bring that committee down. Let me take you to some post-
mined land that has been redone, the beauty of it.
I had the 60 Minutes crew in a helicopter. They asked me
where is the reclaimed area, and I said you have been over it
for 12 minutes. They still would not believe what I told them.
The deer, the life and everything is better on post-mined
land than the land before.
With that, thank you for the opportunity, and let's be
sensible and put America back to work. Thank you very much.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Kirkendoll follows:]

Statement of The Honorable Art Kirkendoll, Senator,
West Virginia State Senate

Good morning and thank you for the opportunity to address this
Committee. My name is Art Kirkendoll and for the past 30 years I've had
the distinct pleasure of serving the people of Logan County, West
Virginia first as a county commissioner and now as state senator. I am
also here on behalf of 63,000 men and women that show up every day at a
working mine in West Virginia as well as the Legislative and Executive
branches of state government. Logan County has been called the `heart
of the coalfields'' and it is that. Coal and Logan County are almost
synonymous. I honestly don't know how you could separate the two.
I've had the responsibility and pleasure of administering a county
budget based on coal tax revenues for schools and important government
services for the seniors and less fortunate. I've also had the daunting
task of preparing that same budget when coal revenue disappeared due to
arbitrary judicial and administrative actions that affected the
continued viability of a coal mining operation in my county such as
EPA's post-issuance veto of the Spruce permit.
As a lifelong resident and a public servant, I am uniquely aware of
the importance of coal to our community, and I am well aware that coal
mining depends on a stable and predictable regulatory environment.
EPA's revocation of a legal, valid permit three years after it was
issued by the Corps of Engineers shatters the trust that must underlie
the relationship between citizens, businesses and their government.
Not only has the EPA's actions shattered that essential
relationship between the people and their government, but in their
politically motivated zeal to invalidate an existing, legal permit, the
agency trampled on the relationship of the states to their federal
government, destroying the very spirit of the Federal Clean Water Act
so much so that a federal judge was inspired to characterize EPA's
actions as ``magical thinking.''
Ladies and gentlemen, it is important that you understand this
issue isn't just about a single mine permit--nor is it about a single
community. Some of you may believe this is just a ``regulatory matter''
but it is not. It is about real people and the impact these decisions
by EPA and others like them are having on families and their
communities in Logan County. . .my home. . .my state and across this
nation. So concerning are EPA's actions to the citizens of West
Virginia that the West Virginia Legislature has twice adopted
resolutions condemning EPA's behavior with respect to the Spruce mine
permit. By disregarding 13 years of environmental analysis that went
into the Spruce mine permit with the stroke of its veto pen, EPA has
essentially chilled the permitting process not only for mining
operations but any development that needs Clean Water Act authorization
from the Corps of Engineers.
Each year, more than 13 million tons of coal is mined in our
county. There are a bit more than 1,500 coal miners working in the
county, and using the standard economic multiplier, that means the
industry provides employment for about 5,000 Logan County residents.
Consider that for a moment--5,000 out of a total population of a little
more than 35,000. To put that into a bit better perspective, most of
those coal miners and service industry employees are married and are in
their prime family years--so it is safe to say that those 5,000 people
represent 5,000 families--about 20,000 people out of 35,000 -something
like 70 percent.
Now, the average West Virginia coal miner makes about $70,000 a
year, which means that the coal industry pays out about $105 million in
wages each year in our county alone. The average salary of our coal
miners is almost twice that of the average per capita income across the
state. In fact, mining jobs are some of the best jobs people can have
in our state.
Historically coal and the coal-related industries have provided
higher paying jobs resulting in a higher standard of living and greater
access to a better education. Consider the impact on Logan County
School System and our families.

The property tax on coal and coal-related industries
in Logan County generates approximately $7.5 million in excess
levy tax revenue for Logan County Schools.

This revenue provide over a million dollars for
textbooks, academic travel for students, and school libraries;

$260,000 for bands, groups, student accident
insurance policies and mini grants;

$300,000 for technology equipment, wiring and
supplies; over a million in construction, security, and
repairs;

$360,000 of playgrounds, public libraries, county
health departments;

$4,981,000 in service and professional salaries.
Not only do the coal industries pay these taxes, employees of these
industries work and live in our communities, and they support our
schools with their personal property taxes as well. What cannot be
overlooked when we discuss the financial impact of levy tax revenue is
the personal dimension to this discussion for our school system, the
emotional devastation that occurs when coal and the families who are
dependent on coal no longer have a viable income.
We understand the importance of the coal industry to our county--
just in terms of the economic impact alone--but it goes far beyond
that.
I can remember back in 1981 when we began to take a longer view of
what our county needed, thank goodness we had coal companies that
provided the taxes and revenue and jobs that enabled us to do that.
When I first started, 15 percent of the people in Logan County had
potable water. As we speak today, 99 percent have it. We recently
started our second phase, our main sewers in southern West Virginia,
and Logan County.
We're making great strides but we remain way behind the rest of the
nation, I am asking that you don't allow the EPA to destroy the
industry that provides us the revenue to get to that next level.
I often hear the opponents of coal talk about the land that is left
once mining is finished. They claim we don't do anything with it.
Well, I don't know what they do in the rest of the country, but in
Logan one of our biggest problems is a lack of readily developable
land. The development and diversification of our economy is severely
limited by the lack of flat, readily developable land. Our people try
to make a living, build homes and businesses on the only flat land
available--the valley floors--but the problem is that these valley
floors are also often 20-year flood plains. Who would make a
significant investment on a 20-year flood plain? Who would build a home
or business?
Coal mining--particularly surface mining such as proposed at
Spruce--can provide us jobs today and possibilities for tomorrow. It
can do so even as it dramatically reduces the cost of site preparation
for major projects--something that is one of the most important
limiting factors.
Today, we have an airport, an industrial park, a regional jail, a
wood products plant, a conference and recreation center among other
things in Logan County, because we took this land and did the right
thing with it after the extraction of coal.
As I stated earlier, this is about more than a single permit or a
single mining operation but it is important to understand the impact
that even a single mine has on a community and county like Logan
County. Unfortunately, we've been here before--in 1999 a federal Judge
halted mining at the Dal-Tex site where the Spruce permit is located.
The mine closed, jobs were lost and communities and families were
ripped apart. That decision, which was reversed on appeal, set in
motion the 13-year permitting process that led to the issuance of the
Spruce mine permit in 2007. When the permit was finally issued, the
company mobilized investment to initiate coal production, restoring
life and economic vitality to these previously-decimated areas. All of
that promise and potential is now threatened by an EPA that is willing
to reach beyond its statutory authority to target an industry and a
region without regard for impacts to real people.
This EPA claims its dedication to the concept of environmental
justice, that no single community or group should unequally bear the
burden of public policy decision with respect to environmental
protection. In the case of the Spruce permit and coal mining in West
Virginia and Appalachia, EPA has warped this concept of environmental
justice to one of environmental injustice--where jobs, lives and
communities are targeted and ultimately destroyed in the blind pursuit
of a purely political agenda. In EPA's distorted world of environmental
injustice, unelected bureaucrats in office buildings in Philadelphia
and Washington substitute their judgment for the will of the elected
West Virginia Legislature and the Congress.
I come to you today seeking nothing more than true justice for my
county and my state. As two federal Judges have recently observed, EPA
is an agency that begs for Congressional intervention. As Judge Amy
Berman Jackson observed, EPA's actions on the Spruce permit represent
``stunning power'' for an agency to assume when there is no mention of
it in the authorizing statute. The House has taken appropriate measures
to restore balance and rationality to EPA and force them to respect the
lines of federal and state responsibility with the passage of H.R.
2018, the Clean Water Cooperative Federalism Act. This same body should
immediately begin consideration of H.R. 457, which will forever prevent
EPA from revoking an issued and operating permit.
As I said, I am asking for nothing more than justice. . .and for
fairness. I am asking you, our elected representatives, to stand beside
the working coal miners of my state and, indeed, this nation. They have
given so much and by their hard work, we have built an economy that is
the envy of the world.
Please don't turn your backs on the proud, hard-working, devoted
West Virginia coal miner and outsource their jobs as we have so many
others. God forbid that ever happens. I never thought that in 2012, as
State Senator, I would spend 80 percent of my time focusing on the
uncertainty of whether people know on Monday if they have a job next
week. That's not America.
Thank you for your time. . .
______

Mr. Lamborn. Thank you for your testimony, Senator
Kirkendoll.
Ms. Harbert, you may begin.

STATEMENT OF KAREN HARBERT, PRESIDENT AND CEO, INSTITUTE FOR
21ST CENTURY ENERGY, U.S. CHAMBER OF COMMERCE

Ms. Harbert. Thank you, Chairman Lamborn and Ranking Member
Holt, members of the Committee.
I am Karen Harbert, President and CEO of the Institute for
21st Century Energy, an affiliate of the U.S. Chamber of
Commerce, which is the nation's largest business federation.
First, let's be clear what the Spruce Mine discussion is
not about. It is not about mountaintop mining. It is not about
whether coal should or should not be part of our energy mix.
It is about the rule of law and whether America is a safe
place for long term investment. It is about the integrity of
our regulatory process. It is about whether America is open for
business. That is why this hearing is so important.
One of our great strengths as a country is that we hold the
rule of law sacrosanct. If we move to a system embodied by the
stance taken by the EPA in the Spruce Mine case, commerce as we
know it would grind to a halt. Hundreds of businesses would be
questioning if they, too, could have their permits
retroactively rejected.
New investments would dry up because there would be no way
to accurately calculate risks associated with the regulatory
agency that can simply change its mind at will.
The U.S. Chamber supports environmental safeguards and we
recognize the clear, transparent and predictable regulatory
system is valuable to both business and to the environment.
We also believe that Government must honor the decisions it
makes and operate within the law.
In the case of Spruce Mine No. 1, a Federal Judge has
clearly demonstrated that the EPA did not.
To give a sense of scale and magnitude put at risk by EPA's
actions, it should be noted that the Army Corps of Engineers
issues approximately 60,000 discharge permits annually under
Section 404, and estimates that covers about $220 billion of
annual investments conditioned on those permits.
It is not just a matter of mining or energy projects, it is
for industry broadly. It covers a significant component of our
economy, including residential and commercial buildings, roads,
renewable energy and other projects.
A reduction or constriction on investment in these key
infrastructure areas will limit job growth.
In fact, a study by the Brattle Group estimates that for
every billion dollars of construction spending, we generate
18,000 jobs. With today's unemployment rate at 8.2 percent, we
cannot afford our Government to restrict job growth.
With after ten years of review, EPA did not even identify
need to withhold the approval for Spruce Mine No. 1 when it had
the opportunity and legal ability to do so.
Attempting to withdraw their approval retroactively, veto
the permit almost two years after issuance, would not only
cause immediate economic loss to the mine owner, the State of
West Virginia, and the workers, but it would really create a
substantial negative and economic chilling impact on the
economy as a whole, setting a precedent that Section 404
permits can be revoked or changed at will.
If permits become subject to arbitrary treatment, the
result will be significantly reduced capital investments, fewer
jobs, and more expensive infrastructure.
The United States is still an attractive market for
investments, but to the extent the Government increases risks,
the United States becomes less attractive.
According to the World Economic Forum's global competitive
report, the U.S., which long held the top global position, has
continued its three year decline, and now holds fifth place.
Two of the factors cited for this decline were a reduction
in the transparency of Government policy making and second, the
increase in burdensome regulations.
When a Government agency takes unprecedented action to
attempt to revoke a legal permit issued by another agency, this
action sends a message to the entire business community that it
cannot count on the Government permits.
Businesses of all sizes are not asking for no regulations,
they are asking for transparent and enduring regulations upon
which they can make decisions on investments.
It would require a process that makes sense, a process that
has clear time frames, and a process where once a decision is
made, it is honored and its investments can go forward and hire
people.
Without such confidence, capital will go elsewhere, and
that undermines not only our competitiveness but the ability to
get America back on its feet and Americans back to work.
Fortunately, the U.S. system still has checks and balances,
and in this case, the system worked.
Judge Amy Jackson issued a striking rebuke to the EPA's
overreach. She called the EPA's interpretation illogical,
impractical, refers to the logic as ``magical thinking,'' and
noted ``It is unreasonable to sew a lack of certainty into a
system that was expressly intended to provide finality.''
At the onset of this case, the EPA sought to silence its
critics, including the Chamber, by objecting to the very filing
of our brief. Now the Court has ruled against EPA but EPA
continues, and it is troubling to waste the taxpayers' dollars
to defend an indefensible policy that is transparently bad for
the economy and inconsistent with the principles of law.
Business can and should adhere to laws and regulations
governing its industry, but we need to know the rules of the
road and the regulators have an obligation to provide a clear
and transparent process to follow.
Congress and the judicial system must ensure that EPA
exercises only the authority it has and not the authority it
wishes it has, nothing less, or the integrity of our commercial
economy is at stake.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Harbert follows:]

Statement of Karen A. Harbert, President & Chief Executive Officer,
Institute for 21st Century Energy, U.S. Chamber of Commerce

Thank you, Chairman Lamborn, Ranking Member Holt, and members of
the Committee. I am Karen Harbert, President and CEO of the Institute
for 21st Century Energy (Institute), an affiliate of the U.S. Chamber
of Commerce. The U.S. Chamber of Commerce is the world's largest
business federation, representing the interests of more than three
million businesses and organizations of every size, sector and region.
The mission of the Institute is to unify policymakers, regulators,
business leaders, and the American public behind common sense energy
strategy to help keep America secure, prosperous, and clean. In that
regard we hope to be of service to this Committee, this Congress as a
whole, and the administration.
I appreciate this opportunity to discuss the Spruce No. 1 mine
(Spruce Mine) permit revocation and the potential impact to capital
investment and jobs. First, I would like to clarify that this is not
about mining, and specifically whether strip mining should be permitted
under federal law. This is not about whether coal which supplies 40
percent of our electricity should or shouldn't be part of our energy
mix. This case is about the rule of law and regulatory certainty and
the type of regulatory regime that the law allows for and that we wish
to have in the United States. Even more fundamentally, the outcome of
this case will signal whether America is open for business and safe for
long term investment.
One of our great strengths as a country is how we hold the rule of
law sacrosanct coupled with a regulatory system with appropriate checks
and balances to protect the regulated. If we were to move to a system
embodied by the Environmental Protection Agency's (EPA) action in the
Spruce Mine case, hundreds of projects and businesses in America today
could question whether they too might retroactively have their lawful
permits revoked or recaptured. New projects will have to determine how
to calculate risks associated with changing viewpoints at a future
point from a regulatory agency. This will reduce and delay a broad
range of projects, increase the cost of doing business, and reduce the
number of jobs at a time when job creation is most critical. The
Chamber supports environmental safeguards and clear standards that are
applied consistently to all businesses. But just as businesses must be
accountable for the decisions they make, government must honor the
decisions that it makes and operate within the laws established by
Congress.
Furthermore, a clear, transparent, and predictable regulatory
system is not only valuable to business, but furthers the protection of
the environment. When business is provided with the certainty to know
what is necessary for compliance, it can be a valuable partner in
environmental stewardship.
Background and Timeline
The Spruce Creek mine was granted a surface mining permit in 1998
by the State of West Virginia under the Surface Mining Control and
Reclamation Act (SMCRA). At the same time permits were pursued under
section 402 of the Clean Water Act (NPDES) and under section 404 of the
Clean Water Act (dredge and fill). The initial section 404 permit was
withdrawn by the Army Corps of Engineers (Corps) because a Federal
Court found that an Environmental Impact Statement (EIS) was required.
EPA commented on a preliminary draft EIS in August 2001 and the draft
EIS in August 2002. In both cases EPA expressed concerns, but committed
to work with the Corps to develop an environmentally acceptable
project. In 2006, the Corps published the draft EIS and final EIS, and
EPA submitted comments in both processes. After further consultation
with EPA, the Corps issued the section 404 permit for the Spruce Mine
in January 2007.
Please note that the section 404 permit, which is required to begin
operations at the Spruce Mine, was issued eight years after the initial
mining permit. Before the initial mining permit was issued, the owner
made significant investments to acquire the rights to develop the mine
and the necessary engineering work to determine the feasibility of the
project. Significant investment was also required to complete the
permitting process which ultimately took 10 years to complete. Much of
this investment remains stranded today as the company battles in court
to defend its right to use the very permit one agency of this
government issued and another agency of the same government
subsequently revoked.
Almost two years after the Corps granted the section 404 permit,
EPA requested the Corps suspend, revoke, or modify the permit in such a
way that would prevent the discharge of dredge or fill as allowed by
the permit. The Corps declined EPA's request. In March 2010, EPA took
the unprecedented action of withdrawing or restricting specifications
in the section 404 permit which would have the impact of revoking, or
retroactively vetoing, the lawful permit issued by the Corps.
This is a very short summary of a long and complex regulatory
record. The key point is that even with the current regulatory process,
there is significant investment risk because of the complexity, long
permit processing times, and potential challenges and litigation.
Adding an arbitrary and capricious and completely unpredictable risk of
a permit being revoked or withdrawn after it is issued, greatly
increases the challenge of securing capital for any project subject to
this process.
Economic Impact of Greater Regulatory Uncertainty
When the risks of a project increase, investors expect a higher
return. Therefore, fewer projects meet the return on investment
criteria to support funding. These risks can be in the form of many
different project impacts, but regulatory risk is clearly one of those
criteria. An economic analysis of the Spruce Mine and the broader
economic impact of EPA's action was prepared by Professor David Sunding
of UC Berkley and The Brattle Group to support a multi-industry amicus
curiae brief filed in support of the lawsuit challenging EPA's action.
The analysis is attached as an appendix. The conclusion of that
analysis provides a good summary of the economic impact:
Conclusions
The EPA's precedential decision to revoke a valid discharge
permit will have a chilling effect on investment across a broad
swath of the American economy. Activities ranging from
residential and commercial development, roads, renewable
energy, and other projects rely on discharge authorization
under Section 404 of the Clean Water Act. These activities
provide needed infrastructure, housing, and other services, and
are a significant part of the annual value of economic activity
in the country. They also generate hundreds of thousands of
jobs nationwide, and stimulate economic activities in support
sectors.

The types of projects that require discharge permits are
usually capital intensive and involve irreversible investments,
meaning that the project proponent cannot recoup costs if the
necessary authorization is revoked by the EPA. Revoking
discharge permits introduces two essential market distortions:
(i) revoking permits raises hurdle rates among private
investors; and (ii) revoking permits reduces the expected
benefit-cost ratio of new projects. These effects are likely to
dampen investment rates in industries relying on discharge
permits, both by delaying and by deterring new projects from
being built. Importantly, I show that even small changes in the
probability of ex post revocation can have a large effect on
project investment.
To give a sense of the scale and magnitude of industries that are
put at risk by this EPA action, the Army Corps of Engineers issues
approximately 60,000 discharge permits annually under section 404 of
the CWA, and estimates that over $220 billion of investment annually is
conditioned on the issuance of these permits. If the investment is
conditioned on the permit and the permit is subjected to potential
future arbitrary and capricious treatment, it is clear that the result
will be significantly reduced capital investment. It is because of
actions like EPA's that regulatory uncertainty has risen to a level
that many economists estimate some $2 trillion dollars have been
``sidelined'' instead of being invested and catalyzing economic growth
and job creation.
While it is never a good time to unnecessarily restrict investment,
it is doubly so during a time when the economy is struggling. We need
productive, effective, and environmentally sound investments to create
jobs. In almost ten years of review, EPA did not identify a need to
withhold approval of the Spruce No. 1 mine when it had the opportunity
and legal ability to do so. Attempting to withdraw their approval and
retroactively veto the permit almost two years after issuance not only
causes immediate economic loss to the mine owner and workers employed
to support the mine, but also creates a substantial negative economic
and chilling impact on the economy by setting a precedent that section
404 permits can be revoked post hoc or changed at will. This
uncertainty has a direct and lasting impact of increasing the risk for
all projects that require a section 404 permit.
This is not just a matter for mining or energy projects, but
impacts industry broadly including both public infrastructure projects
and private industry. As noted by Dr. Sunding, these impacts touch a
significant component of the economy; including, residential and
commercial development, roads, renewable energy and other projects. A
reduction or constriction on investment has a direct impact in limiting
job growth. With an unemployment rate of 8.1 percent, we must ensure
that government is not restricting job growth.
Will the U.S. remain a low risk investment destination?
According to the World Economic Forum's Global Competitiveness
Report 2011-12, the U.S., which long held the top global position as an
attractive investment destination, has continued its three year decline
and now holds fifth place. Two of the factors cited as reasons for this
decline were a reduction in the transparency of government policymaking
and the increase in burdensome regulation.
Some of the risks and uncertainties evaluated as part of an
investment decision process include risks regarding the business
opportunity, commodity prices, and cost management risks. These are
just a few of the considerations. Components of risk analysis also
include legal, regulatory and government related risks. Historically,
the U.S. has had low government or sovereign risk because of the strong
rule of law and consistent regulatory systems. This is in contrast to
many countries around the world in which the regulatory processes and
contract terms are subject to change when the government changes or
when one government or bureaucrat changes its mind. The United States
is still an attractive market for investment, but to the extent that
government increases risk, the United States becomes less attractive
than other potential investment markets.
It is not just the regulatory risk but the accumulation of risks
for a given project, including other issues such as tax policy, which
can increase the perception of sovereign risk. When a U.S. government
agency takes unprecedented action to revoke a lawful permit issued by
another government agency, this action sends a message to all
businesses that government approvals may not be honored.
Businesses of all sizes are not asking for no regulation, they are
asking for transparent and enduring regulations upon which they can
make decisions and investments against a backdrop of certainty. Simply
put, a process that makes sense. A process that has clear time frames.
A process where once a decision is made a business and its investors
can trust the decision will be honored. Without such confidence,
capital will go elsewhere and that undermines not only our
competitiveness but the ability to get Americans back to work and the
economy on its feet. This is not a one-off problem but a long term
challenge to our economic system that we must face head on.
Spruce Mine Case--United States District Court
Fortunately the legal system has provided review and emphatically
stopped EPA's unprecedented attempt to retroactively veto a legally
issued section 404 permit. On March 23, 2012, Judge Amy Berman Jackson
of the United States District Court for the District of Columbia issued
a holding that EPA exceeded its authority by issuing its Final
Determination on January 13, 2010, purporting to modify Mingo Logan's
section 404 permit for the Spruce Mine.
Judge Jackson specifically states: ``First and foremost, EPA's
interpretation fails because it is illogical and impractical. . ..EPA
resorts to magical thinking. . ..Not only is this non-revocation
revocation logically complicated, but the possibility that it could
happen would leave permittees in the untenable position of being unable
to rely upon the sole statutory touchstone for measuring Clean Water
Act compliance: the permit.''
Judge Jackson also states: ``It is further unreasonable to sow a
lack of certainty into a system that was expressly intended to provide
finality. . .the concerns the amici raise supply additional grounds for
finding EPA's interpretation to be unreasonable.''
Judge Jackson also makes specific reference to the importance of
the broad implications of the EPA action. This reference acknowledges
the concerns and impacts presented by the broad based coalition of
business groups presented in our amicus brief.
The Administration went so far to avoid having these broader
implications considered that they petitioned the court to preclude this
information from consideration by objecting to the filing of the brief.
Judge Jackson rightfully denied EPA's attempt to squelch the voice of
the broader business community.
Judge Jackson's opinion is unlikely to be the final word on this
issue. The EPA has already notified the court that it intends to appeal
the decision. It is troubling that the EPA intends to devote even more
resources further defending an indefensible policy that is so
transparently bad for the economy and so inconsistent with the
principles of rule of law and regulatory consistency. And defending
that policy after such a strong rebuke from Judge Jackson.
Summary
Again, I would like to highlight that this issue is not about
whether one is for or against mountain top mining. This is about an
Agency abusing its authority. This action has sent signals to the
broadest set of industries that build the things in this country that
keep our economy moving. The issue is regulatory certainty--ensuring
that the United States maintains a clear, transparent, and predictable
regulatory system for a permitting process that is essential for almost
every significant project and a large part of the economy. This is a
system that Congress envisioned would provide finality to the
regulatory process so business can move forward to make investments and
grow the economy.
In conclusion, I cannot over estimate the potential impact if EPA's
unlawful action remains. As stated earlier, the Corps estimates that
approximately $220 billion in annual investment is contingent on
section 404 permits. The Brattle Group in their economic analysis
estimates that every billion dollars of construction spending generates
16,000 to 18,000 jobs. The process that resulted in the permit of the
Spruce Mine adhered to the law even if it took eight long years. If
that lawful process can be upended, the reverberations through the
economy will be real: restricting, postponing or eliminating investment
and jobs. Making infrastructure projects riskier in the U.S. makes them
less likely to happen and more costly to the consumer and taxpayer.
That is not the foundation for a competitive 21st century economy.
Business can and should adhere to laws and regulations governing
its industry. Business needs to know the rules of the road and
regulators need to provide a clear, transparent, timely, and fair
regulatory process to follow. America's private sector needs the type
of clarity to make investment decisions that EPA's retroactive veto of
the Spruce Mine just undercut.
Effective and consistent environmentally regulatory management is
good for business and good for the environment. In the case of section
404 permits, Congress provided clear direction to EPA. EPA must follow
that direction and Congress and our judicial system must ensure they
do.
[NOTE: The attachment has been retained in the Committee's official
files.]
______

Mr. Lamborn. Thank you for your testimony, Ms. Harbert. Mr.
Eisenberg, you may begin.

STATEMENT OF ROSS EISENBERG, VICE PRESIDENT, ENERGY AND
RESOURCES POLICY, NATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF MANUFACTURERS

Mr. Eisenberg. Good morning, Chairman Lamborn, Ranking
Member Holt, and members of the Subcommittee.
My name is Ross Eisenberg. I am Vice President of Energy
and Resources Policy at the National Association of
Manufacturers.
I am very pleased to come before the Subcommittee today to
discuss Mingo Logan Coal Company's Spruce Mine, and a Section
404 permit, and what the retroactive veto of that permit did
and the impact that had on manufacturers.
In order to drive our nation's economic recovery,
manufacturers really need predictability from the regulatory
process. They must understand the rules of the road so they can
make responsible, informed investment decisions.
This lack of predictability is precisely the problem with
the Spruce Mine case that we are here discussing today, and it
is the main reason that the NAM and other organizations found
it so necessary to enter this litigation against EPA and in
support of Mingo Logan.
The Spruce Mine veto was at its core a $250 million
decision by EPA that created a $220 billion problem. Let's talk
first about the $250 million.
Arch Coal, the parent of Mingo Logan, planned to commit
more than $250 million and create at least 250 new well paying
jobs in Logan County, West Virginia.
Obviously, this project matters there, and you have heard
that today from the State Senator.
About that $220 billion problem, as Ms. Harbert noted
before me, the Corps estimates that it issues roughly 60,000
discharge permits annually under Section 404, and more than
$220 billion of investment annually conditioned on the issuance
of these permits.
This includes pipelines, transmission lines, construction,
renewable energy, transportation infrastructure, agriculture,
and many other sectors.
For as long as the Clean Water Act has been in existence,
the exclusive framework under which Section 404 permits might
be modified has been the Army Corps' regulations.
EPA's retroactive veto of the Spruce Mine permit introduced
for each of these sectors a completely new and undefined threat
to their permits.
EPA's decision would have made it significantly more
difficult for project developers to rely on essential 404
permits when making investment, hiring or development
decisions. Project developers would now have to account for the
possibility of having the rug pulled out from under them after
work on the project had been initiated.
EPA's retroactive veto brought with it significant
investment uncertainty that would inevitably translate into
higher risk of borrowing, less investment, lost jobs, and
slower growth throughout the U.S. economy.
The precedent set by the Spruce Mine case is a serious
threat to manufacturers in its own right. It is only a small
part of a broader new set of water policies being pursued by
the EPA that have manufacturers concerned.
EPA appears to be testing the outer boundaries of its
authority under the Clean Water Act. For instance, EPA right
now is on the verge of issuing final guidance that drastically
expands its jurisdiction under the Clean Water Act.
Manufacturers are concerned that the guidance is
legislative in nature and could significantly impact regulatory
certainty by suggesting a wide range of traditionally
intrastate waters to Clean Water Act jurisdiction and
permitting.
Moreover, by doing this dramatic policy shift through
guidance rather than by regulations or the regulatory process,
manufacturers feel that EPA is circumventing a lot of the built
in regulatory safeguards in the regulatory process to protect
the regulatory community, such as economic impact statements,
job loss analyses, and considerations of impacts to small
businesses.
In addition, EPA is also on the verge of taking another 404
veto action on the heels of its loss in this, the Spruce Mine
case.
This time, EPA actually appears likely to issue a
preemptive veto for the Pebble Project, a proposed copper and
gold mine in Alaska.
If that project were to move forward, it could attract
several billion dollars of investment and countless
manufacturing jobs. EPA has taken the position that it can say
no to this project even before the application for a permit has
been filed.
I would like to conclude by saying that it is very clear
from this case and other water cases that EPA is involved in
that it is uncomfortable with the scope of its authority under
the Clean Water Act. It clearly wants more.
By trying to get more through questionable regulatory
decisions such as this one, EPA is causing a great deal of
uncertainty that goes well beyond the specific project or
projects that it seeks to regulate.
It is also ensuring frankly that most of its decisions will
be subject to litigation and like Spruce Mine, potentially
overturned.
EPA's goal should not be to issue the most aggressive
possible water regulations that might theoretically survive
judicial scrutiny, it should be to carry out the intent of
Congress to restore and maintain the chemical, physical and
biological integrity of the nation's waters, as set forth in
the plain language of the Clean Water Act.
If EPA wants or needs additional regulatory authority,
well, is that not why we have Congress?
EPA should be here asking Congress for this authority and
Congress should debate the merits of such a decision.
Manufacturers need predictability from the regulatory
process, a proper system of checks and balances will ensure
that the Spruce Mine veto and the uncertainty it caused will
not happen again.
Thank you for allowing me to testify here today. I look
forward to any questions you might have.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Eisenberg follows:]

Statement of Ross Eisenberg, Vice President,
Energy and Resources Policy, National Association of Manufacturers

Good morning, Chairman Lamborn, Ranking Member Holt, and members of
the Subcommittee on Energy and Mineral Resources. My name is Ross
Eisenberg, and I am vice president of energy and resources policy at
the National Association of Manufacturers (NAM). I am pleased to come
before the Subcommittee today to discuss Mingo Logan Coal Company's
Spruce Mine No. 1, its Clean Water Act (CWA) Section 404 permit, and
the impact the Environmental Protection Agency's (EPA) retroactive veto
of that permit had on manufacturers. On behalf of the NAM and its
members, I thank you for the opportunity to testify here today.
The NAM is the nation's largest industrial trade association,
representing small and large manufacturers in every industrial sector
and in all 50 states. Its membership includes both large multinational
corporations and small and medium-sized manufacturers. Manufacturers
are major energy consumers, using one-third of the energy consumed in
the United States. Manufacturers, therefore, strongly support an ``all-
of-the-above'' energy strategy that embraces all forms of domestic
energy production, including oil, gas, nuclear, energy efficiency,
alternative fuels, renewable energy sources and the natural resource at
the center of the Spruce Mine controversy: coal.
Coal is one of the nation's most abundant energy resources and a
vital part of our efforts to meet our energy and transportation needs.
Coal generates a significant percentage of our nation's electricity,
and maintaining coal in a diverse national energy portfolio is in the
national economic interest. The NAM believes environmental policies
should be reviewed and applied in a manner that balances reasonable
environmental objectives with the need to have a diverse fuel
portfolio, including continued cost-effective coal use.
It is no secret that the past few years have brought with them a
flurry of new regulations on the coal industry. These regulations
impose new controls on virtually every part of the coal-fired
electricity supply chain, from mining to use to waste disposal. They
each bring with them a cost, which mining companies, electric utilities
and end users (and employees of each) must absorb. While the costs of
many of these new regulations have been substantial, equally difficult
has been the uncertainty that each potential new regulation brings,
along with concerns over what might be next and whether proposed or
existing requirements will change.
In order to drive our nation's economic recovery, manufacturers
need predictability from the regulatory process. They must understand
the ``rules of the road'' so they can make responsible, informed
investment decisions. Lack of predictability is precisely the problem
with the Spruce Mine case and is the main reason the NAM and so many
other organizations found it necessary to enter the litigation against
the EPA and in support of Mingo Logan.
I. History of the Spruce Mine Section 404 Permit
The Spruce Mine controversy dates back to 1997, when Mingo Logan
applied with the West Virginia Department of the Environment (WVDEP)
for a permit under the Surface Mining Control and Reclamation Act.
WVDEP issued the permit on November 4, 1998. Mingo Logan also applied
to WVDEP in late 1997 for a National Pollutant Discharge Elimination
System (NPDES) permit under Section 402 of the CWA. The EPA opposed
issuance of the NPDES permit unless certain conditions were met, one of
which being that Mingo Logan secure a dredge-and-fill permit from the
Army Corps of Engineers (Corps) under Section 404 of the CWA.
Mingo Logan first applied for its Section 404 permit in 1998, as
part of Nationwide Permit 21. In 1999, the Corps found that Mingo Logan
had satisfied Section 404 as part of its Nationwide Permit application.
However, before the Corps could issue its final approval, a federal
court enjoined the approval as part of a series of legal challenges to
Nationwide Permit 21. On June 18, 1999, Mingo Logan decided to apply
instead for an individual permit under Section 404(a). The Corps
commenced a full environmental impact statement (EIS) under the
National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA). WVDEP issued a Section 401
water quality certification for the Spruce Mine Section 404 permit on
December 19, 2005. The Corps issued a 1,600-page Draft EIS for the
project on March 31, 2006. Mingo Logan, WVDEP and the Corps conducted
extensive environmental analysis throughout the permitting process,
including volumes of documents analyzing the impact on macro-
invertebrates, fish, birds, salamanders and other wildlife.
The Corps issued Mingo Logan a final Section 404 permit for the
Spruce Mine on January 22, 2007. The permit authorizes Mingo Logan to
discharge dredged or fill material into 8.11 acres of ephemeral and
intermittent streams within the mine site in exchange for significant
on-site mitigation measures.
On the assumption the project would move forward, Arch Coal, parent
of Mingo Logan, planned to commit more than $250 million and create at
least 250 new, well-paying jobs in Logan County, West Virginia. These
are 250 badly needed jobs in Logan County, where only 39.5 percent of
the county's 36,743 residents are employed and 56.6 percent are what
the U.S. Census considers ``not in the labor force.'' Median household
income in Logan County is $35,465, and 21.8 percent of the people
residing there live below the poverty level. About 15 percent of Logan
County's workforce is employed in agriculture, forestry, fishing,
hunting and mining industries. Add the 250 employees from the Spruce
Mine project, and that number grows to 17 percent.
Prior to issuance of the Section 404 permit, the EPA took no steps
under CWA Section 404(c) to prohibit the specification of disposal
sites in the proposed permit. The EPA wrote to the Corps: ``We have no
intention of taking our Spruce Mine concerns any further from a Section
404 standpoint.'' The mitigation plan required by the permit included
comments by the EPA. The permit itself mentioned nothing about the
EPA's ability to suspend, modify or revoke it.
As has become common practice for any large project with a federal
nexus, several groups challenged the Corps' issuance of a final permit
in 2007. It was only after this litigation had been resolved by the
U.S. Court of Appeals for the Fourth Circuit--in Mingo Logan's favor,
no less--the EPA first asked the Corps to revoke, suspend or modify the
Section 404 permit, claiming concerns about ``the project's potential
to degrade downstream water quality.'' The Corps asked WVDEP for
comment, and WVDEP replied that it saw no reason to take such action as
the project was in compliance. On September 30, 2009, the Corps
announced that it would not revoke, suspend or modify Spruce Mine's
Section 404 permit.
It was at this point that the EPA did something highly unusual--
something, in fact, it had never done before in the history of the CWA.
The EPA retroactively vetoed Spruce Mine's Section 404 permit. The EPA
announced its notice of intent to veto the permit on March 26, 2010; on
January 13, 2011, the EPA issued the final veto. Because the Corps is
the only agency with statutory authority to revoke, suspend or modify a
Section 404 permit, the EPA instead withdrew the specification of
certain areas defined by the Corps as disposal sites under Section
404(c), something the EPA viewed as available to it by language
contained in the statute. But the EPA admitted that by withdrawing the
specification, it was in effect vetoing the Section 404 permit.
Mingo Logan challenged the EPA's retroactive veto in the U.S.
District Court for the District of Columbia. The NAM and several other
industry associations filed amicus curiae briefs in support of Mingo
Logan. On March 23, 2012, Judge Amy Berman Jackson held the EPA
exceeded its authority under Section 404(c) and vacated the EPA's
retroactive veto decision. The EPA recently announced its intent to
appeal the decision to the U.S. Court of Appeals for the District of
Columbia Circuit.
II. Impact of the EPA's Retroactive Veto on Manufacturing
The NAM filed an amicus curiae brief in support of Mingo Logan's
legal challenge to the EPA's Section 404 permit veto. The NAM made the
decision to enter the case because the EPA's retroactive veto sent
shockwaves through a wide range of manufacturing sectors, many of whom
are members of the NAM.
The Corps estimates it issues roughly 60,000 discharge permits
annually under Section 404, and that more than $220 billion of
investment annually is conditioned on the issuance of these discharge
permits. Projects permitted under Section 404 include pipeline and
electric transmission and distribution; housing and commercial
development; renewable energy projects like wind, solar and biomass;
transportation infrastructure including roads and rail; agriculture;
and many others.
For as long as the CWA has been in existence, the exclusive
framework under which Section 404 permits might be altered or amended
has been the Corps' regulations governing suspension, modification and
revocation (33 C.F.R. Sec. 325.7). The EPA's retroactive veto of the
Spruce Mine permit introduced for each of those sectors a completely
new and undefined threat to their permits. As Judge Berman Jackson
wrote:
EPA claims that it is not revoking a permit--something it does
not have the authority to do--because it is only withdrawing a
specification. Yet EPA simultaneously insists that its
withdrawal of the specification effectively nullifies the
permit. To explain how this would be accomplished in the
absence of any statutory provision or even any regulation that
details the effect that EPA's belated action would have on an
existing permit, EPA resorts to magical thinking. It posits a
scenario involving the automatic self-destruction of a written
permit issued by an entirely separate federal agency after
years of study and consideration. Poof! Not only is this
nonrevocation revocation logistically complicated, but the
possibility that it could happen would leave permittees in the
untenable position of being unable to rely upon the sole
statutory touchstone for measuring their Clean Water Act
compliance: the permit.
Judge Berman Jackson found this argument particularly persuasive when
made by the NAM and other amici. She continued:
It is further unreasonable to sow a lack of certainty into a
system that was expressly intended to provide finality. Indeed,
this concern prompted a number of amici to take up their pens
and submit briefs to the Court. They argued that eliminating
finality from the permitting process would have a significant
economic impact on the construction industry, the mining
industry, and other ``aggregate operators,'' because lenders
and investors would be less willing to extend credit and
capital if every construction project involving waterways could
be subject to an open-ended risk of cancellation. See Brief of
Amicus Curiae The National Stone, Sand and Gravel Association
in Supp. of Pl. Mingo Logan Coal Co., Inc. at 5-13; Brief of
Amici Curiae the Chamber of Commerce of the United States et
al. in Support of Pl. at 7-14. EPA brushed these objections
away by characterizing them as hyperbole, Tr. at 66, but even
if the gloomy prophesies are somewhat overstated, the concerns
the amici raise supply additional grounds for a finding EPA's
interpretation to be unreasonable.
For the vast majority of these industries, there is no way to
reconfigure a project to avoid the need for a Section 404 permit. The
EPA's retroactive veto brought with it significant investment
uncertainty with respect to currently held permits and permits to be
acquired in the future. Inevitably, that uncertainty would translate
into higher risks in borrowing, less investment, lost jobs and slower
growth throughout the U.S. economy.
The NAM documented the effect of this uncertainty on investment in
an exhibit to its amicus curiae brief, a report by Dr. David Sunding,
Professor in the Department of Agricultural and Resource Economics at
the University of California, Berkeley. Dr. Sunding concluded that the
EPA's after-the-fact veto of the Spruce Mine permit makes it more
difficult for project developers to rely on essential 404 permits when
making investment, hiring or development decisions, and project
developers must now account for the possibility of losing essential
discharge authorization after work on the project has been initiated.
Dr. Sunding wrote:
The EPA's precedential decision to revoke a valid discharge
authorization alters the incentives to invest in projects
requiring a permit under Section 404. Project development
usually requires significant capital expenditure over a
sustained period of time, after which the project generates
some return. Actions like the EPA's that increase uncertainty,
raise the threshold for any private or public entity to
undertake the required early-stage investment. For this reason,
the EPA's action has a chilling effect on investment in
activities requiring a 404 authorization across a broad range
of markets. Increasing the level of uncertainty can also reduce
investment by making it more difficult to obtain project
financing. Land development activities, infrastructure projects
and the like often require a significant level of capital
formation. Reducing the reliability of the Section 404 permit
will make it harder for project proponents to find financing at
attractive rates as lenders and bondholders will require higher
interest rates to compensate for increased risk, and some
credit rationing may also result.
Dr. Sunding explained that economically rational investors will not
merely make investment decisions based on a simple benefit-cost ratio
but will instead calculate the ``hurdle rate,'' the expected rate of
return necessary for the project's benefits to exceed its actual costs.
The greater the risk, the higher the hurdle rate; the higher the hurdle
rate, the more likely the project will be delayed or deterred. Prior to
the Spruce Mine veto, Section 404 applicants did not need to include in
their hurdle rate calculations the possibility the EPA will revoke
their permit. By retroactively vetoing Spruce Mine, the EPA introduced
a new risk that causes a distortion in the benefit-cost ratio for new
investment projects.
Because the court vacated the EPA's Spruce Mine veto, the fallout
from its decision has been avoided--temporarily. The EPA recently
decided to appeal Judge Berman Jackson's decision to vacate its
retroactive veto. In doing so, the EPA has decided that continuing the
battle on Spruce Mine is worth causing regulatory uncertainty for the
$220 billion in annual investment that relies on Section 404 permits.
III. Spruce Mine as an Indicator of Future EPA Water Policy
The precedent set by the Spruce Mine case is a serious threat to
manufacturers on its own. However, it is only a small part of a broad
new set of water policies being pursued by the EPA that have
manufacturers concerned. The EPA appears to be testing the boundaries
of its regulatory authority under the CWA.
A. Waters of the United States
On May 2, 2011, the EPA and the Corps issued ``Guidance Regarding
Identification of Waters Protected by the Clean Water Act.'' The 39-
page guidance was prepared for agency field staff to use in identifying
``waters of the United States'' subject to CWA regulation. The EPA and
the Corps routinely lament that recent Supreme Court jurisprudence has
made it difficult for the agencies to determine what rivers and streams
are subject to their jurisdiction. The 110th and 111th Congresses
debated, but did not pass, legislation that would delete the term
``navigable'' from the phrase ``navigable waters'' as that phrase is
used to define CWA jurisdiction.
When the 112th Congress began, the EPA chose to forego legislation
and instead issued the aforementioned ``waters of the United States''
guidance. The EPA's guidance, among other things:

Expands the scope of the term ``traditional navigable
waters'' to now cover any body of water that can support
waterborne recreational use, even if such use only occurred one
time for the sole purpose of demonstrating that the water could
be used for recreation;

Regulates all roadside and agricultural ditches that
have a channel, have an ordinary high watermark and can meet
one of five characteristics (two of the five characteristics
include a ditch that has ``standing water,'' or a ditch that
drains a ``natural water body'');

Applies a broadened view of Justice Kennedy's
significant nexus standard not only to wetlands (as Kennedy
did) but also to tributaries and isolated waters;

Finds that a hydrological connection is not necessary
to establish a significant nexus;

Allows the agencies to ``aggregate'' the
contributions of all similar waters (small streams, adjacent
wetlands, ditches or certain otherwise isolated waters) within
an entire watershed, thus making it far easier to establish a
significant nexus between these small intrastate waters and
traditional navigable waters;

Gives new and expanded regulatory status to
``interstate waters,'' equating them with traditional navigable
waters, thus making it easier to find jurisdiction for adjacent
wetlands and waters judged by the significant nexus test; and,

Makes all waters not in any of the other categories
(also known as the ``other waters'') subject to the significant
nexus standard. According to the agencies' economic analysis,
these other waters were previously assumed ``non-
jurisdictional.''
The EPA has sent final ``waters of the United States'' guidance to
the White House Office of Management and Budget for review and
approval. Manufacturers are concerned that the guidance is legislative
in nature and could reduce regulatory certainty by subjecting a wide
range of traditionally intrastate waters to CWA jurisdiction and
permitting. Moreover, by issuing this dramatic policy shift as guidance
instead of a regulation, the EPA and the Corps are circumventing many
safeguards built into the regulatory process to protect the regulated
community, such as economic impact statements, job loss analyses and
considerations of impacts to small businesses.
B. Preemptive 404 Veto Threats
The EPA argued in the Spruce Mine case that the phrase ``whenever''
in CWA Section 404(c) gives it the freedom to withdraw a specification
at any given time. Unless the Spruce Mine case is reversed, the law now
holds that ``whenever'' does not include an after-the-fact, retroactive
veto. However, the EPA is in the midst of lining up its first
preemptive veto under Section 404(c), based again on the Agency's
controversial interpretation of the word ``whenever.'' This preemptive
veto appears likely for the Pebble Project, a proposed copper and gold
mine in southwestern Alaska. In that case, investors have spent nearly
$500 million defining a copper deposit, engineering a possible mine and
collecting scientific information to try to comply with all of the
federal environmental laws so that the Pebble Project can begin the
federal NEPA process. If the project were to move forward, it could
attract several billions of dollars in investment and countless
manufacturing jobs.
However, the EPA appears poised to issue a preemptive 404(c) veto,
taking the position that it can withdraw certain areas from being
specified for dredge-and-fill permits even before a permit application
has been filed. While the EPA has not yet taken this step, it is
performing a watershed assessment of ecological risk for the area
surrounding the Pebble Project and has not closed the door to a
possible preemptive veto of CWA permits for the mine. Environmental
groups have already begun calling for a similar assessment of mining
activity in the Great Lakes region.
IV. Conclusion: The EPA and the Corps Should Look to Congress to Solve
Water Policy Challenges
It is clear from the Spruce Mine case and other recent water
actions that the EPA is uncomfortable with the scope of its authority
under the CWA. However, by testing the boundaries of this authority
through preemptive and retroactive permit decisions and jurisdictional
guidance, the EPA is causing a great deal of uncertainty for
manufacturers. It is changing the aforementioned ``hurdle rate''
substantially, distorting the cost-benefit ratio for new projects and
creating additional risks to investment for the wide range of sectors
subject to the CWA. It is also virtually ensuring every single one of
its decisions will be subject to litigation (and, like Spruce Mine,
potentially overturned).
The EPA should not strive to issue the most aggressive possible
water regulations that could survive judicial scrutiny. Rather, it
should be to carry out the intent of Congress to restore and maintain
the chemical, physical and biological integrity of the nation's waters,
as set forth in plain language of the CWA. To the extent the EPA wants
or needs additional regulatory authority, it should request that
Congress enact legislation to provide this authority, and Congress
should debate the merits of such a decision. Manufacturers need
predictability from the regulatory process. A proper system of checks
and balances will ensure the Spruce Mine veto and the uncertainty it
caused will not happen again.
______

Mr. Lamborn. Thank you for your testimony, Mr. Eisenberg.
We will now hear from Ms. Gunnoe.

STATEMENT OF MARIA GUNNOE, BOONE COUNTY,
WEST VIRGINIA ORGANIZER

Ms. Gunnoe. I am Maria Gunnoe. I am from Boone County, West
Virginia, and I help to represent the Appalachian communities
where coal mining impacts are killing people and de-populating
our mountain culture.
I thank each of you for allowing me the opportunity to
speak to you again today.
I appreciate your obligations and responsibilities in
protecting and serving all U.S. citizens. My hope is that you
listen and hear the pleas for our lives in Southern Appalachia
where these atrocious mountaintop removal permits are
permitted.
The Spruce No. 1 permit is in the headwaters of Pigeon
Roost Creek, the stream and the people seem unimportant to most
people in this room, but to me and the people of Blair, this
stream is a part of our home.
When mountaintop removal is permitted near your home, you
will soon be forced to leave what is the birth place of your
family and your children's birth rights as heirs to your family
land. You are forced by destruction to leave the American dream
that our forefathers prepared and fought for.
Why is it acceptable to de-populate the communities and
culture, poison our water and air and leave us to die in a
post-mining wasteland for temporary jobs and energy?
You should ask yourselves are we knowingly and willingly
flipping on our lights and lining our pockets at the expense of
the lives, livelihood and health of the people in Appalachia.
The answer to this in my opinion is yes, you are.
The Spruce No. 1 permit is one of the first examples of the
steps that the EPA has taken to stop irresponsible mining
practices which were ignored during the Bush Administration.
People from all over Appalachia have lobbied the EPA for
these protections for the past 15 years. The coal industry was
allowed to do as they pleased during the eight years of the
Bush Administration.
In 2009, the Obama Administration took steps trying to fix
the problems that the Bush Administration created and then
ignored.
The coal industry has said that the EPA and the Obama
Administration are trying to shut down coal. The coal industry
is perpetuating a lie, that there is a war on coal, and that
coal mining jobs are under attack.
This is the same false crisis that is created by this
industry each time they do not get what they want.
According to recent reports by Ken Ward of the Charleston
Gazette, coal mining jobs have actually increased by 7.4
percent since 2009, when the Obama Administration took office.
Ted Boettner with the West Virginia Center of Budget and Policy
looked at mining jobs over the last two decades, annual West
Virginia coal mining jobs were higher in 2011 than any other
time in the last 17 years.
Quoting the title of Daniel Weiss' article on
Climateprogress.com, the ``War on Coal is a lie invented by the
coal industry. It is a multimillion misinformation campaign
funded by big coal polluters to distract Americans from the
deadly effects of coal's pollution on public health.''
There is a war in Appalachia, believe this. This war is not
on coal. This war is on the people of Appalachia. Coal is not
our king, God is. Coal is only the dictator of some.
Expanding any mountaintop removal including the Spruce No.
1 permit means the de-population of yet another mountain
community and sickening of the people who live in this
community.
How will this affect our culture? We will die as a culture
as we suffer with the inability to pass this mountain culture
onto our children.
Not even our historic mountain cemeteries are left intact
and accessible.
It is not as if this Committee, Congress, the coal
industry, and the Obama Administration does not know what
mountaintop removal is doing to people. They not only know
about it, but they are supporting it and allowing it by not
ending it.
After visiting the Central Appalachian communities, the
U.N. Women's Tribunal on Climate Change jurist recommendations
for Rio+20 included that mountaintop removal should immediately
be stopped with a moratorium on any mountaintop removal
operations until a full investigation can be undertaken.
Mountaintop removal cannot be silenced. The more people
that are impacted, the more that we will continue to stand up
to protect all that makes Appalachians free. We will not back
down. We know we are doing the right thing in ending this evil
that has come in to destroy our very existence.
We Appalachians for many years have lobbied the EPA to
enforce the laws that are intended to protect our lives.
The coal industry in Appalachia is anti-life and the
enforcement of laws is the only chance that we have to survive
as a culture.
My family first settled in this area during the forced
removal of the Cherokee known as the ``Trail of Tears.''
What the coal industry and our Government is doing to our
native communities in Southern Appalachia feels much like the
second silent forced removal of our people.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Gunnoe follows:]

Statement of Maria Gunnoe, Van, West Virginia

I am Maria Gunnoe from Boone County WV and I (like 100's of others)
help to represent the stories of the Appalachian Communities where coal
mining impacts are killing the people and depopulating our mountain
culture. Thank each of you for again allowing me the opportunity to
speak to you. I appreciate your obligations and responsibilities in
protecting and serving all US citizens. My hope is that you listen and
hear these pleas for our lives from the Southern Mountains of
Appalachia where these atrocious mountaintop removal permits are
operating.
The Spruce No. 1 permit is in the headwaters of Pigeon Roost creek.
This stream and the people of Blair seem unimportant to most people in
this room but to me and the people of Blair this stream is a part of
our home. When mountaintop removal is permitted near your home, you
will soon be forced to leave what is the birthplace of your family and
your children's birthrights as heirs to your family's land. You are
forced (by destruction) to leave the American dream that our
forefathers prepared and fought for. Why is it acceptable to depopulate
our communities and culture, poison our water and air and leave us to
die in a post mining waste land for temporary jobs and energy? You
should ask yourselves: are we knowingly and willingly flipping on our
lights and lining our pockets at the expense of the lives, livelihoods
and the health of the people in Appalachia? The answer to this in my
opinion is YES you are!
The Spruce No. 1 permit is one of the first examples of steps that
the EPA has taken to STOP irresponsible mining practices which were
ignored during the Bush Administration. People from all over Appalachia
have lobbied the EPA for these protections for the past 15 years.
During the Bush Administration the oversight of mountaintop removal
permits was non-existent. The Bush Administration sent word to W.Va
state Department of Environmental Protection Secretary Stephanie
Timmermyer to get these permits pushed through as quickly as possible,
In George Bush's words ``We need this coal, our homeland security
depends on it.'' The coal industry was allowed to do as they please
during the 8 years of the Bush Administration. Then in 2009, in steps
the Obama administration's EPA trying to fix the problems that the Bush
administration created and then ignored. One of the biggest problems
was the lack of enforcement of current regulations on mountaintop
removal operation in Appalachia. The coal industry was allowed to run
out of control in our mountains and depopulate many of our local
communities during this rush to get the coal. In response to this
insurgence by the coal industry, impacted community members organized
to stop the attack of this industry on us in our homes. The EPA heard
from us often and we appreciate that they are listening to the science.
We have organized meetings with the impacted community members so that
the representatives within the government agencies can see and hear the
people's pleas. Still, most of these decision makers walked away
thinking that there is some sort of balance to be found in blowing up
the mountains over our homes and shoving them into our streams. In
reality the fact is mountaintop removal is killing people. These facts
are out and available to anyone who wants to see them. Please
understand that the majority of people in Appalachia are against
mountaintop removal coal mining. The only ones who support it are the
ones who are making money from it. These are the ones that should be
made to live in our communities and suffer the consequences of their
actions. If you support mountaintop removal and what it is doing to us,
you are supporting the murder of the people of the Appalachian culture
that depends on these mountains and their waters for our very lives.
The coal industry has said that the EPA and the Obama
administration are ``trying to shut down coal.'' The coal industry is
perpetuating a lie that there is a ``war on coal'' and that coal mining
jobs are under attack. This is the same false crisis that is created by
this industry every time they don't get what they want. According to
recent reports by Ken Ward of the Charleston Gazette coal mining jobs
have increased by 7.4 percent since 2009 when the Obama Administration
took office. Ted Boettner with the WV Center for Budget and Policy
looked at mining jobs over the last two decades; annual West Virginia
coal mining employment was higher in 2011 than at any time over the
last 17 years, according to Workforce West Virginia. Quoting the title
and text of Daniel Weis's article on climateprogress.com ``The War on
Coal is a Lie invented by the coal industry. It is a multimillion
dollar misinformation campaign funded by big coal polluters to distract
Americans from the deadly effects of coals pollution on public
health.'' There is a war in Appalachia, do believe this. This war is
not on coal, coal jobs, or the coal industry. This war is on these
mountains, our water and the people who depend on it all. Coal is not
our King, God is! Coal is only the dictator of some.
Mountaintop removal is not only killing the people who work these
jobs but it is also killing the people who live in the surrounding
communities. Jobs in any region are important; however ALL of those
jobs need to be safe for the workers and for the communities that they
operate in. Mountaintop removal is NOT safe for anyone. Science has
repeatedly proven this. The facts that mountaintop removal is killing
us are in the 19 health studies that have been compiled. This
committee, Congress, the coal industry and the Obama administration
continue to ignore these studies and continue to allow the blowing up
of our mountains and poisoning of our waters and air to get to the coal
that currently powers about 44% of America's electricity.
Expanding any mtr mining including the Spruce No. 1 permit means
the depopulation of yet another mountain community and the sickening of
the people who live in these communities. Living this depopulation has
made me more aware of the large-scale impact of this ousting and
killing of people on the culture that I love. We will die as a culture
as we suffer with the inability to pass this mountain culture on to our
children. Not even our historic mountain cemeteries are left intact and
accessible. Our people are being mortally impacted by the fallout from
mountaintop removal coal mining in our water and air in our native
homes. Do we really need to prove that blowing up mountains over our
homes and pushing them into our streams is NOT good for us? It is not
as if this Committee, Congress and the coal industry doesn't know what
mountaintop removal does to people. They not only know about it but
they are supporting and allowing it and by not ending it. After
visiting the central Appalachian communities The UN Women's Tribunal on
climate change jurist recommendation will include that mountain removal
should be immediately stopped--an immediate moratorium on any removal
operations until a full investigation including health related disease
incidence rates can be undertaken.
I had hoped that the last time that I came to speak to this
committee that someone would have heard our pleas for our lives in
Appalachia but our pleas fell on the deaf ears of coal supporters. We
had to request that this committee post our comments on their website
for others to view days after the industry's comments were posted. We
were timed to the second on our comments, while pro coal supporters
were allowed to go minutes over their allotted time to speak.
Mountaintop removal cannot be silenced. The more people that are
impacted, the more that will continue to stand up to protect all that
makes us Appalachians FREE! We will not back down. We know we are doing
the right thing in ending this evil that has came in to destroy our
very existence. We Appalachians have for many years lobbied the EPA to
enforce the laws that are intended to protect our lives in our homes.
The coal industry in Appalachia is anti-life and the FIRM enforcement
of the laws are the only chance that we have of surviving as a culture
after this industry is gone.
Parts of my family first settled this area during the forced
removal of the Cherokee known as the ``Trail of Tears.'' What the coal
industry and our government is doing to our native communities in
Southern Appalachia feels much like the second silent forced removal of
our people.
A few notes from community members:

Selenium discharges downstream from Spruce No 1 are
already much higher than EPA standards according to recent water
testing. The Spruce 1 permit will allow more selenium to be released
into this stream. This is the making for life threatening levels of
selenium.

The community of Blair has NO municipal drinking water
available to them. The only water in these communities is the well
water which in some cases has already been polluted. The community of
Blair needs water infrastructure to supply their homes with healthy
water before any area permits are even discussed.

From what we see on the ground the coal companies have
already moved forward in preparing the permit area as if they had an
approved permit.

The Spruce permit is in the Coal River watershed.
Mountaintop removal is why American Rivers placed the Coal River on our
America's Most Endangered Rivers list this year--because the river is
at a decision point--not because it's the most polluted. We can save
these precious headwater streams that also serve as drinking water to
our communities but we must act now before it is too late.
[NOTE: Attachments have been retained in the Committee's official
files.]
______

Mr. Lamborn. Thank you. Thank all of you for your testimony
here this morning. Members of the Committee may have additional
questions for the record, and I would ask that you respond to
these in writing.
We will now begin questioning. Members are limited to five
minutes in their questions but we may have additional rounds.
I now recognize myself for five minutes for the first set
of questions.
Senator Kirkendoll, in your testimony, you discussed the
financial benefits to Boone County and West Virginia more
broadly.
Did I hear you right that there is a $29 million direct
payroll and a total $100 million direct and indirect payroll
that is being lost by the non-operation of the Spruce Coal
Mine?
Mr. Kirkendoll. Mr. Chairman, those are numbers I reflected
back in 1998, when Dal-Tex shut down. Loss of revenue that--we
could not make it up. We never made it up. We made cuts.
The $29 million was direct payroll to 400 employees that
were at Dal-Tex when the permit was no longer there for them to
continue to operate and work.
You can systematically do the math. The people that bring
the supplies to the mines, for example, tires for the trucks,
the bolts, this and that, whatever they do, all the materials,
you can estimate it. We have done estimated numbers that it was
between $90 million and $100 million of lost revenue for what
they call ``support vendors.''
Mr. Lamborn. Senator, how many jobs do you think that
represents? You said 400 direct. Direct and indirect, how many
jobs are we talking about?
Mr. Kirkendoll. We have looked at different statistics.
Some people say a qualified coal mining job, if a person works
his normal hours, is about $65,000 to $70,000 a year. It is
between five and seven additional jobs in the surrounding area
of activity. Two hundred qualified coal mining jobs could be
anywhere between 1,000 to 1,200 jobs of activity with that kind
of revenue there to be split among different type needs and
services; yes.
Mr. Lamborn. With the money that would come to the county
or the state, is the county or the state able to make water
quality and stream quality improvements?
Mr. Kirkendoll. Here is the thing. In Logan, I was
Commissioner for 30 years starting in 1980, and when I got
there, I think we had less than 20 percent of the people who
had potable water. It was a coal mining area. Most of the water
lines back then were two inch lines.
We formed a PSD, very aggressive in request for funding.
When I left the County Commission in 2010, we were over 90
percent of the people in our county, Logan, that had potable
water.
We do have a policy and a program now about stream
restoration. You simply cannot get in a stream any more from
Federal regulations. I do not care what you have in the middle
of that stream.
The Guyandotte River just recently had flooding which--the
water will flow from upper counties down there. You will have
trees and debris lodged in on the connectors of your bridges,
from one side of the waterway to the other. You get in that
stream and muddy the water to kill a crawdad, you are going to
jail.
What we had to do as a Commission is make application to
what they call the Soil Conservation Agency in Charleston, and
they would come in, send engineers, study how to bring the
stream back to what they call ``bedrock,'' bring the water back
to the center of the stream and let it restore itself
naturally.
We were OK with that. We worked with it. There are avenues
to restore streams, but some of the interpretation of
``streams'' is what the problem is now. A dry ditch is not a
stream. A stream is something that flows 70 percent of the year
due to annual rainfall. That is a stream.
Mr. Lamborn. All right. Thank you.
Ms. Harbert, do people working in regulatory agencies have
a clear enough understanding in your opinion of the problems
caused in our economy by increasing uncertainty?
Ms. Harbert. In our opinion, absolutely not. The
reverberations of decisions like this are not just in one
county or one state. They are across the country. They are
affecting industries unrelated to mining, unrelated to energy.
It is building. It is transportation. It is roads. It is
bridges.
These decisions that are taken should not be taken so
lightly. We have to understand that these are billions of
dollars that are at stake, boards of directors have to make
decisions and hire people, and they cannot do it if they think
some time down the road somebody might change their mind and
revoke their permit.
Mr. Lamborn. Will this have the result of driving American
jobs overseas, with this kind of uncertainty?
Ms. Harbert. It most definitely has a chilling effect on
investment. We have to want investment in the United States. We
have to attract it. We have to be inviting, rather than say to
capital markets and capital investors take your money elsewhere
because you are going to have that type of certainty somewhere
else.
Decisions like these look more like Hugo Chavez than George
Washington. What do we want to be as a country? Do we want to
be some place where we want investment, where it is comfortable
and happy here, or do we actually want to scare it to other
markets?
Mr. Lamborn. Thank you. I now recognize the Ranking Member.
Mr. Holt. Thank you. Let me begin with a comment. This
little side show earlier just confirms in my mind that indeed,
the officials at the Environmental Protection Agency had
important and better things to do with their time this morning
than to engage in political theater.
Mr. Chairman, you knew days ago they were not coming. You
did not have to print cards to establish a little skit here, to
ask where the officials were. As I say, this confirms they
indeed have much more important things to be doing this
morning.
Ms. Gunnoe, we have, I think, a chart available that is a
map of the area. The red in the center, I guess, is the
mountaintop area in question. All of the other gray areas are
permitted areas.
It is not as if this is the only opportunity in the tri-
state region.
Ms. Gunnoe, according to the EPA, there are 257 past and
present surface mining permits in the area that collectively
occupy 13 percent of the entire land area.
As you can see in the gray, the mines really blanket the
region.
Do you think the level of mining that is already occurring
in this area means there is more to be done to protect the
streams that would be affected by the Spruce Mine?
Ms. Gunnoe. I do. The streams in that area are already
above EPA standards on selenium. We know that through recent
water testing that has been done.
I need to say that when you look at this mountain,
recognizing that the dark gray areas are peaks that have been
permitted or proposed, and the people that live in the low
lying valleys, when you blow off the mountains, basically what
happens is the people in the valley get flooded, and FEMA comes
in and helps to clean up the flooded communities.
There are many reasons to not allow this permit. The Spruce
River watershed has an astronomical amount of mining in it
already. It has heavily impacted those communities.
These jobs will never benefit the community of Blair. The
community of Blair will be de-populated because of the Spruce
No. 1 jobs.
Mr. Holt. Thank you, Ms. Gunnoe.
Mr. Eisenberg, we have heard this has some effect on the
people locally. Ms. Gunnoe talked about it. You talk about the
need for this coal.
Do you know what happens to the coal from Logan County? How
much of that coal is sent to other countries?
Mr. Eisenberg. Off the top of my head, I do not know the
answer to that.
Mr. Holt. I can help you, a third. A question we have to
ask ourselves is what are we doing to ourselves. Ms. Harbert
said do we want a country that--you described the country where
we would want to live in--I think yes, you are getting right at
the heart of this question.
Do we want a country that is despoiled and contaminated so
that we can send the coal to China and India, and yes, to
Venezuela.
There is not much time. Ms. Gunnoe, let me ask you quickly
if you think it sounds like the EPA should be using new science
as it comes forward to make the best decisions for protecting
the streams.
Ms. Gunnoe. Absolutely they should be. I need to say the
citizens from Southern Appalachia have lobbied the EPA for
these protections. These protections, our lives depend on these
protections.
The EPA is doing what they need to do to protect the lives
of citizens in our communities.
Mr. Lamborn. Thank you. The representative from
Pennsylvania.
Mr. Thompson. Thank you, Chairman. Let me say I am very
disappointed in the Obama Administration, even with notice,
refusing to come.
I happen to believe that we live in a constitutional
republic. This is not a dictatorship. Congress has an oversight
function as part of the checks and balances, and just to
blatantly refuse, I think raises questions, what are they
hiding.
Senator Kirkendoll, what would the potential be for states
to expend resources, and I know at this time the economies are
not good for the Federal Government or states, but to expend
resources permitting mines contemplated by Section 404 permits
that were then after the fact essentially vetoed by the EPA?
Mr. Kirkendoll. I'm sorry?
Mr. Thompson. The impact on the states who are
contemplating permitting only to have it vetoed.
Mr. Kirkendoll. I can tell you the economic impact, the
jobs, number one, but number two, I worked 11 years
underground, so I am not a novice to the coal industry, but I
can remember back when I worked, when I was getting ready to go
to college, we worked, called red hats back then. Jobs were
tough to get but we got some.
Nowadays, it takes $2- to $3 million to qualify permits. To
get companies to come in now and put a permit together and
spend $2- to $3 million not even knowing if it is approved, it
could still be pulled, that is what is throwing everybody off
the curve of the road.
If you approve something, you approve it. There is a rule
and law that we all have to abide by. As Mr. Holt said, these
people had better things to do. I think they should have been
here.
We are talking about people's lives, income, and everything
else, and that is the reason I am here, I care about people
having the ability to wake up on Monday morning as an American
and have a job.
We are putting ourselves in a position now to where the
next generation is not going to be working.
You see the bottom of the Appalachian power bill where it
says you can volunteer money if you choose, to help somebody
who cannot afford their electric bill, if we do not use
domestic energy inside this country, you are going to pay an
energy tax in the next few years and it is going to be
mandatory.
They were making conversation about shipping the coal to
foreign countries, it is exactly right. We should be using our
own coal, our own steel, our own workers, and we should be
operating inside of America, and that is what the people in
this country need, want, and they think we ought to have.
Why are we exporting coal? Because of the rules and
regulations that we have. If we had the right set up, we would
be retrofitting these powerplants and making them
environmentally sound to burn the coal and do it right.
We are missing the boat on every opportunity, and that is
why we are having these types of hearings this morning.
I believe we can mine coal environmentally sound. I do not
want the waters to be run to where they are not useable. We are
not talking about streams.
Come to Southern Appalachia, any of the panelists up here,
and I will take you. I want you to see all those streams we are
talking about. They are dry ditches. They only have water when
it rains. All these miles of streams are not streams.
On 20 degree slopes, how many streams can you have on a
mountain? The water will seek its lowest level.
Let's be very honest about things that are just sensible.
Quit listening to all this rhetoric and come yourself and look.
I will take you on a tour of post-mined land, before and after.
I will talk to you about the good, the bad, yes, we can do
things better. We need to do things better.
We sit up here and people's lives are in jeopardy, needing
the ability to have a job because we are having committee
discussion.
Send people from D.C. down to these regions. You are
talking about multimillion and billions of dollars and lives
and the daily living of American people that are waiting on a
committee to take data.
Come see for yourself. You will find out. We can do it both
ways, gentlemen and ladies. Let's be Americans and do it inside
the borders of America.
Mr. Thompson. Just quickly a follow up question because I
do not have that much time left.
What impact has the litigation had on mining in your
region?
Mr. Kirkendoll. Talking about how many people are working,
come to Logan. We have had massive layoff's in numerous mines
in Boone County. My county has not had as many because we have
a deep mine over there that employs a lot of people, Mountain
Laurel, which is actually the owner of said property in
question for the surface mine.
It is getting to where when you talk to people, and I
always did as a Commissioner, the CEOs of these companies, they
are ready to start going to Illinois, Wyoming and other places
where they can get permits and mine. They are going to leave
the Appalachia region.
It is a question now of do young people buy homes and spend
money, take a chance on making a living in an area so volatile
to just permits being pulled? If you can pull this permit, you
can pull any permits in any job, manufacturing, textiles,
anything else where the EPA has any jurisdiction.
Are we going to get to that point?
Mr. Thompson. Thanks, Senator. Thank you, Chairman.
Mr. Lamborn. All right. Thank you. Senator Kirkendoll, let
me remind you that in September, this last September, this
Subcommittee did go to Charleston and had a field hearing on
stream quality issues.
Mr. Kirkendoll. That is right.
Mr. Lamborn. The Acting Governor, now Governor, was there.
U.S. Senator Manchin was there. Other witnesses, including Ms.
Gunnoe and others testified as well. That was a very good
hearing.
We did see some mine operations and reclaimed land later in
the day as well.
Mr. Kirkendoll. Did you see the golf course?
Mr. Lamborn. We did not see the golf course.
I would now like to recognize the Ranking Member of the
Full Committee, Representative Markey of Massachusetts.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. EDWARD J. MARKEY, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE COMMONWEALTH OF MASSACHUSETTS

Mr. Markey. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The reason that coal
has been on a massive decline in recent years has less to do
with President Obama than with the inability of the coal
industry to innovate and its inability to compete.
There are more than 500 coal fired power generation units
operating in this country, 500.
How many of those are more than 50 years old? More than 200
of them are more than 50 years old. How many are at least 60
years old of that 500? Seventy-four. We actually have ten coal
units that are at least 70 years old.
Here is a picture of the Perry K powerplant in Indianapolis
built in 1925. It is an 87 year old coal fired powerplant.
Thomas Edison was alive when this plant was built. The
television had just been invented. Air travel was in its
infancy. The first transatlantic flight was still two years
away when this plant was built, and still operating today.
We have improved on all the other technologies. We have
figured out how to do the same thing but for less money, all
with greater speed and with reliability. It is the American
way.
New replaces old. Efficient replaces wasteful. Clean
replaces dirty. High tech replaces low tech. Our country
benefits when this happens.
The 87 year old Perry K powerplant is switching to natural
gas beginning in 2014. This is a growing trend in the power
sector. Natural gas is cheaper. It burns cleaner.
You are less likely to get asthma or have a baby with birth
defects. If you live near a plant that burns it, you are
feeling better about the health of your own children because
you know there are more dangerous elements coming out of coal
than out of natural gas.
You can get natural gas without blowing the tops off
mountains and destroying the environment.
Right now, 36 percent of America's electricity is currently
generated by coal, 36 percent today, first three months of
2012.
Six years ago, coal was producing half of America's
electricity. In six years, it has gone from 50 percent down to
36 percent of electricity.
At the same time, electricity from natural gas has grown
from 18 percent of U.S. generation to 27 percent. Wind has gone
from producing virtually none of our power to three percent of
our power in the last six years.
Newer, cheaper, cleaner technologies are beating coal. The
free market is beating coal. Adam Smith is spinning in his
grave as we are listening to the Republicans talk about the
need to prop up the coal industry against competing
technologies like natural gas, like wind.
As a matter of fact, he is spinning so fast in his grave
that he would actually qualify as a new energy source. That is
how much energy he is giving off right now in his grave
listening to the Republicans bleeding about the rise of natural
gas and wind as competition to coal, especially with these
plants that are 50, 60, 70, and 87 years old.
Here is the interesting thing. In the Waxman-Markey bill
that the House of Representatives passed in 2009, we built in
$60 billion for the coal industry, $60 billion between now and
2030, for them to be able to install carbon capture and
sequestration technology.
The electric utility industry supported it, but the coal
industry said no. They said no, we do not want the money. By
the way, it was $200 billion up to the year 2050. That is a lot
of money.
That is a lot of investment in new technology that the
Democrats built into their legislation, so they could innovate,
so they could improve, so it could become more competitive with
the natural gas industry. The coal industry said no, we are not
going to move.
That is $60 billion of funding coming from the Federal
Government, $200 billion by the year 2050, so they could
innovate. They said no. They said no. They said no over and
over again to innovation.
There are now 200 coal plants over the age of 50 that need
to be renovated at the cost of billions of dollars.
Natural gas is cheaper. Wind is on the move. Who wants to
pay now in the private sector to rehabilitate dinosaur coal
units with cleaner, cheaper options available?
Now the free market says if the coal industry did not want
that funding, then we look at the cost and we just say we are
moving to natural gas, we are moving to wind. You innovate or
you die.
Just ask the auto industry. That is what is happening to
the coal industry. They refuse to innovate. They refuse to even
accept the funding that would have made it possible for them to
innovate.
I just hope that the record is clear out there and this
gets reported as the real story, that the coal industry refused
to move, to help their own people, to be able to compete in
this modern marketplace.
I yield back the balance of my time. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Markey follows:]

Statement of The Honorable Edward J. Markey, Ranking Member,
Committee on Natural Resources

The reason coal has been on a massive decline in recent years has
less to do with President Obama and more to do with the inability of
coal to innovate and compete.
There are more than 500 coal-fired power generation units operating
in this country. More than 200 of those are more than 50 years old.
74 are at least 60 years old.
We actually have 10 coal units that are at least 70 years old.
Here's a picture of the Perry K power plant in Indianapolis, built
in 1925. It's an 87-year-old, coal-fired power plant! Thomas Edison was
alive when this plant was built. The television had just been invented.
Air travel was in its infancy, and the first trans-Atlantic flight was
still 2 years away.

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

.epsWe've improved on these technologies. We've figured out how to
do the same thing, but for less money. Or with greater speed and
reliability. Or with fewer casualties.
It's the American way. New replaces old, efficient replaces
wasteful, clean replaces dirty, high-tech replaces low-tech. And our
country benefits when this happens.
The 87-year-old Perry K power plant is switching to natural gas
beginning in 2014. This is a growing trend in the power sector. Natural
gas is cheaper. It burns cleaner. You're less likely to get asthma or
have a baby with birth defects if you live near a plant that burns it.
And you can get natural gas without blowing the tops off of mountains
and destroying the environment.

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

.epsRight now, 36 percent of America's electricity is currently
generated by coal. A little over a third. Six years ago, coal was
producing half of America's electricity.
At the same time, electricity from natural gas has grown from 18
percent of US generation to 27 percent. Wind has gone from producing
virtually none of our power, to 3 percent of our power.
Newer, cheaper, cleaner technologies are beating coal. The free
market is beating coal.
I would just like to say, for the record, that Democrats saw this
coming. In 2009, the Waxman-Markey bill allocated $60 BILLION to coal.
We said ``Here, you don't want to use your own money to innovate? No
problem, we think a future for coal is important, here's $60 billion to
figure out carbon capture and sequestration. Go make clean coal a
reality.'' Waxman-Markey was the single largest investment in coal in
the history of Congress.
Democrats from coal country said YES. Utility companies across
America said YES. But the coal industry said NO. And Republicans said
NO. They said NO to innovation.
And now, there are 200 coal plants over the age of 50 that need to
be renovated at a cost of billions of dollars. But today, natural gas
is cheaper than coal. Wind is competitive with coal. Who wants to pay
to rehabilitate dinosaur coal units with cleaner, cheaper options
available? The free market is working its will.
You innovate or you die. Just ask the U.S. auto industry. They
fought fuel efficiency for 30 years. They refused to invest money in
making vehicles more efficient. Republicans defended them right into
bankruptcy.
Democrats saved those jobs in the Midwest. We said ``America will
partner with you if you start innovating again.''
What's happened? We're heading towards 54.5 mile per gallon
vehicles and the American auto industry is back on top.
You innovate or you die. That's the bottom line. That's the real
story with what's going on with coal right now.
______

Mr. Lamborn. OK. I am glad to hear you do not like old coal
plants. Let's work on getting some new ones out there.
I would like to recognize the gentleman from Michigan.
Dr. Benishek. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I represent
Michigan's First District. We have a lot of minerals in our
district, nickel, copper, iron, gold.
I would like to ask Mr. Eisenberg, this regulation here
where a permit is going to be revoked, can you expound a little
further on what is going to happen to the rest of the
harvesting of minerals in my District, for example? What am I
going to tell people who are looking forward to a resurgence in
mining?
We just had a new mine permitted. I would just like to have
you expound a little more about that.
Mr. Eisenberg. Sure. You are talking about the Pebble case
up in Alaska. That is an interesting case. I urge the Committee
to look at that a little bit closer.
EPA is using the exact same part of Section 404, 404(c). In
the Spruce Mine case, what they said was the term ``whenever''
in 404(c) means they can change a specification whenever. Now
they cannot because the decision says you cannot do it
retroactively, so EPA is now taking the position that they can
do it preemptively, which means before the EIS is done, before
NEPA is commenced, before anything.
That has a lot of folks worried about it, the same
companies and the same industries that were impacted by the
Spruce Mine decision.
Right now, EPA has not done this. They are performing a
watershed assessment, but they seem increasingly likely to do
it at the conclusion of this assessment.
I noted in my testimony that environmental groups have
already started asking for a watershed assessment similar to
that for the Great Lakes region.
It is the same thing as what happened in Spruce Mine. If
you take away the specification, then you cannot do it. EPA
admitted this in the case, you are essentially vetoing the
project, which really is the responsibility of the Army Corps.
It could have wide ranging application, and I certainly
urge the Committee to look at it.
Dr. Benishek. Do you think we are going to need less
copper, nickel, iron in the next 20 years in this country?
Mr. Eisenberg. Speaking on behalf of NAM, absolutely not.
We are going to need more of it.
Dr. Benishek. Do you think we harvest our minerals in this
country at a higher standard than around the world as far as
the environmental impact of the global environment?
Mr. Eisenberg. I am certain that we do.
Dr. Benishek. It just seems to me keeping the jobs here in
America and better environmental quality for the globe is our
goal here in this country. I think we should be harvesting our
materials here at home in a better fashion than occurs in
China.
Ms. Harbert, do you have any comments on that analysis that
I think is true?
Ms. Harbert. If you look at the world's appetite for energy
and the type of economic growth we hope we are going to see
around the world, there is no doubt we are going to need more
minerals. We are going to need more infrastructure.
We as a country are going to have to decide whether we are
going to be complaisant and import those things or whether we
are going to actually cultivate our own resources and have a
comparative advantage.
We have a lot of resources here in this country and those
resources and the technology to take those resources to market
advances every year.
We have the opportunity to use coal, use oil, use gas, all
of our resources, including wind and renewables, really
effectively in our country, but the EPA is standing in the way.
I would like to address the comment about natural gas. The
Sierra Club launched a ``Beyond Coal'' campaign. They have been
successful. Now they have launched a ``Beyond Gas'' campaign.
We have a movement here that is completely against American
resources. We have to be able to figure out who is complaisant
in that, and we cannot let the regulatory overreach of EPA
stand in the way of getting our economy back on its feet.
Dr. Benishek. In order to harvest solar energy and wind
energy, we are going to need minerals, it seems to me.
Ms. Harbert. Absolutely. Certainly, China has that memo.
They are seeking rights to those minerals all around the world.
Dr. Benishek. Do we have the ability to harvest those
minerals needed for those renewable technologies here in this
country?
Ms. Harbert. We certainly have a great deal of minerals. As
you referenced in your own District, you have a great deal of
them. We have a very prohibitive policy to be able to access
those minerals.
If we want to have a domestic, a very vibrant domestic
economy, all those inputs are needed for all sources of energy,
and we are going to need to be able to have a regulatory regime
in place that allows us access to those resources.
Dr. Benishek. Thank you very much. I yield back the
remainder of my time.
Mr. Johnson [presiding]. The gentleman yields back. I think
it is my turn. I am going to yield myself question time.
I am sure we were all entertained by the political theater
of our Ranking Member and his comments. It is shocking to me to
hear comments about the coal industry's--his perception--
inability to innovate and compete.
I do not know how we could possibly think the coal industry
could innovate and compete up against the massive burden and
costly burden of activists, regulatory agencies like the EPA,
and the Department of the Interior.
I would remind this Committee and the Ranking Member that
those old coal fired powerplants that you are talking about,
they provide about 45 percent or 50 percent of America's energy
needs today.
In the State of Ohio, they provide 87 percent of the
energy, and thousands and thousands of jobs across the country.
I am glad Chairman Lamborn hosted this important hearing
today on the Obama Administration's abuse of executive power,
particularly in the case of the Spruce Mine and the broader
effects this abuse of power could have on the economy as a
whole.
The Obama Administration's war on coal is most clearly
exemplified in the Spruce Mine case, and that is the reason for
this hearing.
However, as Ms. Harbert and Mr. Eisenberg have testified
today, the actions taken by the EPA to veto a valid permit by
the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers has potentially crippling
effects to the rest of the economy if it is allowed to stand.
America's businesses are already being crushed by the
uncertainty of regulations coming from Obamacare, other EPA and
Interior regulations, and if the EPA suddenly had the power to
veto permits justly issued by other Federal agencies, companies
could start to move their investments overseas, where they at
least have the certainty and finality they need to invest their
money.
Ms. Harbert, in your testimony, you cite a Brattle study
that says over $200 billion are contingent on Section 404
permits. When EPA asserted the right to withdraw the
specification of a disposal site for a Section 404 permit after
issuance of it by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, U.S.
District Judge Amy Berman Jackson, who was in fact appointed to
the Bench by President Obama, asked the EPA, ``What are the
permittees supposed to do tomorrow?''
Specifically under EPA's reasoning, she asked, ``So,
everybody with a permit has to on a daily basis compare their
permit to your list of specified sites. They cannot do what
they have been permitted to do by the United States?''
My question to you is what would the practical effect be on
a company having their Section 404 permits be subject to EPA's
potentially ever changing list of acceptable disposal sites?
Ms. Harbert. I used to be an infrastructure project
developer, and the one thing you do is you look at all of your
risks, technological risks, sovereign risks, political risks.
What this introduces into the mix is a whole other level of
risk that you have to find a way over, a hurdle.
What does that do? It either causes you to cancel the
project because the hurdle is too high, or it causes you to
increase the cost of the infrastructure project because you
have to take that cost into account, or you take that money and
you go elsewhere.
All of those things make it very impractical and a very
impactful impact on American infrastructure.
We know we have a crumbling infrastructure in this country
and we know we need a lot of investment. Those people who will
make those investments now see those investments at risk.
It has a very real, practical, timely impact.
Mr. Johnson. Mr. Eisenberg, in your testimony, you talked
about a hurdle cost that companies would have to account for in
their planning of projects if this EPA action is allowed to
stand.
Would many of the members of the National Association of
Manufacturers have this same hurdle cost in markets overseas?
Mr. Eisenberg. Probably not. This is a case of duplicative
regulations. EPA does not have the authority to do this. The
Corps has the authority to modify this permit. EPA just tried
to get at the one thing they could, which is where you drop the
fill.
It introduces duplicative regulations. It distorts this
hurdle rate, which is the calculation that an investor makes
when they are going to decide whether or not to invest in a
project.
No, certainly not. It gets to the core of my testimony
which is if EPA wants more authority, they need to come here
and try to get it. If they do not feel comfortable with the
bounds of their authority, Congress is the place they need to
go to try to get more.
Mr. Johnson. OK. Thank you. My time has expired. I will
yield now to my colleague from Massachusetts, Mr. Markey. Do
you have additional questions?
Mr. Markey. I do. It is only to make this point again. For
the first three months of 2012, coal only produced 36 percent
of the electricity in the country. That is my point, it is
declining rapidly because of natural gas and because of wind.
Just in the last five years, just so we get the numbers
right in terms of this trend, there were 16,000 new megawatts
of coal installed in the last five years in the United States.
There were 36,000 new megawatts of wind installed in the United
States, and 41,000 new megawatts of natural gas installed in
the United States.
In other words, to put it another way, over the last five
years, 17 percent of our new electrical generation came from
coal, 39 percent came from wind, and 44 percent came from
natural gas.
That trend is very clear. You might want to keep looking in
the rear view mirror at some numbers from ten years ago or 20
years ago, but it is down to 36 percent of all electrical
generation. The market has moved clearly to wind and natural
gas. Wind is now totally competitive with new coal as a
generating source.
These are numbers that go to free market decisions made by
utility executives all across the United States of America in
terms of where the new electricity is being generated from.
These are just numbers--I know people want to blame Obama
for the free market moving against a technology which is not
competitive, but I just think it is unfair and inaccurate
historically, and I yield to the gentleman from New Jersey.
Mr. Holt. I thank the gentleman for his very good
statement. He describes very well that market conditions are
changing. We want the coal companies to innovate. We do not
wish the miners ill by any means.
If they refuse to innovate, they are going to be left
behind. I think the Ranking Member has made that point very
clearly.
Meanwhile, we have an ongoing obligation to look after the
environment. What is not changing is that obligation that we
have to provide oversight, to see that the Environmental
Protection Agency and the environmental protection laws of this
country are working. That is what this is about.
I thank the gentleman for yielding.
Mr. Markey. I thank the gentleman very much. This is not
unlike the auto industry. The auto industry fought innovation
for a generation. Their fuel economy standards just kept
getting more and more uncompetitive with the rest of the
planet, until they reached a point where their product was not
selling, and they neared bankruptcy, and required Federal
Government intervention in order to ensure they did not go
under.
That was not anything that I wanted to vote for. I am one
of the few people that can say I voted twice to bail out
Chrysler, 1979 and in 2010.
We were offering the same opportunity to the coal industry
in the Waxman-Markey bill. We were saying we will provide the
funding for the innovation. We will provide the help for the
coal industry. We will give you a bridge to make a transition
so you can stay within the competitive framework of new energy
sources within the country. The coal industry, in the same way
the auto industry did, said absolutely no.
Where is the auto industry today? Well, they have come
through their mess and now they are embracing the goal of 54.5
miles per gallon by the year 2026, and they are advertising
every 20 minutes on every television show about their new, more
fuel efficient and safer vehicles they are selling.
The coal industry said no, let's just keep getting at this.
Peabody Coal said no, and in the same way the auto industry did
a disservice to its workers, Peabody Coal has done a disservice
to its workers. Same disservice. Pretending that they could not
innovate, that they could not improve, they could not make
themselves more competitive.
Trying to blame some outside source, whether it be the auto
industry or the coal industry, is just to defy an analysis of
the reality of the marketplace.
The auto industry was losing to international competitors
because they were no longer meeting the goals of what the
consumer expected, and the coal industry clearly in the last
five years, down to only 17 percent of new electrical
generation, wind is at 39 percent and new gas is at 44 percent,
the coal industry is suffering inevitably because of the bad
decisions of the coal industry executives who should be
questioned----
Mr. Johnson. The gentleman's time has expired. We will now
go to Mr. Flores.
Mr. Flores. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The only side show
here has been the comments by the other side to try to change
the subject.
This hearing is not about auto mileage. It is not about
coal. It is not about natural gas. It is not about the Waxman-
Markey bill or capping tax or capping trade or anything else.
It is about out of control bureaucrats that change the
rules after the rules have been passed. It is about out of
control bureaucrats that are not following what the law says
passed by the people that elected the Congress. That is what
this hearing is about. That is clearly what it is about.
I have firsthand experience with this. Before I came here
to fantasy land where people can just change the rules whenever
they see fit, I worked in the real world. I helped create jobs.
I set up operations all over the world. When I did it, I
used to enjoy getting on a plane to come back to the United
States of America because I knew we had a clear, transparent,
fair and stable regulatory structure.
We have become a Third World banana republic like Ms.
Harbert said. That is not what this is about.
We have bureaucrats who invent junk science and bogus
analyses and then change the rules to fit whatever their whim
is that day. They do it because you have environmentalists that
want to move beyond coal and now they want to move beyond
natural gas that the other side waxes so politically about.
You have environmentalists that want to attack crop
insurance. Pretty soon, we will not be able to eat because of
the environmentalists. We will not be able to heat our homes
because of the environmentalists. We will darn sure have no
jobs because of environmentalists.
This is out of control. This is not what America is
supposed to be. This is a region that has 60 percent
unemployment. The unemployment number came out today. The
unemployment rate is 14.8 percent. We have one out of every six
Americans out of work, and now you have out of control
bureaucrats that want to put more people out of work because
businesses that hire these employees, that create these jobs,
do not know what regulators are going to do when they wake up
each morning.
That is an issue for me. That is an issue for the American
people. That is the reason we had a big change in this
Congress, in this House, in November 2010.
We have to move on and talk about why we are here. Ms.
Harbert, the first question is for you. First of all, I agree
with your comment that--I will come back to your comment in a
minute.
I have a question for you, and that is when you get a
permit, you assume that as long as you fulfill the
responsibilities under that permit, that permit should stay in
existence. Is that correct?
Ms. Harbert. Absolutely.
Mr. Flores. What happens if you are an employer or a
business and you cannot count on that permit to be in effect or
that it can be revoked at a whim, even though you are
fulfilling the rules of that permit?
Ms. Harbert. If it happens before you have made the
investment, you give second thought to making the investment.
If it happens while something is under construction, do you
halt construction and lay off your workers or do you continue
at a great deal of risk in the regulatory process?
This is all new territory. I think that is why we are
having this hearing, which is the business community was set
back by this decision by the EPA.
They were overjoyed to see the justice system step in and
say they were overreaching their authority, but at the same
time, now we have EPA overreaching their authority in Alaska
and preemptively perhaps rejecting a project that has not even
gone to final decision.
We are seeing some very scary signs on the wall to the
business community and they want to figure a way out of this.
Mr. Flores. This question is for Mr. Eisenberg. Is there
any statutory authority that the EPA has to retroactively
revoke permits?
Mr. Eisenberg. Absolutely not. They do not even have the
authority to issue the permits. They can only deal with the
specification of where to put the fill under 404.
Mr. Flores. Senator Kirkendoll, I have been to Appalachia.
I have helped go and repair and renovate homes for economically
disadvantaged people in your part of the world.
I can tell you, it is an economically depressed area. The
last thing I would think would be appropriate is to have EPA
bureaucrats that are unaccountable and now irresponsible, to
have them controlling the life blood of your community, how do
you feel about that?
Mr. Kirkendoll. In my area, we do have a lot of people that
have some under privileged situations. We worked on that
through the years. We tried to diversify the economy with
tourism. It is working.
To get to the next level, you have to have your main source
of income and your taxation to diversify with. You can have
visions and dreams and hopes and desires. If you have no money
to get there--for somebody to simply put yourself in a
position--how do you attract business if one day they can
operate and the next day they are pulled, they are pulled
before they get to operate.
It is a scary situation. Like I said before, I talked to
the CEOs of some of those companies that have been long-
standing in my particular region. They do not want to be in the
Appalachia region, not because of the ability to mine some of
the best coal in the world which is----
Mr. Flores. Let me interrupt you for a minute. Would the
folks in your community rather have paychecks or welfare
payments?
Mr. Kirkendoll. The ones I deal with would rather work. In
fact, some of the rallies we have had, when this stimulus money
was handed out in Washington for the auto industry and
everybody else, the cry of the people in the coal fields was we
do not want the stimulus money, give us work permits. Yes, sir.
Mr. Flores. Thank you very much. I yield back.
Mr. Johnson. I thank the gentleman for yielding back. We
will go now to Mr. McKinley.
Mr. McKinley. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you for the
opportunity to participate with this Committee.
I think the previous speaker said it all, what we are here
for. There is always electricity in the air when people try to
divert our attention for what we are supposed to be talking
about here today, because that is what they do a lot in
Washington.
I would just like to start by I am one of maybe three or
four people in Congress that have a construction background,
and I have dealt with permitting agencies for 40 some years.
When they grant a permit, you work with that permit. If the
science changes and you change the requirements----
Mr. Johnson. Would the gentleman suspend? I am going to ask
all Committee members to respect the time that other Committee
members have. If we need to have side bar meetings, we have a
room or a hallway. I would appreciate that. Thank you. Go
ahead, sir.
Mr. McKinley. When they change the rules, on the next
permit, you make that apply. You do not go back retroactively.
That is one of the reasons I came here particularly to
learn from the EPA what was their grounds for this
justification? If it were science, then let's build on the
science.
They unfortunately chose not to be here or not to send any
representatives within their organization. I am a little
surprised by that.
Let's stay focused on why we are here, about a permit. The
permit was given. I am told they said they wanted to revoke it
because of the science, they felt there was more science that
caused that to be considered.
I would like to ask, I suppose, Ms. Gunnoe, to try to give
an analogy. In your house, you probably have plywood in your
house, you have drywall in your house. Are you aware that the
EPA is considering changing the standard on the resin use in
plywood to such a level, a tenth of a part per million, and if
they do make that change, how would you feel after you have
been given a permit to own and build or locate in your house,
they knock on your door and say you have to leave your home
because we have changed the standard and your house is no
longer within the standard?
Would you leave your house willingly?
Ms. Gunnoe. I absolutely would. If I thought my house was
making me sick, I would leave.
Mr. McKinley. If I can reclaim my time, the same thing with
concrete. In your house, you have fly ash in your concrete. The
EPA is now adopting standards that will say that is a hazardous
material.
I suppose what you are willing to say in a very humble way,
that you are willing to face bankruptcy for your standards and
your principles, and I admire you for that, but the bank
probably is not going to like that after they have loaned you
the money----
Ms. Gunnoe. Can I respond to what you are saying or are you
just talking at me?
Mr. McKinley. If I can continue with my time, you may lose
your home and the bank may have to foreclose on it because your
house does not meet the standards of the EPA.
That is a real threat, when we keep moving the goal post,
for people to be able to make a decision.
Ms. Harbert, I like your comments. I wonder whether or not
you have any other comments about the report. Before we get to
this report, in a real short time frame, I want people to
understand that I will play in this court for a little bit,
when they will not acknowledge that in the other committee, but
let's go back to carbon capture and sequestration.
I have asked time and time again of the EPA, if you are
going to set the standard for carbon capture and sequestration,
that is under the new source standards, show me one facility
that has carbon capture, commercially available technology.
There is not one.
We cannot do it in America today, even in a laboratory
setting. Yet, the EPA has set that as being the standard of
where we need to be. They know very well this is a war on coal.
There is no question about it.
When we look at fly ash being called a hazardous material,
greenhouse gases, climate change, new source standard, utility
act, train act, we can go on and on.
We understand they do not want all of the above energy
sources.
Could you say is there anything more on this study that we
need to review that was done by Dr. Sunding?
Ms. Harbert. I think the take away from that report is the
impact on the broader business community and the investment
community will be huge, and it changes the business model for
infrastructure in America, and was that the intention of the
Clean Water Act?
It certainly was not the intention of Congress to change
the business model for the American economy, and that is
ultimately what this could mean.
Mr. McKinley. Thank you. Apparently, I have run over my
time. I did want to ask our Senator from West Virginia about
the fact that Longview Coal Company in West Virginia is
actually producing power notwithstanding the remarks from our
representative from Massachusetts, at a rate lower than the gas
production.
The innovation is there.
Mr. Johnson. Would the gentleman like to ask unanimous
consent for another minute to pursue that?
Mr. McKinley. If he could expand that, I would ask for
another minute.
Mr. Johnson. Without objection, so ordered.
Mr. McKinley. He is aware of the fact that there are coal
companies that are providing innovation but they are being held
back because of the threats of over regulation.
Are you aware of the Longview Mine?
Mr. Kirkendoll. Yes.
Mr. McKinley. It is producing at a heat rate of 8,700 Btu
per kilowatt. For those on the other side of the aisle that are
not aware of that, what would you say to that? The coal
companies are innovating?
Mr. Kirkendoll. I think they are innovating to the best of
their ability, utilities, as far as the economic ability to do
so; yes.
Mr. McKinley. Thank you very much.
Mr. Johnson. I thank the gentleman for yielding back. We
will go to Mr. Duncan from South Carolina.
Mr. Duncan of South Carolina. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I
just want to make the point, I was going to ask some of the
Administration officials on panel one some questions. They are
not here because they did not want to delve into this subject.
We cannot say we were not warned by the Obama
Administration about their intent on fighting the coal industry
because the President himself said as a candidate in 2008 if
someone wants to build a new coal fired powerplant, they can,
but it will bankrupt them because they will be charged a huge
sum for all the greenhouse gases being emitted. That is the
dynamic that is driving the policies of this Administration. We
cannot say we were not warned.
With that, I yield to the gentleman from Ohio.
Mr. Johnson. I thank the gentleman for yielding. I do have
a couple more questions but I would like to point out that we
talk about the decrease in the amount of energy being provided
by the coal industry.
When we have an Administration, the President of whom
acknowledged before he was elected he was going to make it
economically infeasible to build new coal fired powerplants,
and he has done so. We have a Vice President who in 2007 said
coal is more dangerous than high fructose corn syrup and
terrorists.
It is no wonder that Americans today are paying $300 more
on the average per year to power their homes.
If that is acceptable to the American people, than maybe we
are on the right track. I submit we are not.
I want to say that I applaud the coal industry for turning
down the opportunity to receive a bail out from the Federal
Government in an attempt to choose winners and losers.
We have certainly seen the Federal Government's ability to
choose winners and losers, with failed projects like Solyndra.
I think I have made the point.
Ms. Harbert and/or Mr. Eisenberg, is it safe to say we
would start to see some of that $200 billion that we talked
about earlier start to move overseas where companies can rely
on finality of payments?
Ms. Harbert. Sanctity of contracts is extremely important
in any business model. To the extent that the ability to rely
on your contracts or your rule of law, that would certainly
send a signal for capital to go where it feels more
comfortable. If that is overseas, then it is overseas, or it
just will not happen at all.
Mr. Johnson. Thank you. I find it quite ironic that Vice
President Biden was in my District in Ohio just a few weeks ago
talking about the resurgence of manufacturing in America when
the Administration is taking actions that will only push jobs
overseas and attack the very energy sources that are providing
that surge in manufacturing today.
Senator Kirkendoll, many states have primacy over their
SMCRA permitting programs and as such, many states expend a
great deal of time and resources in the mine permitting
process.
What effect would a lack of finality in CWA Section 404
context have on West Virginia's SMCRA permitting scheme?
Mr. Kirkendoll. The Secretary has gone on record many times
that states should have the right in the Clean Water Act, and I
think it just creates an entirely different atmosphere when you
are talking about the permit process, which states do not have
the solvent rights over the Clean Water Act regarding their own
permitting process, and it is overridden by the Federal
regulators.
I think it just challenges the permit process totally.
Mr. Johnson. Thank you. I was afraid that was what you were
going to say. As I said at the beginning of my questioning,
although this is an egregious case of President Obama's
Administration carrying out the war on coal, we have heard
today from witnesses that the EPA's actions have major
ramifications for all American businesses if the EPA's actions
are allowed to stand.
With that, that concludes my questioning.
Mr. Duncan of South Carolina. I reclaim my time.
Mr. Johnson. Without objection----
Mr. Duncan of South Carolina. Reclaiming my time real
quick. I just want to make a point, Denmark is held out as this
epitome of alternative fuels and wind power. They have reduced
their carbon footprint that much (indicating). They are still
relying on their baseload 24/7 power supply from coal.
It is an important resource. I like wind power. The
gentleman from Massachusetts was talking about that earlier.
We cannot continue to talk about wind only. We have to
support what works for that 24/7 baseload always on power
supply and coal provides that in this country.
I think about what coal technology could do for the African
Continent or for Latin America where they use charcoal, which
is taken from the wood harvested in the forests that we love.
If we provided coal fired powerplants in other countries,
especially Third World, and lessened their dependence on the
charcoal, just think about the quality of life issues.
Coal works. It is proven in this country. It can be proven
worldwide.
I yield back.
Mr. Johnson. I thank the gentleman for yielding back. Votes
have been called. Without objection, I am going to yield the
final two minutes to our colleague, Mr. Holt.
Mr. Holt. Thank you, Mr. Chair. Many of the questions that
the Committee seemed to want to ask of the EPA are better
resolved in court dealing with a particular case.
There have been some general statements made that I think
really should be addressed, that have to do with the Clean
Water Act and what it actually says.
It actually says that the Administrator is authorized to
prohibit the specification including withdrawal of
specification of any defined area, and he is authorized to deny
or restrict the use of any defined area for specification as a
disposal site, including withdrawal, whenever he determines,
after notice and opportunity for public hearings, that the
discharge will have an unacceptable adverse effect on water
supplies, fisheries, wild life, and recreation areas.
It goes on to say that the Administrator must consult with
the Secretary and the Corps of Engineers.
The Corps expressed some surprise that Congress would do
this, but Congress did that. Our witnesses today seem to
disbelieve that Congress did this, but Congress did this.
I think it is worth making that clear. I will yield my
remaining time to the Ranking Member.
Mr. Markey. I thank the gentleman. Earlier this week, the
New York Times reported that the American Electric Power
Company was planning to transition a plant in Kentucky from
coal to natural gas. The coal companies objected. They
organized. They insisted that rate payers should pay 30 percent
more so that the plant could continue burning coal instead of
much cheaper natural gas.
They actually got the American Electric Power Company to
submit that proposal to state public utility commissioners.
Let's be honest. That is welfare for coal executives making
rate payers----
Mr. Johnson. I hate to call----
Mr. Markey. I ask for 30 additional seconds.
Mr. Johnson. Without objection.
Mr. Markey. I thank you, sir. That is welfare for coal
executives making rate payers pay 30 percent more. That is just
wrong. That is not free market.
The company finally withdrew this ridiculous proposal after
it gained attention.
I would also like to respond to the gentleman's comments
about electricity rates being increased. In New England, they
are declining rapidly after thousands of new megawatts
constructed of gas, solar, and wind in New England over the
last decade.
We just across the board had a 15 percent reduction in our
electricity rates. That is without coal.
Again, the coal industry now has 75,000 workers, but the
wind industry has 75,000 workers and the solar industry has
100,000 workers.
We just have to say the market is now moving away from coal
because the coal industry refused to accept the $60 billion in
the Waxman-Markey bill that would have helped them to make the
transition.
Mr. Johnson. I thank the panel for their testimony today.
Members of this Committee may have additional questions for the
record, and I ask you to respond to these in writing.
If there is no further business, the Committee stands
adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 11:48 a.m., the Subcommittee was adjourned.]

[Additional material submitted for the record follows:]

Statement of The Honorable Dan Benishek, a Representative
in Congress from the State of Michigan

Mr. Chairman, I appreciate you taking the time to explore this very
important topic today. As you may be aware, mining is one of the
leading industries in Michigan's First District. The Upper Peninsula in
particular has a rich mining heritage and serves as a central driver of
the local economy. Just last week, the New York Times highlighted the
``mining rush in the Upper Peninsula.''
As the representative for Michigan's First District and the son of
a miner, I am truly proud of the new investments being made in the
area--from small businesses to global corporations. These investments
bring jobs to the area. Mining companies invest in our tax base,
helping local schools and libraries. Mining is an investment in the
future of the First District.
Like all industries, mines are highly regulated by the
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA). Many companies in my district
have been working with the EPA for years to receive permits to operate.
I fear many of these regulations are unnecessary and will cost Northern
Michiganders their jobs. Under the current climate, mining companies
are required to invest heavily in the area before they pull one ounce
of product out of the ground. In 2010, the EPA revoked an active mining
permit at the Spruce No. 1 Mine in West Virginia. This action is quite
worrisome due to the precedent it sets. While the EPA has stated that
they do not intend to pursue this route with other mines or industries
around the country, it sends a signal to our nation's job creators that
investing in America may not be a safe bet.
Mr. Chairman, I thank you for holding this hearing, and ask that
Congress pursue all options to restrict the EPA from pursuing this type
of arbitrary action in the future.


