- FAILED FEDERAL FOREST POLICIES: ENDANGERING JOBS, FORESTS AND SPECIES

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

FAILED FEDERAL FOREST

POLICIES: ENDANGERING JOBS,

FORESTS AND SPECIES
=======================================================================

OVERSIGHT FIELD HEARING

before the

SUBCOMMITTEE ON NATIONAL PARKS, FORESTS

AND PUBLIC LANDS

of the

COMMITTEE ON NATURAL RESOURCES

U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

Monday, May 21, 2012, in Longview, Washington

__________

Serial No. 112-112

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Natural Resources

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.fdsys.gov
or
Committee address: http://naturalresources.house.gov

U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
74-531                    WASHINGTON : 2013
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800; DC
area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104  Mail: Stop IDCC, Washington, DC
20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON NATURAL RESOURCES

DOC HASTINGS, WA, Chairman
EDWARD J. MARKEY, MA, Ranking Democratic Member

Don Young, AK                        Dale E. Kildee, MI
John J. Duncan, Jr., TN              Peter A. DeFazio, OR
Louie Gohmert, TX                    Eni F.H. Faleomavaega, AS
Rob Bishop, UT                       Frank Pallone, Jr., NJ
Doug Lamborn, CO                     Grace F. Napolitano, CA
Robert J. Wittman, VA                Rush D. Holt, NJ
Paul C. Broun, GA                    Raul M. Grijalva, AZ
John Fleming, LA                     Madeleine Z. Bordallo, GU
Mike Coffman, CO                     Jim Costa, CA
Tom McClintock, CA                   Dan Boren, OK
Glenn Thompson, PA                   Gregorio Kilili Camacho Sablan,
Jeff Denham, CA                          CNMI
Dan Benishek, MI                     Martin Heinrich, NM
David Rivera, FL                     Ben Ray Lujan, NM
Jeff Duncan, SC                      Betty Sutton, OH
Scott R. Tipton, CO                  Niki Tsongas, MA
Paul A. Gosar, AZ                    Pedro R. Pierluisi, PR
Raul R. Labrador, ID                 John Garamendi, CA
Kristi L. Noem, SD                   Colleen W. Hanabusa, HI
Steve Southerland II, FL             Paul Tonko, NY
Bill Flores, TX                      Vacancy
Andy Harris, MD
Jeffrey M. Landry, LA
Jon Runyan, NJ
Bill Johnson, OH
Mark Amodei, NV

Todd Young, Chief of Staff
Lisa Pittman, Chief Counsel
Jeffrey Duncan, Democratic Staff Director
David Watkins, Democratic Chief Counsel
------

SUBCOMMITTEE ON NATIONAL PARKS, FORESTS AND PUBLIC LANDS

ROB BISHOP, UT, Chairman
RAUL M. GRIJALVA, AZ, Ranking Democratic Member

Don Young, AK                        Dale E. Kildee, MI
John J. Duncan, Jr., TN              Peter A. DeFazio, OR
Doug Lamborn, CO                     Rush D. Holt, NJ
Paul C. Broun, GA                    Martin Heinrich, NM
Mike Coffman, CO                     Betty Sutton, OH
Tom McClintock, CA                   Niki Tsongas, MA
David Rivera, FL                     John Garamendi, CA
Scott R. Tipton, CO                  Vacancy
Raul R. Labrador, ID                 Edward J. Markey, MA, ex officio
Kristi L. Noem, SD
Mark Amodei, NV
Doc Hastings, WA, ex officio

------
CONTENTS

----------
Page

Hearing held on Monday, May 21, 2012.............................     1

Statement of Members:
Hastings, Hon. Doc, a Representative in Congress from the
State of Washington........................................     1
Prepared statement of....................................     3
Herrera Beutler, Hon. Jamie, a Representative in Congress
from the State of Washington...............................     4
Prepared statement of....................................     6

Statement of Witnesses:
Connaughton, Kent, Regional Forester, Pacific Northwest
Region, U.S. Forest Service, U.S. Department of
Agriculture, Portland, Oregon..............................    32
Prepared statement of....................................    34
Fox, Tom, President, Family Forest Foundation, Ethel,
Washington.................................................    10
Prepared statement of....................................    12
Friedman, Mitch, Executive Director, Conservation Northwest,
Bellingham, Washington.....................................    36
Prepared statement of....................................    38
Kreps, Kelly, Kreps Ranch LLC, White Salmon, Washington......    46
Prepared statement of....................................    48
Mealey, Stephen P., Vice President of Conservation, Boone &
Crockett Club, Leaburg, Oregon.............................    23
Prepared statement of....................................    25
Nelson, Tom, Washington Timberlands Manager, Sierra Pacific
Industries, Mount Vernon, Washington.......................    50
Prepared statement of....................................    51
Niemi, Ernie, Senior Economist, ECONorthwest, Eugene, Oregon.    40
Prepared statement of....................................    41
Pearce, Hon. Paul, Commissioner, Skamania County, Washington,
on behalf of the National Forest Counties and Schools
Coalition..................................................     7
Prepared statement of....................................     9
Salwasser, Dr. Hal, Cheryl Ramberg and Allyn C. Ford Dean,
College of Forestry, Oregon State University, Corvallis,
Oregon.....................................................    17
Prepared statement of....................................    18
U.S. Department of the Interior, Statement submitted for the
record.....................................................    65

Additional materials supplied:
List of documents retained in the Committee's official files.    69

OVERSIGHT FIELD HEARING ON ``FAILED FEDERAL FOREST POLICIES:
ENDANGERING JOBS, FORESTS AND SPECIES.''

----------

Monday, May 21, 2012

U.S. House of Representatives

Subcommittee on National Parks, Forests and Public Lands

Committee on Natural Resources

Longview, Washington

----------

The Subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 9:00 a.m., at
the Cowlitz County Expo and Conference Center, 1900 7th Avenue,
Longview, Washington, Hon. Doc Hastings presiding.
Present: Representatives Hastings and Herrera Beutler.
The Chairman. The Subcommittee on National Parks, Forests,
and Public Lands will come to order. I'm Congressman Doc
Hastings. I'm the Chairman of the Committee on Natural
Resources. I come from the other side of the State. What you
are experiencing here with rain we call inventory on our side
of the State so thank you for doing that. I'm very pleased to
be in the Third Congressional District, and I'm very pleased to
have here with me Congresswoman Jamie Herrera Beutler. Without
objection, she will sit with me at the table.
The Subcommittee on National Parks, Forests and Public
Lands meets today to hear testimony on a hearing entitled
``Failed Federal Forest Policy: Endangering Jobs, Forests and
Species.''
Can you hear me by the way? Is that better? Is that better?
OK. I apologize for that. I won't start over. I could start
over, but I won't start over. But we are here today to hear
testimony on a hearing entitled ``Failed Federal Forest
Policies: Endangering Jobs, Forests and Species,'' but, first,
before we start, I want to defer to my distinguished colleague,
the Congresswoman from the Third Congressional District for the
purposes of flag and introductions.
Ms. Herrera Beutler. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you for
being here. We're privileged to have, and I'm going to read
their names, Steven Wallace, Alex Wallace, Dane Kitchens for
Boy Scout Troop 319, and Eric Kolditz and Carl Kolditz from Boy
Scout Troop 883 to post the colors and lead us in the Pledge of
Allegiance, so please stand.
[Pledge of Allegiance.]

STATEMENT OF THE HON. DOC HASTINGS, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF WASHINGTON

The Chairman. Before hearing from our panel, I and
Congresswoman Herrera Beutler will have an opening statement. I
want to thank Congresswoman Herrera Beutler for hosting this
and for joining me here today. This hearing comes more than 20
years following approval of a Northwest Forest Plan and after
the Northern Spotted Owl was listed as endangered under the
Endangered Species Act.
To put it simply, the Northwest Forest Plan has failed. It
has failed on health of national forests, it has failed on the
economic well-being in rural counties and schools, it has cost
tens of thousands of Northwest timber-related jobs and the
closure of hundreds of mills and affected wood product
industries, and it has failed, probably more importantly, to
recover the Spotted Owl.
Nationwide, Federal agencies are not managing the land that
they are required to manage. Amidst our nation's $15.5 trillion
debt, the Interior Department and Forest Service's own
estimates reveal $22 billion in maintenance backlogs for lands
managed by the Forest Service, the Bureau of Land Management,
the U.S. Parks Service and the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service.
Worse, since the Northwest Forest Land, an average of 355,000
acres per year of Northwest national forests has been destroyed
by wildfires; yet agencies continue to request and spend more
money to contain wildfires and acquire even more land.
In the State of Washington, the Forest Service is already
responsible for managing over 9 million acres of forest land
contained within seven national forests. Timber harvest of
those forests has declined by 84 percent over the last decade,
84 percent, resulting in a loss of jobs and economic certainty
and a breach of the Federal Government's commitment to rural
forest communities.
Each year Washington's national forests grow three times
faster than they die. The Forest Service harvests just 2
percent of new growth, which yields about $13 million in
revenue. In contrast, the State of Washington, which manages
the trust about one-fourth the size of the Forest Service
lands, produces seven times more revenue than the Forest
Service for their local communities and, of course, those funds
go to our universities and school construction fund.
Despite the Administration's promises to streamline
regulations on Federal lands, it instead finalized the National
Forest Planning Group that de-emphasizes active management and
statutory multiple use requirements.
Let me just interrupt here for a moment to say when I
became Chairman of the Natural Resources Committee, which has
broad jurisdiction over all Federal lands, I viewed my
responsibility to uphold what I think was the first reason for
having public lands to be multiple use unless Congress
designated otherwise, and unfortunately, we have gotten away
from that notion, and multiple use, by the way, is not confined
just to recreation. It also means commercial activity.
The EPA has also failed to define its longstanding rule
exempting forest management activities from the Clean Water Act
permitting requirements and is pressing ahead with imposing yet
another damaging and burdensome regulation on forest
management.
Most concerning, the Fish and Wildlife Service issued
sweeping critical habitat proposals for the Spotted Owl that
amount to a huge land grab in Washington, Oregon and
California, some 13 million acres, including nearly 2 million
acres of private property. The proposals of these largely
outdated data from the '90s, they don't include an economic
impact analysis and they do little, if anything, to address the
concern of the Spotted Owl's decline, mainly another predatory
owl called the Barred Owl.
Earlier this year Secretary Salazar toured an ``ecological
pilot timber sale project'' as part of the Bureau of Land
Management's ``Western Oregon Strategy.'' The project, ``Pilot
Joe,'' produced only enough timber to run a single mill for a
week. I expected to inquire about the status of the BLM sales
but BLM, unfortunately, declined to participate in this
hearing.
One constant undercurrent is the Endangered Species Act.
Extreme groups file lawsuit after lawsuit to block human or job
creating economy activity tied to the forest, yet the results
are more catastrophic wildfires, more diseased and dying trees,
and destruction of the owl and the species' habitat.
Private landowners seeking safe harbor either can't afford
or don't trust the Federal Government's discretion, which
appears driven by the constant threat of more lawsuits, so
action must be taken to protect rural communities and private
property from these burdensome regulations.
I look forward to hearing from our witnesses today and
receive constructive input on how to go forward to improve our
forests' health and to recover the Spotted Owl.
With that, I'll recognize the gentlelady from Washington,
as we say in the other Washington, Ms. Herrera Beutler.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Hastings follows:]

Statement of The Honorable Doc Hastings, Chairman,
Committee on Natural Resources

I thank Congresswoman Herrera Beutler for joining me here today.
This hearing comes more than twenty years following approval of the
Northwest Forest Plan and after the Northern Spotted Owl's listing
under the Endangered Species Act.
To put it simply, the Northwest Forest Plan has failed. It has
failed the health of national forests. It has failed the economic well-
being of rural counties and schools, has cost tens of thousands of
Northwest timber-related jobs and the closure of hundreds of mills and
affected wood-products industries. And, it has failed to recover the
Spotted Owl.
Nationwide, federal agencies are not managing the land they are
required to manage. Amidst our nation's current $15.7 trillion debt,
the Interior Department's and Forest Service's own estimates reveal $22
billion in maintenance backlogs for lands managed by the Forest
Service, Bureau of Land Management, U.S. Park Service and the U.S. Fish
and Wildlife Service.
Worse, since the Northwest Forest Plan, an average of 355,000 acres
per year of Northwest national forests has been destroyed by wildfire.
Yet, agencies continue to request and spend more money to contain
wildfires and acquire even more land.
In Washington, the Forest Service is already responsible for
managing over 9 million acres of forest land contained within seven
national forests. Timber harvests of those forests declined 84 percent
over the past decade, resulting in a loss of jobs and economic
certainty, and a breach of the federal government's commitments to
rural forest communities.
Each year, Washington's national forests grow three times faster
than they die. The Forest Service harvests just 2 percent of new
growth, yielding about $13 million in revenue. In contrast, the State
of Washington, which manages in trust about one-fourth the amount of
the Forest Service's lands, produces seven times more revenue than the
Forest Service for local governments, universities and state school
construction.
Despite the Administration's promises to streamline regulations on
federal lands, it instead finalized a National Forest Planning Rule
that de-emphasizes active management and statutory multi-use
requirements. The EPA has also failed to defend its longstanding rule
exempting forest management activities from Clean Water Act permitting
requirements and is pressing ahead with imposing yet another damaging
and burdensome regulation on forest management.
Most concerning, the Fish and Wildlife Service issued sweeping
critical habitat proposals for the Spotted Owl that amount to a huge
land grab in Washington, Oregon and California--13 million acres--
including nearly 2 million acres of private property. The proposals are
based largely on outdated data from the 1990's, don't include an
economic impact analysis, and do little, if anything, to immediately
address the main cause of the owl's decline--another predatory owl--the
Barred Owl
Earlier this year, Secretary Salazar toured an ``ecological pilot
timber sale project'' as part of the Bureau of Land Management's
``Western Oregon Strategy.'' The project--``Pilot Joe'' produced only
enough timber to run a single mill for a week. I expected to inquire
about the status of BLM's sales,'' but BLM unfortunately declined to
participate in today's hearing.
One constant undercurrent is the Endangered Species Act. Extreme
groups file lawsuit after lawsuit to block human or job-creating
economic activity tied to the forests, yet the results are more
catastrophic wildfires, more diseased and dying trees, and destruction
of owl and species habitat. Private landowners seeking ``safe harbor''
either can't afford or don't trust the federal government's discretion,
which appears driven by the constant threat of more lawsuits.
Action must be taken now to protect rural communities and private
property from these burdensome regulations. I look forward to hearing
from our witnesses today and to receive constructive input on how,
going forward, we can improve forest health, create jobs and recover
the Spotted Owl.
______

STATEMENT OF THE HON. JAMIE HERRERA BEUTLER,
A REPRESENTATIVE IN CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF WASHINGTON

Ms. Herrera Beutler. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you
for your leadership on this issue. This is incredibly important
to my region and I appreciate you taking time and effort to
bring this congressional hearing to Cowlitz County.
I want to welcome everyone. This is our home, so welcome to
the folks who aren't from here to Southwest Washington. And I
want to start really quickly by recognizing the elected
officials and dignitaries who have joined us today. If I say
your name, please stand so that I know I've got you. I don't
mean got you, but got you.
The first one is Washington State Representative Ed Orcutt;
Skamania County Commissioner Paul Pearce, who is one of our
witnesses; Lewis County Commissioner Lee Grose; Cowlitz County
Commissioner George Raiter; Cowlitz County Commissioner Mike
Karnofski; Cowlitz County Commissioner Jim Misner, Wahkiakum
County Commissioner Dan Cochran; and a government official from
the Cowlitz Tribe, Chairman William Iyall. Thank you all for
joining us.
Now, today we're going to consider the policies and
practices that affect our forests, our wildlife, our economy
and the entire communities that surround this region. Those
things make up our identity, and folks across the spectrum are
recognizing that those things that we value are in jeopardy.
That's why we're here today.
Almost 20 years ago, the Northwest Forest Plan was written
into law. I was entering high school. The stated goals of the
plan were very laudable: Balance a healthy forest economy with
the protection of wildlife. Makes sense. But before a new plan
is adopted that doubles down on the current practices, we need
an honest science-based assessment of how the plan has worked
over the past two decades.
What we'll hear today will be based on science, expert
analysis and the testimony of community members who have been
left to deal with the consequences of these policies. I believe
what we'll hear is that the reality has been very far
different, far removed from what even the plan's architects had
intended.
Former U.S. Forest Service Chief Jack Ward Thomas was the
primary author of the Northwest Forest Plan. Ten years after he
stated that the plan is not working and has failed to fulfill
its promises to the people as well as the to environment he
stated, quote, ``I've got real terrible concern whether we're
taking care of the land.''
Here's what we've seen: Federal forests like the Gifford
Pinchot have been locked away from the economic activity and
species like the Spotted Owl have plummeted in number. Setting
aside 80 percent of our forests in some places has still failed
to protect the Spotted Owl. Plans to undertake environmentally
sound forest harvest projects and even very small projects have
been arrested by lawsuits and a thicket of Federal laws and
hoops to jump through and a failure of the U.S. Forest Service
to defend those projects.
Those I hear from, regardless of political party, want a
better plan for management of our forests and sustaining our
community. They're not asking for anything unreasonable, just a
plan that's based on science that manages for all the wildlife
species, including the one that's most important to me, which
is the endangered American wage earner.
Unfortunately, mismanagement by the U.S. Fish and Wildlife
Service has led to the decline of species like elk, deer and
multiple species of bird that are dependent on the diversity of
habitat. In the Northwest for generations, use of our forest
for economic activity has been part of who we are. We have
necessarily adopted and changed to become more sustainable and
responsible. That's great.
I've worked with Members of Congress from both parties to
protect common sense in our forest economy. For instance, my
colleague who wasn't able to join us today Kurt Schrader from
Oregon and I are working to keep 35 years of forest and water
protection in place instead of allowing the onerous Forest
Roads Rule from locking up even more of our forest economy.
I've worked with business, labor, Republicans, Democrats on
this issue because make no mistake about it, jobs are at stake,
communities will be affected.
I look forward to hearing from our witnesses today about
the need for better science and more balance in our forest
management practices. For two decades the mismanagement of our
beautiful forests have put them at grave risk of destruction
from disease, insect devastation and catastrophic wildfires.
Just last December the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service
admitted during a congressional briefing that managing for one
species only has harmed other wildlife, it hasn't protected the
Spotted Owl and it most certainly hasn't protected the jobs
that our community so desperately needs, so I believe we can do
better. Our wildlife and economy can both be protected.
Treating those two goals as mutually exclusive simply hasn't
worked. Our forests and our communities are sounding the alarm
and it's time for us to listen, so with that I look forward to
the testimony.
The Chairman. I thank the gentlelady.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Herrera Beutler follows:]

Statement of The Honorable Jamie Herrera Beutler,
a Representative in Congress from the State of Washington

I want to welcome everyone to my home, Southwest Washington.
I'd like to start by recognizing those elected officials who took
the time to join us today.
Today we consider the policies and practices that affect our
forests, wildlife, economy, and entire communities in this region.
Those things make up our identity. And folks across the spectrum are
recognizing that those things that we value are in jeopardy.
Almost twenty years ago, the Northwest Forest Plan was written into
law. The stated goals of the plan were laudable: balance a healthy
forest economy with the protection of wildlife.
But before a new plan is adopted that doubles-down on the current
practices, we need an honest, science-based assessment of how they have
worked over the last 2 decades.
What we'll hear today will be based on science, expert analysis,
and the testimony of community members who have been left to deal with
consequences of these policies. I believe what we'll hear is that
reality has been far different from what even the plan's architects
intended.
Former U.S. Forest Service Chief Jack Ward Thomas was a primary
author of the Northwest Forest Plan. Ten years after, he stated that
the plan is not working and has failed to fulfill its promise to the
people, as well as the environment. He stated: ``I've got real terrible
concern whether we are taking care of the land.''
Here's what we've seen: federal forests like the Gifford Pinchot
have been locked away from economic activity, and species like the
Spotted Owl have plummeted in number. Setting aside 80% of our forests
in some places have still failed to protect the Spotted Owl.
Plans to undertake environmentally sound forest harvest projects,
even very small projects, have been successfully arrested by lawsuits
and a thicket of federal laws and hoops to jump through, and a failure
of the U.S. Forest Service to defend these projects.
Those who I hear from, regardless of political party, want a new
plan for managing our forests and sustaining our communities. They're
not asking for anything unreasonable; just a plan based on science that
manages for all of the wildlife species. Unfortunately, mismanagement
by the US Fish and Wildlife Service has led to the decline in species
like deer, elk, and multiple species of birds that are dependent on
diversity of forest habitat.
In the northwest for generations, use of our forests for economic
activity has been part of who we are. That has necessarily adapted and
changed to become more sustainable and responsible. But I have worked
with Members of Congress from both parties to protect common sense in
our forest economy. For instance, my friend Kurt Schrader from Oregon
and I are working hard to keep 35 years of forest and water protection
in place, instead of allowing the onerous ``Forest Roads Rule'' from
further locking up our forest economy. I've worked with business,
labor, Republicans and Democrats on this issue because, make no mistake
about it, jobs will be lost. Communities will be harmed.
I look forward to from hearing from our witnesses about the need
for better science and more balance in our forest management practices.
For two decades, mismanagement of our beautiful forests have put them
at grave risk of destruction from disease, insect devastation, and
catastrophic wildfire.
Just last December, the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service admitted
during a congressional briefing that managing for one species has
harmed other wildlife. It hasn't protected the Spotted Owl, and it most
certainly hasn't protected the jobs that our community so badly needs.
I believe we can do better. Our wildlife and our economy can be
protected. Treating those two goals as mutually exclusive simply hasn't
worked.
Our forests and our communities are sounding the alarm. It is time
for us to listen and respond.
______

The Chairman. And I do want to remind the audience that--
first of all, let me thank all of you for being here, but this
is an official congressional hearing and for any of you that
would like to submit testimony, we would absolutely welcome
that testimony, and if you have any questions on precisely how
that process comes about, you can contact any of the people up
here that are part of the community. So we look forward to your
testimony. The idea of this Committee is to get testimony from
various people.
We do have a distinguished panel here, and let me introduce
them. First you have, who's already been introduced, The
Honorable Paul Pearce who's the Skamania County Commissioner.
Mr. Tom Fox is the President of the Family Forest Foundation,
and starting from your left to the right--I guess it would be
from my right to the left, which probably I prefer to do it
that way, third we have Dr. Hal Salwasser, Dean of College of
Forestry for Oregon State University; Mr. Steve Mealey, Vice
President of Conservation Boone and Crockett Club; Mr. Kent
Connaughton, Pacific Northwest Regional Forester U.S. Forest
Service; Mr. Mitch Friedman, the Executive Director of
Northwest Ecosystem Alliance; Mr. Ernie Niemi, Senior Economist
of EcoNorthwest; Mr. Kelly Kreps from Kreps Ranch, LLC; and Mr.
Tom Nelson, the Washington Timberlands Manager of the Sierra
Pacific Industries.
Let me explain for those of you that have not testified in
front of the Congressional Committee, first of all, your full
statement will appear in the record, and in every case, I
think, of the statements that I have reviewed, your statements
are longer than five minutes, which is fine, but your full
statement will appear in the record, but you have in front of
you a device that we call a timing light. It's on a five-minute
clock, and I hope that you keep your remarks to five minutes,
and the way that works is, when the green light is on, that
means you're doing extremely well. When the yellow light comes
on, it means you have one minute left, and I'd like you to wrap
up your remarks. And then when the red light comes on, you
really don't want to know what happens at that point. But if
you can confine yourself to that timing light, I'd very much
appreciate it. Obviously, if you're in a thought toward the
end, that discretion will be there, and I certainly do
recognize that.
So with that, let me start the testimony, and I'll
recognize Committee and County Commissioner Paul Pearce. Paul,
you're recognized for five minute.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. PAUL PEARCE, CHAIRMAN, SKAMANIA COUNTY
COMMISSIONER, STEVENSON, WASHINGTON

Mr. Pearce. Thank you very much. Good morning, Chairman
Hastings and Congresswoman Herrera Beutler. Thank you for the
opportunity to appear on behalf of the National Forest Impacted
County Control.
Skamania County is over 90 percent impacted by Federal Land
management. Since the listing of the Northern Spotted Owl we've
witnessed the wholesale destruction of an industry and economy.
From 1970 to 1990 Gifford Pinchot Forest produced on average
350 million board feet of timber yearly. The forest growth rate
is 1.1 million board feet and the mortality rate is 218 million
board feet.
In 1990 there were 1,200 jobs in the Gifford Pinchot, 350
with the Forest Service employees. We had four mills operating
in the county. Today there are few timber jobs and one mill.
They import mostly non-Federal logs from outside the county.
From the Canadian border to mid California you hear the same
stories from national forest impacted counties.
1992 saw Congress pass Owl Guaranteed payments for the
counties and schools hit with the loss of their economy to
allow agencies to plan for resuming some level of sustainable
harvest. This did not happen. SRS/County payments was passed
from 2000 through to the last payment in 2012. The payments
kept the county governments and the schools operating but also
turned many of us into the largest employers in our community.
Skamania's general fund budget this year was reduced from
$14.5 million to $10 million. We face another $4 million cut
next year. Our budget is 80 percent people. We have very little
land available for property tax. Our school districts are
facing a similar fate. Enrollment has dropped by 28 percent
over 20 years. We average 60 percent free and reduced lunch,
which is a key indicator of poverty, and on top of that, three
counties in Oregon currently face insolvency.
With Fish and Wildlife Services' suggestion of doubling
critical habitat from 6 million to 14 million acres, the
counties have simply had enough, especially when the Service
indicates that the greatest peril to the Spotted Owl is from
the Barred Owl. My county in Washington, Douglas County in
Oregon, Siskiyou County in California are the lead counties of
this fight on behalf of all affected communities in our state.
First, the counties have requested of the Secretary a 90-
day extension of the public comment deadline. We've had no
official reply. The Service tells us they will not have their
economic or environmental report done until late May, leaving
barely 30 days to comment only because they moved their
deadline 30 days. Their economic impact report will begin with
this new Critical Habitat and will not look at historical
impacts.
The Service complained an extension is impossible because
they're under court-ordered deadline of November 15th. This is
a gross misstatement of fact, as a quote from the Federal
Register shows. On October 12, 2010, the Court remanded the
2008 Critical Habitat rule and adopted the Service's proposed
schedule to issue a new rule for public comment by November 15,
2011, and a final rule by November 15, 2012.
The Service created the schedule, missed the deadline for
public comment by seven months, moved the deadline 30 days and
can certainly move the comment deadline an additional 90 days.
Second, the counties have no faith in this economic study
and have commissioned our own at the cost of the county. In the
'92 Final Plan, the Service estimated that only 27,000 jobs
would be lost. Oregon alone has lost in excess of 40,000. The
estimated impact to the Federal Treasury is $50 million per
year. The number is closer to $700 million per year.
Third, this morning the counties filed for legal
recognition as cooperating agencies on the final habitat plan.
We're closer to the social and economic issues surrounding this
proposal than any other Federal agency which would, without our
expertise, be acting in a vacuum again. I want to note that
this Critical Habitat Plan would make the provisions of
Chairman Hastings' bill impossible to implement across the
landscape, and as said by Chairman Hastings', DNR has 23
percent of the acreage and harvests 465 percent of the volume.
Finally, as I speak to public lands impacted, County
Commissioners, I find that no matter their political
persuasion, for the most part they have the same message: No
more wilderness or other set-asides of these public lands until
we've settled the active management and significant economic
questions before us.
Thank you.
The Chairman. Thank you very much for your testimony,
Commissioner Pearce.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Pearce follows:]

Statement of The Honorable Paul Pearce, Commissioner, Skamania County,
Washington, on behalf of the National Forest Counties and Schools
Coalition

Good morning Chairman Hastings and Congresswoman Herrera Beutler.
Thank you for the opportunity to appear before you as National Forest
Counties and Schools Coalition Vice President, NACo's Public Lands
Steering Committee Vice Chair, and most importantly as the Chair of the
Skamania County Board of Commissioners, a county 90% impacted by
Federal Land management.
Since the listing of the Northern Spotted Owl we have witnessed the
wholesale destruction of an industry and economy. From 1970 to 1990
Gifford Pinchot Forest alone produced on averaged 350 million board
feet of timber yearly. The forests mortality rate is 218 million board
feet and the growth rate is 1.1 billion board feet. Harvest even at
that level barely surpassed the mortality rate.
Beginning in 1992 with Critical Habitat, followed by the 1994
Northwest Forest Plan we saw the continued loss of timber jobs and
infrastructure at an incredible rate. In 1990 there were 1200 jobs on
the Gifford Pinchot Forest, 350 of them were forest service employees.
There were four full time mills operating in my county alone.
Today there are few timber jobs and only one full time mill. And
they truck logs in, mostly from non-federal lands. You'll hear the same
stories from Counties containing National Forests from the Canadian
border to mid California.
Congress passed Owl Guarantee payments for those counties and
schools hit with the loss of their entire economy so as to allow
agencies to get their act together resuming some level of sustainable
harvest. This did not happen and SRS/County Payments was passed from
2000 through this last payment in 2012. These payments kept the county
Governments and the Schools operating but also turned us into the
largest employers.
Our general fund budget for 2012 was cut from 14.5 million to 10
million. We face another 4 million cut in 2013. Like most public land
counties we only have a small sliver of land available for property
tax. Our school districts are facing a similar fate. Enrollment has
dropped by 28% over 20 years. We average 60 percent free and reduced
lunch, a key indicator of poverty. Our unemployment rate is still near
12% with an underemployment rate much higher.
Three counties in Oregon face insolvency. These statistics are true
for the highly public land dependant counties in all three states and
across the country.
So as the Service now suggests doubling Critical Habitat from 6
million to 14 million acres in Washington, Oregon and California the
counties have simply had enough. Especially when the Services indicates
that the greatest peril to the Spotted Owl is from the Barred Owl.
Skamania County in Washington, Douglas County in Oregon and
Siskiyou County in California are the leads for their sister counties.
We have requested a 90 day extension of the public comment deadline. We
have had no official reply to as yet.
The Service tells us they will not have their economic or
environmental reports done until late May which leaves barely 30 days
to reply. We are informed that their economic impact report will begin
on the day this new Critical Habitat is final and will not look at
historic impacts.
Members of the Service unofficially complain that an extension is
impossible because they are under a court ordered deadline of November
15th. This is a gross misstatement of fact
I quote from the federal register at page 1408:
``On October 12, 2010, the Court remanded the 2008 critical habitat
designation. . .and adopted the Service's proposed schedule to issue a
new proposed revised critical habitat rule for public comment by
November 15, 2011, and a final rule by November 15, 2012. . ..''
The Service created the schedule then missed the deadline for
public comment by seven months. They can certainly move the other
deadlines by 90 days.
The Counties have no faith in the economic study and have
commissioned our own. In the 1992 Final Plan at page 1815 the Service
makes a number of estimates as to the impacts of the listing and
critical habitat for the Northern Spotted Owl. They estimate that only
27,000 jobs would be lost stating that this was only 3% of timber
related jobs nationwide; as if the owl were listed nationwide. We know
that Oregon alone lost in excess of 40,000. They further estimate the
impact to the federal treasury at $50 million per year. We know based
on actual payments prior to the listing that this number is closer to
$700 million per year.
Also the three counties I mentioned above have this morning filed
for Cooperating Agency status on the final plan on behalf of all
affected counties.
This Critical Habitat makes the provisions of Chairman Hastings'
``Federal Forests County Revenue, Schools, and Jobs Act of 2012'' House
Bill 4109 impossible to implement across the landscape of these Owl
impacted Forests.
Timber harvest by the Forest Service and BLM is abysmal. Department
of Natural Resources in Washington State manages the counties timber
lands. DNR has a Habitat Conservation Plan including the Spotted Owl.
DNR manages 2.2 million acres. The Forest Service 9.3 million. From
2008 through 2010 DNR sustainably harvested 1.8 billion board feet of
timber. The Forest Service harvested 387 million board feet. DNR. . .at
23% of the acreage. . .harvested 465% of the volume as compared to the
forest service.
Finally as I speak to public lands impacted County Commissioners I
find that no matter their political persuasion; for the most part they
have the same message. No more wilderness, wilderness like, roadless,
roadless like, natural preserves or other set asides, of these public
lands until we have settled the active management, and significant
economic questions before us.
______

The Chairman. Next we'll call on Mr. Tom Fox, the President
of the Family Forest Foundation.
Mr. Fox, you're recognized.

STATEMENT OF TOM FOX, PRESIDENT,
FAMILY FOREST FOUNDATION, ETHEL, WASHINGTON

Mr. Fox. Thank you.
In Washington state there are 215,000 family forest
landowners. Although the parcel size is the average of 40
acres, family forests account for over 20 percent of the 16
million acres of forest land in the State of Washington. Family
forests are working for us, managed and nurtured with the care
and attention that only personal commitment and stewardship and
a unique love of the land.
Family forests generate nearly one-third of the state
timber harvest, contributing to the economic, social and
environmental health of the rural communities, but certain
implications of the ESA and the failed Federal policy are
forcing small landowners out of business.
Congress amended the ESA in 1986 to mitigate the impacts of
the Act by creating Section 10. Under the Habitat Conservation
Planning process you're supposed to be able to negotiate a plan
with U.S. Fish and Wildlife and National Marine Fishery
Services to provide for the economic viability of the landowner
and the habitat species need. This has worked OK for industrial
landowners in the State of Washington to the extent that there
are four companies that have HCP.
The State of Washington State Lands has an HCP and the DNR
Forest and Fish HCP. Most of these HCPs are working well, but
from the prospect of most family forest landowners, the HCP,
the Forest and Fish HCP is not working very well and is not
meeting major portions of the agreement such as developing low
effect prescriptions, providing adequate funding for the
forestry occurring easement, which is mitigation for the taking
that was promised to small landowners in the agreement.
In 1997 the Federal Government came to four small forest
landowners and asked them to do HCPs. In 2004 I was the only
family forest landowner out of the original four that was
successful after six years of working with the Services and
paying an eight-year HCP on my 45 acres of family forest. I
have a Safe Harbor Agreement, a conservation agreement with
assurances and a low fixed HCP.
In 1997, shortly after the original four began their
individual HCPs, the Services realized its small forest
landowners were having a hard time participating and that the
significant work load for the services, so this U.S. Fish and
Wildlife came to Lewis County government and a small group of
family forest Landowners in Lewis County to develop and to
participate in a pilot program that would develop a science-
based, county-wide programmatic HCP for small landowners. It
was a voluntary process. People that didn't want to participate
didn't have to.
In 2007, ten years later, after investing over $4 million
in public and private funds and during countless meetings,
participating in independent scientific review, the Family
Forest Foundation in those counties submitted the Family Forest
Habitat Conservation Plan. The response from the Services was
to sit on the application for an additional three-and-a-half
years before issuing a Notice of Receipt, not a Notice of
Intent but a Notice of Receipt. I requested public comment on
the proposal in early 2011.
Halfway through 2012, nearly 15 years later, the process of
the process, the Service has yet to render a written decision.
Requests from Lewis County and the Family Forest Foundation on
the written comments have been ignored. This is clearly a
conflict of the intent of Section 10 of ESA.
The recent U.S. proposal to shotgun Barred Owls to save
endangered Spotted Owl cousins defies common sense, logic and
cross into a murky moral morass of human playing God. This full
notion that we should and can try to shoot and control these
species with a shotgun is ludicrous.
Mr. Chairman, this probably has been made even worse by
U.S. Fish and Wildlife's recent Spotted Owl designation of
critical area habitat on 150 acres of private forest land.
Also, with the forest land not having any harvest of the larger
trees, we've lost our milling infrastructure and small
landowners are now forced to grow their trees on a shorter
rotation.
Mr. Chairman, I'm not sure how to address this problem, but
we're hoping that Congress can help us fix it. At a minimum I
would like to recommend creating an accountability and
appointing an omnibus coupled with an independent scientific
review team, change agency culture and staff in addition to
providing adequate fundings and combining two ESA
responsibilities for two agencies into one.
Thank you very much for allowing me to speak.
The Chairman. Thank you very much, Mr. Fox. I appreciate
your testimony.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Fox follows:]

Statement of Tom Fox, President, Family Forest Foundation

Sadly, too many politicians and agency administrators are unaware
that not all forest land is owned by an industrial company, a public
agency, or a Native American tribe. Far from that is the truth. In
Washington State there are over 215,000 family forest landowners that
own nearly 20% of the state's 16.1 million acres of commercial forest
land. Nationwide, the number is 59%. These family-owned forests are
nurtured and managed with the care and attention that comes only with
personal ownership and love of the land. These family forests
contribute immensely to the economic, social and environmental health
of local communities.
One might logically believe that fostering the vitality and
vibrancy of family forests would be an imperative goal of our nation's
federal forest management policies. If in fact that is true, our
federal forest policies of the last three decades have failed
miserably, resulting in the endangering of jobs, forests and species.
In this testimony I will describe 1.The failed Family Forest
Habitat Conservation Plan (FFHCP), 2. The effects of the failed federal
agencies policies, and 3.The effects of the failed Northwest Forest
plan and it economic and social ramifications to the rural counties in
which these forests are located.
The first is an example of our federal agencies stubborn refusal to
embrace and fully employ the processes embedded in the HCP provisions
of the Endangered Species Act to support and incentivize ownership and
sustainable management of family forests.
Designating additional acres of critical habitat for the Northern
Spotted Owl (NSO) as the U.S Fish and Wildlife suggest in their current
public registry notice is the wrong path to follow. That type of action
will only create disincentives for landowners to grow and maintain NSO
or for that matter any type of species habitat. Forest land owners are
getting weary of the federal services inability to work cooperatively
with them, and see this current habitat designation as another
misguided policy that will backfire causing additional species habitat
loss across the landscape.
Until recently, a more rational approach to species conservation
was utilized by the Services and landowners. Under the Habitat
Conservation Planning (HCP) process landowners and Services staff
negotiated numerous conservation plans that allowed sustainable forest
management while creating and maintaining species habitat.
In 1997, the Services invited a small dedicated group of family
forest landowners in SW Washington State to participate in developing
an HCP on their individual forest ownership. Four family forest
landowners stepped up to work with the services at the services
request. I was the only family forest landowner out of the original
four in that was successful and endured the over 6 years of working
with the services in 2004 in obtaining a HCP for my then 144 acres of
forest land in SW Washington. In fact I believe I am the only family
forest landowner in the nation that has been successful in receiving a
multi-species 80 year HCP in 2004 after working with the Services for
over 6 years. My forest land is named the Tagshinny Tree Farm, which is
a Gallic term that meaning ``Home of the Fox''. Our agreement includes
a combination of a Safe Harbor Agreement (SHA) that covers the NSO,
Candidate Conservation Agreement with Assurances (CCAA) with USFW, and
a Low Effects HCP (LEHCP) with NOAA.
The reasons I was determined to get my HCP was because I wanted to
provide my family with a long term forest management plan into the
future that provided certainty to my family. But also I and my family
truly want to provide certainty for the species that currently did or
could inhabit my land in the future. I didn't want to be managing my
forest land in the fear of having ESA species on my ownership but
rather I wanted to be able to welcome any and all species that lived or
came on my ownership. I had seen the ESA listing in the 1990's when the
NSO was listed and how it had affected the psyche of forest landowners
by driving them to ``Manage by Fear''. Fear that a species would
inhabit their property and that their property and investment would
become worthless. Also fear that if they created and providing habit
for ESA listed species on their property they would be punished for
doing the right thing.
My children as many other forest land owner's children have been
discouraged by what they see as a very negative image of being a forest
landowner that continues to be betrayed by many out of touch
environmental organizations. The continued lies and miss-truths that
those groups have and continue to spread have poisoned future
generations minds. The continual misrepresentation of forest landowners
has twisted the truth to a point where many heirs don't want anything
to do with forest ownership as they have been brainwashed that growing
and then harvesting trees in a sustainable manner is a bad thing.
In 1997 after the four original forest landowners in Lewis County
Washington stepped up to work with the Services it quickly became
apparent to the Services that they didn't have the staff or ability to
take on the HCP planning process on a one on one bases with family
forest landowners. So the Services suggested that the Family Forest
Foundation (FFF), Lewis County government work with the services and
the family forest landowner in that county to develop a County wide
programmatic HCP. The concept was that Lewis County would be the
permittee of the HCP and willing landowners would be included into the
plan with the use of a certificate of inclusion. Landowner
participation into the HCP would be on a volunteer basis and those
landowners that were not interested in participating would simply
continue to follow the current set of rules and regulation that they
were already following. The Forest and Fish agreement which is the
state wide HCP that was implemented in 2000 included a clause that
allowed landowners that entered into HCP's to replace portions of the
state wide HCP with their negotiated prescriptions. After investing
over $4 million of public and private funds, enduring countless
meetings and participating in independent scientific review processes
the Family Forest Foundation in cooperation with Lewis County submitted
the Family Forest Habitat Conservation Plan (FFHCP) to the Services in
2007. After sitting on the application for nearly three and a half
years the Services issued a Notice of Receipt (NOR) and requested
public comment on the proposal in early 2011. Lewis County and the FFF
have not received any communications from the services about the
results of the NOR. Lewis county and the FFF have repeatedly requested
copies of the NOR comments that were submitted, but the Services refuse
to allow us copies of the written comments. How and why have the
services been allowed to stonewall us and not provide us with that
information? We even filed a FOIA request in an attempt to find out the
breath of the comments submitted on the NOR but the services have only
provided us with minimal amounts of information. The Services are
clearly not following the intent of Section 10 of the ESA or the
written policies of the Services as stated in the HCP Handbook. When
and who is going to make the Services accountable? The FFHCP, if
implemented, could provide an enormous incentive to Lewis County
landowners to help encourage them to keep growing trees while providing
quality species habitat across the landscape rather than develop their
land to other nonforest uses. Family forest landowners are struggling
to stay on the landscape and need an alternative to the ``one size fits
all'' Forest and Fish agreement, like the customized FFHCP if they are
to continue to keep their land in forests.
I believe the Services are negligent in their duty by not working
with Lewis County and willing landowners to develop the FFHCP. Rather
they undermine and demoralize the very land owners they are charged to
work with. Additionally the Services are negligent in their duty to the
species by not understanding that continuing to not provide incentives
and alternatives that the ESA is designed to provide only drives
landowners to not manage their property for increased species habitat.
I do believe that sustainable working forests are compatible with
species protection but a landowner that is growing a crop for 50-70
years needs to have some level of certainty in order to feel
comfortable about continuing to invest in forest ownership for decades.
Here we are almost half way through 2012 and the Services to date
have yet to render a decision on the FFHCP. Off the record we have been
told that there will be no more forestry HCP's for coverage of aquatic
species on private lands in Washington State because of the state wide
Forest and Fish HCP agreement. We were also told by the Services that
family forest landowners don't need a HCP because we don't have any ESA
species issues. Now we have the Services wanting to designate
additional NSO habitat on private land. Clearly, the HCP process in
this region is broken. It's not that the ESA has changed, but rather
it's because the Services staff and leadership has changed and they
have decided they don't want to do HCP's with family forest landowners
in Washington State. They don't want to abide by the ESA as it was
intended to be implemented. They have decided in some dark room
somewhere that they are not going to work with landowners that are
interested in doing HCP's. Rather the current staff and leadership have
taken upon themselves to basically rewrite the ESA and deny what is
rightly due willing landowner. We need new leadership in these agencies
that will work with and not against forest landowners with voluntary
incentive based solutions. Putting a gun to our heads demanding more of
our forests is not going to work. When are you the Congress going to
hold these out of control bureaucrats accountable for their actions?
Aquatic species conservation in Region 1 (Washington, Oregon and
Idaho) is an enigma to say the least. Salmon lead the list of species
under protection and spend the majority of their life cycle in the
ocean. As an example when they swim inland up the Columbia River
regulations vary greatly depending on the direction of travel. If the
fish swims into Washington State the regulatory rule book for aquatic
species conservation is four inches thick. Site potential tree height
buffers as wide as 200' protect even water that doesn't have fish but
could in the future be potential fish habitat. If the species swims
south into Oregon the rules are considerably less, and if the fish can
make their way past all the dams to their home in Idaho the regulations
are even less.
Where is the credit for Washington forest landowners for stepping
up and agreeing to the Forest and Fish agreement HCP? The riparian
buffers that are being left along all the streams in Washington State
in perpetuity should be considered as available habitat for the NSO.
Washington's agreement is called the ``Forest and Fish Agreement'' and
as such does and will forever provide habitat for many upland species
and should be part of the equation when calculating future available
habitat for the NSO.
In the last 12 years since the NW Forest Plan (NWFP) implementation
the Forest Service has done a dismal job of meeting their allowable cut
goals of the plan only producing 2% of what was agreed to in the NWFP.
Continued pressure and threat of lawsuits from out of touch enviro
groups have paralyzed the Forest Service. Comparing the Washington
State DNR state lands average return of almost $400 per thousand board
feet to the Forest Service's average return to the US Treasury of less
than $10 per thousand board feet, one has to conclude that Forest
Service management has been a disaster. As a result of the Forest
Service's inability to harvest the timber that they should be
harvesting the large log milling infrastructure of the state has been
decimated by the lack of available timber volume. Consequently private
forest landowners in Washington State don't have any place to sell
their large logs. Previously, growing your timber older, larger, and
longer was better. Better in the since that a landowner would get more
for their logs at the mill and they could grow bigger and better
habitat for the species. But because of the lack of milling options
today landowners actually are penalized and get paid less for their
larger logs. This phenomenon is driving landowners to grow their tree
on a shorter rotation or be punished by reduced income for growing a
longer rotation. In the past many family forest landowners enjoyed and
were more than willing to grow their trees to 70 or 80 years of age
creating older succession type timber. Today with the lack of large log
milling infrastructure the incentive to grow timber on a longer
rotation has disappeared.
From the perspective of private forestland owners, federally driven
constraints on management of forests both private and government
controlled has been a dismal failure. Evidence the serious increase in
mill closures since 1990 reported by Ehinger and Associates. Mill
closures have mostly been caused by drastically reduced National Forest
timber sales due to the listing of the NSO. With this precipitous drop
in milling infrastructure thousands of jobs have been lost and the NSO
has not been recovering in numbers or increased its range.
Private forest landowners have been forced to stop growing what
could have been ideal NSO forest habitat. Large log sawmills are
closing and the forest industry has had to retool to cut smaller, more
uniform saw logs to remain competitive in the global marketplace. The
loss of a sustainable supply of large saw logs from USFS lands forced
the milling industry to adapt to milling only smaller logs; logs which
come from smaller trees, younger forests. These younger forests,
smaller trees, and reduced NSO habitat are then a direct result of the
failure of the NSO Recovery Plan!! Evidence all of the habitat
destruction caused by stand replacement wildfire that has occurred on
USFS lands since 1990. Evidence the Arizona and Colorado wildfires
burning out of control today, May 2012! Forests are dynamic and ever
changing; so by them setting aside or ``preserving them in perpetuity''
does not guarantee the `banking' of that habitat.
By restricting USNF timber sales of large logs, in a misdirected
attempt to save the owl, the government agencies have actually reduced
the available acreage of potential NSO habitat except on Habitat
Conservation Plan (HCP) Lands.
Over time the cumulative effects of increasing regulatory
constraints on forest management reduce yield and the incentive for
private forest landowners to continue providing the goods and services
society has come to expect from them (clean air, water, wood products,
tax receipts, etc.) Private forestlands in the United States exist in
our capitalist, democratic country because of the rights bestowed us in
our US Constitution. The incentive to profit from the production of
forest products is what drives investment in forestland. This is the
American way!
If the profit motive is taken away by the piling on of more and
more regulations, ultimately these ever increasing constraints will
eventually render forest management uneconomic and these forestlands
will be converted to other uses that provide greater economic
opportunity. These alternative uses normally degrade wildlife habitat
quality from that provided by managed forests.
There are ways to overcome these blunders.

Promote HCP's; individual or programmatic (provide
fast track templates)

Include economic analysis of costs in terms of
harvest yields and other costs

Mitigate these losses and compensate for government
takings of private property

Minimize constraints on private lands

Promote incentives to provide habitat
Below is information that shows the impact on Washington's working
forest and was derived from the State Wide Data Base. In summary the
information below shows that there are currently a total of 1,615
landowners that own 10 acres or more that would be affected by the
additional 150,000 acres of habitat that USFW is currently proposing.
The economic effects, in an already dismal employment picture, of
increasing the critical habitat designation will be the further
crippling of already struggling rural counties.

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74531.001

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74531.002

.epsFor every 1,000 acres of working forest 12 jobs are supported
paying $523,000 in wages and $19,000 in taxes and fees, annually.
After the proposed exclusions of HCPs and other federal agreements,
nearly 150,000 acres of privately owned land remains within the federal
critical habitat designation in Washington State.

150,000 acres of working forests supports 1,800 jobs.

150,000 acres of working forests impacts 1,615
landowners.

150,000 acres of working forests produces $2.1
million in annual sales
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74531.003

.epsThe premise underlying the Services decision to shoot sea lions
to save salmon was shaky at best. The more recent decision to shotgun
barred owls to save its endangered spotted owl cousin defies common
sense, logic and crosses into a murky moral morass where humans attempt
to play god and choose which cousin shall survive. So what about the
fact that spotted owls and barred owls are now cross breeding. How will
the services shooters know if it's a spotted, barred or spard owl. This
whole notion that we can control these species with a shot gun is
ridiculous.
Natural resource agency consolidation needs to be a top priority of
the Congress. Negotiating a HCP with two different agencies with two
different policies is mind boggling. All they do is point fingers at
each other and won't cooperate with you or each other. I believe the
Congress should cut their budgets, consolidate agencies and develop an
all lands approach to species conservation!
If we can't accomplish some major changes to the current system
then we can look forward to a future where the nights are spent shot
gunning innocent barred owls and we can watch the further fragmentation
of family forest habitat by day.
Scientific efforts in political processes have taken a beating. We
clearly lack processes where by the preponderance of scientific
information can move forward while acknowledging dissenting opinions in
a transparent manner. Instead scientific approaches fail in stakeholder
processes built on consensus models where political posturing is
confused for scientific debate and progress is measured in years and
strict adherence to protocol. The effect of this confusion is never
more evident that in the Interdisciplinary Team review process
currently utilized in the implementation our State's Forest Practices
HCP. This costly and ungainly process entails representatives from
USFWS, NOAA Fisheries, Ecology, Washington Department of Fish and
Wildlife, affected Tribes and is spearheaded by the Department of
Natural Resources Forest Practices forester. Any deviation from the
current Forest Practice rule requires a visit from and ID team to
determine whether or not the proposed deviation provides ``equivalent
function'' to the current rule. These determinations often mire down in
agency infighting over whose fish is the best fish etc., and rarely
improve the proposed forest practice while spending thousands of scare
resource dollars per visit.
The time for regulation by committee has passed. We simply cannot
afford this sort of agency redundancy in order for our regulatory
system to function correctly. Forest practice foresters are highly
qualified individuals well equipped to make functional determinations
in the field. If additional resources are needed to make such
determinations then field foresters can reach out to qualified resource
professionals on a case by case basis.
Federal critical habitat designation is the wrong conservation
mechanism for private forestlands. Washington's private forests are the
economic engine of the forest industry. You need to remove federal
critical habitat designation on private working forest lands;
otherwise, we will destroy the very landowners that should be
encouraged to stay on the landscape. If the landowner and working
forests become extinct none of the species will survive.
______

The Chairman. Next we'll call on Dr. Hal Salwasser, Dean of
the College of Forestry at Oregon State University, and let me
explain why you are speaking this way. You will notice a little
bit of an accident and there's some question on what the
accident was. Some of your friends said it was other activity.
You said you fell, so we'll take your word for it. At any rate,
you are recognized for five minutes.

STATEMENT OF HAL SALWASSER, PH.D., CHERYL RAMBERG AND ALLYN C.
FORD DEAN, COLLEGE OF FORESTRY, OREGON STATE UNIVERSITY,
CORVALLIS, OREGON

Dr. Salwasser. Thank you, Chairman Hastings and
Representative Herrera Beutler. I'm Hal Salwasser. I'm
testifying here today as a private citizen. I have almost 20
years of experience, starting as a wildlife ecologist in
California and culminating as a senior executive in the
Washington office, the Northern Rockies and California. For the
past three decades I've been engaged with an agency trying to
change in response to changing societal values and science.
If I were to give what I have to say today a title it would
be Restoring Federal Forests for Prosperity in the American
West. In my brief time I'm going to touch on four things that
are expanded upon in my written testimony. The first is the
Grand Societal Resource Challenge--Meeting the needs of 30
percent more people by mid-century with no more land or water
than we have now and probably less access to fossil
hydrocarbon. The Economist call this the 9 Billion People
Challenge. It translates here in the Pacific Northwest to 30
percent more people in the Nation to 30 percent and global with
30 percent.
The second is the problem in the west. Western Federal
forest lands no longer make significant contributions to the
grand challenge for natural resources at any geographic scale.
They no longer serve their statutory purposes. They're becoming
a substantial liability to the states, their rural communities
and American taxpayers and they are now a growing threat to
adjoining landowners due to vulnerability, to fire, insects and
disease.
Third thing is the inadequacy of current legislative
approaches. While well intended, recent legislative proposals
do not address the larger problems of statutory dissonance,
governance dysfunction and long-term sustainability of new
directions. The trees keep growing and dying, victims of client
change, invasive species, uncharacteristic fire, insects and
insufficient funds or social license to change course.
My last theme is Options Forward. Sooner or later society
has to confront the consequences of Federal forest land
management dysfunction, declining land, rising health costs,
poverty stricken rural America, hanging on through Federal
payments because the Nation refuses to empower the responsible
agencies to sustainably use public lands and their natural
resources to generate wealth and jobs while improving
environmental benefits. Meanwhile, the nation's dependence on
foreign natural resources increases, so it's past time to try
some novel grand experiments.
And here are some that are being talked about right now:
The first is technical and managerial, and the examples are the
pilots being done on Oregon and California lands in southern
Oregon, the Johnson Franklin ecological restoration project.
The problem with these is that they don't address the
fundamental ill, the lack of clarity on a mission.
There are also some discussions about changes in
governance. Dan Kemmis, for example, suggests local
collaboratives, but it's going to take Cabinet or Congressional
level authority to make those work. Several people have
suggested a Presidential commission with broad authority to
suggest maybe changes in policy. In my view that would merely
kick the can down the road. What is necessary is congressional
clarification of the statutory purposes and clear roadblocks to
effectiveness. The core issue is not failed Federal forest
policies, nor is it failing Federal agency. It's failure of
Federal forest laws to address the environmental economic and
community aspirations of western states.
The last is to transfer the alliance to somebody else to
manage without the current Federal policy hurdles. Oregon
congressional delegation has proposed transferring some of the
BLM lands to a trust. Others have suggested to transfer them
back to the original stewards, the tribes, who have the
capacity in many places and can provide the kind of protection
and integrated management that meets their needs as well as
other people.
Thank you for this opportunity to testify and I look
forward to further discussions.
The Chairman. Thank you very much, Dr. Salwasser.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Salwasser follows:]

Statement of Hal Salwasser, Cheryl Ramberg and Allyn C. Ford Dean,
College of Forestry, Oregon State University

Mr. Chairman and Members of the Committee:
I am Hal Salwasser, Cheryl Ramberg and Allyn C. Ford Dean of the
College of Forestry at Oregon State University. I testify today as a
private citizen, with over 20 years of experience with the US Forest
Service, starting as a wildlife ecologist in California and culminating
as a Senior Executive. I was the Director of New Perspectives and
Ecosystem Management in the Washington Office, Regional Forester in the
Northern Region and Director of the Pacific Southwest Research Station
in California. In my latter two roles I provided executive guidance to
the Interior Columbia Basin Ecosystem Management Project and the
Framework for Revising National Forest Plans in the Sierra Nevada.
During the first decade of the 21st century, I served on the National
Commission on Science for Sustainable Forestry and was chair from 2003-
2005. I have been Dean at OSU since 2000.
For the past three decades I have been engaged with an agency
trying to change in response to changing societal values and science,
first as one of its leaders and later as a concerned colleague and
citizen. If I were to give what I have to say today a title it would be
this:
Restoring Federal Forests for Prosperity in the American West
In my brief time here I will talk about four themes that, in my
experience are relevant to your task:
The Grand Societal Resource Challenge--Meeting the needs of 30%
more people by mid-century with no more land or water than we have now
and perhaps less access to fossil hydrocarbon: the 9 Billion People
Challenge (30% more in PNW, 30% more in US, 30% more in world).
The Problem in the West--Western federal forestlands no longer make
significant contributions to the grand challenge for natural resources;
they no longer serve their statutory purposes; they are becoming a
substantial liability to the states, their rural communities and
American taxpayers; and they are a growing threat to adjoining
landowners due to vulnerability to fire, insects and disease.
The Inadequacy of Current Legislative Approaches--While well
intended, recent legislative proposals do not address larger problems
of statutory dissonance, governance dysfunction, and long-term
sustainability of new directions. The trees just keep growing and
dying, victims of climate change, invasive species, uncharacteristic
wildfires, insect outbreaks and insufficient funds or social license to
change course.
Options Forward--Sooner or later society must confront the
consequences of federal forestland management dysfunction, e.g.,
declining land health, rising costs, a poverty stricken rural America
hanging on through federal payments because the nation refuses to
empower the responsible agencies to sustainably use public lands and
their natural resources to generate wealth and jobs while improving
environmental benefits. Meanwhile the nation's dependence on foreign
natural resources increases. It is past time to try some novel grand
``experiments.'' The following are among those suggested:

Technical/managerial, e.g., Franklin/Johnson,
ecological restoration emphasis; but this will not address
underlying problem of lack of clarity on agency mission

Governance, e.g., Kemmis, local collaborative; but it
will take Secretary or Congressional authorization

Presidential Commission with broad authority to
suggest major change in policy (like the recent Entitlements/
Deficits Commission); to me this just kicks the can down the
road;

Congressional clarification of the statutory purposes
and to clear roadblocks to effectiveness; the core issue here
is not failed federal forest policies, not is it failing
federal forest agencies. It is the failure of a suite of
federal laws to address the environmental, economic and
community aspirations of those whose lives are so deeply
affected by what happens on federal forests. Only Congressional
action can fix this.

Transfer the lands to someone else to manage without
current federal policy hurdles, e.g., land trust or tribes with
capacity--the original stewards, or at minimum charter as
appropriate to provide anchor forests for protection of tribal
forest values; this is a slippery slope that once started could
end up with divestiture of federal lands outside
Congressionally designated Wilderness Areas, National
Monuments, and Wild and Scenic Rivers.
Context: The 9 Billion Challenge
We live in a world that has twice as many humans as when I was a
kid; I am 66. We humans consume more space and resources and produce
more pollutants than many ecosystems can sustain over the long term. To
support this many people has required re-plumbing river systems,
massive conversion of forests, woodlands and grasslands to agriculture,
development of hard infrastructure, depletion of marine resources, and
exhaustive mining of minerals and hydrocarbons. In the US, we thrive
off the material production of others, often in exploitive ways. And,
we tolerate a widening gap between the truly wealthy and the truly
poor, a social justice problem that belies our rhetoric about equality.
We are clearly not on a sustainable trajectory, let alone poised to
handle 9-10 billion humans. But that is only the dark side. How about
the upside?
Most humans now live longer. Most are healthier. Many are better
educated. We have not exhausted all renewable natural resources due to
sustainable, science-informed professional management. These statements
are not true for all people or resources, but things are better in many
ways than just 50 years ago. In other words, things are not as bad as
they might have been. So, where do forest management and forest and
other natural resource professionals fit in this complex picture?
Those now in their 20s and early 30s will be asked to meet the
needs of 30% more people before their careers are over; as The
Economist put it last year, addressing the 9 billion people question.
They will be expected to do this with no more forested land than now
exists, perhaps even with less. Using much of that land to grow a
renewable material and provide substantial ecosystem service benefits
in economically feasible and socially acceptable ways will be critical
to future human well-being. Meeting the challenge will require highly
skilled and motivated professionals. Producing these individuals and
the discoveries that will help them be successful is our business at
America's Land Grant Universities.
But merely meeting the material needs of a growing human
population, while necessary, will not be sufficient. Social and
environmental justice must be part of the future to prevent societies
from tearing themselves asunder, just as we see today where those needs
are lacking. Future industrialized societies must also transition from
a hydrocarbon-dependent economy to a carbohydrate-augmented economy,
and not just in what we eat, wear and how we travel. Wood and cellulose
will be major factors in that transition. So will optimizing every acre
of forest for its best service to society, not every acre for wood but
more than we currently employ in the U.S. Optimally all forests, local
to global, should have science-informed, owner-values based
professional management. That will not come from those who believe
forests should be managed only for wood or those who believe they
should be left to nature. The former is socially and environmentally
unacceptable in our nation and in many others and the latter option
disappeared with population growth and affluence enabled by the advent
of agriculture 10,000 years ago, though some still live in denial of
the reality of what it takes to support so many people on planet earth.
So, why focus on western U.S. federal forests? They are not
industrial forests, where wood production takes precedence in desired
outcomes. A major reason is they dominate the Western forest scene and
they no longer play productive roles for meeting the grand societal
challenges of the 21st century at any geographic scale from local to
global. Further, what happens on federal forests affects others in more
ways than many people think. I suspect few urbanites realize the
conditions of ``their'' federal forests threaten other nearby
landowners and communities and that lack of management is the reason.
The Western Federal Forest Case
Western states have lived with federal management of almost half to
nearly all their forestland estate for over 100 years. Those forests
have shaped much of what Westerners and others think about forestry and
their states, not all, of course, but much. Federal forests have always
been the West's preeminent watersheds; this will continue far into the
future. They also are and will continue to be some of the West's
richest habitats for native plants and animals, prominent among them
Douglas-fir, ponderosa pine, aspen, oaks, trout, salmon, elk, deer,
bears and an occasional owl or wolf.
Over time, federal forests have lost a few native species, such as
grizzlies and gray wolves which are now returning to a small part of
their original range and they have become significant recreation and
tourism assets. For a brief interlude, from around 1950-1990, Western
federal forests delivered nearly a quarter of the nation's softwood
lumber and panel production, and they supported hundreds of local rural
communities and hundreds of thousands of jobs related to forest
resources, significant sources for rural community vitality and
prosperity and, because wood products are in traded sector economies,
urban ones as well.
Many, but not all, of the economic, environmental and community
benefits from federal forests remain; timber supply and its associated
jobs and wealth creation are greatly reduced. But now, due to lack of
sustainable wealth creation from renewable resources, rising costs of
fire management, threats to private, state and tribal forests from
wildfires and insect and pest outbreaks and loss of wood processing
infrastructure, federal forests are becoming a substantial liability to
rural communities, western states, American taxpayers, and, in many
places, non-federal timberlands. These are all unintended consequences
of how environmental laws suited to the 1970s are interpreted and
implemented, most notably the Endangered Species Act and the Clean
Water Act.
The current costs of holding federal forests as a government
managed public trust far exceed the revenues generated, and expenses
related to fire management exceed all other investment needs. This was
not always the case. Who pays the bills? Every American taxpayer does.
Who bears the impacts? Mostly local people and communities in areas
near the forests and throughout the west. This is hardly an equitable
condition and certainly out of alignment with the social contract
between urban and rural America that began eroding in the 1980s.
Counties across the west are left begging for a federal transfer of
wealth in lieu of revenues from sustainable economic activities on
federal forests and they do not get federal timber-related jobs and
indirect businesses with their check. Continuing the check it is not a
path to prosperity; it is merely a bridge from the past to, well,
where? Meanwhile, the trees keep growing and, in fire-prone forests
dying, victims of climate change, invasive species, uncharacteristic
wildfires, insect outbreaks and insufficient funds or social license to
change course. I am not the first or only person to point this out.
Western federal forests are simply not sustainable on their current
trajectory; they are not ecologically, economically or socially
sustainable. Absent course correction, the situation will only worsen,
leaving political leaders at national, state and local levels literally
hamstrung for viable options, to wit, the suggestion by some that we
can thin our way to economic vitality or sustainability. To me we, as a
society, are ignoring the fundamental issue: What is/are the purpose(s)
of lands held and managed in the public trust by agencies of the
federal government? Marion Clawson wrote a still relevant book on this
in 1975: Forests for Whom and for What. That is still the question.
Very few people want to see species go extinct or water quality to
decline. So, any path forward must guard against those outcomes and the
latter will prove more feasible than the former. Declining political
support for the federal check in lieu of wealth creation from federal
forests shows that very few people support such a wealth transfer. So,
any path forward must deal with this issue as well. Thus, the critical
policy question must be: Are there ways to sustain/restore resilient
federal land ecosystems that deliver desired environmental, economic
and social benefits to society with less impact to economies and
communities than current approaches? If so, would laws need to be
changed? Yes and yes.
Let's drop back to what Congress has said are the original purposes
for federal forests. Three laws define the purpose(s) for national
forests (Organic Act of 1891, Multiple-Use, Sustained-Yield Act of
1960, and National Forest Management Act 1976 amendment to the
Renewable Resources Planning Act of 1974), two for Public Lands (BLM)
(Oregon and California Lands Act of 1936 and Forest and Rangeland
Policy and Management Act of 1976). Other laws have overlaid purposes
not meshed with these organic statutes: Endangered Species Act of 1973
as amended (ESA), Clean Water Act (CWA), and Clean Air Act (CAA). Equal
Access to Justice Act (EAJA) and Administrative Procedures Act (APA)
give activist groups essentially a free ride to use those other laws to
subvert the statutory purposes of federal forests, with taxpayers
paying their bills.
Pioneering conservation leaders of the late 1800s and early 1900s
championed federal land tenure to promote protection and conservation
of wild places, wild life and waterways and the shared, sustainable,
ethical and productive uses of natural resources. There was tension in
the balance among these purposes from the very beginning of federal
land tenure and aggravated distortions appeared post World War II as
the nation increasingly relied on federal forests for its home
construction boom. The distortion now is the false notion that not
managing forests for some wealth creation is a form of protection. In
our nation's current financial situation it is actually a path to
degradation of a once prime asset.
Our current framework of resource and environmental policies,
suited to and based on 1960s issues, and science are simply not working
for 21st century challenges. Nor are they reflective of current
scientific understandings of ecosystem dynamics and resilience. Perhaps
it is time for a big Forest Policy Rummage Sale. Before a rummage sale,
you sort through the ``stuff'' in your attic to rediscover the
treasures you want to keep and identify the junk you want to jettison.
Along the evolutionary course of conservation on federal forests
several ``grand experiments'' have been, and some still are, carried
out (though they were not thought of as experiments in the true sense).
This is 2012, so I'll give you 12 that come to my mind. This is some of
the stuff in the attic.
1.  Governance by scientifically trained managers in
consultation with local, state and legislative leaders (1905-
on),
2.  Curtailment of the worst forms of domestic livestock
grazing and timber poaching (1905-on),
3.  Eradication of top predators (done by 1920s),
4.  Suppression of all wild-land fire (10 AM policy, post Big
Burn, 1910-on),
5.  Development of recreation infrastructure (1920s-on),
6.  Use of unemployed people to carry out conservation
projects (CCC, 1930s),
7.  Engineering waterways for flood, irrigation and hydropower
control (generally 1930s-1960s),
8.  Dedication to domestic timber supplies (1950s-1990),
9.  Congressional creation of no-development Wilderness Areas
(1964-on) and agency dedication of de-facto wilderness, i.e.,
Roadless Rule (2001-?),
10.  Protection and conservation of at risk species (ESA 1973-
on),
11.  Widespread judicial enforcement of single resource
legislation, e.g., ESA, CWA, and CAA, at the expense of
multiple-use sustainability mandates, e.g., MUSY, NFMA, O&C
Act, and FLPMA, (mostly post 1970s) and lately
12.  The era and euphoria of collaboration (1990s-on).
During the course of these ``experiments'' our human population
grew threefold and migrated from rural to urban settings, the climate
changed, economies and technologies changed, and policies and social
norms enabled a highly consumptive culture fed by non-domestic resource
production. Yet, we remain saddled with laws written during an earlier
time, based on antique science, and designed to solve yesterdays'
challenges. Some of yesterdays' challenges are still with us and some
or all of them may grow in magnitude. But the times are vastly
different and new science has shown that the vitality and resilience of
ecological, social and economic systems are ill-served by single-
species, single-industry, single-engine dominance, i.e., what we seem
to have high-centered on with federal forest management lately as
single-species protection is trumping all other purposes. With current
and pending climate change it may not be possible to ``save'' species,
one-by-one. If so, perhaps society should rethink ESA to focus on
conserving the ecosystems, the originally stated purpose, and try to
ensure their diversity, productivity and resilience.
Are we, as a nation or as citizens of western states, satisfied
with this situation? If yes, stay the course and bear the consequences.
If not, what must we do to change course? What outcomes would we likely
favor if options forward were put to a vote, with those most directly
affected by the outcome given the largest number of votes, i.e., those
living in closest proximity to federal lands? Assuming clarity of
purposes is possible, how might we act to further those purposes? These
questions call for more than timid legislative proposals to address
limited technical or managerial challenges.
The conundrum for western federal lands is not, after all is said
and done, merely forestry, environmental or resource management
challenges. It calls for what USFS Chief emeritus, Jack Ward Thomas and
the National Commission for Science on Sustainable Forestry called for:
Congressional action to clarify purposes and processes for more
efficient and effective stewardship of some of the world's most
remarkable natural land and resource assets. It may also call for
experimentation beyond how forestry or other resource management is
practiced, perhaps also experiments with more effective and equitable
models of governance, as called for by ex-Speaker of the Montana House
of Representatives Dan Kemmis. Or, as is currently being considered for
some federal lands in Oregon, it may just be time to stop the
incremental experiments and start transitioning federal lands and
policies for those lands to states, trusts, or back into the hands of
their original stewards. A majority of federal and perhaps even state
political leaders appear unwilling or unable to go there at this time
but sooner or later society must confront the consequences of federal
forestland management dysfunction: let me repeat, declining land
health, rising costs and a poverty stricken rural America hanging on
through at-risk federal checks because the nation refuses to use its
federal forest lands and resources to generate wealth and jobs. Rep.
Hastings and Reps. DeFazio, Schrader and Walden have some proposals on
the table. They deserve thoughtful consideration.
Among the options forward so far are the following. Drs. Norm
Johnson and Jerry Franklin, are championing pilot projects in fire-
prone forests on Public Lands in SW Oregon. It could be one option in
changing course. It involves restoration of stress-resilient forests
and structural class diversification through a combination of thinning
and modest regeneration harvests that would produce commercially viable
timber sales. Jobs and wealth would be created by both, though not in
the magnitude of management activities of the mid to late 20th century.
It is worth trying. But it may not be the only technical or managerial
option. Their pilots do not address the fundamental underlying issues:
lack of clarity on purpose, alignment of process to purpose, and
governance effectiveness (though the pilots do rely on local
collaboration). Other, well-thought proposals should also be tried, if
someone will be bold enough to create and present them. I suggest that
these so-called ``pilots'' not be ad hoc, anecdotal efforts; they
should be well designed ``grand experiments'' to test ecological,
social, managerial, and governance hypotheses.
The current course is not a rosy path for the future of Western
federal forest. It is certainly not focused on roles for federal lands
on the 9 billion people question (in Oregon it is a 4 million challenge
and in the nation it is a 500 million challenge). And it comes at a
time when Forest Service leaders are proposing yet another new
collaborative approach to forest planning. You may not agree with my
assessment. Perhaps the Forest Service and BLM will find a
collaboration pony in the pile of convoluted laws and legal precedent.
But for me it is a sober reality check and perhaps a wake-up call. It
is not too late to change course. It is never too late. But the longer
we wait the greater the challenges will become and the higher the costs
will be for future generations. Simply stated, we cannot thin our way
to sustainability for federal forests, we cannot save single species by
doing nothing in dynamic ecosystems, and no amount of collaboration
will ever satisfy those who see only one purpose for federal lands,
their purpose. So far, resistors won't let restoration happen fast
enough, large enough or heavy enough to make much of a dent in
disturbance vulnerability or effective governance. And if they did, one
must ask, ok, then what? Where's the money going to come from to
sustain mixed-use management when the federal treasury is drained every
year by defense, health care and social security payments? Is saving
single species even possible and would it be better for the future than
managing for resilient, dynamic ecosystems?
Closing Thoughts
When I was a kid my grandpa told me money doesn't grow on trees,
you have to work to earn it. He was a mechanic. He was brilliant but he
didn't know much about forestry. Experience has shown me he was half
right; he got the work part right. Many, though not all, Western
federal forests not only still have the potential to grow money, they
have the potential to grow jobs, productive wildlife, clean water,
happy fish and the greenest, most renewable raw material on earth. It
is time for federal forests to re-start doing their share for the
future well-being of our communities, states, and nation, and, yes,
even for the health of our federal forests. From many conversations, I
am convinced the people in our federal forest agencies would love to
chart a more sustainable course for their future as forest stewards, as
citizens of our communities and as contributors to addressing the 9
billion people challenge.
So, let's cycle back to where we started. Sustainable management of
renewable natural resources has always been one of the keys to human
well-being. It was and is key to all that is good about our current
lifestyle. But staying the course in a finite world with a growing
human population will not make the grade. We must seek continual
improvement and change course when evidence makes the need for change
clear. Our Endangered Species Act is not saving many species and, at
least here in the Pacific Northwest, its social and financial costs are
substantial. Something must change and the Congress is the only agent
capable of meaningful change.
______

The Chairman. Next we'll call Mr. Stephen Mealey, Vice
President of Conserve Boone and Crockett Club.
Mr. Mealey, you're recognized for five minutes.

STATEMENT OF STEPHEN MEALEY, VICE PRESIDENT OF CONSERVATION,
BOONE AND CROCKETT CLUB, SPRINGFIELD, OREGON

Mr. Mealey. Thank you very much, Congressman. I'm pleased
to be here. The Boone and Crockett is the oldest hunting
conservation organization in American, founded by Teddy
Roosevelt in 1887. I too have a history of forest service
management as well as state and private management.
The Chairman. Could you pull that microphone closer to you?
I know it's awkward sometimes. We get the full benefit that
way.
Mr. Mealey. Thank you.
In the 22 years since the listing of the Northern Spotted
Owl there are many examples of failed Federal policies--I'll
share some today--but they're not the main problem. I'll share
testimonies which I see as the failure in Federal laws that
drive them. I want to give three examples of the Northwest
Forest Plan. First of all, the effects on deer black-tailed
deer and hunters and Oregon Department of Fish and Wildlife.
Habitats since 1989 have declined by 90 percent, hunters by
34 percent, and I want to read a summary of the effects of
that. It's a powerful irony that Federal protection primarily
for one species and its associates is undermining North
American wildlife conservation that has restored wildlife to
Oregon and America and is likely the most successful wildlife
management model on earth. It is a particularly tragic irony
since the Northwest forest in 18 years has failed to halt the
decline in Northern Spotted Owl, indicating it's certainly an
insufficient response to the ecological challenges of NSO
recovery. While the costs to the Northwest Forest Plan of
Oregon is modeled by conservation and its hundreds are
significant and clear, the benefits for Northern Spotted Owl
recovery, its intended purpose, remain uncertain at best.
I want to give a couple of examples that are very specific
and I want to say in preface that I stay in touch with the
ranger district people, and I want to say that all the folks
I've been in touch with are as good as they've ever been. This
has to the Middle Fork Ranger District, the Willamette National
Forest, and I'm going to talk quickly about two projects, the
Jim's Creek Project and the PineGrass Project, both of which
were planned for forest restoration in the dry oak Savanna
ponderosa pine project of 25,000 acres.
Jim's Creek was planned as a test, if it was successful, to
apply to a broad area. The PineGrass Project was a restoration
of the plantation. The simple fact is that Jim's Creek Project,
while it had a very successful test, was precluded by a judge's
reinstatement of survey and management standards and guidelines
per red back bulls, and obviously there were too many bulls on
the site for the project to go forward.
And the PineGrass Project was precluded and planned for
thinning. It was precluded by an extension of the revised
Critical Habitat Rule which made it infeasible. So despite the
revised recovery plan and the proposed revision of the Critical
Habitat to facilitate forest restoration--in fact, in these two
cases it actually precluded tested, ongoing projects designed
exactly to achieve the objectives the two plans purported for
advance.
Let me say a quick word about Rachel Carson's and Silent
Spring. You all know that Silent Springs was published in 1962
and it was designed to stop things, and our whole body of
Federal law that followed that then were patterned after the
mentality of stopping things without ignoring the dimension of
time to deal with the omission, that is, omitted acts, and so
our whole body of Federal law that followed that reflected that
same precluding mentality.
And I just want to get to my recommendations very quick.
The first one is that the Northwest Forest Plan has been in
effect for 18 years with no significant external evaluation.
I'm suggesting that it's time for Congress to ask for an
evaluation of the Northwest Forest Plan, which would probably
assemble a group of experienced managers as well as team
members that wrote the plan in the first place to see if it's
achieved its intended objectives.
Another recommendation that I have is that for Federal
law--you probably--I know you know, Congressman, that the
Healthy Forest Restoration Act contains in Section 106(C)(3) a
provision for looking at the comparative risk of action and
inaction. There's no reason that that same provision couldn't
be included in the Endangered Species Act and the Clean Air and
Clean Water Act and it would extend a broader precautionary
approach, which could be integrated simply by amending Section
7, consultation requirements to that agency balance the impact
to the ecosystem likely affected by the project and the short-
and long-term effects of undertaking agency action against the
short and long-term effects of not undertaking that action.
In addition, I want to quote Jack Thomas, who thinks that
it's over time now to assemble a group of folks to look at the
whole body of Federal law and determine their function and
dysfunction, make recommendations about how they should.
And one final--I've got just a couple of seconds. I want to
make a reference to Charles Darwin, who noted that individuals
less suited to the environment are less likely to survive and
less likely to reproduce. Individuals more suited to the
environment are more likely to survive and more likely to
reproduce and leave their inheritable traits to future
generations, which produces the process of natural selection,
and this applied to the Barred Owl. I would observe that I
think Darwin would find it ironic and surprising that an
informed society would fund and enforce a requirement to thwart
such a fundamental evolutionary process by killing Barred Owls
in the name of ecosystem preservation. At least I think he
would likely find it another example of static versus dynamic
management.
Thank you.
The Chairman. Actually, you borrowed a few seconds from Dr.
Hal Salwasser. I'm keeping track over here.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Mealey follows:]

Statement of Stephen P. Mealey, Vice President of Conservation,
Boone and Crockett Club, Leaburg, Oregon

Mr. Chairman and Members of the Committee:
I am Steve Mealey, Honorary Life Member of the Boone and Crockett
Club, and Vice President for Conservation. I am currently retired in
Oregon. My professional career spanned 30 years and included wildlife
(grizzly bear) research as well as management and administration for
federal [U.S. Forest Service (USFS)], state (Idaho Department of Fish
and Game), and private (Boise Cascade Corporation) natural resources
based organizations. I am proud to represent the Boone and Crockett
Club here today which was founded by Theodore Roosevelt in 1887. It is
America's oldest hunter/conservationist organization with national
focus. The Club's mission is to promote the conservation and management
of wildlife, especially big game and its habitat, to preserve and
encourage hunting and to maintain the highest ethical standards of fair
chase and sportsmanship in North America. The Boone and Crockett Club
has a great legacy of protecting wildlife, especially big game, as well
as federal land habitat. It's fair to say the Club is the ``godparent''
of America's national forests, national parks and wildlife refuges
having worked long, hard, and successfully for more than a century for
their establishment, maintenance and improvement.
I come here today to express grave concern for:
1)  The effect of the Northwest Forest Plan (NWFP) on black-
tailed deer and hunting and on ecosystem restoration project
implementation in western Oregon;
2)  The effect on ecosystem restoration project implementation
of the March 2012 proposal to expand critical habitat (CH) for
the Northern Spotted Owl (NSO); and,
3)  The problems associated with major federal land/regulatory
laws underlying the NWFP and NSO protection rules and
proposals.
I'll offer some recommendations for repair.
Prelude
In 1993, a comprehensive NWFP was initiated to end the impasse over
management of federal forest lands in the Pacific Northwest within the
range of the NSO. With the signing of the Northwest Forest Plan Record
of Decision (ROD) in 1994, a framework and system of standards and
guidelines were established to guide management of 24 million acres of
federal forests in Oregon, Washington and northern California and
protect the NSO listed in 1990 as a threatened species under the
Endangered Species Act (ESA). The plan is a much less flexible version
of its precursor, ``Option 9'', developed by the Forest Ecosystem
Management and Assessment Team (FEMAT) led by then USFS Chief Research
Wildlife Biologist, and later USFS Chief Jack Ward Thomas. Twenty-two
years since listing, a Revised Recovery Plan for the NSO was issued
June 28, 2011 which recognized ``many populations of spotted owls
continue to decline. . .even with extensive maintenance and restoration
of spotted owl habitat in recent years. . .it is becoming more evident
that securing habitat alone will not recover the spotted owl. .
.competition from the barred owl poses a significant and complex
threat. . .''. Overall NSO numbers have been declining nearly 3%/year
leading to an estimated 40% decline over the last 25 years. In
February, 2012 the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service (USFWS) announced a
proposal identifying nearly 14,000,000 acres in Oregon, Washington and
northern California as CH for the NSO. The proposal is a 62% increase
over that designated in the 2008 plan.
NWFP and Deer, Elk, Hunting, and Ecosystem Restoration in Western
Oregon
General
Since 1989, the year before NSO listing to present, timber harvest
on federal forestland in western Oregon has dropped from about 3.5
billion board feet/year to under .5 billion board feet/year, an 86%
decline owing to the effects of environmental litigation and an
emphasis on mature and old forest retention. Final harvest acres
declined from nearly 100,000/year to less than 10,000/year. Creation of
early seral (deer and elk) habitat has declined approximately 90%
annually. In response, black-tailed deer harvest and associated hunters
have declined dramatically. Numbers of deer hunters have dropped 34%
from around 170,000 to about 112,000 while harvest has dropped 67% to
around 20,000. Hunter success has declined 44% to about 18%. A similar
trend for Roosevelt elk and related hunting is likely. Elk numbers from
Oregon Department of Fish and Wildlife (ODFW) annual counts on the
Willamette National Forest in the McKenzie Unit have declined to 16 in
2012 from 114 in 2005, an 86% drop.
This loss of early succession habitat with the sharp drop in deer
and elk populations indicated in part by declining harvest, and
accompanying steep declines in hunter numbers all owing to the virtual
end of timber harvest following the listing of the NSO has been a major
contributor to the more general problem of declining hunter
participation in Oregon. Here, the participation rate of resident
hunters has declined nearly 30% from about 340,000 in 1986 to around
240,000 in 2011. Resident hunters as a percent of eligible residents
declined about 53% to 8% in the same period. Even though Oregon's
population has expanded by around a million during the period, the
number of licensed resident hunters has declined in absolute numbers.
There are similar declining trends in neighboring California and
Washington. Nationally hunting participation also declined during the
25 year period but only by about 5%--much less than in Oregon.
Declining game populations and habitat combined with increased license
fees to offset lost revenues from fewer hunters is generally seen as a
main reason for this disturbing trend which is a clear threat to
Oregon's and America's primary hunting heritage and legacy: the North
American Model of Wildlife Conservation.
The Model powered by hunters who have restored much of our nation's
wildlife and habitat and enabled everyone who wants to--to hunt holds:
1)  Wildlife can be owned by no individual, but is held by the
states in trust for all people;
2)  Trustee states have no power to delegate trust
responsibilities, and;
3)  States have an affirmative duty to fulfill their trust
role: take care of wildlife for the people.
Coupled with the advocacy of sport hunters concerned with the
dramatic declines in wildlife in the late 19th and early 20th
Centuries, the Public Trust Doctrine, which mandates that states hold
and manage wildlife for its citizens, is the lynchpin of the Model and
is the legal bedrock for states to manage and regulate wildlife.
Hunters and hunting have been the reason for the success of the Model.
Hunters have been the main proponents of wildlife and have paid the
bills for wildlife conservation through purchases of licenses and
hunting equipment which have been the principal support for most state
wildlife agencies including ODFW. Through the loss of deer and elk
populations and habitat and the resulting loss of hunters causing
declining license fees to ODFW and its reduced ability to carry out its
Public Trust role, the NWFP is weakening the institution of wildlife
management in Oregon.
This is a powerful irony: that federal protection primarily for one
species and its associates is undermining the North American Model of
Wildlife Conservation that has restored wildlife to Oregon and America
and is likely the most successful wildlife management model on earth.
It is a particularly tragic irony since the NWFP has in 18 years failed
to halt the decline in NSO indicating it is certainly an insufficient
response to the ecological challenges of NSO recovery. While the costs
of the NWFP to Oregon's Model of Wildlife Conservation and its hunters
are significant and clear, the benefits for NSO recovery--its intended
purpose, remain uncertain at best.
Jim's Creek Restoration Project
While the NWFP standards and guidelines preclude most traditional
(pre-1990) timber harvest practices, silvicultural opportunities
including production forestry, ecological restoration and adaptive
management are provided for in ``matrix'' and other areas in the 1994
NWFP ROD.
Standards and guidelines include those for ``Survey and Manage''
(S&M) intended to reduce or eliminate potential effects of agency
actions on over 300 species including mosses, liverworts, fungi,
lichens, vascular plants, slugs, snails, salamanders, great grey owl,
and red tree voles. With some qualifications pre-disturbance surveys
for target species are required before proposed activities can proceed.
If evidence of a species is found (i.e. tree vole nest tree) proposed
projects are modified to meet species management requirements
(protection of 10 acres/Vole Habitat Area).
The Jim's Creek Project (JCP) on the Middle Fork Ranger District,
Willamette National Forest is a forest restoration project that has
been planned and nearly completed. The JCP Decision Notice was signed
in August 2006 and the project implemented through a Stewardship
Contract in June 2008. The following were cited as primary benefits of
the project and it's supporting Alternative:
1.  Comprehensive and much needed ecological restoration of a
small part of the unique Oregon white oak/ponderosa pine
savanna ecosystem and gains in biodiversity;
2.  Reduced wildfire risk;
3.  Restored big game forage within a high emphasis Big Game
Management Area;
4.  Monetary receipts for subsequent ecological restoration;
5.  Economic values to local economies from harvest of about 10
million board feet of forest products;
6.  Refugia for species associated with the oak/pine savanna.
The JCP was seen as a small scale ``test'' to work out the
restoration concepts and methods for subsequent application to other
nearby oak/pine savanna landscapes critically in need of broad scale
restoration. The project resulted in a non-significant forest plan
amendment. While it modified and/or removed habitat or diminished its
quality for use by NSO, the USFWS Biological Opinion found
implementation (and effects on red tree voles as a NSO food) would not
jeopardize the continued existence of NSO and that it could proceed.
The project was widely supported; there were no appeals or lawsuits.
In 2007 the USFS and the Bureau of Land Management (BLM) eliminated
for the second time the S&M Mitigation Measure. Had this not occurred
the JCP could not have been implemented in 2008 because of the
abundance of red tree voles in the project area and beyond. Restoration
of approximately 455 acres of a potential 25,000 acre landscape
restoration project has been completed.
On July 5, 2011 U.S. District Court Judge Coughenour issued a court
order directing implementation of the settlement agreement restoring
the S&M requirement. The order was implemented by the USFS July 21,
2011. Resumption of the S&M Mitigation Measure precludes expansion of
the JCP restoration strategy across the broader 25,000 acre Middle Fork
Mixed Conifer Forest Type (which was an open forest type and has been
degraded by fire suppression and tree in-growth) because of the
abundance of red tree voles in the area (a 10 acre Habitat Area is
protected where one or more voles are known or assumed to occur).
Specifically, S&M measures for the red tree vole prevents
implementation of actions needed over a 25,000 acre landscape to save
historic Oregon white oak/ponderosa pine savannas threatened by
encroaching Douglas fir and ultimately uncharacteristic wildfire.
Inability to expand on the JCP success precludes reducing the risk
of habitat loss or degradation from stand replacing wildfire over a
broad fire-prone landscape, one of the four most important threats to
the NSO stated in the Revised Recovery Plan (vii). Not expanding the
JCP also contributes to the progressive loss of early forest succession
habitat and consequent declining elk and deer numbers on the Willamette
National Forest and other national forests in Region 6 of the USFS and
on BLM lands and resulting lost hunting opportunity. Its loss also
raises concerns about the likely adverse ecological effects of
shrinking early succession habitat on other early succession dependent/
associated species including neo-tropical migratory birds, reptiles and
amphibians. One predictable effect is reduced economic activity
associated with less hunting and wildlife associated recreation. A
related issue is that ODFW will likely be unable to maintain current
herd objectives for elk and deer on federal forestland habitats in the
Southern Willamette Watershed District because of rapidly declining
early forest succession habitat resulting from reduced timber harvest.
The reality of the Jim's Creek case defies common sense:
Reinstatement of S&M for the vole, a relatively abundant ``species of
concern'' has precluded expansion of the JCP restoration strategy while
the JCP Biological Opinion for the NSO, a beneficiary of voles as prey,
concluded NSO would not be jeopardized and the project could proceed.
The Middle Fork Ranger District covers roughly 725,000 acres with
about 60% unavailable for management because of protection reserves
(i.e. wilderness areas, Late Succession Reserves, roadless areas,
riparian conservation reserves, etc.). Only about 200,000 acres are
available for active management projects such as the JCP.
The JCP example shows clearly how the NWFP through application of
its S&M standards and guidelines or through related litigation
outcomes, acts as a barrier to active management of landscapes in need
of restoration even where proposed projects occur in the
Provide timber-based economic opportunities for rural
communities;

Ensure the long-term health and productivity of these
lands; and

In coordination with the FWS and other agencies and
partners, create multiple environmental benefits--including
recovery and conservation of species and habitat--that result
from healthy forests and watersheds.
Economic Activity/Timber Sales
The BLM's timber management activities have direct effects in terms
of employment and income in the Pacific Northwest, as well as induced
effects in the local economy, such as the activities of other
businesses required to support timber operations. In Oregon, which has
seen a marked decline in traditional forestry jobs, BLM's forest
management activities supported over 2,700 jobs in 2010 and produced
almost $600 million in economic activity (The Department of the
Interior's Economic Contributions; June 21, 2011).
Although timber purchases as well as harvest levels are driven by
market forces, the BLM continues to offer a predictable, sustainable
supply of timber sales in western Oregon of approximately 200 million
board feet (MMBF) per year. In recent years the BLM's timber volumes
offered for sale have ranged from highs of 236 MMBF in 2008 and 233
MMBF in 2010, to 198 MMBF in 2007.
The BLM offered 198 million board feet of timber for sale in
FY2011, including 28 MMBF from the Roseburg District and 22 MMBF from
the Medford District, and in addition, re-offered 12 million board feet
from previous contracts that had been mutually cancelled. In FY 2012,
the BLM plans to offer the program target volume of 193 MMBF of timber
for sale; the Roseburg target is 28 MMBF and the Medford target is 19
MMBF. The BLM also plans to reoffer additional volume from eight more
contracts that were mutually cancelled. For FY 2013, the BLM budget
proposal also includes an increase of $1.5 million in the O&C Forest
Management program to increase the volume of timber offered for sale.
Forest Health & Productivity
The Department's highest priority activities are directed toward
reducing risks to communities by ensuring the long-term health of these
forests and their watersheds. In recent decades, prolonged droughts and
the spread of insect infestation have devastated millions of acres of
trees in the Northwest. Through Federal forestry management, we are
working to improve the health of these forest ecosystems, which, in
turn, makes the forested lands more resilient against the risk of
wildfires and invasive species, and preserves key wildlife habitat that
will aid in conserving and recovering threatened and endangered
species.
The BLM, in collaboration with the FWS, is working to refine its
implementation of active management, which employs science-based
``ecological forestry' practices that are carefully tailored to restore
localized forest areas to healthy conditions. In the dry forests of
southwestern Oregon, for example, a prescription for active management
may require intervention to reduce the buildup of fuels. In the wetter
forests on the west side of the Cascades, a prescription may include
patchy regeneration harvests in addition to thinning to better mimic
natural forest processes. In addition to restoring forest health, these
techniques allow for sustainable timber harvests for local mills and
the communities who rely on the timber industry for jobs and economic
strength.
Pilot Projects
As a result of the December 2010 Forest Summit, Secretary Salazar
set in motion a plan to apply the principles of active forest
management, as suggested by Professors Norm Johnson and Jerry Franklin,
on BLM lands within the Coos Bay, Roseburg, and Medford Districts in
Oregon. Professors Johnson and Franklin--in collaboration with the BLM,
FWS, the National Marine Fisheries Service, and the Coquille Indian
Tribe--are demonstrating the ecological and economic merits of
ecological forestry principles in Oregon's moist and dry forests. The
Medford pilot project, the first of the three sales and the one
furthest along in implementation, received no protests or
administrative appeals and sold for more than four times the appraised
value. Commercial harvest is underway in that Pilot. The Coos Bay and
Roseburg Pilots are at various stages of the sale and environmental
assessment process.
Based on the promise of these pilot projects described by
Professors Johnson and Franklin in a report on Ecological Forestry
pilot projects, in February Secretary Salazar announced that the BLM
will plan five additional timber sales using ecological forestry
principles in 2012 and 2013. Drs. Johnson and Franklin estimate that
the BLM's use of ecological forestry practices would sustainably yield
an annual harvest of approximately 217 to 286 MMBF for the next 15
years from the public forests in Oregon.
Moving Forward/Planning
As part of the commitment to restoring healthy habitat and
providing sustainable timber harvest and revenues--in March of 2012,
BLM announced that it will undertake Resource Management Plan (RMP)
revisions which will provide goals, objectives, and direction for the
management of approximately 2,500,000 acres of BLM-administered lands
in western Oregon. The revisions to the existing RMPs will determine
how the BLM will actively manage BLM-administered forests in western
Oregon for multiple objectives including contributing to the recovery
of threatened and endangered species, to provide clean water, to
restore fire adapted ecosystems, to produce a sustained yield of timber
products, and provide for recreation opportunities. Finding a balanced,
sustainable approach is critical in western Oregon. The Department
encourages citizens to participate in discussions about management of
public forests in western Oregon and to be part of the solution. The
first step in the BLM's process to revise RMPs is a formal public
scoping period to seek public input regarding the range of issues to be
addressed in the planning process, including the management
alternatives that should be examined. The public scoping period ends on
July 5, 2012.
We expect that with participation from members of the public and
stakeholders in this scoping process as well as throughout the planning
process, the agency will be better able to determine which forest
management practices and activities will help achieve our goals.
Northern Spotted Owl Recovery Efforts
The U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service (FWS) is working to recover the
northern spotted owl in coordination with the U.S. Forest Service, BLM,
National Park Service, and many other state, tribal, and private sector
partners. Recovery efforts currently encompass recovery planning,
critical habitat designation, and barred owl management. The recently
released 2011 Recovery Plan for the Northern Spotted Owl includes 34
recovery actions and makes three overarching recommendations: 1)
protect the best of the spotted owl's remaining habitat; 2) conserve
forest ecosystems through active management; and 3) reduce competition
from the encroaching barred owl. Specifically:

To protect the best of the spotted owl's remaining
habitat, FWS recommends conserving spotted owl sites and high
quality habitat across the landscape. This means the habitat
protections provided under land use plans on Federal lands will
continue to be a focus of recovery, but protection of other
areas is likely needed to achieve full success. FWS is
currently seeking public comment on the proposed critical
habitat designation and an economic analysis will be made
available for public review and comment.

To conserve forest ecosystems through active
management, FWS recommends actions that make forest ecosystems
healthier and more resilient to the effects of climate change
and catastrophic wildfire, disease, and insect outbreaks. This
involves an ``ecological forestry'' approach in certain areas,
which may include carefully applied prescriptions such as fuels
treatment to reduce the threat of severe fires, thinning to
help older trees grow faster, and restoration to enhance
habitat and return the natural dynamics of a healthy forest
landscape. FWS also recommends continually evaluating and
refining active forest management techniques. This effort
includes the BLM's pilot projects, supported by Secretary
Salazar.

To reduce competition from the encroaching barred
owl, FWS recommends managing barred owl populations to give the
spotted owl a chance to rebound sufficiently that the two
species may eventually be able to co-exist. To test the
feasibility and effectiveness of barred owl management, the FWS
is proposing experimental removal of barred owls in certain
portions of the spotted owl's range to see how this may affect
spotted owls. If the experiment proceeds and the effects on
spotted owls are positive, the FWS may consider the efficacy
and feasibility of barred owl removal on a broader scale.
Northern Spotted Owl Recovery Plan and Critical Habitat Proposal
Minimizes Impact to Private Landowners and States
The 2011 Recovery Plan for the Northern Spotted Owl acknowledges
that certain areas on non-Federal lands play a critical role in
recovery and recommends working collaboratively with key conservation
partners such as state agencies, private landowners, and tribes. FWS is
pursuing ongoing dialogue and collaborative decision-making with state
agency partners and citizens to determine the best way forward. FWS
will also continue to consult and collaborate with tribal governments
that have long worked to monitor and conserve spotted owls on their
lands, thus making valuable contributions to recovery. The goal is to
work with partners and citizens to evaluate the potential contribution
of state and private lands to recovery in areas where Federal lands are
limited. If any areas are to be included, FWS will work together to
develop economic and other sensible incentives for voluntary habitat
conservation partnerships such as Safe Harbor agreements and Habitat
Conservation Plans.
For the current critical habitat proposal, FWS is considering the
exclusion of several categories of land from the final designation,
including state and private lands which are already managed for
conservation. When a critical habitat designation includes non-Federal
lands with no Federal connection, there is no direct effect on
landowners (though there may be indirect effects). The designation
helps to inform state and local government agencies and private
landowners about the value of the habitat. As a result, a critical
habitat designation may help facilitate voluntary conservation
partnerships such as Safe Harbor agreements and Habitat Conservation
Plans.
A Safe Harbor is a voluntary agreement between FWS and a private
landowner that encourages private landowners to carry out habitat
conservation measures on their land to benefit species listed under the
Endangered Species Act. In exchange, FWS provides assurances that
future land use restrictions will not be imposed. Under Safe Harbors,
some impacts to individual species may occur in return for the
landowner's commitment to conservation measures that contribute to the
species' population overall. This provides landowners with more
certainty for their land use planning. There are currently five Safe
Harbor agreements for the northern spotted owl--two in Washington, one
providing statewide coverage in Oregon, and two in northern California.
Similarly, Habitat Conservation Plans are used for non-Federal
landowners (usually government agencies, private organizations, or
businesses) whose otherwise lawful activities are expected to impact
listed species. The FWS works with these landowners to develop
provisions for monitoring, minimizing, and mitigating for potential
incidental take. There are currently 12 Habitat Conservation Plans for
the spotted owl--six in Washington covering more than 2 million acres,
two in Oregon covering 200,000 acres, and four in California covering
more than 200,000 acres.
Addressing Forestry Needs
The BLM has a target of 197 million board feet of proposed sales in
western Oregon in FY 2013. The Secretary announced that as part of this
target, BLM will plan for at least five additional timber sales
(totaling approximately 15 million board feet) using ecological
forestry principles. By using ecological forestry principles,
addressing the growing impact of the invasive barred owl and expanding
the scientific foundation for wise management of our forests, the
Department of the Interior seeks to give communities, foresters, and
land managers the additional tools they need to forge healthier and
more resilient forests. The Department is also working closely with the
Forest Service, which recently announced steps to improve forest
restoration through active management and to increase forest products
sold by the National Forests from 2.4 billion board feet in 2011 to 3
billion board feet no later than 2014.
The current critical habitat proposal for northern spotted owl
encourages increasing active management of forests, consistent with
ecological forestry principles and practices within critical habitat
when it promotes forest restoration and ecosystem health. This is a
major change from previous critical habitat designations. Many Pacific
Northwest forests are out of balance due to an interaction of natural
and human influences. In the drier and diseased forests, FWS supports
intervention to protect older trees, reduce unnatural fire risk, and
better manage insect outbreaks. In the moist forests west of the
Cascade Mountains, FWS supports thinning and patchy regeneration
harvests that better mimic natural forest processes. Application of
such science-based forest treatments could provide significant economic
and employment opportunities in many areas and should be compatible
with the goals of northern spotted owl recovery. It may also reduce the
potential for litigation of some timber harvest proposals that apply
these methods.
The Endangered Species Act requires the FWS to identify all areas
essential to the conservation of a species and that may require special
management, and then to take other factors, such as economic impacts,
into consideration to refine proposals before critical habitat
designations are finalized. The critical habitat proposal that
identifies areas that may be considered for the final designation also
emphasizes the significant benefits of excluding private lands, and
that consideration, along with the economic assessment, will help
inform which areas will be excluded from the final critical habitat
designation. The FWS is contracting with economics experts to develop a
thorough economic analysis of the critical habitat proposal, which will
evaluate timber harvest-related and other potential economic impacts.
The economic analysis will be made available for public review and
comment, prior to the finalization of the northern spotted owl critical
habitat designation.
Conclusion
By working in partnership with local communities, forest industry,
and conservation groups, this Administration is moving toward a long-
term strategy for forest management that is environmentally sound and
economically sustainable. The Department's science-based planning
activities, informed by economic analysis and public feedback, will
provide greater certainty for timber mills and communities while
conserving our land, water and wildlife.
______

The documents listed below have been retained in the
Committee's official files.

Anderson, Emily, Grayland, Washington, Comment form
submitted for the record

Bonagofsky, Jerry, Comment form submitted for the
record

Cowlitz County, Board of Commissioners, Letter
submitted for the record

Dubrashich, Mike, Lebanon, Oregon, Letter submitted
for the record

Edwards, Karla Kay, Willamina, Oregon, Comment form
submitted for the record

Forsberg, R. Lynn, Ridgefield, Washington, Letter
submitted for the record

Graham, Darren, Comment form submitted for the record

Gross, Commissioner Lee, on behalf of the National
Forest Counties and Schools Coalition, Letter submitted for the
record

Hallanger, Bill, Email submitted for the record

Jensen, Carol, Longview, Washington, Comment form
submitted for the record

Krug, Larry, Stevenson, Washington, Comment form
submitted for the record

Linde, Thomas, Carson, Washington, Letter submitted
for the record

McKeirnan, Leigh, Letter and email submitted for the
record

Mitchen, Darcy, Comment form submitted for the record

Newton, Dr. Michael, Professor Emeritus of Forest
Ecology and Management, Oregon State University, Letter
submitted for the record

Oregon State Delegation, U.S. House and Senate,
Letter to Secretary Salazar

Pickell, William, Hoquiam, Washington, Letter
submitted for the record

Revesz, Peter & Jane, Battleground, Waashington,
Letter submitted for the record

Richter, Jeff, Letter and comment form submitted for
the record

Smith, Larry F., Mossyrock, Washington, Comment form
submitted for the record

Spencer, Paul, Letter submitted for the record

Stubblefield, Ted, Former Forest Supervisor, Gifford
Pinchot National Forest, Letter submitted for the record

Teitzel, David, Carson, Washington, Comment form
submitted for the record

Whipple, Darrel, Rainier, Oregon, Comment form
submitted for the record

Woods, Richard I., Kelso, Washington, Letter
submitted for the record


