- OVERSIGHT HEARING ON THE ``EFFECT OF THE PRESIDENT'S FY 2013 BUDGET AND LEGISLATIVE PROPOSALS FOR THE BUREAU OF LAND MANAGEMENT AND THE U.S. FOREST SERVICE'S ENERGY AND MINERALS PROGRAMS ON PRIVATE SECTOR JOB CREATION, DOMESTIC ENERGY AND MINERALS PRODUCTION AND DEFICIT REDUCTION.''

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

EFFECT OF THE PRESIDENT'S FY 2013 BUDGET AND LEGISLATIVE PROPOSALS FOR
THE BUREAU OF LAND MANAGEMENT AND THE U.S. FOREST SERVICE'S ENERGY AND
MINERALS PROGRAMS ON PRIVATE SECTOR JOB CREATION, DOMESTIC ENERGY AND
MINERALS PRODUCTION AND DEFICIT REDUCTION

=======================================================================

OVERSIGHT HEARING

before the

SUBCOMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND
MINERAL RESOURCES

of the

COMMITTEE ON NATURAL RESOURCES
U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

Tuesday, March 20, 2012

__________

Serial No. 112-101

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Natural Resources

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.fdsys.gov
or
Committee address: http://naturalresources.house.gov
_____

U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE

73-487 PDF                WASHINGTON : 2013
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800; DC
area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104  Mail: Stop IDCC, Washington, DC
20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON NATURAL RESOURCES

DOC HASTINGS, WA, Chairman
EDWARD J. MARKEY, MA, Ranking Democrat Member

Don Young, AK                        Dale E. Kildee, MI
John J. Duncan, Jr., TN              Peter A. DeFazio, OR
Louie Gohmert, TX                    Eni F.H. Faleomavaega, AS
Rob Bishop, UT                       Frank Pallone, Jr., NJ
Doug Lamborn, CO                     Grace F. Napolitano, CA
Robert J. Wittman, VA                Rush D. Holt, NJ
Paul C. Broun, GA                    Raul M. Grijalva, AZ
John Fleming, LA                     Madeleine Z. Bordallo, GU
Mike Coffman, CO                     Jim Costa, CA
Tom McClintock, CA                   Dan Boren, OK
Glenn Thompson, PA                   Gregorio Kilili Camacho Sablan,
Jeff Denham, CA                          CNMI
Dan Benishek, MI                     Martin Heinrich, NM
David Rivera, FL                     Ben Ray Lujan, NM
Jeff Duncan, SC                      John P. Sarbanes, MD
Scott R. Tipton, CO                  Betty Sutton, OH
Paul A. Gosar, AZ                    Niki Tsongas, MA
Raul R. Labrador, ID                 Pedro R. Pierluisi, PR
Kristi L. Noem, SD                   John Garamendi, CA
Steve Southerland II, FL             Colleen W. Hanabusa, HI
Bill Flores, TX                      Paul Tonko, NY
Andy Harris, MD
Jeffrey M. Landry, LA
Jon Runyan, NJ
Bill Johnson, OH
Mark Amodei, NV

Todd Young, Chief of Staff
Lisa Pittman, Chief Counsel
Jeffrey Duncan, Democrat Staff Director
David Watkins, Democrat Chief Counsel
------

SUBCOMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND MINERAL RESOURCES

DOUG LAMBORN, CO, Chairman
RUSH D. HOLT, NJ, Ranking Democrat Member

Louie Gohmert, TX                    Peter A. DeFazio, OR
Paul C. Broun, GA                    Madeleine Z. Bordallo, GU
John Fleming, LA                     Jim Costa, CA
Mike Coffman, CO                     Dan Boren, OK
Glenn Thompson, PA                   Gregorio Kilili Camacho Sablan,
Dan Benishek, MI                         CNMI
David Rivera, FL                     Martin Heinrich, NM
Jeff Duncan, SC                      John P. Sarbanes, MD
Paul A. Gosar, AZ                    Betty Sutton, OH
Bill Flores, TX                      Niki Tsongas, MA
Jeffrey M. Landry, LA                Paul Tonko, NY
Bill Johnson, OH                     Edward J. Markey, MA, ex officio
Mark Amodei, NV
Doc Hastings, WA, ex officio
------

CONTENTS

----------
Page

Hearing held on Tuesday, March 20, 2012..........................     1

Statement of Members:
Holt, Hon. Rush D., a Representative in Congress from the
State of New Jersey........................................     4
Prepared statement of....................................     6
Lamborn, Hon. Doug, a Representative in Congress from the
State of Colorado..........................................     1
Prepared statement of....................................     3

Statement of Witnesses:
Abbey, Hon. Robert V., Director, Bureau of Land Management,
U.S. Department of the Interior............................     7
Prepared statement of....................................     8
Response to questions submitted for the record...........    12
Fosburgh, Whit, President and CEO, Theodore Roosevelt
Conservation Partnership...................................    68
Prepared statement of....................................    70
McKee, Michael J., Uintah County Commissioner, Uintah County,
Utah.......................................................    50
Prepared statement of....................................    52
Milito, Erik, Group Director, Upstream and Industry
Operations, American Petroleum Institute...................    53
Prepared statement of....................................    55
Skaer, Laura, Executive Director, Northwest Mining
Association................................................    58
Prepared statement of....................................    60
Tidwell, Hon. Tom, Chief, U.S. Forest Service, U.S.
Department of Agriculture..................................    18
Prepared statement of....................................    20

Additional materials supplied:
List of documents retained in the Committee's official files.    26

OVERSIGHT HEARING ON THE ``EFFECT OF THE PRESIDENT'S FY 2013 BUDGET AND
LEGISLATIVE PROPOSALS FOR THE BUREAU OF LAND MANAGEMENT AND THE U.S.
FOREST SERVICE'S ENERGY AND MINERALS PROGRAMS ON PRIVATE SECTOR JOB
CREATION, DOMESTIC ENERGY AND MINERALS PRODUCTION AND DEFICIT
REDUCTION.''

----------

Tuesday, March 20, 2012

U.S. House of Representatives

Subcommittee on Energy and Mineral Resources

Committee on Natural Resources

Washington, D.C.

----------

The Subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:06 a.m., in
Room 1300, Longworth House Office Building, Hon. Doug Lamborn
[Chairman of the Subcommittee] presiding.
Present: Representatives Lamborn, Gohmert, Thompson, Duncan
of South Carolina, Gosar, Amodei; Holt, Tonko, and Markey.
Mr. Lamborn. The Committee will come to order. The Chairman
notes the presence of a quorum, which under Committee Rule 3(e)
is two Members.
The Subcommittee on Energy and Mineral Resources is meeting
today to hear testimony on an oversight hearing on the effect
of the President's Fiscal Year 2013 budget and legislative
proposals for the Bureau of Land Management and the U.S. Forest
Service's energy and mineral programs on private sector job
creation, domestic energy and minerals production, and deficit
reduction.
Under Committee Rule 4(f), opening statements are limited
to the Chairman and Ranking Member of the Subcommittee.
I ask unanimous consent to include any other Members'
opening statements in the hearing record, if submitted to the
Clerk by close of business today. Hearing no objection, so
ordered.
Mr. Lamborn. I now recognize myself for five minutes.

STATEMENT OF HON. DOUG LAMBORN, A REPRESENTATIVE IN CONGRESS
FROM THE STATE OF COLORADO

Mr. Lamborn. During today's hearing, we will hear the
Administration's justification for their Bureau of Land
Management and U.S. Forest Service budgets, and legislative
proposals for the Federal onshore energy and mineral programs
in Fiscal Year 2013.
The energy and minerals programs under the jurisdiction of
this Subcommittee bring in the most revenue to the Federal
Treasury behind the IRS.
In addition, Federal lands are a key contributor to job
creation. According to the Administration's own report, more
than half the jobs created by the Departments' activities are
related to energy and mineral production.
This equates to more than 726,000 American jobs that are
dependent on the actions of this Administration.
The opportunities for new job creation are endless.
However, without policies in place that encourage energy and
mineral development, these job opportunities are nonexistent.
Today we will hear weighty claims of actions that this
Administration is supposedly taking to promote domestic energy
and create American jobs.
Unfortunately, since the Administration took office, the
Department of the Interior has taken steps to reduce access to
domestic energy and mineral resources on Federal lands,
including renewable resources, like wind and solar.
Today we might hear from the Administration that the
agencies are working to lower gas prices for American
consumers. We might also hear President Obama's claim that high
gas prices are not the President's fault.
However, a careful review of President Obama's actual
actions paint a very different story.
In 2009, shortly after President Obama took office, 77
leases issued in Utah were withdrawn. This cost American
taxpayers millions of dollars in lost lease bids, production
royalties, and the opportunity to produce American energy to
offset rising imports of oil and natural gas.
According to an Uintah County Commissioner in Utah, this
prevented the creation of approximately 3,000 jobs.
Who made the decision to withdraw these leases, thereby
stopping energy production and job creation? President Obama.
The Administration often touts their record of encouraging
oil and natural gas development on Federal lands, but since the
President took office, the last three years have seen the
fewest acres leased for oil and natural gas in over 30 years.
Who makes the decision to lease or not lease land for
energy development? President Obama.
The last three years have seen the fewest new leases sold
by BLM since 1984. Who makes the decision to sell leases?
President Obama.
Since the Administration took office, a moratorium on outer
continental shelf production reduced production on the OCS by
500,000 barrels per day.
In December 2009, EIA's annual energy outlook for 2010
forecast Gulf of Mexico crude oil production to average 1.76
million barrels per day.
Today, EIA's estimate for the second quarter of 2012 is
1.26 million barrels per day, half a million barrels less.
Who makes the decision to approve, delay and deny permits
for energy production in the Gulf of Mexico? President Obama.
Who made the decision to entirely halt all production in
the Gulf of Mexico while thousands of Americans sat unemployed
for nearly a year? President Obama.
Who stood idly by as rigs left the Gulf of Mexico bound for
the shores of other countries while thousands of American jobs
went with them? President Obama.
A robust energy and mineral industry in this country
contributes billions of dollars to our economy and provides raw
materials for countless products that Americans depend on every
day.
The economic security of our country is directly dependent
on developing our own domestic resources that we are fortunate
enough to have within our borders.
An effective energy and mineral program within the BLM and
Forest Service is imperative for the creation of American jobs,
increasing national security through our domestic energy and
critical and strategic mineral resources, and increasing
revenue into Federal, state and local treasuries.
Unfortunately, the policies of the current Administration
will not create jobs or produce American energy. In fact,
President Obama's solution to rising gas prices is OPEC.
Just last week, President Obama asked Saudi Arabia to
increase oil production to mitigate gasoline prices.
Rather than facilitating our own energy production and
creating jobs for Americans, President Obama would rather send
American dollars to the Middle East and create jobs for the
citizens of Saudi Arabia.
The Administration's policies instead have and will lead to
American job loss, further dependence on foreign sources for
our country's energy and mineral needs, and severely limit the
revenue stream from the development of Federal mineral
resources.
I look forward to hearing from all of our witnesses today
on this important topic.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Lamborn follows:]

Statement of The Honorable Doug Lamborn, Chairman,
Subcommittee on Energy and Mineral Resources

During today's hearing we will hear the Administration's
justification for their Bureau of Land Management and U.S. Forest
Service budget and legislative proposals for the federal onshore energy
and minerals programs in Fiscal Year 2013. The energy and mineral
programs under the jurisdiction of this subcommittee bring in the most
revenue to the federal treasury behind the IRS. In addition, federal
lands are a key contributor to job creation. According to the
Administration's own report, more than half the jobs created by the
Department's activities are related to energy and mineral production.
This equates to more than 726, 000 American jobs that are dependent on
the actions of this Administration. The opportunities for new job
creation are endless; however, without policies in place that encourage
energy and mineral development, these job opportunities are non-
existent.
Today, we will hear weighty claims of actions that this
Administration is supposedly taking to promote domestic energy and
create American jobs. Unfortunately, since the Administration took
office the Department of the Interior has taken steps to reduce access
to domestic energy and mineral resources on federal lands including
renewable resources like wind and solar.
Today we will likely hear from the Administration that the Agencies
are working to lower gas prices for American consumers. We might also
hear President Obama's claim that high gas prices are not the
President's fault. However, a careful review of the President Obama's
actual actions paint a very different story.
PRESIDENT'S ACTIONS
In 2009, shortly after President Obama took office, 77 leases
issued in Utah were withdrawn. This cost American taxpayers millions of
dollars in lost lease bids, production royalties, and the opportunity
to produce American energy to offset rising imports of oil and natural
gas. According to a Uintah County commissioner, this prevented the
creation of approximately 3,000 jobs. Who made the decision to withdraw
these leases--thereby stopping energy production and job creation?
President Obama.
The Administration often touts their record of encouraging oil and
natural gas development on federal lands. But since the President took
office, the last 3 years have seen the fewest acres leased for oil and
natural gas in over 30 years. Who makes the decision to lease, or not
lease, land for energy development? President Obama.
The last three years have seen the fewest new leases sold by BLM
since 1984. Who makes the decision to sell leases? President Obama.
Since the Administration took office, a moratorium on Outer
Continental Shelf (OCS) production reduced production on the OCS by
500,000 barrels per day. In December 2009, EIA's Annual Energy Outlook
for 2010 (AEO2010), forecast Gulf of Mexico crude oil production to
average 1.76 million barrels per day. Today EIA's estimate for the 2nd
quarter of 2012 is 1.26 million barrels per day. Who makes the decision
to approve, delay and deny permits for energy production in the Gulf of
Mexico? President Obama.
Who made the decision to entirely halt all production in the Gulf
of Mexico while thousands of Americans sat, unemployed, for nearly a
year? President Obama.
And who stood idly by as rigs left the Gulf of Mexico, bound for
the shores of other countries while thousands of American jobs went
with them? President Obama.
A robust energy and mineral industry in this country contributes
billions of dollars to our economy and provides raw materials for
countless products that Americans depend on every day. The economic
security of our nation is directly dependent on developing our own
domestic resources that we are lucky enough to have within our borders.
An effective energy and mineral program within the BLM and Forest
Service is imperative for the creation of American jobs, increasing
national security through our domestic energy and critical and
strategic mineral resources, and increasing revenue into federal, state
and local treasuries.
Unfortunately, the policies of the current Administration will not
create jobs or produce American energy. In fact, President Obama's
solution to rising gas prices is OPEC. Just last week President Obama
asked Saudi Arabia to increase oil production to mitigate gasoline
prices. Rather than facilitating our own energy production and creating
jobs for Americans, President Obama would rather send American dollars
to the Middle East and create jobs for the citizens of Saudi Arabia.
The Administration's policies instead have and will lead to American
job loss, further dependence on foreign sources for our country's
energy and mineral needs and severely limit the revenue stream from the
development of federal mineral resources.
I look forward to hearing from our all of today's witnesses on this
important topic.
______

Mr. Lamborn. I now recognize the Ranking Member, the
gentleman from New Jersey, Mr. Holt, for his opening statement.

STATEMENT OF HON. RUSH HOLT, A REPRESENTATIVE IN CONGRESS FROM
THE STATE OF NEW JERSEY

Mr. Holt. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
There are many good and important things that the BLM does
and the Forest Service. We maybe should talk about those, but
given the onslaught here trying to blame the Obama
Administration for gasoline prices, I think we really need to
address some of these issues with the facts.
In 2011, American crude oil production reached the highest
level in nearly a decade. Natural gas production was once again
at an all time high.
Some have claimed that this is in spite of actions by the
Obama Administration. The Obama Administration has increased
domestic oil and gas production on Federal land as well.
Over the first three years of the Obama Administration, oil
production from all offshore and onshore Federal land has been
13 percent higher than during the last three years of the
previous Administration.
Some have claimed that oil production on Federal lands is
down because of the Obama Administration. Well, oil production
in 2011 was slightly lower than 2010. Remember, this is in the
aftermath of the Deepwater Horizon disaster when oil and gas
companies could not demonstrate that they had the capability
actually to respond to and contain blowouts.
Even with that slight dip in offshore production, overall
Federal oil production in 2011 under President Obama was higher
than in each of the last three years of the Bush
Administration.
According to a recent Department of Energy report that
examined production during the period 2003 to 2011, onshore oil
production from Federal land in 2011 was higher than at any
point during the Bush Administration over the first three years
of the Obama Administration.
Natural gas production onshore was six percent higher than
during the last three years of the Bush Administration.
The Department of the Interior has approved more permits to
drill and industry has begun drilling more wells in the first
three years of the Obama Administration than in the first three
years of the Bush Administration.
Yet, these companies are sitting on more than 7,200
approved drilling permits, on which they have not begun
drilling.
Oil and gas companies hold more than 25 million acres of
public land onshore on which they are not producing oil and
gas. The Obama Administration is not holding up production on
these leases. The oil and gas companies who hold the permits
are holding up production.
Ranking Member Markey and I have introduced legislation to
establish an escalating fee on oil and gas leases, which would
provide strong incentives for oil companies to either start
drilling or relinquish the land.
If the Majority is interested in increasing oil production
on Federal lands, they should support this legislation, get the
companies to stop sitting and start drilling, if that is what
they want.
Last year, there was a 50 percent increase in industry
nominations to lease Federal land onshore for oil and gas
drilling.
The oil and gas industry would not be expanding the areas
it wanted to drill in if it thought the Obama Administration
was not allowing development to go forward.
There are plenty more facts like that that we can lay out
that show these claims that we have been hearing just do not
hold up.
I would like to briefly, however, talk about another aspect
of energy policy on public lands.
As part of the ``all of the above'' energy strategy, the
Administration is also developing renewable energy on public
lands, with the goal of permitting 11,000 megawatts, 11
gigawatts, by the end of next year. This would be more than
five times the amount of renewable energy permitted by all
previous Administrations combined.
Yet, the Republican Majority is threatening to raise taxes
on the wind industry this year, which would jeopardize those
projects and many others, and could kill 37,000 clean energy
jobs.
I look forward to the testimony of the witnesses. As I say,
there are many other aspects of your important work that we may
want to talk about, but I am pleased to have the opportunity to
set these matters straight.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Holt follows:]

Statement of The Honorable Rush D. Holt, Ranking Member,
Subcommittee on Energy and Mineral Resources

In 2011, American crude oil production reached the highest level in
nearly a decade. Natural gas production was once again at an all-time
high. Some have claimed that this is in spite of, not because of, the
Obama Administration.
Yet, the Obama Administration has continued to increase domestic
oil and gas production on federal land. Over the first three years of
the Obama Administration, oil production from all offshore and onshore
federal land has been 13 percent higher than during the last three
years of the Bush administration.
Some have claimed that oil production on federal lands is down this
year because of the Obama Administration. Well, oil production in 2011
was slightly lower than 2010 as a result of the aftermath of the BP
Deepwater Horizon disaster when oil and gas companies were not able to
demonstrate that they had the capability to actually respond to and
contain a deepwater blowout. And even with that slight dip in offshore
production, overall federal oil production in 2011 under President
Obama was still higher than each of the last three years of the Bush
Administration.
According to a recent Department of Energy report that examined
energy production between 2003 and 2011, onshore, oil production from
federal land in 2011 was higher than at any point under the Bush
Administration.. Over the first three years of the Obama
Administration, natural gas production onshore was 6 percent higher
than during the last three years of the Bush Administration.
The Department of the Interior has approved more permits to drill,
and industry has begun drilling more wells in the first three years of
the Obama Administration than in the first three years of the Bush
Administration. Yet these companies are sitting on more than 7,200
approved drilling permits on which they have not begun drilling. Oil
and gas companies hold more than 25 million acres of public land
onshore on which they are not producing oil and gas. The Obama
administration isn't holding up production on these leases, the oil and
gas companies who hold these permits are holding up production.
The Administration has once again proposed establishing a fee on
these nonproducing leases. Ranking Member Markey and I have introduced
legislation to establish an escalating fee on oil and gas leases,
providing a strong incentive for oil companies to either start drilling
in a timely fashion or relinquish this land so that another company can
develop it. If the majority is interested in increasing production on
federal lands they should support this legislation to get these
companies to stop just sitting on the thousands of approved permits to
drill and the tens of millions of acres of public lands they already
hold.
And last year there was a 50 percent increase in industry
nominations to lease federal land onshore for oil and gas drilling. The
oil and gas industry wouldn't be expanding the areas it wanted to drill
in if it thought the Obama Administration was not allowing oil and gas
development to go forward.
And as part of its real ``all of the above'' energy strategy, the
Obama Administration is also developing renewable energy on public
lands, with the goal of permitting 11,000 megawatts by the end of 2013.
This would be more than 5 times the amount of renewable energy
permitted by all previous administrations combined. Yet the Republican
Majority is threatening to raise taxes on the wind industry at the end
of this year, which would jeopardize those projects and could kill
37,000 permanent and existing clean energy jobs.
I look forward to the testimony of our witnesses today and I yield
back.
______

Mr. Lamborn. I now invite forward our first panel
consisting of The Honorable Bob Abbey, Director of the Bureau
of Land Management, and The Honorable Tom Tidwell, Chief of the
U.S. Forest Service.
Your written testimony will appear in full in the hearing
record, so I ask that you keep your oral statements to five
minutes, as outlined in our letter and under Committee Rule
4(a).
Our microphones are not automatic, so you need to turn them
on when we begin.
After four minutes, the yellow light will come on, and then
after five minutes, the red light comes on.
Director Abbey, thank you for being here, and you may
begin.

STATEMENT OF ROBERT ABBEY, DIRECTOR,
BUREAU OF LAND MANAGEMENT

Mr. Abbey. Good morning, Mr. Chairman, members of the
Subcommittee. It is my pleasure to be here and talk about the
President's Fiscal Year 2013 energy and minerals budget
requests for the Bureau of Land Management.
The BLM is responsible for managing over 245 million acres
of public lands, primarily in the 12 Western States, as well as
approximately 700 million acres of onshore, subsurface mineral
estate nationwide.
The BLM's unique multiple use management of public lands
includes activities as varied as livestock grazing, outdoor
recreation, and conservation of natural, historical, cultural
and other important resources.
America's public lands also provide resources that are
critical to the nation's energy security. These resources will
continue to play an important role in the domestic energy
production and mineral development for decades to come.
The BLM is one of a handful of Federal agencies that
generate more revenue than it spends. Our management of public
land resources and protection of public land values results in
extraordinary economic benefits to local communities and to
this nation.
It is estimated that in 2011, the BLM's management of
public lands contributed more than $120 billion to the national
economy and supported more than 550,000 American jobs.
BLM's total Fiscal Year 2013 budget request is $1.1 billion
or about $500,000 below the 2012 enacted budget.
The budget proposal reflects the Administration's efforts
to maximize public benefits while recognizing the reality of
the current fiscal situation.
Our proposed budget makes strategic investments in support
of important Administration and Secretarial initiatives which
will reap benefits for years to come.
The New Energy Frontier initiative recognizes the value of
environmentally sound and scientifically grounded development
of both conventional and renewable energy resources on public
lands.
Conventional energy resources on these public lands
continue to play a critical role in meeting the nation's energy
needs, producing 41 percent of the nation's coal, 13 percent of
natural gas, and five percent of the domestically produced oil.
During 2011, the BLM held 32 onshore oil and gas lease
sales covering over four million acres which generated about
$256 million in revenue. Total onshore mineral revenues are
estimated to be $4.4 billion in 2013 from leasing and
production activities.
The Department's balanced approach to responsible
conventional energy development combines oil and gas policy
reforms with effective budgeting to provide appropriate support
for conventional energy development.
The 2013 budget strengthens the BLM's oil and gas
inspection capability through a proposed fee on oil and gas
producers, similar to the fee now charged for offshore
inspections.
Collections of these fees is consistent with the principle
that users of the public lands pay to cover oversight
activities. This will generate an estimated $48 million in
funds to improve safety and production inspections for oil and
gas operations.
In addition, the budget also proposes $13 million in
increased funding to continue to implement leasing reform
efforts.
President Obama, Secretary Salazar, and this Congress have
stressed the importance of renewable energy to the nation's
energy security and long term economic development, and the
protection of the environment.
The development of renewable energy creates American jobs
while reducing the country's reliance on fossil fuels.
To date, Secretary Salazar has approved 29 commercial scale
renewable energy projects on public lands, including 16 solar,
five wind, and eight geothermal projects that represent more
than 6,500 megawatts and 12,500 jobs.
The BLM intends to reach its goal of permitting 11,000
megawatts in 2013. Our 2013 budget proposes a $5 million
increase for these efforts.
Finally, the budget proposes legislative initiatives to
reform hard rock mining, remediate abandoned mines, and
encourage diligent development of nonproducing oil and gas
leases.
The BLM's 2013 budget request provides funding for the
Agency's highest priority energy and minerals initiatives, and
reflects the Administration's commitment to encourage
responsible energy development on the public lands.
Again, Mr. Chairman, thank you for the opportunity to
testify.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Abbey follows:]

Statement of Robert V. Abbey, Director,
Bureau of Land Management, U.S. Department of the Interior

Mr. Chairman and Members of the Subcommittee, thank you for the
opportunity to appear here today to discuss the President's Fiscal Year
(FY) 2013 energy and minerals budget request for the Bureau of Land
Management (BLM).
The BLM, an agency of the U.S. Department of the Interior (DOI), is
responsible for managing our National System of Public Lands, which are
located primarily in 12 western States, including Alaska. The BLM
administers over 245 million surface acres, more than any other Federal
agency. The BLM also manages approximately 700 million acres of onshore
subsurface mineral estate throughout the Nation. The BLM's unique
multiple-use management of public lands includes activities as varied
as energy production, mineral development, livestock grazing, outdoor
recreation, and the conservation of natural, historical, cultural, and
other important resources. The BLM is one of a handful of Federal
agencies that generates more revenue than it spends.
Meeting Our Nation's Needs
The BLM's management of public land resources and protection of
public land values results in extraordinary economic benefits to local
communities and to the Nation, helping to contribute more than $120
billion annually to the national economy and supporting more than
550,000 American full and part-time jobs according to the Department of
the Interior Economic Contributions report of June 21, 2011. Energy and
mineral resources generate the highest revenue values of any uses of
the public lands from royalties, rents, bonuses, sales and fees.
These benefits are not only economic, but also contribute
substantially to America's energy security. During calendar year 2011,
the BLM held 32 onshore oil and gas lease sales--covering nearly 4.4
million acres--which generated about $256 million in revenue for
American taxpayers. Onshore mineral leasing revenues are estimated to
be $4.4 billion in 2013. The 2011 lease sale revenues are 20 percent
higher than those in calendar year 2010. There are currently over 38
million acres of Federal mineral estate under oil and gas lease, and
since only about 32 percent of that acreage is currently in production,
the BLM is working to provide greater incentives for lessees to make
production a priority. In FY 2011, the Department of the Interior
collected royalties on more than 97 million barrels of oil produced
from onshore Federal minerals. Moreover, the production of nearly 3
trillion cubic feet of natural gas made it one of the most productive
years on record.
Meanwhile, the coal produced from more than 300 Federal coal
leases, on nearly a half million acres of federal mineral estate,
generated over $780 million in royalties. This coal is used to generate
electricity in at least 40 states, accounting for more than one-fifth
of all electricity generated across the country. The BLM held four coal
leases sales in 2011. The BLM accepted bonus bids of more than $700
million for these four lease sales, underscoring the Administration's
commitment to the goals of energy security and job creation.
The BLM also is leading the Nation on the new energy frontier,
actively promoting solar, wind, and geothermal energy development.
Under Secretary Salazar, BLM has approved permits for 29 commercial-
scale renewable energy projects on public lands or the transmission
associated with them since 2009. This includes 16 solar, five wind, and
eight geothermal projects. Together, these projects represent more than
6,500 megawatts (MW) and 12,500 jobs, and when built will power about
1.3 million homes. In addition, the Department has identified more than
3,000 miles of transmission lines for expedited review. Enhanced
development of wind power is a key component of our Nation's energy
strategy for the future. There are currently 437 MW of installed wind
power capacity on BLM-managed public lands, but there are 20 million
acres of public lands with wind potential. Additionally, nearly half of
U.S. geothermal energy production capacity is from Federal leases. The
2013 budget reflects a goal of permitting a total of 11,000 MW of clean
renewable energy by the end of 2013.
FY 2013 Budget Overview
The BLM's FY 2013 energy and minerals budget makes significant
investments in America's economy, while making difficult choices to
offset priority funding increases. Investments in this budget will
promote America's energy production at home and grow America's economy.
The proposed budget for the BLM makes a strategic investment in support
of the New Energy Frontier, an important Secretarial Initiative.
Investment in this program today will reap benefits for years to come.
The total FY 2013 BLM budget request is $1.1 billion in current
authority, which is essentially the same as the 2012 enacted level. The
budget proposes $952.0 million for the Management of Lands and
Resources appropriation and $112.0 million for the Oregon and
California Grant Lands appropriation, the BLM's two main operating
accounts. The budget makes strategic funding shifts to target high-
priority initiatives, scales back on lower-priority programs, and
sustains and expands energy program activities. The budget also
includes several important legislative proposals linked to the uses of
lands and resources, including proposals to fund the remediation of
abandoned hardrock mines; to provide a fair return to the taxpayer from
the production of several hardrock minerals on Federal lands; to
encourage diligent development of oil and gas leases; to repeal a
prohibition on charging oil and gas permitting fees along with
associated mandatory funds; and to reauthorize the Federal Land
Transaction Facilitation Act. This testimony focuses on the BLM's
energy and mineral resources programs.
Promoting American Energy Production at Home
The 2013 budget continues the Department's New Energy Frontier
initiative to create jobs, reduce the Nation's dependence on fossil
fuels and oil imports, and reduce carbon impacts. The Secretary's New
Energy Frontier Initiative emphasizes the value of scientifically-
based, environmentally-sound development of both renewable and
conventional energy resources on the Nation's public lands.
Facilitating renewable energy development is a major component of this
strategy along with effective management of conventional energy
programs. The BLM's proposed FY 2013 budget advances the goals of the
initiative by including priority funding for both renewable and
conventional energy development on public lands.
Renewable Energy--President Obama, Secretary Salazar, and the
Congress have stressed the critical importance of renewable energy to
the future of the United States. Success in attaining the Nation's
goals to reduce greenhouse gas emissions, mitigate climate change, and
protect the global environment relies on sustained efforts to develop
renewable energy resources. Renewable energy production is vital to our
Nation's long-term economic development and energy security. The
development of renewable energy creates American jobs and promotes
innovation in the United States while reducing the country's reliance
on fossil fuels.
The BLM continues to make significant progress in promoting
renewable energy development on the public lands in 2012, including
working to approve additional large-scale solar energy projects and
complete a draft Solar Programmatic Environmental Impact Statement to
provide for landscape-scale siting of solar energy projects on public
lands. The agency is working on wind development mitigation strategies
with wind energy applicants and other Federal agencies, and is
currently reviewing over 45 wind energy applications. Additionally, the
transmission infrastructure required to deliver renewable energy from
production facilities to major markets relies on corridors across BLM-
managed lands.
The 2013 budget request includes a total program increase of $7.0
million in the Renewable Energy Management program, including $5.0
million in new funding. This will support additional environmental
studies to accelerate the identification of prime areas for utility-
scale renewable energy project development. It will also enable the BLM
to continue ongoing program management responsibilities associated with
geothermal energy development by replacing mandatory funding previously
provided by the Geothermal Steam Act Implementation Fund, for which new
deposits have ceased. The remaining $2.0 million increase is a transfer
of geothermal funds from the oil and gas management program to the
BLM's renewable energy program.
Conventional Energy--While we work to develop renewable energy
sources, domestic oil and gas production remain critical to our
nation's energy supply and to reducing our dependence on foreign oil.
Secretary Salazar has emphasized that conventional energy resources on
BLM-managed lands continue to play a critical role in meeting the
Nation's energy needs. Conventional energy development from public
lands produces 41 percent of the Nation's coal, 13 percent of the
natural gas, and 5 percent of the domestically-produced oil. The
Department's balanced approach to responsible conventional energy
development combines onshore oil and gas policy reforms with effective
budgeting to provide appropriate planning and support for conventional
energy development.
The FY 2013 budget proposes an increase of $2.4 million in
appropriated funding to be utilized for inspection and enforcement of
coal production on Federal and Indian lands. The requested increase
will fund the program at roughly the 2011 enacted level. BLM will
continue efforts to institute cost recovery fees within this program,
but recognizes these fees may not be in place by the start of 2013.
The President's FY 2013 budget proposes $13.0 million in oil and
gas program increases to provide industry with timely access to Federal
oil and gas resources, backed by the certainty of defensible
environmental analysis. Of that increase, a $5.0 million program
increase will restore the BLM's leasing and oversight capacity to the
2011 enacted level. An additional $3.0 million will be used for large,
regional-scale studies and environmental impact statements for oil and
gas leasing and development issues. Finally, an additional $5.0 million
programmatic increase will allow the BLM to fully implement its leasing
reform strategy without sacrificing other important program goals.
The BLM is committed to ensuring oil and gas production is carried
out responsibly. To accomplish this, the BLM performs inspections to
ensure that lessees meet environmental, safety, and production
reporting requirements. The BLM recently initiated a program using a
risk-based inspection protocol for production inspections, based on
production levels and histories. Success realized in this program will
support expansion of this risk-based strategy to the other types of
inspections the BLM performs. The risk-based strategy will maximize the
use of inspection staff to better meet BLM inspection goals and
requirements in the future.
The 2013 budget proposes to expand and strengthen the BLM's oil and
gas inspection capability through new fee collections from industry,
similar to the fees now charged for offshore inspections. Collection of
these fees is consistent with the principle that users of the public
lands should pay for the costs of use authorizations and the costs
associated with the oversight of authorized activities. The inspection
fee schedule included in the budget is estimated to generate $48.0
million in collections, which would offset a proposed reduction of
$38.0 million in BLM's appropriated funds, while providing for a net
increase of $10.0 million in funds available for this critical BLM
management responsibility. The increased funding is aimed at correcting
deficiencies identified by the Government Accountability Office in its
February 2011 report, which designated Federal management of oil and
gas resources including production and revenue collection as high risk.
The $10.0 million increase will help BLM achieve the high priority goal
of increasing the completion of inspections of Federal and Indian high
risk oil and gas cases by nine percent over 2011 levels. The BLM will
also complete more environmental inspections to ensure environmental
requirements are being followed in all phases of development. Fee
levels will be based on the number of oil and gas wells per lease so
that costs are shared equitably across the industry.
To encourage diligent development of new oil and gas leases, the
Administration is proposing a per-acre fee on each nonproducing lease
issued after enactment of the proposal. The $4-per-acre fee on non-
producing Federal leases (onshore and offshore) would provide a
financial incentive for oil and gas companies to either put their
leases into production or relinquish them so that tracts can be re-
leased and developed by new parties.
The Administration believes that American taxpayers should get a
fair return on the development of energy resources on their public
lands. A 2008 Government Accountability Office (GAO) report suggests
that taxpayers could be getting a better return from Federal oil and
gas resources in some areas. To this end, the Administration is
developing a proposed rule to address onshore royalty rates.
Abandoned Mine Lands & Hardrock Mining Reform Proposals
The budget includes legislative proposals to address abandoned mine
land (AML) hazards on both public and private lands and to provide a
fair return to the taxpayer from hardrock production on Federal lands.
The first component addresses abandoned hardrock mines across the
country through a new AML fee on hardrock production. Just as the coal
industry is held responsible for abandoned coal sites, the
Administration proposes to hold the hardrock mining industry
responsible for abandoned hardrock mines. The proposal will levy an AML
fee on all uranium and metallic mines on both public and private lands
that will be charged on the volume of material displaced after January
1, 2013. The receipts will be distributed by BLM through a competitive
grant program to restore the Nation's most hazardous hardrock AML sites
on both public and private lands using an advisory council comprising
of representatives of Federal agencies, States, Tribes, and non-
government organizations. The advisory council will recommend objective
criteria to rank AML projects to allocate funds for remediation to the
sites with the most urgent environmental and safety hazards. The
proposed hardrock AML fee and reclamation program would operate in
parallel to the coal AML reclamation program, as two parts of a larger
effort to ensure that the Nation's most dangerous coal and hardrock AML
sites are addressed by the industries that created the problems.
The budget also includes a legislative proposal to institute a
leasing process under the Mineral Leasing Act of 1920 for certain
minerals (gold, silver, lead, zinc, copper, uranium, and molybdenum)
currently covered by the General Mining Law of 1872. After enactment,
mining for these metals on Federal lands would be governed by a leasing
process and subject to annual rental payments and a royalty of not less
than five percent of gross proceeds. Half of the royalty receipts would
be distributed to the states in which the leases are located and the
remaining half would be deposited in the Treasury. Pre-existing mining
claims would be exempt from the change to a leasing system, but would
be subject to increases in the annual maintenance fees under the
General Mining Law of 1872. However, holders of pre-existing mining
claims for these minerals could voluntarily convert their claims to
leases. The Office of Natural Resources Revenue in the Department of
the Interior will collect, account for, and disburse the hardrock
royalty receipts.
Reductions & Efficiencies
The BLM's FY 2013 budget proposal reflects many difficult choices
in order to support priority initiatives and needs while supporting the
President's commitment to fiscal discipline and spending restraint. In
2013, the BLM is requesting a decrease of $2.0 million for its
abandoned mine lands program. The BLM will continue to fund the highest
priority sites, as determined through its ongoing ranking process. Red
Devil Mine reclamation activities remain a high priority.
Conclusion
The BLM's Fiscal Year 2013 budget request for energy and minerals
programs provides funding for the agency's highest priority energy and
minerals initiatives, while making difficult but responsible choices
for reductions to offset some of these funding priorities. Our public
lands and resources play an important role in American lives,
economies, and communities and include some of our Nation's greatest
assets. This budget request reflects the Administration's commitment to
encourage responsible energy development on the public lands, as well
as to ensure the American people receive a fair return for the public's
resources. Mr. Chairman, thank you for the opportunity to testify on
the BLM energy and mineral budget request for Fiscal Year 2013. I will
be pleased to answer any questions you may have.
______

Response to questions submitted for the record by Bob Abbey, Director,
Bureau of Land Management

Questions from Chairman Doug Lamborn:
1.  At the House Natural Resources hearing on February 15, Secretary
Salazar implied that the industry was supportive of federal
hydraulic fracking regulations and has often said that in
developing the regulations the Department worked closely with
industry in crafting these regulations. Can you please describe
to the committee the companies, Indian tribes, and state
government officials you or the Department has consulted with
in crafting the federal hydrofracking regulations and what
feedback or statements of support were given specifically
regarding federal hydrofracking regulations?
Response: As stewards of the public lands and their resources, the
BLM evaluated the increased use of well stimulation practices over the
last decade and determined that the existing rules for well stimulation
on public lands require updating. Over the past few years, in response
to strong public interest, several states--including Colorado, Wyoming,
Arkansas, and Texas--have substantially revised their state regulations
related to hydraulic fracturing. One of the BLM's key goals in updating
its regulations on hydraulic fracturing is to complement these state
efforts by providing a consistent standard across all public and Indian
lands. The BLM is actively working to minimize any duplication between
the proposed rule and the reporting required in state regulations. The
rule will create a consistent framework for fracturing across BLM lands
in numerous states, consistent with BLM's statutory stewardship
responsibilities, unlike the patchwork of state standards among those
states.
In April 2011, the BLM hosted a series of regional public meetings
in North Dakota, Arkansas, and Colorado--states that have experienced
significant increases in oil and natural gas development on federal and
Indian lands--to discuss the use of hydraulic fracturing on lands
administered by the BLM and on Indian lands. At these meetings, many
oil and gas industry representatives, as well as organizations and
businesses that support this sector, supported only state regulation of
hydraulic fracturing; some indicated support for disclosure of
fracturing fluids to the public. The BLM explained that the rules
governing drilling practices on lands that it has a responsibility to
oversee included obsolete, outdated references to hydraulic fracturing
and that the agency reviewed hydraulic fracturing regulations from
several states and used valuable information from these state
regulations in developing the proposed rule. Further, BLM stressed that
the agency was committed to working with individual states on the
implementation of the proposed regulation, as it does currently in
implementing other drilling-related requirements on our public lands,
to encourage efficiency in data collection and reporting.
The BLM's proposed hydraulic fracturing rule is consistent with the
American Petroleum Institute's (API) guidelines for well construction
and well integrity (see, API Guidance Document HF 1, Hydraulic
Fracturing Operations--Well Construction and Integrity Guidelines,
First Edition, October 2009).
With respect to tribal lands, the BLM has offered government-to-
government consultation with tribes on this proposal and offered
follow-up meetings as part of the consultation process with individual
tribes. In January 2012, the BLM held four informational regional
meetings as a starting point of the consultation process, to which over
175 tribal entities were invited. These initial consultations were held
in Tulsa, Oklahoma; Billings, Montana; Salt Lake City, Utah; and
Farmington, New Mexico. Eighty-four tribal members representing 24
tribes attended the meetings. Senior policy leaders from the Washington
Office as well as local line officers who have built relationships with
the tribes in the field participated in the regional meetings. The four
meetings ended with a commitment to continue the dialogue using the
established local relations with the BLM field office managers.
In these meetings, BLM discussed the proposed rule with tribal
representatives; these discussions resulted in substantive dialogue
about the hydraulic fracturing rulemaking process. A variety of issues
were discussed, including applicability of tribal laws, validating
water sources, inspection and enforcement, wellbore integrity, and
water management. One of the outcomes of these meetings is the
requirement in the proposed rule that operators certify that operations
on tribal lands comply with tribal laws.
Additional individual meetings with tribal representatives have
taken place since January as the consultation process continues. The
BLM has met with the United South and Eastern Tribes, an organization
representing 25 assembled member tribes, the Coalition of Large Tribes
and the Mandan, Hidatsa and Arikara Nation. In the near future the BLM
expects to meet with tribal representatives from Montana including the
Blackfeet, Chippewa Cree, Fort Belknap, and Flathead tribes. As part of
the BLM's commitment to exchange information and provide opportunities
for continued government-to-government consultation, the BLM held four
regional meetings in June 2012, which took place in Salt Lake City,
Utah; Farmington, New Mexico; Tulsa, Oklahoma; and Billings, Montana.
The BLM also participated in the National Congress of American Indian
summer meeting in Lincoln, Nebraska. On July 13, 2012 the BLM conducted
another regional session in New Town, North Dakota which was attended
by 15 tribal members representing 5 tribes including the Three
Affiliated Tribes of the Mandan, Hidatsa and Arikara Nation, Standing
Rock, Turtle Mountain, Fort Peck and the Alabama-Conshatta Tribes of
Texas.
The BLM will incorporate information gathered from tribal
consultation in developing the final hydraulic fracturing rule. Through
ongoing tribal consultation, BLM will continue to seek tribal views
regarding the potential impacts of hydraulic fracturing on trust assets
and traditional tribal activities.
The comment period for the hydraulic fracturing rule closes on
September 10, 2012. The BLM welcomes comments from any interested
parties. The BLM will fully consider all comments received during the
comment period.
2.  Your BLM field offices continue to struggle to meet the demands of
several new requirements connected with oil and gas exploration
and drilling on public lands; requirements connected to APD's,
sundry notices and even on leases that have been awarded, paid
for and issued but challenged by the environmental litigation
industry.
a.  The President said in the State of the Union that he wants to see
more leasing. How do you propose to accomplish this goal?
Response: As of November 2011, the BLM has more than 49,000 leases
on more than 38 million acres. Of these, however, fewer than 23,000
leases, totaling fewer than 12.5 million acres, are in production. The
BLM continues to implement the Secretary's 2010 oil and gas leasing
reforms, which established a more orderly, open, consistent, and
environmentally sound process for developing oil and gas resources on
public lands. These reforms are helping to reduce potential conflicts
that can lead to costly and time-consuming protests and litigation of
leases. The BLM will continue to make appropriate public lands
available for oil and gas leasing and will do so in a thoughtful and
responsible manner consistent with our leasing reforms.
The BLM held 32 onshore oil and gas lease sales during calendar
year 2011, offering 1,755 parcels of land covering nearly 4.4 million
acres. In total, 1,296 parcels of land were leased generating
approximately $256 million in revenue for American taxpayers--a nearly
20 percent increase in lease sale revenue over 2010 levels. The BLM has
scheduled 31 oil and gas lease sales for calendar year 2012.
b.  As you impose new rules such as HF disclosure requirements, how
will that speed up the process of producing more oil and gas
domestically?
Response: BLM developed its proposed hydraulic fracturing rule`s
disclosure requirements and other proposals based on best practices in
industry, and it will be fine-tuning its final regulations based on
additional input from industry. With regard to disclosure requirements,
the proposal does not impact the speed of drilling, since disclosure is
proposed to be made after the drilling has occurred. More generally,
the BLM understands the time sensitive nature of oil and gas drilling
and well completion activities, and it intends to promptly review
requests to conduct well stimulation activities. It is not anticipated
that a proposed requirement to submit additional well stimulation-
related information with APD applications will impact the timing of the
approval of drilling permits. The additional information that would be
required by the proposed rule would be reviewed in conjunction with the
APD and within the regular time frame for APD processing.
c.  Many of your rules (such as rules for Master Leasing Plans) frankly
hurt development on public lands, hamper exploration and
production on tribal lands and deny states and the federal
treasury important royalty income. Have you worked with OMB to
stream line your requirements to increase incomes which trickle
down to schools, police departments and other state, county and
municipal governments?
Response: The BLM does not believe that oil and gas leasing reforms
have slowed development on public lands. To the contrary, prior to the
implementation of the Secretary's leasing reforms in 2010, 49 percent
of lease parcels were protested resulting in a backlog of pending
parcels awaiting adjudication. To respond to these protests, BLM
implemented leasing reform which provided more certainty to industry.
Leasing reform front-loaded more analysis and improved the BLM's
ability to adjudicate lease sale protests prior to the lease sale.
After implementation of leasing reform, lease sale protests dropped to
approximately 35% of the parcels offered in 2011.
The BLM has analyzed the costs and the benefits of the proposed
hydraulic fracturing rule in a Regulatory Impact Analysis, available in
the rulemaking docket. This Analysis assumed that the proposed rule
would mitigate risks associated with wellbore integrity and unlined
pits, and reduce costs related to surface and subsurface remediation.
These estimated benefits range from $12 million to $50 million per
year, and estimated costs of imposing the proposed rule range from $37
million to $44 million per year. Given the conservative assumptions
made about the costs of remediating contamination and the fact that
certain benefits were not quantified, the BLM believes that the
quantified range could underestimate actual net benefits.
3.  States with disclosure requirements--including two with some of the
more stringent requirements, Wyoming, and my home state of
Colorado--provide detailed approaches to protection of trade
secrets relating to the fracture stimulation fluid
formulations. The states do so in a way that achieves a balance
between the public interest in information about what has been
discharged into subsurface strata, and the valid interest of
business entities in a process or formulation that presents
them with a legitimate competitive advantage. The draft BLM
regulations do not seem to provide equivalent assurances to
suppliers that have a commercial interest in formulations that
is of the sort given protection in the Uniform Trade Secrets
Act that has been ratified by 46 states. Please describe how
BLM would plan to recognize the property interest in trade
secrets that has been acknowledged by the states that are
regulating hydraulic fracturing.
Response: In addition to the water and sand that are the major
constituents of fracturing fluids, chemical additives are also
frequently used. These chemicals can serve many functions, including
limiting the growth of bacteria and preventing corrosion of the well
casing. The exact formulation of the chemicals used in fracturing fluid
varies depending on the rock formations, the well, and the requirements
of the operator.
In order to protect proprietary formulations, the proposed rule
would require oil and gas operators using hydraulic fracturing
techniques to identify the chemicals used in fracturing fluids by trade
name, purpose, Chemical Abstracts Service Registry Number, and the
percent mass of each ingredient used. The information would be required
in a format that does not link additives to the chemical composition of
fluids, which will allow operators to provide information to the public
while still protecting information that may be considered proprietary.
This design of the disclosure mechanism in the proposed rule will
inhibit reverse-engineering of specific additives. The information is
needed in order for the BLM to maintain a record of the stimulation
operation as performed. The proposed rule, would allow an operator to
identify specific information that it believes is protected from
disclosure by federal law, and to substantiate those claims of
exemption. This approach is similar to the one that the State of
Colorado adopted in 2011 (Colorado Oil and Gas Conservation Commission
Rule 205.A.b2.ix-xii).
a.  In looking at the BLM draft regulations--it seems that in general
they go significantly above and beyond what any state has in
place right now. Why did BLM make such drastic changes as
opposed to what the states have been doing in regulating
fracking for years?
Response: The BLM recognizes that some, but not all, states have
recently taken action to address hydraulic fracturing in their own
regulations. The BLM's proposed rulemaking is designed to complement
ongoing state efforts by providing a consistent standard across all
public and tribal lands and ensuring consistent protection of the
important federal and Indian resource values that may be affected by
the use of hydraulic fracturing. Moreover, BLM's regulations are now 30
years old and need to be updated to keep pace with the many changes in
technology and current best management practices.
The BLM is also actively working to minimize duplication between
reporting required by state regulations and reporting required for this
rule. The BLM has a long history of working cooperatively with state
regulators and is applying the same approach to this effort.
4.  The draft BLM regulations refer to a separate proposal for well
stimulation operations that an operator must submit on a
separate sundry notice application form--a process entirely
separate from the review and approval process for the
application for permit to drill (APD). This apparent two-track
permit process sets up the possibility that an operator could
receive approval of its application for permit to drill, and
have approval withheld on its sundry notice for well
stimulation--in other words, be approved to drill, but not to
compete, its well. How does BLM intend to reconcile this
potential permitting dilemma?
Response: Under the well stimulation rule, the operator has the
option to submit a sundry notice with an APD, or submit a separate
sundry notice for approval for hydraulic fracturing activity. If an
operator submits a sundry notice with an APD for well stimulation on a
new well, prior approval would be required as part of the APD approval
process that already is in place. If an operator submits a separate
sundry notice for well stimulation (in the case of a well permitted
prior to the effective date of the rule), the operator would submit a
well stimulation proposal for the BLM's approval before the operator
begins the stimulation activity.
5.  Unlike the more stringent state disclosure requirements, the draft
BLM regulations require pre-approval of fracture stimulation
formulations.
a.  What is the technical basis on which such approval will be given or
withheld by the agency?
Response: The proposed hydraulic fracturing rule does not call for
BLM involvement in determining or approving the chemical composition of
the hydraulic fracturing fluid. The proposed rule requires the
operators to report the chemical composition of their fracturing fluid
within 30 days after they have completed the fracturing activity. The
draft rule proposes that prior approval would be required for well
stimulation activities, generally in connection with the prior approval
process that already is in place for general well drilling activities
through the Application for Permit to Drill (APD) process.
Information collected by the BLM and used for pre-approval of well
stimulation activities would be used by the BLM to determine the
parameters of the well stimulation operation; verify that the operator
has taken the necessary precautions to prevent migration of fluids into
usable water horizons; ensure that the facilities needed to process or
contain the estimated volume of fluid will be available on location;
and ensure the methods used will adequately protect public health,
safety and the environment.
b.  Can the Secretary describe the staff expertise that will be
required to make such determinations, and whether BLM plans to
consult with the state agencies that will also be enforcing
regulations that pertain to well drilling or completion?
Response: The BLM technical staff includes petroleum engineers,
petroleum engineering technicians, geologists, and hydrologists, among
others. These BLM specialists have a level of expertise commensurate to
that of technical staff employed by industry and the state agencies.
BLM technical specialists routinely consult with their state
counterparts for operational issues and will continue to do so. One of
the BLM's key goals in updating its regulations on hydraulic fracturing
is to complement these state efforts by providing a consistent standard
across all public and Indian lands.
c.  How will BLM archive the data it receives?
Response: Federal oil and gas operations lease and well files are
maintained in accordance with laws, regulations, and BLM policy that
restrict release of records containing proprietary information. The BLM
General Records schedule provides guidance on life cycle maintenance of
all records, including a retention and disposal schedule for records
that contain proprietary information or information protected by the
Freedom of Information Act (FOIA). Oil and gas operations and wells
files contain proprietary information that is protected from release by
the FOIA and maintained in secure locations with restricted access.
These files are transferred to the Federal Records Center (FRC) 10
years after the lease terminates, the bond is released and appeal
rights are exhausted.
d.  How will this data be compiled, reported and analyzed?
Response: The proposed rule would require that disclosure of the
chemicals used in the fracturing process be provided to the BLM after
the fracturing operation is completed. This information is intended to
be posted on a public Web site, while protecting trade secrets and
confidential business information.
BLM engineers will analyze the information and data presented. The
results of the analysis would be used to ensure that appropriate
protection for other subsurface resources has been achieved; human
health and safety measures are considered in the design and execution
of the hydraulic fracturing operation; and there is appropriate
protection for surface resources. Information collected by the BLM will
be used to verify that the operator has taken the necessary precautions
to prevent migration of fluids in to the usable water horizons; ensure
that the facilities needed to process or contain the estimated volume
of fluid will be available on location; and ensure the methods used
will adequately protect public health, safety, and the environment.
6.  Director Abbey, could you please describe the BLM's familiarity
with the operational practice in the drilling industry of
making adjustments to well stimulation fluid formulations on a
relatively continuous manner during the process of drilling and
completing a well--including making adjustments to such
formulations while hydraulic fracturing operations are underway
as a result of many factors including the pH levels of the
water used and the temperature of the air during the job?
Response: The proposed hydraulic fracturing rule does not call for
BLM involvement in determining or approving the chemical composition of
the hydraulic fracturing fluid. The proposed rule requires the
operators to report the chemical composition of their fracturing fluid
within 30 days after they have completed the fracturing activity.
a.  Please describe how BLM would expect to administer these
regulations if adopted in light of that practice, given the 30
day pre-approval submittal requirement?
Response: The BLM is not proposing regulations that require 30-day
pre-approval submittal requirement for hydraulic fracturing operations.
Prior approval would be required for well stimulation activities,
generally in connection with the prior approval process that already is
in place for general well drilling activities through the Application
for Permit to Drill (APD) process.
b.  Do you agree that because of the level of detail and specificity
required by BLM's regulations as drafted (e.g. ``complete
chemical makeup of all materials used'') that an operator that
changes its fluid formulation could be forced into a situation
where it must stop and resubmit to the agency?
Response: No, the proposed rule does not work that way. The
proposed rule requires the operators to report the chemical composition
of their fracturing fluid within 30 days after they have completed the
hydraulic fracturing operations, not during operations.
7.  Recent numbers released by the Energy Information Administration
show that since 2000, oil production on private and state lands
has risen by 11 percent and natural gas production has risen by
40 percent. Fossil fuel production has dropped by 7 percent
since President Obama took office and 13 percent since 2003.
From 2010 to 2011, total federal onshore oil and natural gas
production is down 13 percent and 10 percent, respectively.
What is the reason for the sharp decline in oil and natural gas
production on federal lands, when production is increasing
rapidly on state and private lands?
Response: The aggressive development of shale gas and shale oil
resources has led to a shift to private lands in the east and south,
where new technologies have made production more economically
attractive and where there are far fewer public lands. Currently,
nearly 37 million acres of federal mineral estate are under oil and gas
lease, although less than one-third of that acreage, (about 12 million
acres) is currently in production. And the BLM typically processes
between 4,000 and 5,000 drilling permits per year. As of the end of FY
2011, nearly 7,100 drilling permits have been approved and yet remain
undrilled by industry on federal and Indian lands. In FY 2011, the
Department of the Interior collected royalties on more than 97 million
barrels of oil produced from onshore Federal minerals. Also in 2011,
the production of nearly 3 trillion cubic feet of natural gas made it
one of the most productive years on record. Combined onshore oil
production from public and Indian lands has increased every year since
2008. Conventional oil and gas development from public and Indian lands
produces 14 percent of the nation's natural gas, and 6 percent of our
domestically produced oil.
Questions from Representative Paul A. Gosar, D.D.S.
1.  Environmental groups have recently ratcheted up an effort to have
their members urge the Obama Administration to designate the
approximately 1,006,545 acres of public and National Forest
System lands, withdrawn from location and entry under the
Mining Law of 1872, 30 U.S.C. Sec. Sec. 22-54 subject to valid
existing rights for a period of 20 years, under Public Land
Order No. 7787, as a National Monument. Does the President
intend to designate the 1 million withdrawn acres in question
as a National Monument in response to this pressure from the
environmental groups (Sierra Club, Grand Canyon Trust, Center
for Biological Diversity & others)?
Response: Any new special management designations work best when
they build on local efforts to better manage places that are important
to nearby communities, and this Administration is committed to working
closely with the public, the Congress, and local officials. We
recognize and respect the importance of public and congressional input
in considering protections for our natural, historic, and cultural
treasures and constantly strive to take into account the interests of a
wide range of stakeholders.
2.  Since Interior Secretary Salazar signed the Record of Decision in
January on Public Land Order No. 7787, he has continually
alluded to a study or review that he intends to conduct during
the 20-year withdrawal period to determine whether uranium
mining can be conducted in a way which is compatible with the
protection of the Colorado River Watershed and the Grand Canyon
National Park itself. Please characterize the Administration's
intentions for what will occur during the 20 year withdrawal?
Is there such a study underway? Will there be such a study or
review conducted? Will the industry, the states and local
communities have any role in it? Will Congress? Will such a
review include economic impacts as well as environmental
impacts? When will it be conducted, over what duration? Which
agencies inside the DOI (or outside DOI) will be responsible
for such a review? Will the review or study be shared with
Congress?
Response: The BLM is currently working with the U.S. Geological
Survey (USGS), U.S. Forest Service (FS), U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service
(FWS), and the National Park Service (NPS) to determine the number and
scope of studies that will be conducted over the near and long term
during the withdrawal to better understand potential effects of uranium
mining on water and biological resources in the region. Once priorities
for the studies are set, this interagency team will issue a report on
its plans. These studies would add to our scientific knowledge and
reduce the uncertainty of potential effects.
In addition, at the conclusion of the withdrawal process the USGS
had underway several water-related studies that are expected to
continue for several years. These are surface water monitoring and run-
off sampling in the north and south parcels and water chemistry
monitoring on the Colorado River. The agencies are working to provide
funding to continue some or all of these tasks within current agency
budgets.
USGS has also identified a number of new studies that could be
initiated to better understand groundwater flow paths, travel times,
biological toxicity pathways, and radionuclide migration. The agencies
are currently working on the development of a study proposal for
vetting by each agency and the Department of the Interior and the
Department of Agriculture. The proposal will outline a multi-year work
program, costs, and priorities for specific tasks.
Regarding economic and environmental impacts, a future decision on
whether to continue or to terminate the withdrawal would be made
through the withdrawal review process, including the appropriate level
of environmental review and analysis.

3.  Since only one uranium mine is currently in operation within the
withdrawal area and only a few others contemplated, how will the DOI
determine the full scope and impacts from these mines on the Grand
Canyon and Colorado River Watershed? Will it be confirmed data or
hypothesis? If actual data, will DOI be in contact with those operating
the Arizona mine and other proposed mines to determine how data
gathering will occur? If the affected mining company is not included,
how will the impacts of mining be determined? Will naturally occurring
impacts to the Grand Canyon and the watershed be included in any review
or study? If a study is conducted in coordination and cooperation with
industry, would the Administration outline steps that industry could
take to mitigate any impacts to the environment so that mining could
continue to occur (after the end of the withdrawal) in an
environmentally acceptable way?

Response: There are four authorized uranium mines in the withdrawal
area (three on the Arizona Strip and one on National Forest land south
of the Grand Canyon), all owned by Denison Mines Corp. Currently, the
Arizona 1 Mine is in production, but scheduled to close and go into
reclamation later this year. The Pinenut Mine is being prepared to go
into production later this year. Denison is in the process of closing
and reclaiming the Kanab North Mine, and opening the Canyon Mine, which
is on National Forest land.
Denison has also submitted a Plan of Operations (POO) for a new
mine (the EZ Mine) on the Arizona Strip. This will require a validity
determination and preparation of an Environmental Impact Statement
(EIS) before the POO can be approved.
The presence of the existing mines and potential new mines offer
additional opportunities to monitor the potential effects of mining on
water and biological resources. The BLM and FS will continue working
with the USGS, NPS, FWS, and Denison to design and carry out these
studies in a manner that takes advantage of these opportunities.
Regarding natural vs. human-caused impacts, the USGS has proposed
additional studies that would help better determine these factors,
including evaluating and refining the isotopic Uranium Activity Ratio
(UAR) analysis that is already in progress. This process seeks to
determine the sources of elevated water or soil samples.
4.  Section 204 of FLPMA required that a 12-part justification for the
withdrawal be submitted to Congress as part of the January 9,
2012, actions taken by the Secretary of the Interior. Could the
relevant agencies please share those required responses which
were used to justify the withdrawal with this committee?
Response: The 12-part justification was delivered on January 9,
2012, to Chairman Hastings and Ranking Member Markey of the House
Committee on Natural Resources, as well as to Chairman Bingaman and
Ranking Member Murkowski of the Senate Committee on Energy and Natural
Resources.
______

Mr. Lamborn. Thank you for your testimony.
Mr. Tidwell?

STATEMENT OF TOM TIDWELL, CHIEF,
U.S. FOREST SERVICE

Mr. Tidwell. Mr. Chairman, members of the Subcommittee, I
am pleased to be here today to discuss the President's Fiscal
Year 2013 budget request for the Forest Service's energy and
minerals program.
This budget request will support our goal to meet the needs
and desires of the American people while reflecting our
commitment to fiscal restraint and efficiency.
The Forest Service is committed to effectively managing the
mineral resources to facilitate energy transformation and to
sound development of both renewable and nonrenewable energy.
We play a vital role in providing job opportunities through
both mineral operations and renewable energy production,
including solar, wind, hydroelectric, geothermal, and
bioenergy.
Over five million acres of the National Forest System lands
are currently leased for oil, gas and coal.
The Forest Service administers operations on approximately
160,000 mining claims and manages approximately 2,600 mineral
sale contracts.
In Fiscal Year 2010, we produced 16 million barrels of oil,
one trillion cubic feet of natural gas off these lands. This
does not include the production from over 15,000 wells that
overlie private minerals.
In addition, 20 percent of the nation's coal was produced
off the National Forest System lands, and this is some of the
cleanest coal produced in America.
The value of the energy and minerals production from these
operations exceeds $6.5 billion every year.
The Federal royalties from oil and gas from the National
Forest lands was about $136 million in Fiscal Year 2009, with a
total return to the Treasury from oil, gas, coal and minerals
ranging around $650 million to $850 million each year.
In addition to the royalties and receipts, mineral and
energy development support over 110,000 jobs every year.
The Fiscal Year 2013 budget request of $73.4 million for
our minerals and geology management program is a $10 million
decrease from the Fiscal Year 2012 enacted.
With this budget request, the Forest Service will need to
focus more on our nondiscretionary activities to ensure we are
processing the mining claims and surface use plans on leased
areas, will focus our efforts on using the appropriated money
to process energy related mineral proposals, and focus on
increasing opportunities to develop and supply oil, gas, and
geothermal resources from Federal lands.
We are going to do this through our continued focus on
increasing our efficiency, especially where we work so close
with the BLM.
We are going to continue to work on processing our drill
applications in a more timely fashion through our pilot
offices. We are going to proceed and pursue more opportunities
through service first, and I want to thank you for granting us
that authority.
We are also using one environmental analysis to cover the
leasing decisions for both the BLM and the Forest Service, and
we will continue to use our categorical exclusions wherever
possible to facilitate the timely decisions.
We are also going to be focused on reviewing environmental
analysis for leases prior to when those leases expire, so we
can assure that if there has been any changed conditions, we
address that before these leases expire.
This budget request will cover processing about 7,000
mineral and energy applications, and we expect close to between
180 to 200 permits for drilling. It will also fund the
Administration of over 10,000 active mineral operations and
over 19,000 operating oil and gas wells.
In addition to that, there is currently increasing interest
in developing solar and wind energy on the National Forest
System lands, along with hydropower, which will probably
continue to be the primary source for renewable energy, but we
also see a lot more interest in geothermal, and of course, with
the opportunities to use woody biomass, but these are probably
going to be the areas where we see the highest potential for
renewable in the future.
Minerals management on the National forests and grasslands
is essential for the American people, for energy, for minerals,
and for the jobs that are produced.
Again, I want to thank you for the opportunity to address
the Subcommittee today, and I look forward to discussing our
request for this important program, and will be pleased to
answer any of your questions.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Tidwell follows:]

Statement of Tom Tidwell, Chief, U.S. Forest Service,
U.S. Department of Agriculture

Mr. Chairman and members of the subcommittee, I am pleased to be
here today to discuss the President's Budget request for the Forest
Service in fiscal year (FY) 2013, specifically as it relates to the
energy and minerals programs administered by the Forest Service. I
appreciate the support this subcommittee has shown the Forest Service
in the past, and I look forward to working together in the future to
ensure that stewardship of our nation's forests and grasslands
continues to meet the desires and expectations of the American people.
This budget will allow the Forest Service to support that goal, while
also reflecting our commitment to fiscal restraint and efficiency.
The Forest Service is committed to effectively managing mineral
resources, to facilitating energy transmission in a responsible manner,
and to the sound development of both renewable and non-renewable
energy. The Forest Service oversees surface use impacts from energy and
minerals activities, administers special use authorizations, and
facilitates renewable energy development. We play a vital role in
providing job opportunities through renewable energy production
including solar, wind, hydroelectric, geothermal and bioenergy.
Energy and Minerals Management
The FY 2013 President's Budget requests $73.4 million for the
Minerals and Geology Management Program, a $10.1 million decrease from
the FY 2012 enacted appropriations bill. Given this budget decrease,
the Forest Service will focus on non-discretionary activities such as
processing mining plans and surface use plans on leased areas. We will
continue to identify and pursue opportunities that increase our
efficiency, such as enhancing an already-close working relationship
with the Bureau of Land Management (BLM).
The Forest Service Minerals and Geology Management Program supports
the provision of jobs, minerals, and energy for the American people,
while ensuring that watersheds are protected, threats to human safety
are minimized, and contaminated sites--especially abandoned mines--are
restored. Our funding request emphasizes the environmental review of
proposed operations. Funds will be used to process energy-related
mineral proposals with a focus on increasing opportunities to develop
and supply oil, gas, and geothermal resources from Federal lands in
support of the Energy Policy Act of 2005 (EPAct 2005). Other priorities
include inspecting and monitoring ongoing minerals operations;
providing expertise to ensure watershed health and public safety;
managing significant geologic resources and hazards; cleaning up
contaminated sites; mitigating safety hazards at abandoned mines; and
ensuring our operations are managed to standard.
In addition to leasable energy resources, we manage many other
types of operations. We manage more than four thousand mineral material
permits and sale contracts, for example, which provide over 3.5 million
tons of sand and gravel and other materials critical for maintaining
roads in rural communities. We are also involved in operations that
minimize environmental and water quality impacts of mines--such as
those mines producing gold and copper.
The Forest Service works closely with BLM in managing energy and
mineral development on National Forest System (NFS) lands. In general,
the Forest Service is responsible for managing impacts on the surface
estate, while BLM manages the Federal subsurface estate. BLM issues
leases for exploration and development of energy minerals after
receiving consent from the Forest Service for those leases overlaying
NFS lands where the sub-surface is federally held. When BLM receives an
oil and gas drilling permit applications on NFS lands, the Forest
Service processes the surface use authorization. BLM processes the
drilling portion of the application and approves the drilling permit
after consolidating the surface and sub-surface portions. The
Department of the Interior's Office of Natural Resources Revenue is
responsible for the efficient, timely, and accurate collection and
disbursement of all royalty payments and other revenues from the
leasing and production of natural resources from federal lands.
Over five million acres of NFS lands are currently leased for oil,
gas, coal, and phosphate mining operations. At any given time, the
Forest Service administers operations on approximately 160,000 mining
claims and manages approximately 2,600 mineral material sale contracts.
The value of energy and minerals production from these operations on
NFS lands typically exceeds $6.5 billion per year, as calculated by the
Forest Service and the Department of the Interior's Office of Natural
Resources Revenue.
Mineral receipts are derived from annual lease rentals, royalties
on production, bonus bids for competitive leases, and mineral material
sales. Of the total revenues received, between 25 and 50 percent--
depending on whether production is from acquired lands or lands
reserved from the public domain--is returned to the State or county of
production. Federal royalties from oil and gas leases on NFS lands were
$136 million in calendar year 2009. Returns to the Treasury each year
from lease rentals, royalties on production, bonus bids, and mineral
material sales on NFS lands typically range from $650 million to $850
million. The Forest Service is analyzing additional lands across the
country which could be made available for leasing.
The Minerals and Geology Management Program works to mitigate
potential threats to the environment and human safety associated with
thousands of abandoned mines and other contaminated sites located on
NFS lands. The program works to preserve valuable geologic resources
and minimize the impacts of pollution on NFS lands to protect and
enhance our nation's water resources. Roughly 66 million Americans rely
on drinking water that originates from NFS lands. Energy and mineral
development can go hand-in-hand with conserving resources and it is the
Forest Service's aim to do so.
Mineral Applications Processing
The Budget requests $19.0 million to fund the processing of an
estimated 7,260 mineral and energy mineral applications in FY 2013,
depending on market demand for mineral resources from NFS lands. Last
year we processed approximately 200 permits for drilling or master
development plans across the nation. The energy component of this
applications processing activity will continue to focus on increasing
opportunities to develop and offer oil and gas, coal, and geothermal
resources from Federal lands. Also, approximately twenty percent of all
U.S. coal is produced from NFS lands with an annual market value in
excess of $3 billion.
Mineral Operations Administration
The Budget requests $26.8 million to fund the administration of an
estimated 10,824 active mineral operations in FY 2013. The program will
emphasize meeting necessary administrative demands to ensure compliance
with operating plan requirements and specific environmental standards
for protecting resources. This program provides for the inspection,
oversight, and monitoring of approved mineral operations on NFS lands.
This funding will allow the Forest Service to administer surface
occupancy for a significant amount of oil, natural gas, coal and
geothermal operations. In addition to receipts from lease rentals,
royalties, bonus bids, and mineral material sales returned to the
Treasury, States, and counties, mineral and energy development on NFS
lands support on average over 110,000 jobs (Eichman 2011, IMPLAN
Model), often in areas or communities where employment opportunities
are limited.
This Administration believes natural gas development is an
important component of the nation's energy portfolio, with potential to
advance our nation's energy security, improve air quality, and create
jobs. The responsibility of the Forest Service and the rest of the
Administration is to safely and responsibly develop these resources in
a way that ensures the well-being of surrounding communities and
protects our landscapes and watersheds.
Across the country, National Forests and Grasslands currently host
over 19,700 operating oil and gas wells. Approximately 4,200 of those
19,700 wells overlay Federal minerals where the subsurface is federally
held, not privately owned. As mentioned, the Forest Service works
closely with BLM. Coordination between the two agencies is outlined in
a national memorandum of understanding (MOU) where BLM has primary
responsibility for sub-surface impacts and the Forest Service has
primary responsibility for surface impacts. In 2010, wells on NFS lands
overlying federally owned minerals produced approximately 16 million
barrels of oil and one trillion cubic feet of natural gas. The
remaining oil and gas wells--about 15,500--overlie privately held
minerals. Where the subsurface mineral estate is privately held, the
Forest Service works closely with the operator, along with state and
local governments, to coordinate appropriate protection of surface
resources.
Pilot offices authorized under the EPAct of 2005 will continue to
help the agency efficiently process energy leasing and permit
applications, particularly with respect to processing oil and gas lease
nominations and surface use plan of operations relative to applications
for permits to drill. This program provides for the review and approval
of plans for proposed mineral activities. These activities include the
exploration and development of locatable minerals under the authority
of the General Mining Law of 1872; exploration for coal, oil, gas, and
geothermal; production under the various mineral and geothermal leasing
acts; and finally, contracts for the extraction of materials like sand
and gravel by the public and local, State, and Federal agencies under
the Materials Act of 1947 and other statutory authorities.
Geologic Resources and Hazards Management
The Budget requests $5.6 million to fund the identification and
management of an estimated 790 geologic resources and hazards. Managing
geologic resources encompasses the management and administrative
activities for paleontologic resources and caves, both of which have
statutory direction for management and conservation. It also
encompasses unique landscapes and groundwater. Our management
activities inform land management decisions, project design, and
protect sites that have scientific or educational value and use.
We provide for the safety of the public by identifying and managing
geologic hazards such as floods, landslides, avalanches, earthquakes,
volcanoes, and naturally occurring hazardous minerals like asbestos and
radon gas. We take action to minimize the consequences of conditions
and events that would affect human health and safety, and we protect
infrastructure, soil, groundwater, and other natural resources. The
geologic resources and hazards program area provides assessments of
geologic settings and active geomorphic processes for land management
planning, environmental protection and restoration, as well as for the
cost effective management of roads, recreation sites and other
infrastructure.
Abandoned Mine Lands (AML) Safety Risk Features Mitigation
The Budget requests $6.9 million to fund the mitigation of an
estimated 489 abandoned mine sites. The AML Program focuses on
mitigating safety risk features and associated activities for abandoned
mines in high-priority watersheds. This program provides for the
inventory, assessment, and mitigation of abandoned mine safety hazards
and environmental damage. This work includes closing underground mine
openings and vertical shafts; re-contouring open pits, trenches and
associated roads; and removing or stabilizing abandoned buildings,
equipment, and hazardous materials. Wherever feasible, AML work
minimizes or mitigates adverse effects on AML-dependent wildlife and
AML-associated cultural and historic resources.
Environmental Compliance Management
The Budget requests $1.6 million to fund 21 environmental
compliance audits, assuring the protection of employee and public
health and safety. This program funds a national audit process which
assesses Forest Service compliance with environmental statutes and
trains field personnel on compliance and pollution prevention.
Environmental Restoration Management
The Budget requests $13.5 million to fund restoration activities on
50 known hazardous material sites on NFS lands. Cleanup of contaminated
sites is critical for the long-term protection of surface and
groundwater quality, and it contributes to overall ecological health.
This program provides for the inventory, assessment, and cleanup of
sites where there is a release--or threat of release--of a hazardous
substance, pollutant, or contaminant. Restoration mainly occurs at AML
sites, though non-AML sites may also be restored. Cleanup projects are
typically initiated under requirements of the Comprehensive
Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability Act, the Resource
Conservation and Recovery Act, or the Clean Water Act. Restoration
helps minimize or eliminate threats to human health, safety and the
environment.
We will continue to utilize pilot offices, authorized under the
EPAct of 2005, as they eliminate duplication between agencies. These
offices help the Forest Service efficiently process energy leasing and
permit applications, particularly with respect to eliminating the
backlog of oil and gas lease nominations and surface use plan of
operations relative to applications for permits to drill. We plan to
continue to use legislated- and agency-established categorical
exclusions where appropriate. We will work to update Environmental
Impact Statements that are ten or more years old to ensure leasing
decisions for high potential areas are more defensible and protective
of the environment. This will facilitate the offering of new leases. We
are working more closely than ever with BLM to improve efficiencies.
Authorizations for Energy Facilities and Other Land Uses
One of the priorities of the Forest Service in FY 2013 will be
processing applications for land use authorizations that contribute in
various ways to meeting the nation's energy needs. Special use
authorizations for energy are managed by the Forest Service Lands
Staff. Forest Service authorization of wind, solar, and hydroelectric
energy facilities, as well as electric transmission facilities, will
contribute to reducing our dependence on fossil fuels.
The Forest Service's FY 2013 budget request includes $10.3 million
for processing land use proposals and applications. This request will
fund issuance of approximately 3,875 new land use authorizations and
administration of approximately 14,850 land use authorizations, with a
primary focus on those associated with statutory rights and energy-
related uses. Priority will continue to be placed on energy and
communications projects.
A priority for the Forest Service is improving America's ability to
deliver electricity and transport oil, gas, and hydrogen, as well as
broadband deployment. These land use projects increase the capacity of
the power grid for renewable energy, improve both energy reliability
and access to energy generation, and finally, advance broadband service
for thousands of communities across the United States. The Forest
Service will continue to work with other federal agencies, tribal
governments, and states to refine the location of energy corridors and
enhance energy production and transmission and broadband deployment.
For example, the Forest Service is a signatory to the 2009 interagency
memorandum of understanding (MOU) for expediting evaluation and
authorization of high-voltage and other significant electric
transmission projects that cross lands managed by more than one federal
agency.
The Agency's FY 2013 budget also includes an estimated $7 million
to fund the Administration of Rights-of-Way and the Other Land Uses
Programs. Both of these non-discretionary programs operate with cost
recovery funds. The Forest Service is seeking permanent cost recovery
authority for Administration of Rights-of-Way before the current
authority expires on September 30, 2012. This authority enables the
Agency to improve customer service and reduce the backlog of expired
authorizations. Processing applications for reauthorization of these
uses facilitates the development and transmission of affordable,
reliable energy, supports economic development, and promotes public
health and safety.
Expediting evaluation and authorization of these projects improves
reliability of the electrical grid and supports transmission of
renewable energy. Twenty-seven of these projects involve NFS lands. The
Forest Service has issued national directives implementing the 2009
interagency MOU to (1) ensure better cooperation and coordination with
other federal agencies in evaluating and authorizing electric
transmission projects; (2) optimize siting of rights-of-way for energy
transmission corridors; and (3) expedite applications for electric
transmission projects on NFS lands. In implementing the MOU, the agency
works closely with the U.S. Department of Energy (DOE), the Western
Electricity Coordinating Council, and the Council on Environmental
Quality's Rapid Response Team. As directed by the Energy Policy Act of
2005, the Forest Service, working with DOE and the U.S. Department of
the Interior, submitted a report to Congress on assessment of electric
transmission in the eastern United States. Approximately 13,500 miles
of electric transmission lines and 6,000 miles of pipelines are
authorized on NFS lands under a land use authorization.
Renewable Energy Development
Renewable energy resources are critical for satisfying America's
energy demands and will create energy-related jobs in the future. The
Forest Service will continue to help increase the supply of renewable
energy by promoting wind and solar energy, engaging in hydropower
licensing, development and geothermal operations, and encouraging use
of woody biomass from NFS lands.
Solar and Wind
In August 2011, the Forest Service issued final agency directives
for evaluating applications and issuing authorizations for wind energy
facilities on NFS lands. The directives promote consistent evaluation
and authorization of proposed wind energy facilities and increase the
agency's efficiency in processing proposals and applications for those
facilities. Equally important, the directives foster early project
collaboration among affected government agencies. The directives also
address consideration of factors that are unique to wind energy
development, such as visual impacts from ridge top development and
potential impacts on migratory birds and bats.
The Forest Service administers nearly a dozen land use
authorizations for wind energy site testing and feasibility. In
addition, the agency has approved the environmental analysis for first
wind energy facility on NFS lands in the Green Mountain National Forest
in Vermont. The Deerfield Wind Energy Project would involve
installation of 15 wind turbines and would generate 30 megawatts of
electricity. Three million acres of NFS lands have been identified as a
possible location for utility-scale solar development. The Forest
Service has issued one study authorization and has received several
inquiries regarding construction of a solar facility on NFS lands.
Hydropower
Because most of the viable utility-scale hydropower sites in the
United States have already been developed, new production likely will
come from increasing the efficiency of existing dams and smaller in-
stream facilities that do not interfere with fish passage. Proposals
for small-scale hydropower facilities are anticipated to increase.
Streams on NFS lands are most likely to support low-flow hydroelectric
operations with a potential production capacity of approximately 5
megawatts, which is enough to power approximately 3,750 homes. The
agency also participates in hydropower licensing proceedings
administered by the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission (FERC) by
developing terms and conditions for inclusion in FERC licenses to
ensure adequate protection and use of NFS lands. The Forest Service is
striving to reduce the time and resources needed to establish
appropriate terms and conditions for FERC hydropower licenses.
Geothermal
Two geothermal power plants are located on NFS lands at present,
providing the equivalent of a 60 megawatt power plant with capacity to
meet the electricity demand for 60,000 homes. There is significant
potential for increased geothermal production from NFS lands. In 2008,
the Forest Service and BLM completed a joint programmatic environmental
impact statement (PEIS) evaluating geothermal development on federal
lands in the western United States to enhance efficiency in processing
applications for geothermal leasing on NFS lands.
Leasing of NFS lands for geothermal development is similar to the
leasing of NFS lands for oil and gas development. In both cases, the
Secretary of the Interior issues leases for NFS lands, subject to
conditions imposed by the Secretary of Agriculture to protect NFS
lands. In 2011, BLM issued ten geothermal leases encompassing 16,550
acres of NFS lands. An additional 700,000 acres of NFS lands are under
NEPA analysis for geothermal leasing.
Woody Biomass and Bioenergy
Forest Service biomass and bioenergy activities provide numerous
benefits, including improved forest health and productivity, and
reduced fire risk to communities. In FY 2013, the Forest Service
proposes $38.2 million for woody biomass and bioenergy programs,
including $13 million for bioenergy and biobased products research. The
FY 2013 request also includes $5 million for Woody Biomass Utilization.
This grant program has created or maintained approximately 1,700 jobs
over the past seven years.
Right now, national forests supply 1.4 million dry tons of biomass
per year, equivalent to the output of a 159 megawatt power plant or
enough to supply the electricity for 159,000 homes. Through additional
targeted small-diameter thinning, but without increasing the annual
timber harvest, national forests could provide 5.4 million dry tons per
year or enough to supply electricity for 616,000 homes. The Forest
Service is working closely with other mission areas in the U.S.
Department of Agriculture to pursue additional wood-to-energy
opportunities. Similarly, we are working with DOE in converting Forest
Service facilities to the use of wood energy.
Using national forest biomass byproducts from ecological
restoration activities as a source of renewable energy can enhance
economic opportunity and forest sustainability by providing raw
material for renewable bioenergy and biobased products. The Forest
Service intends to promote increased use of woody biomass by working
with other agencies to encourage market development for the product.
The Forest Service's woody biomass program is ensuring a sustainable
and reliable supply of raw materials and fostering effective business
models to promote growth in this emerging sector. Stewardship contracts
remain an important tool in meeting this objective. Stewardship
contracts provide a more dependable wood supply, thereby encouraging
investment in private sector facilities.
Conclusion
This President's budget request for FY 2013 takes a comprehensive
approach to conservation that addresses the challenges faced by federal
land managers, while considering the need to reduce spending and
enhance efficiency. The Forest Service's vision includes not only
creating healthy ecosystems, but also thriving communities in the
vicinity of national forests and grasslands and providing jobs in rural
areas. Our energy and minerals programs contribute to sustainable
domestic energy production and support many jobs and socioeconomic
benefits to the American people, while protecting healthy ecosystems.
Thank you for the opportunity to discuss the President's budget
request as it relates to the Forest Service's energy and minerals
programs. I look forward to sharing more information about these
programs and working with you to develop the proposals included in the
FY 2013 budget. I would be happy to answer any questions you may have.
______

Mr. Lamborn. Thank you, Chief Tidwell. We will now begin
questioning. Members are limited to five minutes for their
questions, but we may have additional rounds. I now recognize
myself for five minutes.
Director Abbey, one of the Administration's proposals is to
increase the royalty rate for production on Federal lands by 50
percent more than what it is today.
Do you believe that a 50 percent increase in the royalty
rate as proposed by Secretary Salazar will make production on
Federal lands more or less economically feasible?
Mr. Abbey. Mr. Chairman, we have not reached that
conclusion as far as what increase, if any increase, we might
impose relating to royalties.
Our budget request does assume an 18.75 percent royalty
rate for onshore minerals similar to what is being charged or
exactly what is being charged for offshore oil and natural gas.
We are completing our analysis and continuing to assess the
options that are before us, but let me assure the members of
this committee that there has been no final decision to
increase royalty rates on onshore oil and gas.
Mr. Lamborn. Would you agree with me that increasing
onshore production costs, which are already on shaky ground as
the IHS CERA Report said last November, that my State of
Colorado and others onshore will have even less exploration and
development?
Mr. Abbey. No. There are a lot of factors that will come
into play. Certainly, the market will be a factor. The cost of
developing and producing from Federal lands or private lands
continues to be a factor.
Just the fact that there may be an increase in royalty for
oil and gas on public lands is just one of many factors that
the industry would have to consider relative to where they want
to develop and where they will likely have an opportunity to
produce.
Mr. Lamborn. You are right, it is one of many factors, but
it seems to me it would be a cost factor that will either get
passed onto the ultimate consumers, like people who are buying
gasoline at the pump, or if they cannot pass it on, they will
be less competitive, and they will do less of it as a result.
Either way, it sounds kind of negative to me.
Mr. Abbey. Well, certainly the industry has been very good
about passing on those costs to the American consumer. Having
said that, as we go forward, we take all these factors into
account as we conduct our analysis.
The one thing that we want to assure is that the American
taxpayers get a fair return from the assets that are being
produced from their lands and minerals.
Mr. Lamborn. I would certainly agree with that. We want a
fair return. I am concerned about the price at the pump.
Also, Director Abbey, the BLM has announced its intention
to release a rule regulating hydrofracking on Federal lands.
Can you tell me what kind of feedback you are getting just in
general?
Mr. Abbey. Well, we have spent the last several months
consulting with states who have passed their own fracking
disclosure rules.
We also have met with the members of the conservation
community. We have met with members of the industry.
We have circulated a rough draft, a working draft, with
Native American Tribes that we consulted with. That information
has been shared. We have received quite a bit of feedback
relative to what the industry, the conservation groups, and
even the states would like to see us adjust from the working
draft.
We have taken those comments to heart. We are continuing to
finalize our proposed rule. We anticipate to be able to release
a draft rule as early as April.
Mr. Lamborn. Thank you. I do have here a packet of letters
from the Governor of North Dakota, a letter from several Indian
Tribes, and from industry. At this point, I would ask unanimous
consent to introduce this into the record. Seeing no objection,
so ordered.
The documents listed below were submitted for the record
and have been retained in the Committee's official files.

Submitted by The Honorable Doug Lamborn:

Letter from Governor Jack Dalrymple, State of North
Dakota, Letter to Secretary of the Interior Ken Salazar, dated
February 8, 2012, submitted for the record

Letter from The Honorable Don Young, Chairman, and
The Honorable Dan Boren, Ranking Member, Subcommittee on Indian
and Alaska Native Affairs, to Secretary of the Interior Ken
Salazar, dated February 8, 2012, submitted for the record

Letter from Irene C. Cuch, Chairwoman, Ute Tribal
Business Committee, Ute Indian Tribe, to Secretary of the
Interior Ken Salazar, dated February 9, 2012, submitted for the
record

Letter from Tex ``Red Tipped Arrow'' Hall, Chairman,
TAT-MHA Nation, to Secretary of the Interior Ken Salazar, dated
March 9, 2012, submitted for the record

Letter from Jimmy R. Newton, Chairman, Southern Ute
Indian Tribal Council, to Jim Stockbridge, Trust Liaison
Officer, Bureau of Land Management, dated January 18, 2012,
submitted for the record

Letter from IPAA, API, AXPC, USOGA and ANGA to
Chairman Doc Hastings, dated February 15, 2012, submitted for
the record

Submitted by Erik Milito:

Environmental Protection for Onshore Oil and Gas
Production Operations and Leases, API RECOMMENDED PRACTICE 51R,
FIRST EDITION, JULY 2009

Hydraulic Fracturing Operations--Well Construction
and Integrity Guidelines, API GUIDANCE DOCUMENT HF1, FIRST
EDITION, OCTOBER 2009

EMPLOYMENT, GOVERNMENT REVENUE, AND ENERGY SECURITY
IMPACTS OF CURRENT FEDERAL LANDS POLICY IN THE WESTERN U.S.,
Prepared by API January 2012

Energy Security Handout, January 2012
API

Letter from Governor Dalrymple (ND) to Sec. Salazar
(DOI)

Letter from Governor Herbert (UT) to Sec. Salazar
(DOI)

Water Management Associated with Hydraulic
Fracturing, API GUIDANCE DOCUMENT HF2, FIRST EDITION, JUNE 2010

Practices for Mitigating Surface Impacts Associated
with Hydraulic Fracturing, API GUIDANCE DOCUMENT HF3, FIRST
EDITION, JANUARY 2011

Assessment of the Impacts of Increased Access versus
Higher Taxes on U.S. Oil and Natural Gas Production, Government
Revenue, and Employment, Released January 4, 2011, Revised June
24, 2011, Prepared by Wood Mackenzie Energy Consulting

Isolating Potential Flow Zones During Well
Construction, API STANDARD 65, PART 2, SECOND EDITION, DECEMBER
2010

Economic Impacts of Oil and Gas Development on BLM
Lands in Wyoming, May 2011, Prepared by SWCA Environmental
Consultants

White Paper on Oil and Gas in Obama Administration

U.S. Supply Forecast and Potential Jobs and Economic
Impacts (2012-2030) Released September 7, 2011, Prepared by
Wood Mackenzie Energy Consultants

Submitted by Laura Skaer:

2012 RANKING OF COUNTRIES FOR MINING INVESTMENT:
``WHERE NOT TO INVEST,'' Prepared by Behre Dolbear Group Inc.

World Exploration Trends 2012: A Special Report from
Metals Economics Group for the PDAC International Convention
------

Mr. Lamborn. I am concerned because as the letter from the
Ute Tribe, for instance, concludes ``For these reasons, the Ute
Indian Tribe requests that BLM not move forward at this time
with development of regulations for hydraulic fracking on
public lands, and more specifically, reservation lands.''
Why is BLM moving forward with something that the
stakeholders I am hearing from are very opposed to?
Mr. Abbey. The Ute Tribe, they are one of just many
stakeholders that have a say relative to how these public lands
and mineral resources should be managed.
Let me say that our proposed rule on fracking takes into
account also the information that has been shared with us from
the Department of Energy's Task Force on Fracturing Technology,
where they said it makes a lot of sense to move forward,
requiring disclosure of chemicals, to ensure integrity of the
well bores, and also to----
Mr. Lamborn. Mr. Abbey, are not states already doing all of
these things through their regulation, and do they not know
their own territory better than we know it here from
Washington?
Mr. Abbey. Our rules will be applied on the ground by field
people who are working in those offices in these Western States
and where we have responsibility for the Federal mineral
estate.
As it relates to the states, some states have disclosure
rules, not all states do. In fact, most states do not have
disclosure rules at this point in time.
Again, the rules that we will be proposing will require
disclosure of chemicals, unless there is proprietary reasons
not to.
We will be sharing that information publicly, along with
the requirements to ensure integrity of the well bores and also
for wastewater management.
Mr. Lamborn. I am extremely troubled by what you are
proposing there.
I would now like to recognize the gentleman from New Jersey
for five minutes.
Mr. Holt. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Director Abbey, the BLM has proposed collecting $48 million
in new inspection fees for oil and gas operations, similar to
the fees charged for offshore inspections.
Is that correct?
Mr. Abbey. That is correct.
Mr. Holt. This revenue would be used to fund increased
inspections?
Mr. Abbey. Yes.
Mr. Holt. If you are not able to collect these fees, would
it be likely that the oil and gas operations would be less
safe, or at least you would be able to do less to ensure they
are safe? Is that correct?
Mr. Abbey. It is correct. If we were not able to collect
the fees that we are proposing, then it would have to come out
of the appropriated funds, and we did not request inspection
and enforcement funds in our budget request.
Just to comment, I would think the taxpayers would want to
get a proper return on the oil and gas resources.
Mr. Holt. Director Abbey, you note in your testimony that
only slightly less than a third of the 38 million acres of
public lands that oil companies currently hold onshore are
under production. Is that correct? Less than a third are
currently under production?
Mr. Abbey. About a third, yes.
Mr. Holt. The industry has more than 7,000, as I understand
it, approved permits to drill that they are not using. Is that
correct?
Mr. Abbey. That is correct.
Mr. Holt. What is the BLM doing to encourage the industry
to begin developing these millions of acres, and would it be
appropriate to add incentives of one sort or another for them
to either use or abandon their permits?
Mr. Abbey. I do think there should be some encouragement
and incentives for the industry to move forward and produce
some on the lands they have already leased, and also to use the
permits that have been approved.
Those incentives can be positive types of incentives or
negative types of incentives. For example, in our budget
request for 2013, we have proposed applying a $4 per acre fee
for lands that have been leased to the oil and gas industry but
are not being explored, produced or developed.
At the same time, as we go forward, this past year, we
approved a little over 4,200 applications for permits to drill.
That was about 100 plus more than the number of applications
that we had received from the industry.
We are staying abreast of the applications that are coming
in relative to reviewing the applications and then making
decisions relative to the appropriateness of those
applications, and then issuing decisions.
At the end of last fiscal year, there were around 7,200
applications that we have approved, that would allow the
industry to move forward and develop on those permits.
Mr. Holt. Thank you. I would like to turn to renewables.
The amount of wind, solar, geothermal capacity permitted for
development on public lands has increased by more than
tripling, more than 350 percent.
As I am sure you are aware, taxes would increase at the end
of this year if the Republicans continue to block the extension
of the production tax credit.
If the tax credit for the wind industry, looking at wind
specifically here, is allowed to expire, what would that mean
for the wind energy projects that you have permitted?
Do you have any estimate?
Mr. Abbey. I do not think it would have much of an effect
on the projects that we have already permitted, because they
can go forward and construct those projects.
It certainly would diminish the interest in using public
lands or any lands for that matter to develop alternative
energy sources like wind, if such subsidies are to be lost.
Mr. Holt. I began my statement earlier to try to correct
some of the misinformation about energy production on public
lands in general.
As I said in my opening statement, the Department of Energy
report shows that production on public lands between 2003 and
2011, onshore oil production on Federal lands in 2011 was
higher than at any point under the Bush Administration.
Did I characterize that correctly in my opening statement?
Mr. Abbey. You did. As you pointed out, the facts are
clear. The oil production overall is the highest it has been in
eight years. Natural gas production is at an all time high.
There is no disputing those facts. I do not think any member of
this committee would dispute that.
Also, as you pointed out, despite a slight dip in 2010, oil
production and gas production from public lands and waters are
still higher in the first three years of the Obama
Administration than they were in the last three years of the
previous Administration.
Mr. Holt. Thank you, Director Abbey. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
Mr. Lamborn. All right. Representative Gohmert?
Mr. Gohmert. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Appreciate you both
being here.
I am curious, Director Abbey, as you take credit for the
highest production in the last eight years, has it ever crossed
your mind to send a thank you note to President George W. Bush
for getting all those leases done that allows you to take
credit for the highest production in the last eight years?
Mr. Abbey. No, it never has, but we would also be sending
thank you notes to President Clinton as well.
Mr. Gohmert. That is right. This is a long process. When
did you become Director?
Mr. Abbey. 2009.
Mr. Gohmert. Thank you. Was that in January?
Mr. Abbey. It was in July, I believe.
Mr. Gohmert. You were not on board in January of 2009.
Because of your history, you are probably aware that one of the
first acts of Secretary Salazar was to send back the checks for
the leases in Utah. I believe there were 77 of them. Secretary
Salazar announced, you may recall, that he was not going to
allow these leases to go forward that were let at the midnight
hour.
Do you recall that?
Mr. Abbey. I do.
Mr. Gohmert. I was always curious how in the world checks
that were issued and given to the Federal Government in
November and December of 2008 were sat on for that length of
time, so that a new Secretary could come in and send them back.
I was gratified to Secretary Salazar at one of our prior
hearings, he did accurately admit that he knew that there had
been a seven-year process to let those leases go.
As you are well aware, an oil company cannot come in at the
midnight hour and just throw out a bid for a lease. There has
to be a lot of homework that goes in, there has to be all kinds
of environmental analyses to determine whether a lease can be
let.
After a seven-year process, that was thwarted. I was just
curious, since we hear so much about jobs and trying to achieve
lower gas prices, do you have any estimate as to how many jobs
were created when those lease checks, after that seven-year
process, were returned to the bidders?
Any idea how many jobs were created when the Interior
Department refused to allow that seven-year process to go
further at all?
Mr. Abbey. You know, I do not have specific numbers of
jobs. Let me share with you as I did with the members of the
Senate that I appeared before last week, when we came into our
roles in 2009, we had inherited an oil and gas program that was
on the verge of collapse.
Congressman, it was not serving anyone well.
Mr. Gohmert. OK. Thank you, sir. My time is so limited, I
cannot let you go on with a speech like that, and I appreciate
it, and glad to hear anything you have to submit in writing
from here.
Do you have any estimate as to how much gas prices were
reduced after that seven-year process when those checks were
returned and people were not allowed to drill on that Federal
land? Any idea? Any estimate?
Mr. Abbey. I do not.
Mr. Gohmert. All right. Now, I have had different groups
come and talk to me. We have information through the Committee
that there is this hard rock shale in Utah, and maybe in
Northwestern Colorado.
There is a company that is producing oil from that very
type of shale in Estonia, and they have some private leases.
They say they can make money at $60 a barrel, and yet we have
kept so much of that land off limits.
We have heard estimates from one trillion to three trillion
barrels of oil could be produced from that hard rock shale. It
does require heat out of the presence of oxygen.
Have you seen or heard any estimates just as to how much
oil could be produced and money made at under $100 a barrel in
that area of Utah?
Mr. Abbey. I have read a lot of statements regarding what
potential exists, but let me share with you that there is no
proven technology to do what some members of that----
Mr. Gohmert. Thank you. Obviously, you are ignorant of what
they are doing in Estonia, Director, and I would encourage you
to take a look at that.
Mr. Abbey. Congressman, we have looked at what they are
doing in Estonia. They are burning the shale, just like coal.
Mr. Gohmert. You are aware they are producing oil and doing
so, making money at $60 a barrel?
You are going to continue to refuse to allow those leases
in that area of Utah, is that correct?
Mr. Abbey. No.
Mr. Gohmert. You are reopening those for bid?
Mr. Abbey. We have issued six RD&D leases for oil shale
development.
Mr. Gohmert. Are those part of the 77 that you canceled?
Mr. Abbey. Seventy-seven leases for oil and gas, not oil
shale.
Mr. Gohmert. All right. My time has expired. I look forward
to hearing anything else you may wish to submit to us in
writing.
Mr. Lamborn. Thank you. Representative Tonko?
Mr. Tonko. Thank you, Mr. Chair. Gentlemen, thank you for
appearing before the Subcommittee today. I appreciate the
thoughtfulness that you are attempting to address questions by.
If I could hear a little more about the collapse that you
were going to address with the oil and gas situation, and I
would hope we could learn from some information here as we
exchange thoughtful dialogue.
Mr. Abbey. I really appreciate that opportunity. The truth
of the matter is our program managed by the Bureau of Land
Management was on the verge of collapse. Over 50 percent or
almost 50 percent of all the parcels that we were offering for
leases were being protested or litigated.
We had issued literally hundreds of leases that had been
sold, but we could not actually issue those leases to the
companies for potential development because of protests and
litigation.
Until that litigation was resolved, the monies that we had
already collected from the industry were placed in suspense
accounts, not doing anyone any good.
We had rules in place to govern oil and gas leasing and
operations on public lands that were over 20 years old.
Technology had changed significantly in that 20-year period,
yet our rules governing operations on public lands had not been
adjusted or modified.
We had several Office of Inspector General reports and GAO
audits that had identified significant deficiencies in the oil
and gas program that were not being addressed in a timely
manner, if addressed at all.
We had EPA and other Federal agencies that were routinely
and publicly criticizing the BLM's NEPA documents and our
analysis, primarily as it related to air quality.
We had sportsmen and other public land stakeholders that
were voicing concerns about the way we were operating, leasing
anywhere and everywhere, without any regard at all to the
environmental consequences of these actions.
Rather than ignore the issues and challenges that we faced
when we came into these roles, we decided to take them head on.
We decided to do something about them, so we could give
assurance to the industry, if they were going to be leasing
parcels of land, that they were assured of getting the parcels
that had the greatest chance of being developed, instead of
tied up in court for 10 to 15 years.
We initiated leasing reforms, again, for the goal of
meeting the goal of making sure the parcels that were going to
be offered for leasing were the right ones and had the greatest
chance for success of being developed in a timely manner.
Again, in 2009, the oil and gas industry had absolutely no
assurance or certainty that the parcels they had done a lot of
work on and research, and that they were willing to apply a lot
of money in securing leases, were ever going to be developed.
The program that we have in place right now is intended to
address those challenges and make sure again the parcels that
we are offering up are the right ones and have the greatest
chance of being developed.
Today, the protests have dropped from almost 50 percent to
around 36 percent in the first year of implementing our leasing
reforms. We are making significant progress along those lines.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you very much for finishing that answer.
You mentioned that the Agency has instituted a new risk based
inspection protocol for oil and gas production activities.
Can you elaborate on that, please?
Mr. Abbey. Again, we have had to prioritize where we are
going to do inspections. We completed over 33,000 inspections
on oil and gas operations last year on Federal minerals.
In order to prioritize where those inspections were to
occur and where we are going to give the highest priority, we
did develop a risk based program, and it was based upon the
number of violations that had occurred on a particular
production operation. It also had to do with the volumes of
natural gas or oil that was being produced from those areas.
Mr. Tonko. Is this underway currently or when will it be
implemented?
Mr. Abbey. No. We implemented it two years ago. We are
continuing to fine tune the criteria that we are using to
identify the highest risk, and then again, devoting our
energies toward making sure those drilling operations are being
inspected routinely.
Mr. Tonko. According to a report issued by our Ranking
Member Markey and Representative Holt, there were over 2,000
violations issued between 1998 and 2011, involving some 300
companies, that resulted in over $270,000 worth of penalties.
Given the value of the resources being extracted and the
potential cost to the taxpayer for remediation, do the fines
appear to provide a deterrence at all?
Mr. Abbey. They certainly provide some deterrence. Again,
our hope is that when we inspect these drilling operations and
production operations, if we do find deficiencies and we
highlight what those deficiencies are, that the industries
themselves will take it upon themselves to correct those
deficiencies based upon the notice that we give them.
If they do not, then the assessments come into play. If
they fail to take the actions that we are requiring them to
take as part of our inspections, then there will be an
assessment imposed against that company.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you very much. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Lamborn. Thank you. Representative Thompson?
Mr. Thompson. Thank you, Chairman.
Director and Chief, thank you for your testimony today and
your leadership.
Chief Tidwell, I want to start with you. In terms of the
President's budget, do you believe there is adequate funding in
the President's budget request for the Forest Service to
perform environmental studies, particularly in NEPA?
Mr. Tidwell. Yes. I believe our request does provide
adequate resources, as long as we focus on dealing with the
applications for both minerals and energy production, and
realize that we will have to deemphasize some of the other
parts of our minerals and geology program.
The other key thing that I mentioned is, by having both the
BLM and the Forest Service work together to do one
environmental analysis to cover both of our decisions, this,
too, will greatly help facilitate our efficiency.
Mr. Thompson. Essentially, it sounds like in terms of
addressing NEPA, there is maybe not enough money there, but
there are other monies. You said deemphasizing other programs.
Where is that decision made? Does it lie with the Forest
Supervisor who may decide, ``Well, we are going to deemphasize
moving ahead with NEPA analysis to move ahead with energy
leases, oil and natural gas minerals,'' and in favor of
supporting whatever you were alluding to, this other pot of
money? I'm confident in your grasp of it, but where does that
decision making fall? What are the guidelines?
Mr. Tidwell. It will start with once we receive our budget
for the next year. We will send out direction when we send the
money out to the regions that provides where we are going to
focus and emphasize on, and then also there is some discretion
at the local level.
There are parts of the program, there is just no
discretion, that we have to address. That will always be the
first priority.
Some of the other parts dealing with some of the
environmental concerns, dealing with abandoned mine
reclamation, those are some areas we have some flexibility to
be able to shift resources.
It is a combination of the national direction plus the
discretion that our local managers need to have.
Mr. Thompson. If the President's budget comes up short in
terms of clearing these hurdles to energy production and
mineral production, I guess I have concerns.
I have a question later regarding some specific National
forests, where we have had forest supervisors, it seems like
they have had their own agenda in shutting down energy
production.
I guess I just would go on record that I am concerned about
how much discretion, and I know that is a fine line. We want to
empower our forest supervisors to do a good job.
But if they are anti-energy, it seems like there would be a
potential if the President has underfunded clearing the
environmental hurdles for energy production, we may run into
some problems locally.
In my District, a lot of local operators in the Allegheny
National Forest are regularly frustrated by the often lengthy
permitting process and delays.
It is especially so in my area since the vast majority of
the mineral rights and forests are privately owned. Allegheny
is somewhat unique, 93 percent of the subsurface rights are
privately held.
Generally, the wells in the Allegheny are shallow, which
means these companies need to have a steady flow of permits, as
opposed to deep well drilling.
Chief, what steps might we be able to take to help expedite
permitting and the necessary reviews for energy production in
the National forests?
Mr. Tidwell. Well, specifically, there in the Allegheny,
our process now is to meet with the proponents and quickly
negotiate for some reasonable mitigating measures and then to
issue a notice to proceed.
In other areas outside of the Allegheny, our use of
categorical exclusions has proven to be very effective. For
instance, out in North Dakota, which is by far the most active
area on the National Forest System right now, being able to
work closely with the BLM to issue those permits in a very
timely fashion, too.
Those are the things we are really focused on. The other
thing I wanted to also mention is this need for us to look to
see if the analysis that was done eight, nine, sometimes ten
years ago is still current, if there is any new information,
and actually address those concerns before the leases expire.
This is another area we want to focus some of our limited
resources on, to ensure that those leases can continue, if they
need to be extended, or be available to be re-leased.
Mr. Thompson. Thank you for that. Any insight on how the
pending forest planning rule is going to impact energy
production in National forests?
Mr. Tidwell. I believe our preferred alternative for the
new planning rule will help facilitate everything we do on the
National forests by reducing the time we spend on planning by
at least 50 percent, cut down the costs, and also will allow
the local communities to have much more of an engagement in
that entire process.
I believe it will facilitate not only minerals and energy
production but also the need for us to restore our National
forests.
Mr. Thompson. I would just publicly thank you for as a part
of that planning rule establishing that advisory committee,
which gives that local voice. That was a nice addition.
Mr. Lamborn. Thank you. Representative Gosar?
Dr. Gosar. Thank you very much.
Director Abbey, has Congress appropriated too much money to
the Bureau of Land Management?
Mr. Abbey. No.
Dr. Gosar. Do you believe the BLM has been appropriated
enough money to do its job sufficiently?
Mr. Abbey. I think we have sufficient funds to meet the
highest priority needs.
Dr. Gosar. We could process all the new permits,
eliminating the current backlog?
Mr. Abbey. We have requested sufficient funds to move
forward to address the backlog, yes.
Dr. Gosar. That is a stretch, we are right at that edge,
right?
Mr. Abbey. We are right at that edge.
Dr. Gosar. On February 16, Secretary Salazar advanced his
blueprint for renewable energy development in Arizona.
The Department then announced it will be examining all
lands in Arizona, not just lands that fall within the purview
of the Department or solely just the Federal Government.
I am all for the increased development of renewable energy
in our state's vast public lands. In fact, I encourage it.
My District alone is 70 percent public lands. Multiple use
of these lands is good and critical to rural Arizona as well as
our educational system.
Is analyzing private lands a good use of scant Agency
resources when you just stated you have just enough money to do
your day to day duties you are currently authorized to do?
Mr. Abbey. Congressman, the Bureau of Land Management was a
partner in that statewide planning effort. Other partners
included the State of Arizona, county governments, and other
stakeholders.
I think it was prudent. I think it was a responsible action
for everybody working together to identify the best lands for
such development to occur, whether they were on private lands
or state lands or even Federally managed lands.
Again, as it relates to private lands, it is up to the
private land owner what they want to do with their lands.
Dr. Gosar. It seems to me like when we start looking at
that private versus public, most of the solar programs do not
really worry about private lands because it is easily done. If
they can be put to a test and economically viable, it will get
done.
It seems to me like we need to concentrate on the Federal
jurisdiction because most of them do not even approach using
the Federal lands because of the bureaucracy and the red tape.
Mr. Abbey. I think we are making significant progress in
moving forward and analyzing the project proposals that are
before us. As I mentioned in my opening remarks, we have
already approved 6,500 megawatts of renewable energy on public
lands that are managed by the Bureau of Land Management.
We anticipate approving upwards of 11,000 megawatts in
2013. That is two years ahead of the congressional time line
that was provided to us in previous legislation, where they
identified 2015 as being the time line for approving in the
neighborhood of 10,000 megawatts from public lands.
Dr. Gosar. Looking at this blueprint, the Agency claims it
is analyzing items like transmission, but many of the solar
zones currently identified are not on a grid.
Is the Administration planning on using some of the excess
funds that it has been using to analyze private lands to invest
in transmission infrastructure?
Mr. Abbey. We are working very closely with the states and
Western Governors. We are also working very closely with the
Department of Energy, with the Department of Agriculture, with
the Department of Transportation to move forward, to align
transmission corridors, to where the developments are likely to
occur.
Dr. Gosar. OK. Finally, I would like to talk about the
actual analysis of BLM land. The Agency is taking into account
environmental conflicts while examining these zones.
I would simply like to ask in making the determination that
a parcel of land has too much environmental conflicts for the
development, is the Agency developing a proposal for additional
wilderness designation in my state?
Mr. Abbey. None that I am aware of.
Dr. Gosar. In my district, we have lots of problems with
the government bureaucrats administering land like the
wilderness. After analysis like this, regardless of the actual
land designation, will the Agency promise us they will ensure
local bureaucrats administer lands appropriately for the actual
land designation?
Mr. Abbey. These lands will be managed consistent with the
land use plans that are in place governing that type of use.
Dr. Gosar. Last, Chief Tidwell, I know we talked earlier.
We have a big deadline coming up. We would sure like to keep
those time lines appropriately. We have fire season coming up
on us. I know there is a lot riding on it, but we have a lot of
itchy people back there.
I would like to also thank you very, very much for your
cooperation and help in mitigating issues with Tony Ferguson
over at the Stone Quarry, where we had a rogue geologist by the
name of Jessica Lopez-Pierce, who decided to take issues into
her own hands, and I think the mitigation with Mike Williams
showed us we can actually solve a problem and get to the bottom
of it cooperatively. Thank you.
Mr. Tidwell. Thank you, Congressman.
Mr. Lamborn. Thank you. Representative Duncan?
Mr. Duncan of South Carolina. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I
thank the gentlemen for being here today.
Just a quick comment. I cannot think of a single example
where an increase in a tax or a fee ever reduces the price for
the consumer. It generally has the adverse effect. Taxes or
fees go up, the manufacturer or the producer passes that on to
the consumer or as a direct fee or tax that is assessed at the
pump or on a product directly, and we see a price increase.
You propose in your budget an increase of onshore royalties
from 12.5 percent to 18.75 percent, an increase on the cost
that the consumer will pay, because that will be passed on.
You also propose a $4 per acre fee for nonproducing Federal
leases. I heard your comments earlier, but there is no way you
can guarantee that every square inch of every leased acre is
going to be a producing area.
The oil and natural gas companies, they invest their own
dollars in these leases. This is not a gift from the
Government. They are investing their dollars in the opportunity
to go out, whether it is offshore or onshore, on Federal lands,
to take the risk of exploring for and hopefully producing oil
and natural gas resources that will yield them a profit at the
end of the day. Total recovery of their investment costs and
ultimately yield them a profit.
I just want us to chew on that going forward.
Director Abbey, I have some questions for you. The
Administration frequently touts an impressive record of
increasing energy development on Federal lands. What type of
energy development are they touting, primarily?
Mr. Abbey. All of the above. As renewable increases,
renewable development, as well as conventional energy.
Mr. Duncan of South Carolina. All of the above. Let's use
the President's words from the White House statement on the
Keystone Pipeline.
The President said this, he wants to ``Increase American
energy production while lessening our dependence on oil.''
Period. Not foreign oil, not Middle Eastern oil. The White
House statements says ``lessening our dependence on oil.''
That tells me he wants to increase American energy
production, wind, solar, hydro, and other things on Federal
lands, and not necessarily pursue oil and natural gas, because
he wants to lessen our dependence on oil.
Let me just go to the question. These are Yes or No
questions for you, so if you will limit it to that--in 2009,
when the Administration withdrew 77 leases issued in Utah from
development, do you believe this created American jobs and
increased domestic energy development? Yes or no?
Mr. Abbey. I do not believe it increased jobs, no.
Mr. Duncan of South Carolina. Since the Administration has
been in office, the last three years have seen the fewest acres
leased for oil and gas development in the last 30 years,
according to the BLM 2009, 2010, and 2011 acreage leased for
oil and gas development, was the lowest recorded since 1984.
Do you believe this helps create American jobs and
increases oil and natural gas development? Yes or no.
Mr. Abbey. Congressman, there are no yes or no answers to
the questions that you are raising. I will say this, the leases
we are now issuing have the greatest chance of being developed.
That was not the case in 2009 when we came into our positions.
Mr. Duncan of South Carolina. The last three years, we have
seen the fewest new leases sold by BLM since 1994.
I will agree with you to some degree that we are focusing
on targeted leases that are producing in geological productive
areas. I get that.
When I look at North Dakota, wildcat energy driven economy,
unemployment less than three percent. It is the Bakken Oil
Reserve there, Bakken formation. It is going gangbusters.
I look over in Montana, and Elm Creek was an original
Bakken production, I get that, but I see a lot of Federal land
that has the Bakken formation under it, and I do not see the
oil and natural gas production happening there that I see in
North Dakota.
I ask myself why because, in North Dakota, the oil and
natural gas production is happening on state land and private
land. It is not on Federal land.
If we were to open up these areas, and these are the
questions I get from my constituents back home, America is
blessed with the abundance of oil and natural gas resources,
why in the world, in this economic climate that we have, when
prices have gone up 108 percent since the day of inauguration
of President Obama until today, 108 percent, I did the math
this morning, why in the world are we not harvesting our
natural resources? Why are we not expediting lease sales?
I was on the MMS Five Year Planning Subcommittee. I know
the convoluted long process for offshore lease sale in the Gulf
of Mexico. It takes a while.
We should have started this process a while back. I
understand that as well. My constituents are asking me, and I
am asking you today, why in the world we are not expediting oil
and natural gas leases on Federal lands to meet our energy
needs?
Oil and natural gas is what drives this economy right now.
Why are we not expediting those lease sales?
Mr. Abbey. Congressman, let me just say that the most
successful lease sale we have ever had in the Bureau of Land
Management was in Eastern Montana last year. We are leasing
lands where there is an interest in development those leases.
We are doing so in a responsible manner. We are making sure
we are looking at these lands and doing the analysis prior to
committing those lands through the leasing process.
That way, it provides greater certainty to the industry
that the lands they will be leasing will have the greatest
chance of being developed and in a more timely manner, and not
be tied up in protests and litigation for years.
What good is that doing to the American public? We already
have over 24 million acres that have already been leased that
are not even being explored or developed.
Why do we want to continue to add to that inventory, if we
have 24 million acres already leased that is not being
developed?
We are doing 32 lease sales this year alone. Last year, we
offered 4.4 million acres.
Mr. Duncan of South Carolina. Based on some of the comments
that Mr. Gohmert from Texas made earlier, that kind of
contradicts some of the things you are saying.
I am out of time. Mr. Chairman, I will yield back.
Mr. Lamborn. Thank you. I would like to now yield five
minutes to the Ranking Member of the Full Committee for either
questions or an opening statement.
Mr. Markey. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, very much.
Director Abbey, last month Representative Holt and I sent
you a report prepared by the Committee staff that analyzed
drilling, safety and environmental regulations that occurred on
Federal lands over the last decade.
There were a total of 2,025 violations that occurred over a
13-year period in 17 states. Of these, 20 percent had to do
with problems with the blowout preventer and other well control
equipment.
In at least a dozen cases, operators were found to be
drilling without any blowout preventer installed at all. There
was one case where a well experienced a blowout and the
operator did not even notify the BLM, and another case, where
an operator was found to be dumping drilling fluids directly
into a river in Oklahoma.
Furthermore, there were more than 50 instances where an
operator began drilling on Federal lands without an approved
permit from BLM.
Yet, for the 2,025 violations we examined over that 13-year
period, oil and gas companies were only fined a total of
$273,000. That is an average of $135 per violation for an
industry where the top five companies made $137 billion last
year.
That is not a real deterrent for these companies. The fines
that BLM can levy on oil and gas companies who violate
regulations are set by a 30-year-old law that has not been
updated.
Do you think Congress should raise the fines that BLM can
issue so that there are meaningful financial deterrents for
these companies?
Mr. Abbey. Congressman, I think fines and assessments
certainly are a tool that we need and if we are going to have
such a tool, then they need to be sufficient to meet the goals
of such assessments.
Having said that, of the drilling inspections that we have
done over the past ten years, we found fewer than ten percent
of those operations actually committing any kind of violation,
and most of these violations were corrected after the first
notice.
Mr. Markey. Do you think that an average of $135 per
incident is adequate to serve as a deterrent or do you believe
the fines should be higher and that the statute should reflect
that?
Mr. Abbey. I do believe the statute should reflect a higher
assessment, yes.
Mr. Markey. For example, currently, the maximum fine that
BLM can issue for a major violation, for something like
drilling without a blowout preventer or drilling without a
permit is only $5,000.
Do you think that a maximum penalty of $5,000 is an
adequate deterrent to keep a company from drilling without a
blowout preventer? Is $5,000 enough to deter that?
Mr. Abbey. No.
Mr. Markey. It is not? Thank you.
Last year after the Deepwater Horizon oil spill, Director
Bromwich testified in front of this committee that the current
civil penalties of $40,000 per incident per day that can be
issued for offshore drilling violations are not even close to
being a sufficient deterrent and needed to be increased
substantially.
BOEM Director Beaudreau recently agreed that the civil
penalties offshore are inadequate.
If a fine of $40,000 per day is not a sufficient financial
deterrent, it is clear, and I agree with you, that a fine of
$5,000 for a serious violation like not having a blowout
preventer would not be a sufficient deterrent.
In the Department's budget request, BLM expresses plans to
implement an expanded oil and gas onshore inspection program to
increase safety and environmental protection.
Our report found that there were 13 companies that were
chronic violators, meaning that they had more than 30
violations. Of these, four of the companies were not fined
anything.
Will BLM's new inspection strategy focus on the high risk
operators such as these repeat offenders and ensure that
enforcement actions are more consistently applied, and that BLM
inspectors are more consistently exercising their enforcement
authority by issuing even the minimum allowable fines?
Mr. Abbey. Congressman, our inspection program that is in
place today is intended to serve that same purpose. If we have
repeat offenders, we are going to be out there on the ground
more often.
Again, our desire is to make sure that people comply with
any deficiencies that we find upon our inspections. If they
fail to comply with those deficiencies, we will take the
necessary actions to ensure compliance.
Mr. Markey. I just think the fine structure, the monetary
penalties are woefully out of date. BLM's current policy for
enforcement, unfortunately, allows even the most egregious
violators to keep taking the test over and over again until
they pass.
I just think we need to look at this area in the same way
that we should have in retrospect looked at what the safety
precautions were against the blowout in the Gulf. We should
just take this as an opportunity to do so.
I thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Lamborn. Thank you. Representative Amodei?
Mr. Amodei. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chief Tidwell, I had the opportunity last week to have a
field hearing under Mr. Bishop's Subcommittee of this Full
Committee in Elko to talk about the Humboldt-Toiyabe and also
meet with your regional forester, Harv Forsgren.
I want to first of all say through you to them, thank you.
It was a good meeting. We had a good exchange, met with your
regional forester afterwards to discuss some issues.
Appreciate the participation and the attitude to which your
folks came, and I would also represent to you that the people
of Elko treated them with respect and dignity, which sometimes
people were concerned about. I was proud of the people who
attended the meeting, too.
As you know, in Nevada, we are dealing with as well as some
other Western States some issues about potential listing of
what I refer to as the ``sage hen,'' because I say ``Nevada''
and not ``Neh-vah-da.'' The Nevada people refer to it as the
``sage grouse.'' Anyhow, same thing either way for purposes of
this.
In speaking with Director Abbey next to you, there were
some specific provisions put in the BLM budget to deal with
sage hen issues. Are there any specific issues with respect to
Forest Service lands in those Western States?
Obviously specifically I am talking about the Humboldt-
Toiyabe National Forest to deal with sage hen issues in your
coming budget.
Mr. Tidwell. We provided funds in our current budget to
work together with the BLM and the states to address the need
for sage grouse habitat, sage hen habitat.
I feel very optimistic with what I have seen come out of
the State of Wyoming and the efforts that are starting in
Idaho, Utah, and I think now in Nevada, to be able to find
those local solutions, to be able to address that issue, but at
the same time, be able to allow us to go forward with our
multiple use activities.
Mr. Amodei. I appreciate that. The only thing I would draw
to your attention, because I am going to turn to the gentleman
to your right who owns the larger portion of Federal lands in
Nevada shortly, but in talking with the Fish and Wildlife
Service, the state Department of Wildlife folks, your fire
folks nationally and in the Humboldt-Toiyabe, as well as other
agencies, I have a concern that a lot of those efforts are
focused on after the fire starts.
I have gone to fire now because there appears to be no
dispute amongst those folks in my state that the number one
predator for sage hen habitat is wildland fire.
That is not a blame thing. That is just a fact that is on
the ground.
I am looking forward to continuing those discussions with
your national fire folks which have made themselves very
available at your level as well, thank you for that, to talk
about what we can do before the fire starts, about addressing
this issue in terms of the current budget process.
Obviously, that involves things like fuels management,
identification of where those critical habitat areas are,
starting there, those sorts of things.
My concern is that we will manage all those man based
activities, energy exploration, minerals exploration, ATVs, all
the stuff we can get our hands around, but to a factor of
probably 80 percent or more, that habitat has disappeared to
wildland fire. But as I look at all this, and this is not a
blame thing, we Federally are doing very little to talk about
what happens before the fire starts in terms of veg management,
Pinyon juniper creep, all that sort of thing.
I will look forward to meeting with your fire folks
nationally and locally, if that is OK, if I can have your
support in that, to make sure that we are looking at that as
well as those other manmade activities that we have talked
about before.
Mr. Tidwell. Yes, and I agree with your understanding that
we need to address the situation before the fires start. Of
course, you will have my full support.
It is one of the things we want to continue to work on.
When we talk about restoring our national forests and
grasslands, it is to make sure that we are addressing the fuels
issue especially, and we are finding that because of the kind
of fire we are having, in many cases, it is having more impact
on wildlife than any other activity.
Mr. Amodei. I appreciate that. My problem is while we are
doing all this, if we ultimately, as the land owners, do
nothing to address--``nothing'' is probably too strong a word--
but if our priorities are against activities to manage
activities that account for the vast minority of the impact to
the habitat, then we have failed in our policies.
I appreciate that.
Mr. Tidwell. It is going to take a combination of looking
at everything we can do and working together across these large
landscapes.
Once again, I do believe especially after what we have seen
come out of the State of Wyoming that there is a very workable
solution if we can continue to work together.
Mr. Amodei. I appreciate that. Mr. Chairman, I see my time
has expired so I will yield back in hopes there will be another
round.
Mr. Lamborn. There will be. We will start that right now,
in fact.
Director Abbey, you mentioned several times before this
committee and last week before the Senate that the oil and
natural gas industry has 7,000 applications for permits to
drill or APDs, and that these are not being drilled.
Since you have used this number many times, is it possible
to get the data behind how this number was calculated, the
states in which these APDs are said to exist, and whether they
are actually shovel ready or actually waiting on further
environmental or wildlife clearances?
Mr. Abbey. We would be happy to provide those materials to
you, not only where those applications for permits to drill
have been approved by state, but also by company, if you would
like that information.
Mr. Lamborn. Do you have that right now? Can I have that
right now?
Mr. Abbey. I do not have it with me right now, no.
Mr. Lamborn. Is it possible to get it by the close of
business today?
Mr. Abbey. We can get you the states where the permits have
been issued, but probably not by company by the end of today.
Mr. Lamborn. You are using this number all the time. I
thought you would have it at your fingertips.
Mr. Abbey. We have the number. We can give that to you.
Mr. Lamborn. Not the number. Anyone can throw out a number.
I want the facts to evaluate the number.
Mr. Abbey. Yes, we can get that to you.
Mr. Lamborn. By close of business today? I appreciate that.
Thank you so much.
Mr. Abbey. You bet.
Mr. Lamborn. We will count on that.
Second, you stated that the previous Administration was
leasing everywhere for oil and gas. What percentage of the
entire Federal estate would you suppose is being leased for oil
and gas right now?
Mr. Abbey. Leasing for a number of years has been driven by
where the interest of the industry is. They are the ones that
nominate parcels they would like to see interest in, and they
work with us to move forward with the necessary analysis and
put those parcels up for lease.
I mentioned we have 700 million acres that we manage
relative to Federal mineral estate. We have over 38 million
acres under lease as of the end of Fiscal Year 2011. We have a
little under 16 million acres that are either being explored or
being produced today.
I do not have the number of acres----
Mr. Lamborn. Out of 700, 38 plus 16, that is 54, that would
be about eight percent or something like that. When I look at
the entire Federal estate, because you only have jurisdiction
over obviously part of the onshore areas, the actual number, I
understand, is even lower, two to three percent.
I just do not think it is an accurate characterization to
say the previous Administration was leasing everywhere for oil
and gas when what we are looking at is two to three percent.
Mr. Abbey. There were certainly areas that were being
leased that were inappropriate for leasing; yes.
Mr. Lamborn. How can you say it is everywhere when it is
actually two to three percent? I just do not understand that.
My last question in my limited time, in the past, Director
Abbey, you have praised the use of FracFocus, a voluntary
program that states participate in, for disclosure of
chemicals.
Can you tell the Committee why the Administration would
want to duplicate something that you have praised the states
for doing successfully?
To me, this is a new layer of bureaucracy and burdensome
paperwork and possible other regulatory hurdles that are going
to cripple energy production in this country.
Mr. Abbey. We do not see it being duplicative in nature. In
fact, our proposed rule identifies FracFocus as the likely
system we would be using for disclosure of chemicals.
Mr. Lamborn. That begs the question, why do something the
states are already doing?
Mr. Abbey. Not all states are doing it, Congressman.
Mr. Lamborn. The states that are doing it, can they be
exempt?
Mr. Abbey. We would work with them based upon any comments
they provided to us as part of the review of our draft rules
and see what makes sense.
Mr. Lamborn. Colorado, for instance, has an excellent
program. Some people call it the best in the country.
Mr. Abbey. We are benchmarking against Colorado, and we,
too, are very complimentary of their program.
Mr. Lamborn. Can Colorado be exempted?
Mr. Abbey. We will look into that situation.
Mr. Lamborn. OK. Along that line, when can we expect the
regulations and what will be the time line period for comments
and implementation of these regulations?
Mr. Abbey. We would hope to be able to issue the draft
regulations in April of this year. Then there will be a public
comment period, we will determine what is the appropriate
length of time for those comments, but the public will have an
opportunity to comment on our proposal.
Mr. Lamborn. OK. Thank you so much for being here today and
for answering questions.
Representative Holt?
Mr. Holt. Thanks. I would like to continue the discussion
of hydraulic fracturing. Director Abbey, it has been said the
regulations that the Department is developing with respect to
hydraulic fracturing would shut down natural gas development.
Is that your intention? Do you think that would be the
effect? Really, two questions there.
Mr. Abbey. We do not believe it will be the effect. Over 90
percent of the oil wells that are being drilled today that are
on Federal lands and Federal minerals are using the fracking
technology.
Mr. Holt. Do you think that would be curtailed or shut down
if these regulations go forward?
Mr. Abbey. It will not.
Mr. Holt. The draft regulations are likely to say that a
company should have a basic plan of what they will do with the
wastewater.
A lot of the fluid, water and other ingredients, that are
injected in the well, much of that comes back out after the
high pressure fracturing, and it comes mixed with both what was
put down there in the first place and what is mixed down in the
depths.
There have been reports of companies that have dumped the
fluids into rivers or sent them to treatment plants that could
not handle them.
Is it important that the regulations include careful plans
for what is done with the wastewater?
Mr. Abbey. We certainly believe it is. There are two issues
with water as it relates to fracking. One is the quantity of
water. It is a very intensive use of water technology. The
industry itself is doing a much better job of re-using water
that they had in the past been disposing of.
Certainly, I compliment the industry for taking actions to
apply best management practices and re-use as much water as
possible.
The second issue is the disposal of wastewater. Again, our
proposed rule will require that the wastewater will be subject
to local and state law. When they apply for their permits to
drill, we will ensure they provide us an operation plan of how
they intend to dispose of any wastewater that would come from
their drilling operations, and that they have certificates in
hand
Mr. Holt. As this water goes down and back out of the
wells, the cementing procedures are critically important. It
would be through faulty cement joints that maybe would be most
likely for these fluids to get into the groundwater.
Now that we are drilling at really enormous depths and
subjecting the wells to enormous pressure, will the regulations
include really comprehensive and strict requirements about the
cementing process, the cementing testing, the cementing
composition?
This is a somewhat leading question. Do you agree this is a
critical and maybe the most critical part of the regulatory
process?
Mr. Abbey. We certainly believe it is the most critical
part of the drilling operations, even though the public is
very, very concerned about the chemicals that are being used in
fracking and they are demanding that such chemicals be
disclosed, we certainly are well cognizant that the most
critical stage of drilling is to ensure the integrity of the
well bore.
Our proposed rules will adopt API standards for the
cementing, and again, that the actual operations are consistent
with the engineering drawings that are presented to us as part
of the applications for permits to drill.
Again, we will be using the industry's own standards, best
management practices, that we will be incorporating in our
proposed rules.
Mr. Holt. Thank you very much, Director.
Mr. Lamborn. Thank you. Representative Thompson?
Mr. Thompson. Thanks, Chairman.
Chief, my last question when we were talking about the
proposed alternative with the new forest planning rule, and
specifically, some of the delays regarding permitting, I want
to really zero in on something important in my state, and
obviously present in the Allegheny National Forest, but also
important nationally, the permitting related to natural gas
production on our national forests.
Do you see the proposed forest rule as assisting in having
it done more efficiently, the permitting process? Will the new
forest rule make that a better process? Not just in the
Allegheny but nationally.
Mr. Tidwell. Congressman, I do believe it will once again
be a much more efficient process, especially during our forest
planning process.
That is when we make the determinations often of which
areas should be available for leasing, areas that we consent
for the BLM to go ahead and lease. That is our first decision.
As far as the drilling permits, those decisions are not
part of the national forest plan specifically, but by doing a
good job to establish the standards and guides that are
followed, it really facilitates being able to use our
categorical exclusions for the drill site, and which really
will expedite that. It does have a direct benefit.
The other key thing is that by leaving up to the local unit
the discretion for which standards and guides they need to
address drilling operations, that allows them to basically
customize to address the local issues instead of having
something that we use nationally.
Mr. Thompson. I want to follow up on that. The local
discretion, I think it has positive's but I think it has some
potential threats as well.
As you both probably know, in the past year, the George
Washington National Forest in Virginia proposed to ban
horizontal drilling. Similarly, the Wayne National Forest in
Ohio canceled a mineral lease auction citing potential shale
gas drilling and hydraulic fracturing.
Both techniques, of course, are critical in order to assess
previously unconventional sources of shale gas, and obviously,
for the record, they are not new. We have hydrofracked over a
million wells in this country over a period of more than 60
years.
What are the Forest Service and the BLM doing to stop these
unilateral decisions and allow for shale production to move
forward on Federal lands, or in other words, what are you doing
about this?
Mr. Tidwell. Congressman, your point of finding that right
balance between allowing the local managers some discretion,
some decision making, but at the same time, to have consistent
approaches where we need to.
That is the role of my office here, to make sure we have
that consistent approach.
We, of course, believe fracking is proven to be a very safe
technical approach without any question, as long as it is done
correctly.
Those two situations that you referenced, on the Wayne, we
believed we needed to, because of some questions that were
raised about a decision that was made in 2006, we had to stop
and re-evaluate to make sure that there is not any new
information that we had not factored into that decision, to
make sure that lease can go forward after we made our decision,
to ensure we just do not end up in court.
On the George Washington, it is a forest plan revision
process.
In both cases, the concerns were raised by the public,
local government officials, that questioned if we had done
adequate analysis, so that is the reason we have had to take a
step back and do some additional analysis, to address their
concerns.
One of the things with this hydraulic fracking, we have
been using it for many, many decades in this country, and when
it is done correctly, there are no problems with it.
But the public has some concerns, especially in some parts
of the country where the horizontal part of it is somewhat new.
I think by reassuring the public about what chemicals are
actually being used, to reassure that without any question, it
is going to be done correctly, to make sure the well bore is
properly sealed, and there is a plan to dispose of wastewater
that is pulled out of these wells.
I believe that will go a long way to resolve a lot of
concerns that the public has, and by having that in place, I
think it will also help our decisions.
We will be relying on the BLM, their rulemaking, nor do we
have the authority to deal with subsurface estate. That is the
BLM's responsibility. It will come out of their rulemaking and
we will use it.
But I really do think it will help alleviate a lot of the
public's concerns about this, so that we can actually move
forward with more efficiency with our decision making.
Mr. Thompson. With the patience of the Chairman, just one
clarification. I think that is important for people to
understand, where the American taxpayers own the subsurface
rights, the BLM has jurisdiction.
Am I correct in saying, for example, in the Allegheny
National Forest, it really is private individuals and entities
that own the subsurface rights, in terms of subsurface, the
jurisdiction really falls with the state, and specifically in
Pennsylvania, the Department of Environmental Protection.
Mr. Tidwell. That is correct.
Mr. Thompson. Thank you.
Mr. Lamborn. Thank you. Representative Markey?
Mr. Markey. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, very, very much.
I know Mr. Holt already congratulated you on your great
work, and I just wanted to join in the chorus, and to talk
about the great work that is going on.
Because of your great work, because of the Department of
the Interior's great work, because of the work in the private
sector, we are now down to importing only 45 percent of the oil
which we consume in the United States, and we were importing 57
percent of the oil that we consumed in the United States in
George Bush's last year as President.
Knocking it down from 57 percent down to 45 percent, what a
great achievement for you, Mr. Abbey, and for the Obama
Administration.
Moreover, we are producing more now than we have in eight
years in the United States, and very importantly, we are at a
12-year low in our imports.
All of this has occurred just in the last three and a half
years. Tremendous work, really want to congratulate you.
I know you are proposing to open up 70-75 percent of the
OCS for more drilling, and that is very, very important.
I would just like to give you a chance, if you would like,
just to kind of lay out your vision going forward for how you
see this story line unfolding. We all know it is in conjunction
with the dramatic increase in the fuel economy standards.
Finally, we got the auto industry to get out of their
denial. We used to have an oil-auto axis that said they could
not improve the fuel efficiency standards, and from 1975 all
the way until we passed a bill in 2007, which I was proud to be
the author of in the House, the fuel economy standards, they
said they could not improve it.
Now, there could be upwards of 25 new models, electric
vehicles coming on the market next year. Something they all
said was impossible.
We have had a seven percent reduction in oil consumption
just over the last year, and prices continue to spike, and you
are out there reducing, no longer incrementally, but really
substantially the amount of oil that we actually import.
Could you just lay out for us where you think it could all
go?
Mr. Abbey. First, let me thank you for your kind words. It
is rare I ever hear kind words from members of this Congress.
Mr. Markey. It is St. Patrick's Day. I am feeling generous.
By the way, St. Patrick's Day lasts one month in Boston. I am
in the spirit for an extended period of time. Is ``Abbey'' an
Irish name?
Mr. Abbey. It is Scottish.
Mr. Markey. Well, first cousins, if you will have us.
Mr. Abbey. I think, as a nation, we should all take time to
acknowledge the good work that is going on. This is not about
who is to blame or who to praise. It is about what are we going
to do as a nation to become less dependent upon foreign energy
sources.
I think we are making significant headway today by
diversifying our energy portfolio.
We understand the frustrations with high gasoline prices in
this nation. We, too, pay for gasoline in our own vehicles, and
we know what we are paying.
We are doing everything that we can to be smart from the
start, to make sure as I mentioned before, that the lands we
are offering for leasing are the appropriate ones for leasing
and that will have the greatest chance of being developed in a
more timely manner, so that we can continue to increase
domestic oil as well as natural gas from these Federal assets.
At the same time, you know, as a nation, we do have oil and
gas resources not only on the Federal mineral estate but also
on private and state lands.
The industry is going to move forward and develop based
upon many factors, including the market conditions at the time.
For example, that is why there is a lot of production at this
point in time in North Dakota. There are a lot of drill rigs
operating in North Dakota right now. There are a lot of
subcontractors already in that part of the Nation that are in
place.
Therefore, if you are going to develop those resources up
there, it does not take you weeks or months to find a drilling
rig or subcontractor to do the work on the leases that you
have.
Decisions are being made every day by members of the oil
and gas industry.
Mr. Markey. I apologize. There is a long litany of saintly
activities that you are taking on. I also wanted to compliment
you on the 11,000 new megawatts of wind that you are going to
permit on public lands.
That is the beautiful combination, that 11,000 megawatts of
electricity, wind, on public lands, then being plugged in with
electric vehicles that then says to the OPEC sorry, we just do
not need your oil at all.
That is just going to continue to lead to a drop in the
amount of oil that we have to import, and this combination of
wind and solar with electric vehicles is the real threat that
keeps oil sheiks sleepless at night, because they can see it
all coming their way.
I want to thank you because you are at the center of this
incredible revolution. Thank you so much.
Mr. Lamborn. Thank you. Representative Amodei?
Mr. Amodei. Thanks, Mr. Chairman. Bob, in keeping with the
sainthood of the Bureau of Land Management, I will be crisp. As
someone who is of Irish ancestry, too, I guess I am a first
cousin also.
I have looked at the $15 million that is in your budget for
sage grouse. I appreciate that. But as I looked through that, I
see a lot of planning.
I see a lot of stuff which I know is important in terms of
the process, but I see very little in terms of Pinyon juniper
encroachment, I see very little in terms of cheatgrass, I see
very little in terms of fuels management, on the ground, in
that budget for addressing things that are going to happen
within 24 months, potentially. I am talking about the greater
population, not the bi-States stuff.
We have spoken with and interacted with your folks in
Nevada as well as the Chief's folks in Nevada, and talked about
that issue.
I will tell you frankly what they said is ``Please do not
try to redirect the planning money, but if you want to go after
something, go after the WUI money,'' the urban, rural,
whatever, to start doing stuff on the ground.
What is your reaction to that statement? I understand you
support the President's budget.
Mr. Abbey. That would be good advice, the Wildland Urban
Interface, WUI.
As it relates to your earlier comments, Congressman, it is
important that we acknowledge that the number one threat to
sage grouse, at least in the Great Basin States, is from
wildland fire.
To that degree, I think there is a good story that we can
tell about the actions that we are taking to prepare to protect
those core sage grouse areas.
For example, we are moving forward as expeditiously as we
can with a fuels management agenda and pre-suppression
activities out there to protect those core areas.
Mr. Amodei. Let me stop you there. I know you are pre-
positioning fire equipment, too. I want to focus on before the
fire starts.
When you say you are moving forward as quickly as possible,
I know the Department of Wildlife has identified where those
critical areas are.
Are there any present plans to go in and effect fuels
management activities around those areas, in those areas, that
you are aware of? I am asking you as the land owner.
Mr. Abbey. Not in all those areas but certainly in priority
areas. We are working in partnerships with many, many others to
effect actions on the ground that will have the greatest good
for sage grouse habitat.
We have not only the $15 million that we requested but not
all $15 million that we are requesting in 2013 is for planning.
About $2.5 million is actually being dedicated to on the ground
type management actions that would protect those core areas.
Mr. Amodei. That is $2.5 million nationwide.
Mr. Abbey. Nationwide. That is true.
The one thing we are keeping in mind is what the Fish and
Wildlife Service needs in order to be able to make a decision,
and if that decision is to not list the sage grouse as an
endangered species, they need regulatory assurance that we have
actions in place consistent with our land use plans that will
lead them to determine that there is appropriate mitigation in
place based upon best management practices to not necessarily
list the species.
Mr. Amodei. I appreciate that. What I would like to avoid
is the situation where you get two years down the road and we
really have not done much on the ground, and we have suffered,
and nobody's crystal ball is better than the other's.
We have suffered another season or two of catastrophic
wildland fire and we have burned up more habitat, so we are
going after the stuff we can control, which represents a small
footprint.
For the rest of my time, I want to ask just a couple of
questions, to ask both of you folks to respond off line to, if
you could.
Chief, there were a couple of issues that came up in the
Elko hearing that dealt with Code of Federal Regulations, the
appeal procedure for your travel management plans and also the
Intermountain Region's position on water rights.
I would like you to make your Solicitor available to meet
with me on those issues because your water rights' position, I
would represent, is much different than the guy sitting next to
you for his water rights' position, in terms of the need for
ownership in the Federal Government or not.
Also, I would like you both if you could to supply as a
percentage what is the amount of land that you administer in
Nevada, how much of it is covered by surface mining permits,
and how much is covered by agricultural permits, compared with
what the wildland fire history is for the last few years, just
so I have solid numbers on that.
The final one is I would like you both to let me know what
kind of success in planning your respective agencies have in
place for replacing retiring personnel in the energy and
minerals program sector, since I know you have some folks in
there that are getting a little long in the tooth. Good for
them. I am jealous. Anyhow, to see how that succession stuff
goes.
I want to thank you both. Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Lamborn. Thank you. I want to thank you both for being
here. We have asked some probing questions but only because
these are such important issues.
Mr. Abbey, if I could make a parting statement, I would
just urge you as you are looking at possible fracking rules for
the country, I personally do not think we need another layer of
regulation at the Federal level when states are already to my
knowledge doing an excellent job.
If you go forward, I would hope that for states that are
doing a similar or identical or substantially similar job of
regulating, that you would give them a safe harbor from Federal
regulation, so that we do not impose a second layer on top of
something that is already being done well, for states like
Colorado.
Mr. Abbey. OK.
Mr. Lamborn. Would you please consider that?
Mr. Abbey. We will. Congressman, I will say this, I think
it is important that we get our proposed rule out so that we
can benefit from the comments that we will receive during that
draft comment period.
Mr. Lamborn. Thank you so much for being here, appreciate
it.
We will now go to our second panel, and I would like to
invite forward Mr. Mike McKee, County Commissioner, Uintah
County, Utah.
Mr. Erik Milito, Group Director, Upstream & Industry
Operations, the American Petroleum Institute.
Ms. Laura Skaer, Executive Director, Northwest Mining
Association.
Mr. Whit Fosburgh, President and CEO, Theodore Roosevelt
Conservation Partnership.
Your written testimony will appear in full in the hearing
record. I ask that you keep your oral statements to five
minutes as outlined in our invitation letter to you.
Our microphones are not automatic so you have to press the
button to get them started. You have five minutes to speak. The
yellow light comes on after four minutes and the red light
after five minutes.
I am going to temporarily hand the gavel over to my
colleague, Representative Thompson. I will be back momentarily.
Commissioner McKee, you may begin. Thank you for being
here.

STATEMENT OF MICHAEL McKEE, COUNTY COMMISSIONER, UINTAH COUNTY,
UTAH

Mr. McKee. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, members of the
Committee.
Just real quickly, I would just like to mention out in
Northeastern Utah, the area of the country where I am from
holds significant resources of our natural resources with
tremendous reserves of natural gas, oil, oil shale, Gilsonite,
et cetera.
There are 111 trillion cubic feet of natural gas that is
found in this area. Also, the world's largest known oil shale
reserves are found in the Green River formation, one of the few
places in the world where Gilsonite is found.
Next slide, please.
Mr. McKee. When companies choose to drill in this area,
there are many zones where this resource is found. It is not
just in one zone, as that slide will show.
Next slide, please.
Mr. McKee. I would like to get right to the heart of what I
would like to talk about here for a moment.
Under the Bush Administration, you will see on the graph
there the number of rigs out in the Uintah Basin. Of course, to
get oil and gas out of the ground, you have to have drilling
rigs. You can see when the new Administration came into office,
also there was a recession, but between the two, the rig
numbers dropped significantly.
Next slide, please.
Mr. McKee. I would like to demonstrate the difference
between out in our area compared to--by the way, we are only 15
percent privately held property, most of this being Federal
land.
And so compare this to private lands in other areas, again,
the Uintah Basin is the upper left. If you go to the upper
right, that is the Williston Basin up in North Dakota.
Not only did they recover but now are doing about quadruple
the number of rigs held before. You will see in the Uintah
Basin, that has never recovered.
If you look at the Permian Basin in Texas, again, not only
have they recovered but many more rigs than what was before,
the same thing in Colorado on the lower right.
Let's look at oil and gas production on the next slide real
quickly.
Again, production follows what happens with your rigs. Up
in North Dakota, you will see on private lands a tremendous
amount of additional production. If you look at Federal lands
compared to 2000, it has dropped by about 40 percent. This is
onshore.
Next slide, please.
Mr. McKee. That is also showing the trend. If you look at
the red line on state and private lands, the trend is moving
up. If you look at oil production, the trend is going down.
Next slide, please.
Mr. McKee. This is sourced by the Department of the
Interior. This is onshore. You will see the MCF of natural gas
has been declining on the Federal lands.
I would like to next go to the leasing. This is in Utah.
You will see that since this Administration has come into
office, if you look on the far right, there has been very few
leases that have been issued by this Administration.
I did hear the Director say protests have dropped by 50
percent. Why have they dropped by 50 percent? It is amazing
there is any protests with the number of leases that have been
issued. It shows that something has not been very effective.
Also, let's look on the next slide the value of canceled
leases. Just a minute, back to this other slide. There is not
going to be a lot of APDs coming out without leasing occurring.
The value of the canceled leases. In 2009, it is referenced
there were 77 canceled leases. That is really the pimple
because they just have not allowed hardly any leasing to occur
since that time.
Six of those leases were recently reinstated. Those six
parcels of about 6,000 acres, the value is $48.6 million just
for the prospect to be able to lease.
I'm going to have to move right along because my time is
short. Let's go to the map, the next map. In this map, the area
in color are areas found in the Resource Management Plan
approved in October of 2008 as areas open for drilling.
The areas outlined in red have been areas that this
Administration is saying let's take another look at this again
before we allow drilling to happen there.
Finally, the last thing that I am going to be able to talk
about because I am running out of time has to do with a huge
issue that is moving forward as we are talking about it right
now.
That has to do with oil shale. There are two to three
trillion barrels of oil shale in the region and where I live
out there. There is an EIS out right now that would reduce by
75 percent lands available for this oil shale.
We deeply are concerned about that. In fact, when we look
at the nation's energy security, it is vastly important that we
not allow this to happen.
I personally went to Estonia this Summer. There is a slide
that I would have shown here. The seam there is only about
three feet thick. Even with the two million acres they were
looking at earlier, there was two million acres there.
It is just amazing the amount of resource potential we
have, and I apologize that I am out of time. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. McKee follows:]

Statement of Michael J. McKee, Uintah County Commissioner,
Uintah County, Utah

Uintah County in Eastern Utah holds vast reserves of natural
resources. According to the Colorado School of Mines there are
approximately 111 trillion cubic feet (TCF) of natural gas, in the
Uintah Basin. This includes 50.8 (TCF) of conventional gas and 60.2
(TCF) of shale gas making the Uintah Basin #1 in the Rockies in both
categories.
Over 50% of the oil sands in the United States are found in Eastern
Utah. There is also a staggering amount of oil shale in the Uintah
Basin with approximately 300 billion barrels of oil. Uintah County is
one of the few places in the world where Gilsonite is found. Uintah
County also has strong reserves of conventional oil.
According to a University of Utah economic report, 60% of the
economy and 50% of the jobs in the Uintah Basin come from the
extraction industry. Obviously, the extraction industry is extremely
important to our area.
Only 15% of Uintah County is privately owned property. The majority
of our county land is managed by the Federal Government. The management
decisions made by the Federal Government deeply effect the economy of
Uintah County and Eastern Utah.
The BLM signed a new Resource Management Plan (RMP) in October of
2008. The plan evaluated all components of land use including oil and
gas activity, grazing, recreation, air quality, wilderness, wild and
scenic rivers, visual resource, endangered species, etc. This planning
effort took 7 \1/2\ years to complete. Uintah County has Cooperating
Agency Status with the BLM and as such contributed significantly to the
process.
The Obama administration came into office in January of 2009.
Within several weeks they had cancelled 77 previously approved oil and
gas leases. The Mineral Leasing Act requires the BLM to conduct lease
sales quarterly. Over the last 3+ years, this administration has
approved very few leases in Utah. They have also implemented guidelines
making it much more difficult to conduct business on the public lands.
The Uintah County Commission is very concerned when we see years of
work and hundreds and thousands of County dollars wasted as this
administration systematically dismantles the RMP. The BLM itself spent
millions of dollars in developing RMPs in the state of Utah.
Even more disturbing, is the fact that we anticipated and were led
to believe that the RMPs would be a planning guide for decisions to be
made over the next 15 to 20 years. Approximately 600,000 acres of land
in Uintah County have been shelved for oil and gas leasing under the
guise of Master Leasing. Almost all of these acres were open for
leasing in the RMP. The BLM now manages nearly three million acres
under Master Leasing Areas in Eastern Utah which closes these lands for
leasing, at least for now. This seems to us to be a blatant attempt to
circumvent the RMPs. We also object to BLM managing to the Red Rock
Proposal rather than the RMPs.
Cumbersome processes have made it difficult and slow for the
industry to get permits on Federal Lands. This has driven investment to
other areas.
Congress directed the BLM to develop a commercial oil shale leasing
program. This has not happened. Rather, the BLM simply evaluated which
lands it would make available. In 2008 the BLM signed a Record of
Decision on oil shale and oil sands. This decision allocated over two
million acres for these important resources. According to the Rand
Report, the largest known oil shale reserves in the world are found in
this formation. It is estimated that there are between 1.5 and 1.8
trillion barrels of oil found here. It is estimated that 300 billion
barrels are found in Eastern Utah. The BLM has just released a new
planning document with their preferred alternative that would reduce by
75% the lands available for oil shale leasing.
In summary given the importance of energy to our national security
we do not believe it wise to lock up our lands. The economy is
struggling nationally. We have the opportunity to create thousands of
high paying jobs and at the same time strengthen our national security
with a strong domestic energy supply.
Please review policies and procedures that will streamline the
permitting process. Projects are now taking many years for approval. We
also see access to the public lands as a important issue.
Thanks you for time and consideration.
______

Mr. Thompson [presiding]. Thank you, Commissioner.
Mr. Milito, you may begin.

STATEMENT OF ERIK MILITO, GROUP DIRECTOR, UPSTREAM AND INDUSTRY
OPERATIONS, AMERICAN PETROLEUM INSTITUTE

Mr. Milito. Thank you. Good morning, Congressman Thompson,
Congressman Markey. Happy St. Patrick's Day. With a name like
``Milito,'' I may not be Irish but I did graduate from Notre
Dame, so go Irish.
Mr. Markey. And go Boston College.
[Laughter.]
Mr. Milito. The rivalry will continue.
My name is Erik Milito and I am the Upstream Director at
the American Petroleum Institute. API has more than 500 member
companies which represent all sectors of America's oil and
natural gas industry.
Our industry supports 9.2 million American jobs and 7.7
percent of the U.S. economy, and is among America's leaders in
job creation today.
We also provide most of the energy for our economy and way
of life, and deliver more than $86 million a day in revenue to
the Federal Government.
We are here to discuss the President's budget for Fiscal
Year 2013, and one of the key and repeated elements of the
President's budget proposal is to increase taxes on the oil and
gas industry.
I would first like to make it clear, these proposals would
raise taxes on energy producers by eliminating tax deductions.
These are not subsidies. These are tax deductions that are
similar to or the same as those that many taxpayers, including
companies like Apple Computer, the New York Times, and General
Electric, avail themselves of.
We do not suggest increasing taxes on any particular
company or sector. We simply believe these proposals amount to
discriminatory tax policies against the oil and gas industry,
and would significantly hurt rather than help the U.S. economy.
In fact, two recent studies by Wood Mackenzie conclude that
it is through increased access to domestic oil and natural gas
rather than increased taxes on the industry that provides the
best strategy for increasing Government revenue, jobs, and
energy production.
These same studies concluded that raising taxes on the
industry could reduce domestic production by 700,000 barrels of
oil a day equivalent, sacrifice as many as 48,000 jobs, and
reduce revenue to the Government by billions of dollars
annually.
Furthermore, the Congressional Research Service concluded
in a March 2 report that the Administration's tax proposals
would make oil and natural gas more expensive for U.S.
consumers and likely increase foreign dependence.
We have a proposal before us that will potentially destroy
jobs, destroy domestic production, destroy Government revenues,
and make oil and natural gas more expensive for U.S. consumers.
The public understands this. API is releasing new polling
results today that show that 76 percent of Americans agree that
increasing energy taxes could increase consumer costs on a wide
variety of products and services, including higher gasoline
prices, and 81 percent agree that expanding access to U.S. oil
and gas resources could help reduce the cost to consumers for
items such as gasoline, home heating oil, and natural gas.
The Administration should encourage a sensible energy
strategy that promotes the safe and responsible development of
U.S. oil and natural gas resources, but we have seen a status
quo approach to Federal resource development characterized more
by delay and restriction than by rising numbers of project
approvals.
Policy leadership for creating and overseeing a more robust
program of safe and responsible development has been absent.
We continue to hear about an ``all of the above'' energy
approach. An ``all of the above'' approach certainly makes
sense, but an ``all of the above'' approach necessarily
includes oil and natural gas.
The Administration's projections show that oil and natural
gas will supply most of the nation's energy for decades to
come, yet while the Administration claims to support an ``all
of the above'' approach, we continue to see decisions that
reduce opportunities for leasing and resource development,
processes that string out permitting, and continued regulatory
uncertainty.
This has been particularly true for BLM managed lands where
leasing and permitting are way down and where we have seen
decision after decision that obstructs development or adds
additional uncertainty into the process.
Among other things, Interior has introduced a slew of new
bureaucratic requirements to an already burdensome onshore
leasing process.
These policies add at least three additional layers to the
existing five layers of regulation and analysis. Interior has
also created a new category of wilderness called ``Wildlands.''
This runs counter to the Wilderness Act, which specifically
provides Congress with the authority to designate wilderness
areas, not Interior.
Congress has effectively designated more than 100 million
acres for protection of wilderness areas. However, the new
wildlands policy has a potential to remove lands from multiple
use to one use, contrary to the directive of the Federal Land
Policy Management Act. There are many other decisions similar
to this.
U.S. oil and natural gas companies are a major force in our
economy, and with the right policies in place, could drive even
greater economic benefits.
We need a change of course to ensure a strategy is truly in
place to take advantage of this tremendous potential for the
benefit of the American people.
Thank you. This concludes my statement.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Milito follows:]

Statement of Erik Milito, Group Director,
Upstream and Industry Operations, American Petroleum Institute

Good morning Chairman Lamborn, Ranking Member Holt, and members of
the committee.
I am Erik Milito, upstream director at the American Petroleum
Institute. API has more than 500 member companies, which represent all
sectors of America's oil and natural gas industry. Our industry
supports 9.2 million American jobs and 7.7 percent of the U.S. economy.
In fact, a recent report from the World Energy Forum concludes that
from 2010 to 2011, oil and gas industry employment grew by 4 percent,
adding approximately 150,000 total jobs to the economy, representing 9
percent of all jobs created in the U.S. in 2011. The industry also
provides most of the energy we need to power our economy and way of
life and delivers more than $86 million a day in revenue to the federal
government.
Our nation can and should be producing here at home more of the oil
and natural gas Americans need. At a time when the United States still
must import half the oil it consumes, we should be adding to our
supplies from our own ample domestic resources. This would strengthen
our energy security and help put downward pressure on prices while also
providing many thousands of new jobs for Americans and billions of
dollars in additional revenue for our government.
The administration should encourage this, but we've seen a status
quo approach to federal lands oil and natural development characterized
more by delay and restriction than by rising project approvals. Policy
leadership for creating and overseeing a more robust program of safe
and responsible development has been absent. We continue to hear about
an ``all-of-the above'' energy approach. An ``all-of-the-above''
approach makes sense, but all-of-the-above necessarily includes oil and
natural gas. The administration's projections show that oil and natural
gas will supply most of the nation's energy for decades to come. Yet
while the Administration claims to support an ``all-of-the-above''
approach, we continue to see proposals to increase taxes on the
industry, decisions that reduce opportunities for leasing and resource
development, processes that string out permitting, and continued
regulatory uncertainty. We have provided a three-page summary for the
subcommittee's consideration that outlines more than 20 key decisions
that propose new taxes or otherwise prevent, delay or obstruct oil and
natural gas development.
This makes no sense. The United States has some of the largest
reserves of oil and natural gas on the planet and we need a
comprehensive energy policy that supports increased development--
something most of the public supports. The industry has the capital,
technology, and commitment to safe and responsible development to make
it happen the right way.
The Administration continues to propose tax increases to the
industry, which is completely contrary to its recent statements that
suggest it supports U.S. oil and natural gas development. And we must
be clear, these proposals would raise taxes on production by
eliminating tax deductions--not subsidies--that are similar to or the
same as those that many taxpayers--including companies like Apple
Computer, the New York Times, and General Electric--avail themselves.
We do not suggest increasing taxes on any particular company or sector;
we simply believe these proposals amount to discriminatory tax policies
against the oil and gas industry and would significantly hurt rather
than help the U.S. economy. In fact, two recent studies by Wood
Mackenzie conclude that it is through increased access to domestic oil
and natural gas--rather than increased taxes on the U.S. oil and
natural gas industry--that provides the best strategy for increasing
government revenue, jobs and energy production.
U.S. oil and natural gas companies are a major force in our economy
and, with the right policies in place, could drive even greater
economic benefits. These companies produce most of the nation's energy,
put millions of people to work and deliver billions in taxes and
royalties to our state and federal governments. The studies show
increased access to areas currently off-limits would create jobs, grow
the economy and dramatically increase revenues to the Treasury, at a
time when the U.S. deficit is of national concern, while increased
taxes would take us backwards.
Increased access to American and Canadian supplies could (by 2020)
create 1,100,000 jobs, deliver $127 billion more in revenue to the
government, and boost domestic production by four million barrels of
oil equivalent a day, according to the Wood Mackenzie study, ``U.S.
Supply Forecast and Potential Jobs and Economic Impacts (2012-2030).''
A copy of this study is provided for consideration by the subcommittee.
In an earlier Wood Mackenzie study, ``Energy Policy at a Crossroads: An
Assessment of the Impacts of Increased Access versus Higher Taxes on
U.S. Oil and Natural Gas Production, Government Revenue and
Employment,'' they found that raising taxes on the industry with no
increase in access could reduce domestic production by 700,000 barrels
of oil equivalent a day (in 2020), sacrifice as many as 48,000 jobs,
and reduce revenue to the government by billions of dollars annually.
An additional 1.7 million barrels of oil equivalent a day in potential
production that is currently of marginal economic feasibility would be
at greater risk of not being developed under the modeled tax increase.
A copy of this study is provided as well.
Furthermore, the Congressional Research Service (CRS) recently
concluded in a March 2, 2012 report entitled ``Oil and Natural Gas
Industry Tax Issues in the FY2013 Budget Proposal'' that the
Administration's tax proposals would ``make oil and natural gas more
expensive for U.S. consumers and likely increase foreign dependence.''
On Saturday, the President stated that a vote for his tax proposal
would show that you ``stand up for the American people.'' Yet it is
this same tax proposal that would destroy domestic production, destroy
jobs, destroy government revenue and, according to CRS, make oil and
natural gas more expensive and make us more dependent on foreign
energy. The American people get it, as poll after poll shows that the
American public opposes increased taxes on America's oil and natural
gas industry, with most Americans agreeing that increasing taxes would
destroy jobs.
In addition to maintaining an effective tax structure and improving
access to U.S. resources, we must also ensure that we have streamlined
permitting and regulatory certainty to ensure continued job creation
and a regulatory climate that encourages investment in U.S. projects.
However, the federal government has taken step after step to
decrease leasing, decrease permitting, and introduce uncertainty into
the regulatory process to effectively place a drag on both short-term
and long-term energy production, in both onshore and offshore areas.
With respect to BLM-managed lands in particular, the picture is not
promising.
Lease sales in the West, which has been a very important region for
U.S. oil and gas development, are down 70 percent in 2011 as compared
to 2008. Some of the state-level examples are striking, with Interior
offering a mere four parcels in Colorado in 2011 as compared to 241 in
2008, a mere 17 in Utah in 2011 as compared to 124 in 2008, and only
213 in Wyoming in 2011 as compared to 1,186 in 2008. Interior has not
consistently met its statutory requirement of issuing leases within
sixty days of the lease sale. On top of that, Interior has canceled or
suspended numerous leases in Utah and Montana.
Permitting is also delayed and down on BLM-managed lands. Companies
simply do not get permits to drill in a timely fashion. Permitting
times have averaged more than 200 days in recent years, and depending
on the field office, it can actually take more than two years to obtain
a permit. The Energy Policy Act of 2005 mandated a thirty day deadline
for processing applications for permits to drill and this deadline is
largely ignored. The number of permits being issued by Interior dropped
by 39 percent when comparing the total permits issued in 2009 and 2010
to the total permits issued in 2007 and 2008. The Administration is
quick to point out that there are about 7,000 outstanding approved
permits, but it conveniently neglects to explain that there are
stipulation periods, lands that are now subjected to new planning
requirements where development is prevented, lawsuits and other reasons
that may prevent companies to utilize many permits. In addition, the
uncertainty about when permits are approved means that companies may
need to submit multiple applications in the hopes that some permits may
actually get approved in a timely fashion. A copy of a January 2012
report by Grand Junction based EIS Solutions on the impact of current
federal lands policies lays out the declining leasing and permitting
trends on BLM-managed lands and is provided for the subcommittee.
Interior is also holding operations at bay through extremely long
delays in completing the environmental analysis to support a project
approval. This environmental analysis must occur before companies can
apply for drilling permits. The Council on Environmental Quality's NEPA
guidance states that Environmental Assessments (EA) should take three
months to complete and Environmental Impact Statements (EIS) should
take 12 months to complete. However, Interior routinely takes years to
complete both EAs and EISs. A May 2011 report by SWCA Environmental
Consultants, entitled ``Economic Impacts of Oil and Gas Development on
BLM Lands in Wyoming'', demonstrated that six EISs were delayed in a
range of one to five years. The impact of these delays is quite
astonishing, with an estimated 17,000 total wells delayed due to the
snail's pace of NEPA review by Interior. The estimated employment
impacts from the delays in these 6 projects equate to 30,666 average
job equivalents and $2.6 billion in earnings that would not be realized
annually within the state of Wyoming. A copy of this report has been
provided to the subcommittee for consideration.
Interior has taken various other specific steps that effectively
add uncertainty to the BLM-regulatory process. In January 2010,
Interior introduced a slew of new administrative requirements and
processes to an already burdensome onshore leasing process. According
the Western Energy Alliance, these policies add three additional layers
to the existing five levels of regulation and analysis. In February
2011, Interior created a new category of wilderness called ``wild
lands.'' This runs counter to the Wilderness Act, which specifically
provides Congress with the authority to designate Wilderness Areas--not
Interior. Congress has effectively designated more than 100,000,000
acres as wilderness. However, the new ``wild lands'' policy has the
potential to remove lands from multiple-use to one use, contrary to the
directive of the Federal Land Policy Management Act. Interior also has
chosen to severely limit the use of categorical exclusions as directed
by Congress in Energy Policy Act 2005. Congress developed these five
exclusions to address situations where the environmental impact is
minimal or where additional review would be redundant, but Interior
continues to ignore this Congressional mandate.
The Rockies have steadfastly delivered oil and natural gas to the
nation through strong state-level regulation of drilling and production
operations on both state and federal lands. The records of Colorado,
Montana, New Mexico, North Dakota, Utah and Wyoming are strong when it
comes to developing and implementing oil and gas regulations. Yet
despite all of this, Interior is moving forward with its own
regulations for drilling operations. The Governors of the States of
North Dakota and Utah recently sent letters to the Secretary of the
Interior objecting to this regulatory effort. Copies of these letters
are provided to the subcommittee. As stated by Governor Dalrymple of
North Dakota, ``I believe additional regulations regarding these issues
are unnecessary and redundant in an area that is already effectively
regulated by the states.'' We simply have not seen a demonstration of
inadequacy in the states' regulatory systems. In fact, EPA
Administrator Lisa Jackson has spoken on multiple occasions in
acknowledgment of the effective job states are doing.
And we have seen the start of a similar pattern of obstruction with
the U.S. Forest Service, which released a draft forest management plan
that proposes a ban on horizontal drilling in the George Washington
National Forest and which canceled a planned auction of public lands in
the Wayne National Forest.
The industry stands committed to safe and environmentally
responsible development. We're working very hard, for example, to
ensure that shale oil and natural gas development occurs with as little
impact on the environment and with as much transparency as possible.
API has more than 200 industry standards related to exploration and
production activities, including a series of hydraulic fracturing
documents that assist operators in well construction and integrity,
water management, surface impact mitigation and environmental
protection. A copy of the hydraulic fracturing series of documents has
been provided to the subcommittee for consideration.
We are aggressively promoting safe and responsible operations by
holding a series of workshops across the country on the API hydraulic
fracturing documents. Targeted to local audiences from industry,
elected officials and other stakeholders, these workshops offer a high-
level explanation of the API standards and our ANSI-accredited
standards process, and demonstrate industry's commitment to working
with communities, local elected leaders and state regulators. To date,
API has completed seven of these half day workshops in Arkansas, North
Carolina, Maryland, New Jersey, West Virginia, Ohio and New York. Each
event has also given the audience of approximately 100 participants the
opportunity to hear from state regulators, local officials and business
people about the latest developments of shale energy in their region.
Additional workshops are scheduled in Bismarck, ND, Cheyenne, WY,
Denver, CO, Baton Rouge, LA, Traverse City, MI and Washington, DC. And
we've also been working closely with state regulators as they've
reviewed and updated their rules to ensure regulations are shaped to
promote safe and responsible industry operations. We understand the
need to do it right, and are working every day to make it happen.
And yet what we've seen on the federal level is a pulling back on
new development on public lands. The administration has been
restricting where oil and natural gas development may occur, leasing
less often, shortening lease terms, going slow on permit approvals, and
increasing or threatening to increase industry's development costs
through higher taxes, higher royalty rates, higher minimum lease bids,
and overlays of new regulations.
The administration likes to point out that oil production is up
nationwide, but it is claiming credit for production gains taking place
on private and state lands within which the federal government does not
have control over leasing, permitting and regulation of operations. In
the areas where the federal government is in control, oil production is
down 7.9 percent when comparing 2011 to 2009 and natural gas production
is down 14.7 percent over the same period. It is important to keep in
mind that BLM-managed lands in the Rockies have historically been a
strong producer of natural gas for the nation, yet we are a seeing a
lag in production. And over the same period, natural gas production
increased by 21 percent on nonfederal lands.
In his recently released book ``The Quest'', the Pulitzer-prize
winning historian Daniel Yergin points out that ``[p]olicies related to
access to energy and its production can have major impact on the
timeliness of investment and the availability of supply--and thus on
energy security.'' With the right policies and right leadership, we
could be doing far better in developing our own energy and bolstering
America's economic and energy security. The results could be
astounding. Within 15 years, American and Canadian energy supplies
could provide 100 percent of U.S. liquid fuel needs with increased
biofuels development and the implementation of four straightforward
policies:

Providing access to U.S. oil and natural gas reserves
that are currently off-limits;

Returning the Gulf of Mexico permitting rates to
premoratorium levels, at a minimum;

Resisting calls for imposition of unnecessary new
regulatory requirements on oil and natural gas development; and

Partnering with Canada to develop new pipeline
capacity to export Canadian crude to the United States,
including approval of the Keystone XL pipeline.
A document is provided that demonstrates how this level of energy
security is achievable.
We urge the Congress and the administration to promote energy
policies that consistent with this strategy to aid our economic
recovery and reduce our debt.
Thank you. That concludes my statement.
______

Mr. Lamborn [presiding]. Thank you.
Ms. Skaer?

STATEMENT OF LAURA SKAER, EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR, NORTHWEST MINING
ASSOCIATION

Ms. Skaer. Thank you, Mr. Chairman and members of the
Committee.
For 40 years, America has been painfully aware of the need
to lessen its dependence on foreign oil. Until recently, our
growing dependence on foreign sources of minerals always took a
back seat to energy with the public and our policy makers.
There is evidence this is changing and that Congress
understands the seriousness of our mineral vulnerability.
Unfortunately, the Administration's budget priorities not
only fail to address this issue, they actually compound the
problem, resulting in serious national defense and economic
consequences while impeding private sector job creation.
The Administration talks the talk but its Fiscal Year 2013
budget does not walk the walk.
Instead of advancing policies that increase access to
mineral deposits, reduce unconscionable permitting delays, and
encourage domestic mineral exploration and development, the
Administration prioritizes land use restrictions, wilderness,
sage grouse conservation, and vague concepts like ecological
sustainability, over multiple use and resource production, and
proposes job killing taxes and fees that will lead to fewer
private sector jobs, less mineral production, and an increased
reliance on foreign sources of minerals.
Specifically, the President's budget and legislative
proposals will increase the cost to explore and produce seven
hard rock minerals critical to infrastructure development,
manufacturing, national defense and energy, by imposing a gross
royalty of not less than five percent coupled with new and
increased fees on all hard rock mines, demonstrating a lack of
understanding of the differences both in terms of geology and
capital investment between finding and producing hard rock
minerals and finding and producing oil and natural gas and coal
by proposing a leasing system for seven critical and strategic
metals do not address the most significant risk to mining
projects in the U.S.
Permitting delays that have caused the U.S. to tie for last
with Papua New Guinea among 25 mineral producing countries, and
attract only eight percent of worldwide exploration spending.
If this is not a call to action, I do not know what is.
The proposals threaten to lock up access to rare and hard
to find mineral deposits through regulatory initiatives like
sage grouse conservation and mineral withdrawals like what took
place in Northern Arizona.
The proposals do not address critical workforce, retirement
and training issues in the BLM and Forest Service locatable
mineral programs, and they do not include Good Samaritan
legislation to encourage AML clean up.
We are entering an era of resource nationalism, where many
countries led by China are using control over resources to
attract long term manufacturing jobs.
In today's highly competitive global minerals industry,
geologic, economic, and political risk factors determine where
a company invests and where high paying jobs are created. Not
only mining jobs but manufacturing jobs and many indirect jobs.
To attract new wealth-creating, job-creating mining
investments, they pay an average wage of $75,000, with an
indirect job multiplier of twice the national average, the U.S.
must adopt policies that will encourage investment and
production of America's vast mineral resources to supply the
metals and materials necessary to create and sustain U.S.
manufacturing jobs and sustain a robust economy and our
standard of living.
Unfortunately, the President's budget and legislative
proposals do not move us in that direction.
We urge the Committee and Congress to reject the
President's budget and its legislative and regulatory proposals
and instead enact policies that will guarantee access to
mineral potential lands, guarantee the certainty and security
of tenure required to invest hundreds of millions to more than
$1 billion to find and develop a mine, all before any return on
investment.
Balance sage grouse conservation with multiple use as
mandated by FLPMA. Much like they did with wildlands, the
Agency is elevating sage grouse conservation ahead of all other
multiple uses in violation of FLPMA.
They need to guarantee timely permits, the number one risk
to mineral investment in the U.S., and they need to address
workforce retirement and training issues in the BLM and the
Forest Service locatable mineral programs where 60 percent of
the trained expertise is eligible for retirement by 2015.
Mr. Chairman, members of the Committee, we look forward to
working with you to find solutions to these issues, and I will
be happy to answer any questions you might have.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Skaer follows:]

Statement of Laura Skaer, Executive Director,
Northwest Mining Association

Executive Summary
Chairman Lamborn, Ranking Member Holt and Members of the Committee,
the Northwest Mining Association (NWMA) appreciates this opportunity to
provide testimony on the Effect of the President's FY-2013 Budget and
Legislative Proposals for the Bureau of Land Management and the U.S.
Forest Service's Energy and Minerals Programs on Private Sector Job
Creation, Domestic Energy and Minerals Production and Deficit
Reduction.
At a time when Members of Congress, the Administration, the media
and the public are acknowledging that the United States has become
increasingly vulnerable and dependant on foreign sources of strategic
and critical minerals, the Administration's budget and legislative
priorities not only fail to address this serious issue, they actually
compound the problem. As you know, this vulnerability has serious
national defense and economic consequences. This increased
vulnerability and reliance on foreign sources of minerals is not new to
NWMA or the mining industry, as we have been delivering that message
for the past ten years.
While Members on both sides of the aisle are introducing
legislation to address these mineral vulnerability issues, e.g., Mr.
Lamborn's Strategic and Critical Minerals Policy Act of 2011 (H.R.
2011),the Administration's budget ignores this reality by proposing
increased fees and royalties; advocating policies that make access to
mineral lands and permits more and more difficult; fails to address
serious workforce issues in both the Bureau of Land Management (BLM)
and the U.S. Forest Service (USFS); and basically ignores Congressional
mandates to manage public and National Forest Lands for multiple-use,
sustained yield and the production of fiber, food, minerals and energy
the Nation requires. Just one example of the latter is the BLM and USFS
Notice of Intent to incorporate Greater Sage-Grouse conservation
measures into Land Use and Land Management Plans. The conservation
measures proposed by the Sage-Grouse National Technical Team (NTT) are
draconian, prohibit or restrict use of public lands for mineral and
energy development and place conservation of sage-grouse habitat above
all other multiple-uses in violation of FLPMA.
The Federal Land Policy and Management Act of 1966 (FLPMA) 43
U.S.C. 17.01 et seq lists twelve policies with respect to the public
lands of the United States. Section 102(a)(12) states that it is the
policy of the United States that:
the public lands be managed in a manner which recognizes the
Nation's need for domestic sources of minerals, food, timber
and fiber from the public lands including implementation of the
Mining and Minerals Policy Act of 1970 (30 U.S.C. 21a) as it
pertains to the public lands;
The Mining and Minerals Policy Act of 1970 declares, in part:
[t]hat it is the continuing policy of the Federal Government in
the national interest to foster and encourage private
enterprise in (1) the development of economically sound and
stable domestic mining, minerals, metal and mineral reclamation
industries,. . ..
The Multiple-Use and Sustained Yield Act of 1960 (16 U.S.C. 528)
and the National Forest Management Act of 1976 contain similar policy
declarations for the USFS.
It is within the context of these statutes and congressional
declaration of policy that NWMA finds the Administration's budget
proposals relating to private sector job creation, domestic minerals
and energy production, and deficit reduction woefully lacking. Instead
of allocating budgetary resources to wealth and job creating mineral
and energy resource programs, and providing incentives and required
certainty to attract mineral investment, the Administration's budget
and legislative proposals focus on protection, removing lands from
productive use, increasing royalties, fees, and taxes, increasing
uncertainty and regulatory burdens and implementing controversial and
job killing policies revolving around climate change and sage-grouse
conservation. While the Administration talks the job creation talk,
their proposals clearly do not walk the job creation walk.
The Administration's job killing budget and legislative proposals
include increased fees and a gross royalty/leasing system for seven
hardrock minerals that will discourage exploration, development and
production of those metals on public lands and increase our Nation's
dangerous reliance on foreign sources of minerals as well as energy.
The President's FY-2013 budget also fails to address project delays
caused by bureaucratic red tape, a broken NEPA process and a failure to
address workforce issues.
Finally, if the Administration was truly interested in reducing the
environmental impact of abandoned hardrock mines, it would have
included Good Samaritan legislation similar to H.R. 3203 introduced by
Chairman Lamborn in the 111th Congress.
Northwest Mining Association: Who We Are
NWMA is a 117 year old, 2,300 member, non-profit, non-partisan
trade association based in Spokane, Washington. NWMA members reside in
44 states and are actively involved in exploration and mining
operations on public and private lands, especially in the West. Our
diverse membership includes every facet of the mining industry
including geology, exploration, mining, engineering, equipment
manufacturing, technical services, and sales of equipment and supplies.
NWMA's broad membership represents a true cross-section of the American
mining community from small miners and exploration geologists to both
junior and large mining companies. More than 90% of our members are
small businesses or work for small businesses. Most of our members are
individual citizens.
Bureau of Land Management Budget and Legislative Proposals
Our testimony focuses on the budget and legislative proposals
impacting the hardrock mining industry, namely the proposed gross
royalty and leasing system for seven locatable minerals, the abandoned
mine land fee for hardrock minerals, regulatory proposals, such as the
draconian sage-grouse conservation measures proposed by the NTT and the
Northern Arizona mineral withdrawal (Public Land Order 7787), the
failure to address delays in the NEPA/permitting process and replacing
and training new professionals to replace an aging workforce. Instead
of focusing on enhancing the programs that create jobs, lessen
America's reliance on foreign sources of minerals and promote the
production of the minerals, food, timber and fiber Americans require,
the Department has elevated protection as its budgetary and legislative
priority.
A. Proposed Leasing/Gross Royalty System for Seven Hardrock Minerals
The President's FY-2013 budget includes a legislative proposal to
institute a leasing process under the Minerals Leasing Act of 1920 for
seven hardrock minerals--gold, silver, lead, zinc, copper, uranium and
molybdenum. These seven minerals currently are subject to location
under the General Mining Laws of the United States. The President's
proposal would include a new leasing process and subject these seven
minerals to annual rental payments and a royalty of not less than 5% of
gross proceeds. One half of the royalty proceeds would be distributed
to the states and the other half would be deposited in the General
Treasury. Existing mining claims would be exempt from the leasing
system but would be subject to increases in annual claim maintenance
fees.
This proposal would have the effect of killing private sector job
creation and discouraging private investment in the exploration,
development and production of domestic mineral resources. It would
increase our nation's reliance on foreign sources of minerals and lower
the United States' standing among the twenty-five largest mineral
producing countries in the world.
The leasing proposal will increase uncertainty by failing to
recognize that unlike coal and oil and natural gas, which are typically
located in vast sedimentary basins, economically viable deposits of the
seven minerals mentioned in the President's proposal are rare and hard
to find. Discovery, delineation and development of metallic ore bodies
require years of fact-finding, including ground, aerial and satellite
reconnaissance, exploration drilling, environmental baseline gathering,
workforce hiring and training, mine and mill planning, design and
construction and closure and reclamation.
In a 1999 report, the National Research Council of the National
Academy of Sciences recognized just how rare economically viable
mineral deposits are: ``Only a very small portion of Earth's
continental crust (less than 0.01%) contains economically viable
mineral deposits. Thus, mines can only be located in those few places
where economically viable deposits were formed and discovered.''
Hardrock Mining on Federal Lands, National Research Council, National
Academy Press, 1999, p. 2-3.
On page 24 of the same report, the National Research Council
Committee included a sidebar on ``How Hard is it to Find a Mineral
Deposit?'' This is what the NRC Committee had to say:
The art and science of finding new mineral deposits is much
better than pure luck, but it is still far from perfect.
Moreover, the search for new mineral deposits is costly, time
consuming, and without guarantee of success. For example,
Roscoe (1971) showed that the number of mineral indications in
Canada that had to be investigated to discover a significant
mineral deposit was about 100 in 1951 and rose to about 1,000
in 1969. There is no reason to expect that this trend has
changed. Similarly, in a probabilistic analysis of exploration
experience in the United States by Homestake Mining Company,
Anderson (1982) concluded that from an initial sample of 1,000
reconnaissance examinations (more or less equivalent to casual
use activities), 100 drillable exploration targets (roughly
equivalent to notice-level activities) would emerge in which
there would be a 75% chance of finding one deposit with 3
million ounces of gold. The statistics may not be quite as grim
as they first appear, because there are many cases of someone
with a better concept, more persistence, or luck finding an
economic deposit in a prospect or worked-out mine that several
companies have deemed worthless. Successful projects can be
spectacularly profitable, but overall, mining has one of the
lowest returns on investment of major industries (Dobra, 1977).
It is not uncommon for mining companies to spend millions of
dollars just to identify 100 drillable exploration targets. Sometimes
more than $100 million can be expended before a decision is made to
build a mine. At a recent mining conference in Denver, the chief
financial officer of a large gold company told the audience that his
company was initially surprised when it spent $2 billion dollars to
explore for, develop and build a mine but they now consider that to be
a common figure. Bear in mind that all of this investment occurs up
front before production and the beginning of cash flow. Furthermore,
the combination of cyclical price volatility and the variations in the
concentration and geologic characteristics of these seven metals within
a single ore body can turn ore with economic value into waste rock at a
sudden downturn in the market.
These are among many reasons that these metals were not removed
from the operation of the Mining Law when the Mineral Leasing Act was
passed in 1920. Congress recognized then, as it should today, that in
order to encourage private enterprise in the development of hardrock
minerals, there must be an incentive for those who take substantial
risk to explore for, find and develop a mineral deposit. The Mining Law
has served this Nation well for 140 years by providing a self-executing
process to enter upon federal lands open to mineral entry to explore
for, find, use and occupy those lands for all uses reasonably incident
to prospecting, exploration, processing and mining. The Mining Law has
provided the necessary framework and security of tenure or certainty
required to attract mineral investment and take the risk to find that
true needle-in-a-haystack, one-in-ten thousand economically viable
mineral deposit.
Removing these seven minerals from the operation of the Mining Law
and placing them in a leasing system will result in less mineral
investment in the U.S. and exacerbate our dangerous reliance on foreign
sources of critical and necessary minerals.
The President's proposal came as a surprise because it is
inconsistent with Secretary Salazar's testimony before the Senate
Energy and Natural Resources Committee on July 14, 2009. While
supporting a need to amend the Mining Law of 1872, including patent
reform and providing a fair return to the taxpayers for the extraction
of valuable resources and the creation of an AML Fund that included a
Good Samaritan provision, the Secretary never suggested a leasing
program. In fact, neither Congressman Rahall's Mining Law Reform bill
introduced in the 110th (H.R. 2262) and 111th (H.R. 699) Congress nor
Senator Bingaman's bill (S. 796) introduced in the 111th Congress
contained a leasing system for hardrock minerals. Both Representative
Rahall and Senator Bingaman's legislation recognized the importance of
the self-initiation rights under the Mining Law to encourage the search
for and production of hardrock minerals.
B. A Gross Royalty Not Less Than 5% Will Adversely Impact Investment in
Domestic Mining.
A royalty assessed on gross proceeds increases the economic risk of
a given mining project investment and acts as a disincentive to
investment. This disincentive becomes pronounced when one considers the
cyclical nature of commodity prices. In other words, as commodity
prices decrease, the rate of return required to justify a mining
investment increases. A gross royalty becomes a fixed cost that, in
times of low commodity prices, can mean the difference between a mine
closing prematurely, resulting in lost jobs, and a mine continuing to
operate because it can cover its fixed costs thereby keeping people
employed during times of low prices. In other words, a gross royalty
raises the ``cut off grade'' between recoverable ore and waste rock.
The life of a mine is shortened by causing what otherwise would be
valuable minerals below the cut off point to be lost. A gross royalty
prevents conservation of the resource and is not an environmentally
sustainable policy. Early mine closures waste public minerals by
leaving minerals in the ground. Premature closures of mines means more
mineral deposits have to be discovered, more mines built, impacting
more land.
Unlike oil, natural gas and coal which are generally marketable as
found in place in the ground, hardrock minerals require extensive and
costly processing and beneficiation to produce a marketable product. A
gross royalty does not consider these costs. A gross royalty is
punitive in periods of low commodity prices. During periods of low
commodity prices, a mining company would continue to have to pay the
gross royalty even if it meant operating at a loss. Since no mine can
be operated at a loss for any significant amount of time, the result is
that some mines will shut down prematurely creating loss of jobs; loss
of federal, state and local taxes; and indirectly adversely impacting
suppliers of goods and services to the mine and the mine employees. The
economic devastation from a gross royalty would be significant,
especially in the rural West where most hardrock mines are located and
mining provides some of the best jobs available, jobs that average more
than $75,000 per year.
On the other hand, a net royalty does not cause a mining company to
operate at a loss. With a net royalty, operators pay higher royalties
when their net is high during periods of robust mineral prices and/or
operating costs are lower. When mineral prices are depressed, and/or
operating costs are higher, operators pay lower royalties, so the
royalty does not cause premature mine closures resulting in job losses.
Because mineral prices are cyclical in nature, there have been and
always will be periods of lower commodity prices. A net royalty
provides the best incentive to explore for minerals on federal lands,
regardless of the economic cycle. A net royalty promotes conservation
of the resource, ensures a longer royalty stream from operating mines,
and promotes job retention.
The Metals Economics Group produces an annual report ``World
Exploration Trends'' which tracks global exploration and industry
trends. The 2012 report estimates that nonferrous exploration budgets
for 2011 will total $18.2 billion, a 50% increase over 2010. Despite
significant mineral resources, the United States attracts only 8% of
total world-wide exploration dollars, while Latin America attracts 25%,
Canada 18%, Africa 15%, and Australia 13%. The following report
provides insight into why the U.S. lags in attracting job creating
exploration dollars.
An internationally respected minerals industry advisory firm, Behre
Dolbear, prepares an annual report ranking the twenty-five largest
mineral producing countries in the world. The latest report is entitled
2012 Ranking of Countries for Mining Investment--Where ``Not to
Invest'' and is attached and incorporated by reference. Behre Dolbear
considers seven criteria in ranking countries:

The country's economic system

The country's political system

The degree of social issues affecting mining in the
country

Delays in receiving permits due to bureaucratic and
other delays

The degree of corruption prevalent in the country

The stability of the country's currency

The country's tax regime
While the United States ranks high (eight or above on a one to ten
scale) for its economic and political system, the United States
received a ranking of three with respect to social issues affecting
mining; ranked last with Papua New Guinea in permitting delays (scoring
2 on a one to ten scale) and a rating of four with respect to its tax
regime. Behre Dolbear considers the total taxes applicable to a mining
project, including income taxes, severance and excise taxes, duties and
imposts, and royalties. The United States corporate tax rate is 35%
plus, which, when combined with state levies effectively makes it the
highest corporate tax rate in the world. This high corporate tax rate
provides a significant disincentive for mineral investment in the
United States. A gross royalty would only exacerbate this disincentive,
and any net royalty must take into consideration the overall government
take.'' According to the study, when the ``government take'' from
combined taxes and royalty reaches 50%, a mining project's economic
viability, during periods of normal commodity pricing, is threatened.
In addition, the Administration doesn't seem to understand that our
lifestyle and standard of living is made possible by mining.
Furthermore, it doesn't understand that the production of solar, wind
and geothermal electricity capacity requires minerals. The
Administration proposes key funding increases for renewable energy
development while proposing new fees and taxes on mineral production,
proposing a new leasing system and enacting policies that will
adversely impact the security of tenure necessary to attract mineral
investment, and failing to address significant workforce issues in the
Mining Law program. The bottom line is that all energy production,
including renewable energy requires minerals, and lots of them. And
they need American minerals--unless, of course, we are willing to trade
our unhealthy dependence on foreign oil for a dangerous dependence on
foreign sources of critical minerals.
In 1995, the United States Geological Survey reported that the
United States was import reliant on 43 nonfuel minerals with a $51
billion value. In 2011, the U.S. had become import reliant on 67
minerals (an increase of 4 over 2010), and 100% reliant on 19 minerals
with a value of $90.4 billion. The U.S. is more import-dependent on 43
non-fuel minerals than it is on crude oil. Unfortunately, the
President's budget and legislative proposals will discourage mineral
production in the United States and further increase our Nation's
reliance on foreign sources of minerals.
C. Abandoned Mine Land Fee
The President's FY-2013 budget proposes a new ``dirt tax'' on
hardrock mining to be used for reclaiming abandoned mines. While framed
as a fee on the production of hardrock minerals beginning January 1,
2013, the ``dirt tax' is based on the volume of material removed or
displaced (overburden and waste rock as well as ore), with the receipts
distributed through a competitive grant program. The President's AML
proposal of a ``dirt tax'' of approximately 7.8 cents per ton of the
material displaced would apply to hardrock mining operations on private
and public lands and is significantly different than any AML fee
proposed in the past either through Mining Law Reform bills introduced
in the last two Congresses or the Secretary's testimony in July, 2009.
What is noticeably absent from the President's proposal is a Good
Samaritan provision.
A Good Samaritan law, similar to the one introduced by Chairman
Lamborn in the last Congress (H.R. 3203), will do more to bring about
the cleanup and reclamation of abandoned hardrock mines than any fee
imposed on production or material moved.
It appears the President's proposal is based on the coal AML
program administered by the Office of Surface Mining (OSM). As was
discussed in more detail earlier in this testimony, increasing fees on
hardrock production is counterproductive to private sector job
creation, domestic energy and minerals production and deficit
reduction. Because most currently producing mines are located in the
same mining districts as most abandoned hardrock mines, a Good
Samaritan provision would enable mining companies to utilize current
permitted processing and tailings facilities, equipment and mine
personnel to reclaim nearby abandoned mines without the legal risk of
incurring cradle to grave liability under the Clean Water Act (CWA) and
the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation and Liability
Act (CERCLA).
On October 2, 2007 at a legislative hearing on H.R. 2262 entitled
Royalties and Abandoned Mine Reclamation, and last year at a hearing
this committee held on Abandoned Mined Lands: Innovative Solutions for
Restoring the Environment, Improving Safety and Creating Jobs, I
provided testimony on hardrock AML issues including the need for Good
Samaritan legislation. As I stated at that time, the mining industry
supports the creation of a new federal AML fund to be financed from
royalties owing under any Mining Law legislation enacted by the
Congress to augment the monies available to state AML Funds to address
safety and, where needed, environmental hazards at AML sites. Our
industry also strongly supports the enactment of comprehensive Good
Samaritan legislation like H.R. 3203, which would allow mining
companies with no previous involvement at an AML site to voluntarily
remediate and reclaim that site in whole or in part without the threat
of potential enormous liability under the CWA, CERCLA and other federal
and state environmental laws. I have attached a copy of that testimony
for the record of this hearing and incorporate it by reference.
Rather than imposing a job-killing ``dirt tax'' on the volume of
material displaced at hardrock mines for reclaiming abandoned mine
sites, Congress should pass Good Samaritan legislation and use, in
addition to state AML funds, monies collected from existing claims
maintenance and location fees that are not used to administer the
General Mining Laws or provide for mineral program workforce hiring and
training as discussed below. Over the past five years, the amount of
claim maintenance and location fees collected has exceeded the amount
allocated by the Secretary of the Interior for administration of the
General Mining Laws by more than $16 million per year. We submit that
this would be a much better use of those excess funds than depositing
them into the General Treasury.
D. Proposed Sage-grouse Conservation Measures will restrict access to
mineral deposits, prevent renewable energy development and
exacerbate our reliance on foreign sources of minerals and
energy
BLM proposes an increase of $15 million to ``implement broad-scale
sage-grouse planning and conservation activities.'' Ten million dollars
would be used to amend or revise 98 land use plans to designate
priority greater sage-grouse habitat where BLM will set draconian
disturbance thresholds for energy and mineral development. Only $2.5
million is designated for on-the-ground habitat restoration and fuel
management. Another $2.5 million would be used for mapping, assessment
and monitoring.
NWMA submits that BLM has it backwards. This budgetary increase
should be used on-the-ground and to better implement Manual 6840
Special Status Species Management. On page IV--6 of BLM's 2013 Budget
Justifications, BLM states ``[I]n its finding, the FWS said the BLM was
not `fully implementing the regulatory mechanisms available' to ensure
species conservation.'' Instead of fully implementing the regulatory
mechanisms available in Manual 6840, BLM has chosen to initiate a
planning process around recommendations that include mineral
withdrawals and validity examinations in priority habitat areas.
Neither BLM's Notice of Intent to incorporate greater sage-grouse
conservation measures in land use plans nor IM 2012-043 and IM 2012-044
mention Manual 6840 (emphasis added). For three years, the current
administration has attempted to implement land use restrictions that
limit or prohibit domestic mineral and energy production and thwart job
creation. We saw it with Secretarial Order 3310, the Wildlands Policy;
we see it with the northern Arizona withdrawal; we see it with
administrative policies that add delays to the permitting process; and
now we have greater sage-grouse conservation. The two IM's mentioned
above already have been used to delay the China Mountain Wind Project
and reduce oil & gas lease sales in Nevada. The failure to mention
Manual 6840 and focus on new regulatory mechanisms instead of better
implementation of available regulatory mechanisms begs the question of
what is the real purpose of BLM's sage-grouse conservation measures.
Is it to truly conserve the greater sage-grouse or is it to do what
they could not do through the aborted Wild Lands Policy? Is it to
conserve the greater sage-grouse or prevent mining, energy development
(both conventional and renewable), and multiple-use of public lands?
Given the fact the greater sage-grouse habitat covers more than 50
million acres across 10 western states, the greater sage-grouse has the
potential of being the spotted owl on steroids as resource dependent
communities across the west face economic devastation.
Addressing Permit Delays and Workforce Training
The hardrock mining location and claim fees have brought in between
$51.5 and $67.3 million over the last five years. These monies are
earmarked for administering the Mining Law Program, yet, over the same
time period, only $32.7 to $39.7 million have been appropriated to run
the program. The balance has gone to the Treasury.
During this same time period, Mining Law/Minerals Program managers
and BLM/USFS field personnel responsible for the locatable minerals
programs have been retiring at an unprecedented rate. Within the next
five years, more than 60% of BLM and USFS employees responsible for the
respective locatable minerals programs will retire or be eligible for
retirement. Yet, there appears to be no effort at the departmental
level to address this issue. The President's FY-2013 budget certainly
doesn't address it.
The 2012 Behre Dolbear report ranking countries for mining
investment ranked the United States dead last in delays in receiving
permits due to bureaucratic and other delays, and near the bottom with
a rating of three out of ten on the degree of social issues affecting
mining in the country. With respect to permitting delays, Behre Dolbear
ranked the United States tied for last among the twenty-five countries
rated stating:
Permitting delays are the most significant risks to mining
projects in the United States. A few mining friendly states
(Nevada, Utah, Kentucky, West Virginia, and Arizona) are an
exception to this rule but are negatively impacted by federal
rules that they are bound to enforce resulting in a 7- to 10-
year waiting period before mine development can begin.
The delays are not due to environmental regulations being stronger
in the United States than in other countries because most countries
have environmental regulations equal, at a minimum, to the standards
established by the World Bank Group. Rather, it is abuse of the NEPA
process, unnecessary bureaucratic red tape and the fact that virtually
every mining project is litigated. These delays represent jobs that are
not being created, jobs by an industry that, according to the
President's Job Council Report, was the only industry to show a net
increase in employment since 2007, pays an average wage of $75,000, and
has an indirect job multiplier equal to twice the national average.
With respect to projects on BLM-managed lands, additional,
substantial delays result from a BLM Instruction Memorandum issued on
December 23, 2009 (IM 2010-043) requiring all Federal Register Notices
be sent to the BLM Washington Office for review and approval prior to
publication in the Federal Register. This Instruction Memorandum also
implemented a 12 to 14 step review and approval process that is taking
approximately four months per Notice, prior to publication. Included
are three procedural notices required by NEPA: (1) Notice of Intent to
prepare an EIS which starts the public scoping process; (2) Notice of
Intent to publish the Draft Environmental Impact Statement; and (3)
Notice of Intent to publish the Final Environmental Impact Statement
and Record of Decision. Note that all three Notices are purely
procedural--nothing substantive.
Contrast the BLM policy with the USFS policy which allows these
purely procedural Federal Register Notices to be sent directly to the
Federal Register by the local forest supervisor. This is not to say
that the USFS NEPA process does not have its own problems, rather,
merely to contrast the USFS' policy with the BLM's policy that is
inhibiting job creation by unnecessarily adding up to a year to what is
already a very broken, anti-job NEPA process. We can think of no
rational reason for the BLM to require these three procedural Notices
to each undergo a four month review and approval process in the
Washington, D.C. office prior to publication in the Federal Register.
It is no wonder the United States ranks last in terms of permitting
delays.
As mentioned previously, claim maintenance and location fees are
bringing in $16-$20 million a year more than is being appropriated to
administer the BLM's locatable minerals program. This is not taxpayer
money. This is money from the mining industry, and we believe some of
this more than $16 million per year could and should be used to hire
and train the necessary professionals to help break the backlog of
permit delays and replace an aging workforce. We believe this should be
BLM's and the USFS's number one budgetary priority for locatable
minerals.
Among all of the programs administered by the BLM and USFS,
hardrock mining is the most technically complex, legally complex and
capital intensive. Hardrock mineral deposits result from complex
geological forces, and, as discussed earlier, are rare and hard to
find. The variation in geology among the different metals as well as
variations within a metal require specific geologic and engineering
knowledge and training.
In addition, BLM and USFS professionals responsible for managing
the locatable mineral programs require an understanding of the General
Mining Laws of the U.S. and their relationship with other laws and
regulations, including environmental laws and regulations. The
technical and legal issues are far more complex than other mineral
resources like coal, oil and gas. Additionally, hardrock mine
development is the most capital intensive activity taking place on
federal lands. Hundreds of millions to several billions of dollars of
investment is required, up front, before there is any cash flow or
return on investment.
These factors demand professionals with specialized education and
training in geology and mining engineering, so they understand the
complex technical, legal and capital investment issues associated with
hardrock mining.
The U.S. Forest Service
While we have focused our testimony on the BLM's budget proposals,
the USFS budget contains many of the same misguided priorities as the
BLM, with a focus on protection, ecological sustainability and climate
change rather than congressionally-mandated multiple-use, mineral and
energy production and job creation. Based on information compiled by
the USFS Minerals and Geology Management staff, the nine largest
locatable mineral mines producing on National Forest Lands in 2010
produced metals worth $1.3 billion, more than all other USFS programs
combined. This represents wealth creation, high paying jobs and
significant state and local tax revenues. It also supports U.S.
manufacturing jobs by helping to ensure a domestic supply of minerals.
As mentioned above, the USFS faces similar workforce issues as the
BLM. As of January 25, three-quarters of the USFS's certified mineral
examiners were eligible for retirement. A December 20, 2010 workforce
analysis by the USFS shows 61% of USFS employees eligible for or will
be eligible for retirement by 2015. Thus, it is likely that within the
next three or four years, the USFS will lose over 60% of its mineral
management expertise, yet, little is being done to replace this
workforce, and the Administration's proposed budget actually reduces
the amount of monies budgeted to manage the mineral wealth of our
National Forest System Lands. The budget shows reductions in monies to
administer mineral operations, process mineral applications and manage
the abandoned mine land program.
As previously noted, the mining industry is the only industry to
show a net increase in employment since 2007, and provides high paying
jobs with an indirect job multiplier equal to twice the national
average. Given these facts, and the economic contribution of mineral
production on National Forest Lands, NWMA is at a loss to understand
why the USFS is proposing to cut more than $10 million from its
Minerals and Geology Management program. This will only compound
permitting delays and exacerbate our reliance on foreign sources of
minerals. The proposed budget reduction also prevents the USFS from
addressing its workforce replacement needs.
In these times of robust mineral prices, we believe the Forest
Service should be increasing its budget request for Minerals and
Geology Management, so it can hire and train the professionals needed
to administer the program and process plans of operation in a more
timely fashion.
Conclusion
The U.S. minerals industry operates in a highly competitive global
environment. The search for new mineral deposits occurs around the
globe. Major mining companies operate internationally and weigh many
factors in determining whether the potential return on mineral
investment is worth the geologic, economic and political risk.
There can be no question that mining creates new wealth and
provides high paying jobs with an indirect job multiplier more than
twice the national average. As mining companies weigh the geology/
mineral potential, economic and political risk, they will invest in
mineral development where they can obtain access to the land; access to
regulatory approvals; access to capital; and access to the resources
necessary to build and operate the mine such as people, water and
energy. While the United States scores high in terms of its economic
and political systems, lack of government corruption and currency
stability, it ranks last or near the bottom in terms of permitting
delays, social issues and tax policy. Thus, in the Behre Dolbear 2012
Ranking of Countries, the United States is sixth behind Australia,
Canada, Chile, Brazil and Mexico.
We also are entering a period of resource nationalism where many
countries, led by China, are asserting control over natural resources
located within their country. Unlike the Arab oil embargo of the early
70's, countries like China are using resource nationalism not to
control the market or the market price for a given commodity, but to
attract long term manufacturing jobs. Manufacturing require minerals.
Manufacturing concerns require a stable and affordable supply of metals
and minerals. In a nut shell, resource nationalism says ``if you want
our minerals, locate your manufacturing facility in our country.''
This is most evident and transparent in China with rare earth
minerals. China currently controls 97% of global rare earth production.
China has announced that it is cutting back on rare earth exports in
favor of internal consumption. Rare earths are required not only in
wind turbines and hybrid vehicles, but also in dozens of consumer
products like flat screen TV's, computer monitors, and energy saving
CFL light bulbs. China is telling these manufacturing concerns that
they have a choice. They can hope to obtain the rare earths they need
in the global market place at the global commodity price, or they can
relocate their manufacturing facility in China and be guaranteed a
supply of rare earths at a discount. China has been very transparent in
this policy because first and foremost they want to create
manufacturing jobs.
Last week, the administration joined with Japan and the European
Union to file a complaint with the World Trade Organization over
China's policy of restricting export of its rare earth minerals.
Instead of settling for Chinese imports, the U.S. should expedite the
development of our own supplies of rare earths and other critical and
strategic minerals. The best way for the administration and congress to
combat China's dominance of critical and strategic minerals production
is to enact a National Minerals Policy based on H.R. 2011 and S. 1113
that promotes domestic production and creates high-paying jobs.
If the United States is going to compete in this global mineral
environment fueled by resource nationalism, it must adopt policies that
guarantee access to lands with mineral deposits, must provide a
competitive tax regime, and must reduce permitting delays. We should be
embarrassed that we rank last among the twenty-five largest mineral
producing countries in terms of permitting delays. The fact a country
with a mineral resource base as rich as the United States attracts only
8% of world-wide exploration spending should be a call to action.
Unfortunately, the President's FY-2013 budget and legislative
proposals for the BLM's and USFS's energy and mineral programs do not
answer this call to action. Instead of advancing policies that will
encourage mineral production, job creation and deficit reduction, the
Administration's proposals will result in less domestic energy and
minerals production, adversely impact private sector job creation, and
increase the United States' dangerous reliance on foreign sources of
strategic and critical minerals. This will have a negative impact on
our balance of payments and will not contribute to deficit reduction,
as we watch other countries reap the benefits of mineral investment and
the resulting private sector jobs, both in mineral exploration and
development as well as manufacturing.
We urge this Committee and Congress to reject the President's
budget and legislative proposals and, instead, enact incentives that
will encourage investment and production of America's vast mineral
resources to supply the strategic and base metals and materials
necessary to create and sustain U.S. manufacturing jobs, a robust
economy, and our standard of living.
Thank you for the opportunity to provide testimony on these
important issues. I will be happy to answer any questions.
______

Mr. Lamborn. Thank you.
Mr. Fosburgh?

STATEMENT OF WHIT FOSBURGH, PRESIDENT AND CEO, THEODORE
ROOSEVELT CONSERVATION PARTNERSHIP

Mr. Fosburgh. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Mr. Markey. I
appreciate being here. My name is Whit Fosburgh. I am the
President and CEO of the Theodore Roosevelt Conservation
Partnership.
Today, I am speaking on behalf of TRCP and Sportsmen for
Responsible Energy Development, which is a coalition with Trout
Unlimited and National Wildlife Federation, and more than 500
other groups, businesses, and individuals who support energy
development on public lands but want to see it done right.
My full testimony has been submitted for the record. That
testimony cites the impacts that irresponsible development has
had on fish and wildlife, and how sensible reforms put into
place in 2010 have reduced conflict, expedited development, and
restored some balance to public lands management, balance that
was sorely lacking after the passage of the 2005 energy bill.
The testimony also notes that there is no shortage of
public lands available for oil and gas development, as many
Members have noted today.
More than 38 million acres of leases are held by industry
and less than half that amount of land is in production, with
about 7,000 permits on public lands currently being unused.
In my oral remarks, I want to highlight the jobs' issue.
First, I want to reiterate that energy development is a valid
and important use of our public lands, whether it be oil and
gas, solar or wind.
A lot of us scratch our heads when we hear that balancing
development with fish and wildlife and recreation is somehow a
job killing strategy.
2010 saw more than 58 million visitors to BLM lands, with a
resulting benefit of $7.4 billion to the economy. Most of those
visits were to hunt, fish, camp, mountain bike, watch wildlife,
or have other outdoor recreational experiences.
During the economic downturn, the outdoor recreation
industry has been growing at an average annual rate of about
six percent, almost three times the rate of the national
economy.
In a report commissioned by the National Fish and Wildlife
Foundation last November, recreation, conservation and historic
preservation contribute more than $1 trillion annually to the
national economy and support 9.4 million jobs.
Another peer reviewed report which will be released later
this Spring examines the relationship between economic security
and varying land management strategies in the rural Rocky
Mountain West.
Going back over 30 years, the report looks at rural
counties where (a) commodity development dominates; (b)
recreation and conserved lands dominate; or (c) where there is
a combination of conserved lands and limited commodity
development.
This analysis indicates that jobs, income and growth in the
commodity production sectors in the rural Rocky Mountain West
while still significant have not experienced the growth seen by
the rest of the regional economy.
Rural counties with greater areas actively conserved for
recreation and conservation plus lower impact development uses,
like balanced uses of mining, timber, energy development,
actually enjoy higher income, population and employment growth.
Counties dominated by conservation and recreation lands
also have higher property values and higher proportions of high
income workers.
Communities need the energy and materials provided by the
commodities sector. Individuals, residents and tourists alike
demand the quality of life provided by the region's fish,
wildlife, and scenic resources.
Nearly all the Rocky Mountain communities need jobs and
income generated by both sectors.
Opening all areas for energy development and relaxing or
eliminating the rules that seek to balance development with
conservation flies in the face of good public policy and good
economic policy.
I want to point out that we have some frustrations with the
BLM and the way it is doing its job as well.
While the promise of the 2000 reforms is good, figure out
up front where developments should be and how it should happen,
too often BLM state directors simply ignore this guidance
creating a patchwork approach throughout the West.
Nowhere is this more evident than in the slow and extremely
uneven application of the Master Lease Planning process. This
is a process we should all embrace, as it should result in
consolidated and expedited development while also keeping
development from critical fish and wildlife and recreation
areas.
Instead of pushing to open more areas of development with
less consideration of fish and wildlife, we would urge the
Committee to use its oversight powers to ask why BLM has been
so slow in implementing its own plans to balance energy
production with fish and wildlife conservation.
The President's proposed budget includes funding the
implementation of lease reforms and increased development fees.
This is promising but only if BLM follows through on the
ground.
I also want to make a comment on what Laura said, that the
environmental community supports the whole abandoned mine lands
reclamation process, and the Good Samaritan provisions would
actually encourage private parties, be it Trout Unlimited or
mining companies themselves, to go back in and fix up chronic
pollution sources on our Western lands.
Thank you. I am happy to answer any questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Fosburgh follows:]

Statement of Whit Fosburgh, President and CEO,
Theodore Roosevelt Conservation Partnership

Mr. Chairman:
Thank you for the opportunity to testify before the House Natural
Resources Committee, Subcommittee on Energy and Mineral Resources. My
name is Whit Fosburgh, and I am the president and CEO of the Theodore
Roosevelt Conservation Partnership, a national non-profit conservation
organization (501-3c) that is dedicated to guaranteeing every American
places to hunt or fish. I am also here on behalf of Sportsmen for
Responsible Energy Development, a coalition of more than 500
businesses, organizations and individuals dedicated to conserving
irreplaceable habitats so future generations can hunt and fish on
public lands. The coalition is led by the Theodore Roosevelt
Conservation Partnership, Trout Unlimited and the National Wildlife
Federation.
As a lifetime hunter and angler and a long-time professional in the
conservation field with experience at numerous levels of government and
non-governmental organizations, I am honored to provide comments on the
important issue of energy development and its potential impacts on
fish, wildlife and sportsmen. The quality of life in this nation, one
enjoyed by sportsmen and non-sportsmen alike, depends on a sound
economy fueled in part by responsible energy production that is
balanced with the needs of fish, wildlife, habitat and water.
The TRCP and the sportsmen's community support responsible energy
development. We understand and appreciate the need for exploration and
production of our domestic energy resources but maintain it must be
done responsibly and in a way that conserves and sustains other values
(such as fish and wildlife, clean water, and recreation) with those of
energy production. America needs the raw materials provided on western
public lands and the jobs supported by these activities are important
contributors to the western economy. Likewise, jobs and economic
benefits dependent on fish, wildlife and the West's outstanding scenery
and recreation values have provided steady growth and are also
important--but often overlooked--contributors to the wealth of the
region and the country. Recognizing that both energy production and
fish and wildlife resources are valuable, and that they often can occur
in the same locations, it is important to strike a proper and
sustainable balance. We advocate true multiple use and sustained yield
of public-lands resources as mandated in federal laws, including energy
production, while maintaining a fish and wildlife conservation legacy
for this and future generations.
The reforms to the onshore oil and gas program announced by
Secretary Salazar in 2010 and beginning to be implemented now represent
positive steps in restoring recognition of the fish and wildlife values
on public lands. We agree with the Secretary that more can be done at
the land use planning and leasing stages to address protection of fish,
wildlife, water and recreation and that this will result in less
conflict and better conservation of multiple-use values on public
lands. It will also provide more certainty for industry during the
development of our public land energy resources and for sportsmen who
depend on the availability of public lands and the vital habitat these
lands provide. Finally, we believe that federal land management and
fish and wildlife agencies need adequate budgets to manage fish and
wildlife resources and that drastic cuts are not acceptable. Federal
budgets for fish and wildlife programs have been neglected for decades
and remain inadequate. Further budget cuts would cause irreparable
harm. We support increased funding for implementation of leasing reform
and higher royalty rates. We also support commensurate increases in
fish and wildlife budgets to handle the additional workload and
resource needs in order to properly evaluate and process the increase
in energy interest in public lands. Having given an overview of our
position l will discuss some of these issues in detail.
Public lands are held in trust for the American people and must be
managed to meet the multiple needs of the citizenry--today and in the
future. Access to public lands for private energy development is a
privilege not a right. The American public expects federal land
managers to require that energy development is conducted in a
responsible manner that ensures the long-term conservation of fish and
wildlife. Polls consistently show that public-lands users want the
federal government to do more to protect fish and wildlife during
energy development, not less. These polling results have been constant
regardless of energy prices and the fiscal recession our country has
experienced. In 2007, the TRCP commissioned a poll of public-lands
users: 85 percent wanted more protection for fish and wildlife during
energy development. Polls executed after the recession and high
gasoline prices in 2008 showed similar results. A poll commissioned by
Trout Unlimited and Sportsmen for Responsible Energy Development showed
that 75 percent of respondents wanted more protections for fish and
wildlife on public lands during energy development and 85 percent
opposed limiting or eliminating the ability for the public to be
involved during energy development planning and permitting. A poll done
last year by Public Opinion Strategies and FM3 (a Republican and a
Democratic polling company) showed that 77 percent of respondents
wanted stronger laws and enforcement for fish and wildlife protection
rather than lessening restrictions (this is up from 74 percent in
2009). Clearly the American public and public-lands users and sportsmen
want more to be done for fish and wildlife, even after experiencing
serious pain at the gas pump and through the hardest financial times
since the Great Depression.
During the energy boom that began in the late 1990s, energy
development practices and policies on public lands diverged with the
principles of multiple use and sustained yield and the expressed values
of sportsmen and other public-lands users. In order to meet industry
demands for leases and permits, fish and wildlife often were treated by
federal land managers as an impediment to development rather than a
valuable resource to be managed in tandem with development. The 2005
Energy Policy Act (EPAct) further prioritized energy development over
other resources and concerns through the establishment of pilot offices
in seven BLM offices for the purpose of expediting permits for
drilling, and the establishment of ``statement of adverse impacts to
energy development'' for actions that were perceived to delay or deny
immediate approval. These legislative directives helped foster an ``oil
and gas trump everything else'' attitude within the agency. This
resulted in practices that crippled the agency's ability to manage
other resources like fish and wildlife, including redirecting
appropriated funding intended for fish and wildlife management to
energy planning and permitting and instructing biologists and other
specialists to prioritize energy above their fundamental tasks of
managing fish and wildlife habitats. Consequently, given full
implementation of the provisions of the 2005 EPAct, industry is still
complaining that they cannot get permits fast enough--a proof that more
access and permitting will not solve our energy problems.
The consequences of this ``energy takes all'' approach to public
lands management were predictable. Sportsmen and other public lands
users would not stand idly by and watch as fish and wildlife values
were sacrificed across the West. For sportsmen and others concerned
about the impact of this imbalance on fish and wildlife, the only clear
avenue of relief was to formally protest lease sales. Between fiscal
year 1998 and fiscal year 2009, the percentage of oil and gas leases
protested jumped from one percent to nearly 50 percent. In some states,
nearly all lease sales were protested. This is more proof that the
model for unfettered access to public lands was not acceptable to the
public who owns these lands.
Unlike other activities on public lands, oil and gas leasing
historically included little opportunity for public involvement. Lease
parcels were secretly nominated by industry six to nine months ahead of
a sale. Then just 45 days before sale, the locations of the parcels
were made available for public review. The only opportunity for the
public to express concerns was to file a formal protest to the BLM 15
days before the sale date. The stakes riding on a decision to protest a
lease sale were high. Once public lands were leased, BLM often
acquiesced to industry claims that the agency had little or no
authority to address impacts on fish and wildlife. Yet, the agency
continued to issue leases based upon environmental analyses that were
decades old, grossly underestimated the number of wells that could be
drilled and relied on fish and wildlife mitigation measures that no
longer reflected the existing wildlife science and were ineffective.
Leased lands became lost lands in the sense that the BLM can no longer
properly manage them for current and future multiple uses.
The current administration inherited an onshore oil and gas program
that was broken. Because protests and lawsuits were clogging the system
and preventing the issuance of leases, it did not function for the
agency or for industry. It certainly was not working for sportsmen and
other public-lands users.
Leasing and permitting have slowed in recent years due primarily to
market forces, not regulation, reflected by fewer nominations from
industry. For example, the largest reduction in the number of wells
drilled on public lands occurred between 2008 (5044) and 2009 (3267)
before any restrictions could have been implemented by a new
administration. Since 2009, the number of wells drilled remained at
about 3200. The largest reduction in permits issued occurred between
2007 (7000) and 2008 (5500). Annual leased acreage dropped from over
4.6 million in 2007 to 2.6 million in 2008 to a low of 1.4 million in
2010. Industry itself nominates lands to be leased. Industry
nominations declined from 3000 in 2007 to 1300 in 2010. Figures for
2011, however, show an increase in nominations as well as acreage
leased (2 million) and revenues. Any reductions in leases sold or
permits issued have had little or no impact on industry access to
public lands. More than 38 million acres of leases are held by
industry. Less than half of that land is in production. Industry
currently holds more than 7,000 unused permits to drill for oil and gas
public lands.
After taking office, the administration did take some common sense
steps to repair a dysfunctional approach to developing oil and gas on
our public lands. The administration rightly recognized that these
policies posed a significant threat to fish and wildlife and were
leading to more and more conflict over every lease. In an effort to
reduce the conflict in the leasing process and balance out resource
considerations, the Department of the Interior provided a number of
reforms through Instruction Memoranda (IMs). Reforms from these IMs
require the Bureau of Land Management to develop local ``Master Leasing
Plans'' to facilitate thorough environmental review of potential
drilling impacts BEFORE offering leases in areas with high energy
potential and high risk of environmental conflicts. BLM also revised
its lease sale procedures to create room for concerns about particular
parcels to be raised and resolved before the sale date.
A halt to these reforms now would be a mistake. Master Leasing
Plans (MLPs), for example, could provide a new and powerful opportunity
to avoid and minimize wildlife and other environmental conflicts that
could result from poorly planned oil and gas leasing before a project
is sited and investments are made. This type of ``smart from the
start'' planning results in a win-win because it has the potential both
to conserve fish and wildlife habitat and to resolve conflicts prior to
the siting and development of oil and natural gas wells, thus avoiding
costly delays and litigation. This approach also would follow the time
tested progression of mitigation actions in which avoidance is the best
and least costly way to deal with impacts.
The immediate benefit of these reforms for BLM and industry is
demonstrated by the fact that the percentage of leases for which
protests were filed in 2011 is down to 35 percent while lease sale
revenues increased 20 percent over 2010. Unfortunately, industry is
costing the BLM precious time with irrelevant lawsuits aimed at
stopping the reforms and costing the taxpayers precious funding, which
could be used to properly manage leases and development. The full value
of these reforms for sportsmen and other public-land users will not be
proven, however, until sportsmen see on-the-ground benefits for fish
and wildlife. Maintaining huntable, fishable populations of game
species on public lands are critical to sportsmen.
It is well-documented that oil and gas development can have
devastating and long-lasting impacts on fish and wildlife habitat. A
typical production field includes a complex network of roads, well
pads, pipelines, compressor stations, waste pits, staging areas, and
other structures that will remain in place for 30 to 50 years. This
cumulative industrial framework fragments fish and wildlife habitats.
Habitat fragmentation affects the feeding, courtship, migration, and
other wildlife behaviors, as their patterns of habitat use across the
landscape are disrupted. It also negatively impacts the overall health
of habitats, assisting the spread of invasive species and diseases,
causing sediment to wash into streams, and changing the makeup of local
vegetation. Sportsmen across the West have been eyewitnesses to the
impacts of this development on the game they have hunted and fished for
generations.
The Greater Sage-grouse is an important game bird that inhabits the
sagebrush steppe habitat of the Rocky Mountain West. The species has
disappeared from nearly half of its historic range due to habitat
fragmentation and other disturbances. The Department of the Interior
has determined the species is warranted, but precluded for for
protection under the Endangered Species Act (this means there is enough
evidence to protect the bird right now, but because of other reasons it
is deferring any action). Oil and gas development is cited by the U.S.
Fish and Wildlife Service as a primary threat to sage-grouse
populations in the Rocky Mountain West. However, sage-grouse is just
one example of the many species dependent on sagebrush steppe habitat
that are threatened by oil and gas development.
Another example of the need for better planning and management of
oil and gas development is the impact on vital mule deer habitats. Mule
deer are a western deer species related to white-tailed deer but with
very different requirements. They respond to human-caused disturbance
much differently. Where white-tailed deer are generalists and highly
adaptable, mule deer mostly inhabit larger western landscapes and
require different seasonal habitats and annual migrations from summer
to winter range. Mule deer populations have been declining across much
of the West. Mule deer experts agree that one of the limiting factors
for mule deer is available winter habitat. These winter habitats often
are deemed ``crucial'' for survival by state game and fish agencies and
have been afforded protection from disturbance for more than 40 years
in many states.
A recent evaluation and report of how mule deer have been addressed
in federal land use planning and major energy projects of the greater
Green River Basin of southwestern Wyoming, northwestern Colorado and
northeastern Utah showed that of the 10.2 million acres of mule deer
crucial winter range on BLM and National Forest lands, 2.4 million
acres already have been leased for development. More than 15,000 wells
have been drilled in this winter habitat. However, current mitigation
plans for energy development in crucial winter range have not been
successful. At the Pinedale Anticline in western Wyoming, the wintering
population of the segment of the deer herd that winters within the
project area has dropped by over 60 percent from levels that were
documented before development began (approximately 6,000 deer used to
winter on the mesa area of the project before development, now
approximately 2,000 deer do so). Many state wildlife officials fear
that a full recovery may not be possible without substantial changes in
how energy development and other human disturbance is permitted and
conducted in mule deer habitats.
The problems with mule deer and sage grouse are important to this
testimony because they offer examples of how BLM policy for energy
development has affected fish and wildlife resources and therefore
sportsmen. Significant new information and science are available
regarding these two species to better balance wildlife with energy
development during project planning, but unfortunately this science has
not been embraced by the BLM and often is ignored or discounted because
energy development is prioritized.
Until now I have discussed problems with previous policies and
budgets, but now I want to focus on some of the benefits of responsible
fish and wildlife management of our public lands. The American system
of public lands is unique, found nowhere else in the world. A
fundamental American value, it was left to us by our predecessors and
held in trust for future generations. FY 2010 saw more than 58 million
visitors to BLM lands with a resulting benefit of $7.4 billion dollars
to the economy. Most of these visits were to enjoy scenery, hunt, fish,
camp, watch wildlife or have other great outdoor experiences. Americans
and people from all over the world come year after year to experience
our public lands, and they bring the economic benefits with them. This
sustainable economic engine is dependent on healthy environments, clean
air, clean water and abundant fish and wildlife. In 2010 in Wyoming,
Colorado and Utah, more than 2.2 million hunters and anglers bought
licenses, providing license revenues of more than $1.2 billion dollars
back to those states. This figure does not include the federal match
generated through the Pittman-Robertson and Dingell-Johnson acts or
revenue from expenditures on food, hotels, equipment, or other
purchases made by these hunters and anglers. Nationwide it is estimated
that 1.2 million jobs are provided annually by the outdoor industry,
many hunting and fishing related.
A new report prepared for Sportsmen for Responsible Energy
Development by Southwick Associates investigated the economic benefits
of public lands adjacent to communities in the Rocky Mountain West. The
report looked at the relationship between land use and economic growth
in seven states in the Rocky Mountain West--Idaho, Montana, Wyoming,
Utah, Colorado, New Mexico and Arizona. The study found that public
lands in the Rocky Mountain West provide energy that has helped drive
the economy and cast the region as one dominated by extractive
industries. However, commodity-based employment has been cyclical and
suffered more severe downturns than other industries. Commodity-based
jobs have become a smaller part of the overall economy while the
service industry, which includes high-paying, skilled positions, has
increased and become the biggest segment of the market. The region's
public lands managed for conservation and recreation are a magnet for
tourists, people looking for a certain lifestyle, retirees and
businesses hoping to draw workers. These jobs and economic benefits are
sustainable, provide growth in hard times, and allow people to
reconnect with nature. Federal policies and budgets significantly
affect our ability to continue these benefits.
Some places in this country are valuable or special and should not
be developed. These ``special places'' have values that could not be
replaced or mitigated if development took place. Places like the Rocky
Mountain Front in Montana, Valle Vidal in New Mexico and Wyoming Range
in Wyoming provide unique experiences for hunters and anglers and vital
habitats for fish and wildlife. In the past decade, these areas have
been threatened through lease nominations and sales and other
development proposals. Previous policy prevented the BLM from
identifying all but congressionally designated lands or previous
administrative withdrawn areas during land use planning development.
Local campaigns or legislation have been required to deal with threats
to these areas, many of which have very little energy development
potential or would be very difficult to develop because of their
landscapes. We promote the identification and protection of these
places to balance fish and wildlife values with areas that have been
and will be developed for energy development. Not all lands are
suitable for development; nor is development compatible with other uses
in all areas.
We also promote responsible development when energy development
takes place. Acknowledging that some places will be developed more than
others and some may become industrial zones, most lands can be
developed while concerns about fish, wildlife and recreation are
addressed. As stated previously, sportsmen want to see energy
development balanced with fish and wildlife resources. The TRCP and our
conservation-sportsmen partner organizations have developed a set of
recommendations, revised in 2011, that can help achieve balance during
energy development. The ``FACTS for Fish and Wildlife'' comprise 25
specific recommendations in five targeted areas--Funding,
Accountability, Coordination, Transparency and Science. The FACTS
recommendations may be found at http://www.trcp.org/assets/pdf/
FACTSfor_web. If the FACTS are employed, conflicts with sportsmen-
conservation groups can be reduced, and we can expand development of
our domestic energy resources. In addition, the TRCP joined SFRED is
drafting a ``Sportsmen's Bill of Rights'' regarding energy development
and a set of joint recommendations that compliment the TRCP's FACTS.
Finally, I deliver this testimony to ensure a bright future for
fish and wildlife, voice concerns about past policies and budget
allocations, and express interest in working with Congress to address
these important issues as we determine future energy policy. Sportsmen
want some certainty that Western fish and wildlife resources can be
sustained at levels that provide quality hunting and fishing
opportunities--ones of which we can be proud. We want a system of
public lands that provides energy AND fish and wildlife, not one that
provides energy OR fish and wildlife. We believe recent policy changes
by the Obama administration take a positive step toward that goal, but
we still have concerns about successful implementation and benefits on
the ground. We also are concerned that future cuts to fish and wildlife
budgets in our federal natural resources agencies could have drastic
consequences for hunting and fishing, along with other important uses
of our public lands.
In closing, the American public supports and promotes the use of
our public lands for many purposes, including energy development but
not at the expense of the fish, wildlife, and recreation these lands
provide. The economic and employment gains from outdoor recreation and
fish and wildlife management cannot be discounted because they are
significant to local communities, state job outlook, and national
interest. The proposed BLM budget does not limit nor hinder energy
development but provides a means for BLM to balance multiple-uses on
the public lands and provide opportunities for responsible energy
development. Our country's energy production is thriving and public
lands are part of that prosperity. Cutting or eliminating funding for
fish and wildlife management, not charging industry proper fees nor
collecting market based royalty rates, and removing protections for
clean air, clean water, and healthy environment will not fix our energy
problems. It will only make them worse.
______

Mr. Lamborn. All right. Thank you. I now recognize myself
for five minutes. Thank you all for being here.
Mr. McKee, in your testimony, you say that approximately
600,000 acres in Uintah County have been shelved for oil and
gas leasing.
Can you tell the Committee the potential that this land
holds for American energy production and jobs in your
community?
Mr. McKee. Yes, thank you, Mr. Chairman. As I noted
earlier, there was 77 leases that were canceled, six of those
were reinstated. There were 6,000 acres reinstated. Just the
royalty--the winning award was $48.6 million for those 6,000
acres. This is a vast resource of oil shale and natural gas and
all the different commodities that are there.
To really be able to know exactly how much that is worth,
it is hard to say, and there is more than just the 600,000
acres. That was just under Master Leasing, take a plan
amendment with the BLM's new plan now to be able to get to
those resources.
There are hundreds of thousands of other acres that are
being not utilized just in my county, let alone the entire
State of Utah and across the West.
Mr. Lamborn. Jobs, any idea on jobs?
Mr. McKee. Well, I know this. I have visited with
companies. There are billions of dollars in investment that
these companies would like to put into our area, but they have
to have something that is predictable, something that is
stable.
What we are seeing is this investment going into other
areas. When the 77 leases were canceled, most of these jobs
were oil and gas jobs. We lost about 3,000 jobs in our county.
It is a small county, about 32,000 people. We lost about 3,000
jobs right at that time.
Mr. Lamborn. Just with the stroke of a pen. Thank you.
Mr. Milito, in your experience in the oil and gas industry,
do you support the Department of the Interior's proposal to
increase royalty rates for production on Federal lands and why
or why not?
Mr. Milito. No. The reason why is simple economics of
running an oil and gas business, particularly onshore where you
have really hundreds if not thousands of operators.
By making those increases, you are essentially taking a lot
of production off the table. You will have less people coming
to the lease sales and purchasing the leases, and then you have
less acreage leased and when we have less acreage leased, you
get less production.
You are disincentivizing the investment in these types of
resources, and you ultimately would be losing production and
jobs to go along with it.
Mr. Lamborn. Maybe you heard my comments earlier, but if
there is the ability to pass on to the consumers, like any
other business, then that leads to higher prices. If that
ability does not exist, then it discourages investment.
In any case, it will not lower prices at the pump, would
it?
Mr. Milito. Well, we do not like to speculate on what will
happen ultimately with the prices at the pump given our role as
a trade association, but any time you are increasing costs on
the industry, you are discouraging the industry from investing
in U.S. projects, and you are discouraging the industry from
investing in U.S. job creation.
Given that it is a global market, we end up often times
losing that investment to other areas of the world, and instead
of securing our own energy future with our own resources, we
end up losing it to other parts of the world, and we have
significant ability to increase our production over the course
of the next five to ten years, and we really have to look at it
in the long term.
I do not want to speculate on prices, but at the same time,
we have to understand Economics 101 shows that by increasing
supplies, you do assert downward pressure on prices.
Mr. Lamborn. Whatever happens on prices, we know there is
absolutely a jobs' impact.
Mr. Milito. Absolutely. Every study that we have seen shows
increasing access, increasing the permitting, streamlining the
permitting, and eliminating regulatory uncertainty, any one of
those will provide additional incentive to invest and increase
job creation.
Mr. Lamborn. OK. Thank you. Finally, Ms. Skaer, the
Administration recently joined with Japan and the European
Union to file a complaint with the WTO over China's policy of
restricting export of its rare earth minerals.
Do you believe this is the best way for this Administration
to ensure an adequate supply of critical and strategic minerals
for our manufacturing base and our national security?
Ms. Skaer. We do not. Instead of relying on China and other
countries to provide the rare earth's and the critical and
strategic minerals that our nation needs that we require as a
society, we believe it would be better to become self reliant,
to produce those minerals here.
We are today import reliant, more than 50 percent import
reliant on 43 minerals, and you compare that to where we are
with crude oil, that to me is a pretty disturbing statistic.
We have the third richest mineral endowment in the world
within the borders of the United States, and we could very
easily meet our needs, but we cannot do it with the regulatory
burdens that we have, with the long permitting times, and with
the uncertainty that we have in this country right now.
Mr. Lamborn. Thank you very much. Mr. Markey?
Mr. Markey. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, very much.
Mr. Milito, I hope you heard the earlier conversation I had
with Mr. Abbey about the fines for violations on public lands,
where there were more than 2,000 violations over a 13-year
period by oil and gas companies on public lands for things as
egregious as drilling without a blowout preventer or drilling
without an approved BLM permit.
Yet, the average fine for these violations was only $135.
We know how much money the oil industry made last year, $137
billion.
It is like paying a parking ticket for parking in the
middle of the day on Connecticut Avenue that was $1. You pay
the $1 every day because it costs you $30 to park in a garage.
It is cheaper to pay the fine.
It does not really provide a disincentive.
Do you agree that the current penalties are too low and
they have not been updated in 30 years, and they should be
increased for the bad actors?
Obviously, the American petroleum industry has many, many
good companies. There are bad actors in every industry. You
really do not have to discourage good companies from doing bad
things. You have to discourage bad actors from doing bad
things.
Do you think the fines should be increased in order to
discourage that kind of activity?
Mr. Milito. I think that is a fair point, especially
considering Director Abbey's statement that fewer than ten
percent of companies have any infractions at all, and most are
corrected immediately.
I think what we support in terms of the fine system is
really looking at reforming the whole process, including making
sure that we have strong enforcement in place and making sure
that the mechanism is there to deter bad actors.
I would not look at it in a vacuum because you may have a
$5,000 fine there, but I think the BLM has the discretion to
issue $5,000 to $10,000 per day in civil penalties.
I think you have to look at what is the overall framework
that BLM is operating under to make sure it is effective both
in regulating and enforcing.
Mr. Markey. You do agree that a $5,000 fine for not having
a blowout preventer is----
Mr. Milito. That sounds low. I do not know the facts around
that. If it is an egregious violation and the total fine is
$5,000, that could be a very bad example.
Mr. Markey. I appreciate it. Thank you.
Mr. Fosburgh, oil companies currently hold 38 million acres
of public land, onshore, but are not producing on 68 percent of
that land, 25 million acres. That is the size of Indiana.
In other words, the public lands of the American people,
the size of Indiana, are out there now and leased for oil and
gas drilling to the private sector, but they are not drilling
on 25 million of those acres.
The oil and gas industry is saying give us more, and they
already have an area the size of Indiana and they are not
drilling for oil and gas, even though they bid for the leases
to drill for oil and gas on public lands.
What is going on there, Mr. Fosburgh? Why do they keep
asking for more when they have not even eaten what they have
already purchased in terms of the oil and gas leases?
What in your mind is going on here? Why do they not do the
work where they already have it rather than keep asking for
more before they finish the job on the 25 million acres?
Mr. Fosburgh. I can only speculate. I do not own an oil
company or gas company. Certainly, in the old days, during the
Bush Administration, it seems they pretty much got anything
they wanted.
I think they got used to asking for a lot, even if they
were not going to use it, because they could lock it up from a
competitive or speculatory basis, and have it down the road,
plus it prevents other people from getting in there and getting
it, too.
All I can say is there are a lot of places that were leased
that were pretty critical to fish and wildlife areas that have
suffered from the development that has occurred, and we just
want to see a process moving forward.
Mr. Markey. I appreciate that. Before they expand out into
other areas, they have 7,000 approved permits to drill, and
they are not drilling. They are saying give us another 7,000.
That does not really make any economic sense, if you are not
already doing the job where you already have the right to do
so.
A lot of us, I am included, think there should be kind of a
time limit on how long you get a lease. You should not be able
to lock it up indefinitely when other companies might want to
go in and drill.
I just do not like the idea where it has been decided it is
OK to keep that oil and natural gas out of the hands of the
American people. I just do not think that is right. Then to
come in and ask for more to lock up that as well. What is the
point of that.
I just think credibility of the people who are asking for
it is kind of questionable, given the fact that two-thirds of
the leases they have already they are not drilling.
That is kind of my point. I thank all of you for testifying
here today. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Lamborn. Thank you. We will finish up with
Representative Thompson.
Mr. Thompson. Thank you, Chairman. Thanks to the panelists
for attending this hearing today.
Ms. Skaer, in your testimony, you suggested the BLM would
do better to use their requested budgetary increase for their
Land Management Plan revisions to accommodate sage grouse
should be used on the ground and to better implement Manual
6840, the Special Status Species Management.
Can you provide more detail regarding Manual 6840 and how
would that be a better use of resources?
Ms. Skaer. Manual 6840 is entitled ``Special Status Species
Management.'' When you go through that manual, BLM has
regulatory mechanisms and they have policies in place to deal
with threatened species, endangered species, and candidates
like the sage grouse which are warranted but precluded.
Yet, when the National Technical Team Report was issued,
BLM issued two instruction memoranda to implement that report
while they are taking scoping comments, not one single mention
is made of this manual that they already have.
The Fish and Wildlife Service did not tell BLM to go adopt
new regulatory mechanisms. They said you need to better
implement the regulatory mechanisms that you have.
Our view is rather than spending two-thirds of their budget
request on the NEPA process, they would be much better off
spending two-thirds of that on the ground implementing the
tools they already have rather than creating new ones.
If you look at the Western Governors' recent report, of the
voluntary and state efforts to conserve sage grouse, they are
working. They are having phenomenal success.
Instead, we really believe that this is an effort to raise
sage grouse conservation above multiple use, much like the
wildlands project, and being from the Northwest and having seen
the impact of the spotted owl on timber communities when the
underlying science was not valid to support the Northwest
Forest Plan, the sage grouse could be the spotted owl on
steroids for the Interior West.
Mr. Thompson. Thank you. Commissioner McKee, frankly, as an
elected official in your county, it must be frightening that
the BLM's preferred alternative is to reduce 75 percent of the
land available for oil shale leasing.
I think when it comes to energy, there are different types
of pains. Obviously, the American citizens are experiencing a
pain at the pump now when demand exceeds supply.
In your community, what happens to your county's economy,
local municipalities, and school districts, if greater burdens
and barriers to energy development are continued by this
Administration?
Mr. McKee. Well, it affects us immensely. After the 77
leases were canceled, we had a lot of our community that had to
leave. Fifty percent of our jobs, 60 percent of our economy is
tied to the extractive industry. It does affect us immensely,
these different policies.
We just had a resource management plan that was supposed to
be a 15- to 20-year planning guide to direct what happens on
the public lands.
Essentially, this Administration threw it out and are kind
of just doing really their own thing with this.
It is unfortunate that we have yo-yo politics rather than
consistent management, with good management goals.
Mr. Thompson. Have you noticed any trends in your county? I
do not know how much of the county is public lands. Have you
observed any energy production trends on Government owned
versus privately owned lands?
I know your chart made some reference to the difference
between Government owned and privately owned.
Mr. McKee. What we are seeing out in our area right now,
because it is so difficult and it is so timely on the public
lands, and I noted that very few leases have been issued, only
15 percent of our county is privately held. There is a lot of
push for those privately held properties.
It does make it difficult. It makes it extremely difficult.
It just seems with the amount of energy we have in that area,
it is a crying shame that we are not utilizing that potential.
Mr. Thompson. Mr. Milito, you suggested that the President
routinely likes to take credit for the fact that the overall
domestic energy production in the U.S. is up.
While he is correct that production has increased in recent
years, it kind of speaks to the line of questioning and
response from Commissioner McKee.
I would agree with you that he has nothing to do with it.
Production is up because of actions taken during previous
Congress' and Administrations and the fact that gas production
on private lands, which is outside the Federal permitting and
leasing process, has increased significantly.
Starting with Mr. Milito but I will open it up to all
panelists, would you agree with this?
Mr. Milito. Yes, I certainly would agree with that. In
fact, we think the Administration's decisions and policies have
been a drag on production, particularly if you look at
offshore.
We were projected to be at about 1.7 million barrels a day
in 2011, and we are going to be at 1.3 million barrels a day.
That is a 400,00 barrel a day impact in the negative direction.
That is the type of supply increase we need to put downward
pressure on gasoline prices.
Things are good on private and state lands, but going down
and the trend is continuing to go down on the Federal lands
they control.
Mr. Lamborn. We are going to have to wrap up with that.
Thank you all for being here. Thank you for your testimony.
I would ask that if any Members of the Committee have
additional questions for the record, that when they submit
those to you, you respond to those in writing.
If there is no further business, without objection, the
Committee stands adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 12:26 p.m., the Subcommittee was adjourned.]


