- AT RISK: AMERICAN JOBS, AGRICULTURE, HEALTH AND SPECIES—THE COSTS OF FEDERAL REGULATORY DYSFUNCTION

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

AT RISK: AMERICAN JOBS,
AGRICULTURE, HEALTH AND
SPECIES--THE COSTS OF FEDERAL
REGULATORY DYSFUNCTION

=======================================================================

JOINT OVERSIGHT HEARING

before the

COMMITTEE ON NATURAL RESOURCES
U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

joint with the

COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE
U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

Tuesday, May 3, 2011

__________

Committee on Natural Resources Serial No. 112-26

Committee on Agriculture Serial No. 112-13

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Natural Resources

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.fdsys.gov
or
Committee address: http://resourcescommittee.house.gov

----------
U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE

66-204 PDF                       WASHINGTON : 2011

For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800;
DC area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104 Mail: Stop IDCC,
Washington, DC 20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON NATURAL RESOURCES

DOC HASTINGS, WA, Chairman
EDWARD J. MARKEY, MA, Ranking Democrat Member

Don Young, AK                        Dale E. Kildee, MI
John J. Duncan, Jr., TN              Peter A. DeFazio, OR
Louie Gohmert, TX                    Eni F.H. Faleomavaega, AS
Rob Bishop, UT                       Frank Pallone, Jr., NJ
Doug Lamborn, CO                     Grace F. Napolitano, CA
Robert J. Wittman, VA                Rush D. Holt, NJ
Paul C. Broun, GA                    Raul M. Grijalva, AZ
John Fleming, LA                     Madeleine Z. Bordallo, GU
Mike Coffman, CO                     Jim Costa, CA
Tom McClintock, CA                   Dan Boren, OK
Glenn Thompson, PA                   Gregorio Kilili Camacho Sablan,
Jeff Denham, CA                          CNMI
Dan Benishek, MI                     Martin Heinrich, NM
David Rivera, FL                     Ben Ray Lujan, NM
Jeff Duncan, SC                      John P. Sarbanes, MD
Scott R. Tipton, CO                  Betty Sutton, OH
Paul A. Gosar, AZ                    Niki Tsongas, MA
Raul R. Labrador, ID                 Pedro R. Pierluisi, PR
Kristi L. Noem, SD                   John Garamendi, CA
Steve Southerland II, FL             Colleen W. Hanabusa, HI
Bill Flores, TX                      Vacancy
Andy Harris, MD
Jeffrey M. Landry, LA
Charles J. ``Chuck'' Fleischmann,
TN
Jon Runyan, NJ
Bill Johnson, OH

Todd Young, Chief of Staff
Lisa Pittman, Chief Counsel
Jeffrey Duncan, Democrat Staff Director
David Watkins, Democrat Chief Counsel
------

COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE

FRANK D. LUCAS, Oklahoma, Chairman
BOB GOODLATTE, Virginia,             COLLIN C. PETERSON, Minnesota,
Vice Chairman                        Ranking Minority Member
TIMOTHY V. JOHNSON, Illinois         TIM HOLDEN, Pennsylvania
STEVE KING, Iowa                     MIKE McINTYRE, North Carolina
RANDY NEUGEBAUER, Texas              LEONARD L. BOSWELL, Iowa
K. MICHAEL CONAWAY, Texas            JOE BACA, California
JEFF FORTENBERRY, Nebraska           DENNIS A. CARDOZA, California
JEAN SCHMIDT, Ohio                   DAVID SCOTT, Georgia
GLENN THOMPSON, Pennsylvania         HENRY CUELLAR, Texas
THOMAS J. ROONEY, Florida            JIM COSTA, California
MARLIN A. STUTZMAN, Indiana          TIMOTHY J. WALZ, Minnesota
BOB GIBBS, Ohio                      KURT SCHRADER, Oregon
AUSTIN SCOTT, Georgia                LARRY KISSELL, North Carolina
STEPHEN LEE FINCHER, Tennessee       WILLIAM L. OWENS, New York
SCOTT R. TIPTON, Colorado            CHELLIE PINGREE, Maine
STEVE SOUTHERLAND II, Florida        JOE COURTNEY, Connecticut
ERIC A. ``RICK'' CRAWFORD, Arkansas  PETER WELCH, Vermont
MARTHA ROBY, Alabama                 MARCIA L. FUDGE, Ohio
TIM HUELSKAMP, Kansas                GREGORIO KILILI CAMACHO SABLAN,
SCOTT DesJARLAIS, Tennessee              Northern Mariana Islands
RENEE L. ELLMERS, North Carolina     TERRI A. SEWELL, Alabama
CHRISTOPHER P. GIBSON, New York      JAMES P. McGOVERN, Massachusetts
RANDY HULTGREN, Illinois
VICKY HARTZLER, Missouri
ROBERT T. SCHILLING, Illinois
REID J. RIBBLE, Wisconsin
------

Professional Staff

Nicole Scott, Staff Director
Kevin J. Kramp, Chief Counsel
Tamara Hinton, Communications Director
Robert L. Larew, Minority Staff Director

CONTENTS

----------
Page

Hearing held on Tuesday, May 3, 2011.............................     1

Statement of Members:
Hastings, Hon. Doc, a Representative in Congress from the
State of Washington........................................     6
Prepared statement of....................................     7
Lucas, Hon. Frank D., a Representative in Congress from the
State of Oklahoma..........................................     1
Prepared statement of....................................     3
Markey, Hon. Edward J., a Representative in Congress from the
State of Massachusetts.....................................     8
Prepared statement of....................................     9
Peterson, Hon. Collin C., a Representative in Congress from
the State of Minnesota.....................................     4
Prepared statement of....................................     5
Rivera, Hon. David, a U.S. Representative in Congress from
the State of Florida, Statement submitted for the record...   163

Statement of Witnesses:
Beehler, Angela, District Manager, Benton County Mosquito
Control District #1, West Richland, Washington.............    97
Prepared statement of....................................    98
Response to questions submitted for the record...........   102
Bradbury, Dr. Steven, Director, Office of Pesticide Programs,
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency.......................    52
Prepared statement of....................................    53
Response to questions submitted for the record...........    23
Bushue, Barry, President, Oregon Farm Bureau, and Vice
President, American Farm Bureau Federation.................   109
Prepared statement of....................................   111
Response to questions submitted for the record...........   114
Edwards, Debra, Ph.D., Senior Managing Scientist, Exponent
Engineer and Scientific Consulting.........................   117
Prepared statement of....................................   118
Response to questions submitted for the record...........   120
Glauber, Dr. Joseph, Chief Economist, U.S. Department of
Agriculture................................................    11
Prepared statement of....................................    12
Response to questions submitted for the record...........    23
Gould, Dr. Rowan, Acting Director, Fish and Wildlife Service,
U.S. Department of the Interior............................    60
Prepared statement of....................................    61
Response to questions submitted for the record...........    23
Grader, W.F. ``Zeke,'' Jr., Executive Director, Pacific Coast
Federation of Fishermen's Associations.....................   134
Prepared statement of....................................   135
Mathison, West, President, Stemilt Growers, LLC, and Board
President, Washington State Horticultural Association......   124
Prepared statement of....................................   125
Response to questions submitted for the record...........   129
Newhouse, Dan, Director, Washington State Department of
Agriculture................................................   129
Prepared statement of....................................   131
Schwaab, Eric, Assistant Administrator, National Marine
Fisheries Service, National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration, U.S. Department of Commerce................    63
Prepared statement of....................................    65
Response to questions submitted for the record...........    23
?

Additional materials supplied:
Flores, Hon. Bill, a Representative in Congress from the
State of Texas, Letter to Secretary of the Interior Ken
Salazar submitted for the record...........................   153
List of documents retained in the Committee's official files.   153
Map entitled ``Number of Species in CBD v. EPA (2011) and
Percent Cultivated Crops per County''......................   154
Map entitled ``Number of Species in CBD v. EPA (2011) and
Percent Forest Land per County''...........................   154
Napolitano, Hon. Grace F., a Representative in Congress from
the State of California, Charts on ``California Waters
Impaired by Pesticides'' submitted for the record..........   155
Sablan, Hon. Gregorio Kilili Camacho, a Delegate in Congress
from the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands.
Letter to Hon. Doc Hastings, Hon. Edward J. Markey, et al.,
submitted for the record...................................   164

(VI)

JOINT OVERSIGHT HEARING ENTITLED ``AT RISK: AMERICAN JOBS, AGRICULTURE,
HEALTH AND SPECIES--THE COSTS OF FEDERAL REGULATORY DYSFUNCTION.''

----------

Tuesday, May 3, 2011

U.S. House of Representatives

Committee on Natural Resources, joint with the

Committee on Agriculture

Washington, D.C.

----------

The Committees met, pursuant to call, at 10:03 a.m. in Room
1324, Longworth House Office Building, Hon. Doc Hastings and
Hon. Frank D. Lucas, presiding.
Present from the Committee on Natural Resources:
Representatives Hastings, Bishop, Lamborn, Fleming, McClintock,
Thompson, Rivera, Tipton, Labrador, Noem, Southerland, Flores,
Harris, Fleischmann, Markey, Kildee, DeFazio, Napolitano, Holt,
Grijalva, Bordallo, Costa, Sablan, Garamendi, and Hanabusa.
Present from the Committee on Agriculture: Representatives
Lucas, Johnson, Neugebauer, Conaway, Schmidt, Thompson, Gibbs,
Austin Scott of Georgia, Crawford, Huelskamp, DesJarlais,
Ellmers, Gibson, Hultgren, Hartzler, Schilling, Peterson,
McIntyre, Cardoza, David Scott of Georgia, Schrader, Fudge, and
McGovern.
The Chairman. The Committee will come to order. The
Committee is holding this oversight hearing today jointly with
the Committee on Agriculture to hear testimony on ``At Risk:
American Jobs, Agriculture, Health and Species--The Cost of
Federal Regulatory Dysfunction.''
Under Committee Rule 4(f), any oral opening statements are
limited to the Chairman and Ranking Member of the respective
committees. This will obviously allow us to hear more from our
witnesses.
However, any Member that wants to have his speech in the
record can do so, and I ask unanimous consent that that be the
case. With no objection, so ordered.
At this time, I would now like to recognize and welcome to
the House Natural Resources Committee hearing room my colleague
from Oklahoma, the distinguished Chairman of the Agriculture
Committee for his opening statement and remarks. And with that,
I recognize the gentleman from Oklahoma.

STATEMENT OF HON. FRANK D. LUCAS, A REPRESENTATIVE IN CONGRESS
FROM THE STATE OF OKLAHOMA

Mr. Lucas. Thank you Chairman Hastings and Ranking Member
Markey for working with Ranking Member Peterson and me on this
important topic.
Though joint hearings represent a logistical challenge, the
interactions and contradictions between the laws in the
programs under our various jurisdictions suggest that effective
oversight will require more cooperation between committees in
the future.
Recently, the Agriculture Committee engaged in a joint
oversight process with the Committee on Transportation and
Infrastructure that led to the successful passage of bipartisan
legislation in the House which would eliminate a costly,
burdensome, and duplicative regulatory process for pesticides.
While we wait for movement of the bill in the Senate, we
now turn our attention to another costly and burdensome
regulatory process that is both duplicative and dysfunctional.
In the process of reviewing individual pesticides under the
Federal Insecticide, Fungicide, and Rodenticide Act, the EPA
assesses more than 120 scientific studies evaluating the
product safety and effectiveness.
Pesticides distributed in the United States must be
evaluated and registered by the EPA based on scientific data
showing they will not cause unreasonable risks to human health,
workers, or the environment when used as directed on the EPA-
approved product label.
As defined in the statute, the term ``unreasonable adverse
effects on the environment'' includes any unreasonable risk to
man or the environment, taking into account economic, social,
and environmental costs and benefits of the use of any
pesticide.
Once a pesticide is registered, the Federal review process
does not end. In fact, the law mandates a process of
registration review. The registration review program makes sure
that as the ability to assess risks evolves and policies and
practices change, all registered pesticides continue to meet
the statutory standard of no unreasonable adverse effects.
Despite having a rigorous science-based process in place to
register and periodically review pesticides, provisions of the
Endangered Species Act, ESA, require that the EPA consult with
the Fish and Wildlife Service or the National Marine Fisheries
Service, which I will refer to as ``Services,'' whenever there
is any possibility, however remote, that the use of the
pesticide could adversely affect, threaten or endanger species.
Although no credible evidence has been presented documenting a
causal link between the registration of a pesticide and the
decline of any listed species populations or rates of recovery,
this scientific evidence has done nothing to impede the
environmental extremists.
Groups like the Center for Biological Diversity have been
clogging our courtrooms with frivolous lawsuits that have cost
taxpayers tens of millions of dollars in litigation costs and
have further congested an already dysfunctional Federal
bureaucracy. Consultation is a process meant to facilitate
understanding among and between agencies.
Unfortunately, the consultation process under the ESA is
heavily biased toward the European model of a precautionary
principle. Should any expert agency ignore the opinion of one
of the Services, they risk civil and criminal penalties in the
event of the loss of a single plant or animal from a listed
species.
Counter to the intent of consultation, the Services have
administered a process where they ignore scientific evidence
presented by expert agencies. They refuse to consider or even
accept public comment. And, in some cases, they simply ignore
the request by EPA for a consultation. Recently, the Services
have acknowledged that the scientific models they have used to
develop their biological opinions for pesticides are fatally
flawed. Thankfully, a request has been made by USDA, EPA,
Interior, and Commerce to have the National Academy of Sciences
conduct a review of the models used by the Services.
I am hopeful and would expect confirmation from each of the
Federal agencies here today that the scope of the work that is
contracted will be a comprehensive review, not only of the
scientific models used by the Services, but also the models
used to analyze the economic impact of any suggested
alternatives.
Of further concern, the fact that while waiting for the
completion of the scientific peer review, EPA is still being
asked to implement the recently finalized biological opinions,
which the agency has repeatedly and publically challenged.
Given the admission of the fundamental flaws in the Services'
models, I would suggest that the Services consider seeking
reinitiation of consultation when scientific models have been
developed, validated, and agreed upon.
One final note, prior to this hearing Chairman Hastings and
I received a letter from the four departments suggesting that
due to concerns over pending litigation, they would be unable
to answer many of the questions the Committee would be raising.
I would like to make it clear that while I recognize
certain questions regarding pending litigation are sensitive,
congressional oversight is equally as important and I hope the
panelists will be as responsive as possible. I will tell you
now that just because a question may be difficult or may cause
some degree of embarrassment for the bureaucracy does not mean
that the question should be off limits to congressional
oversight.
I look forward to a cooperative dialogue with all of our
witnesses today and am now happy to yield to my Ranking Member,
the gentleman from Minnesota, Mr. Peterson, for his opening
statement.
[The prepared statement of Chairman Lucas follows:]

Statement of The Honorable Frank D. Lucas, Chairman,
Committee on Agriculture

Thank you Chairman Hastings and Ranking Member Markey for working
with Ranking Member Peterson and me on this important topic.
Though joint hearings represent a logistical challenge, the
interactions and contradictions between the laws and programs under our
various jurisdictions suggest that effective oversight will require
more cooperation between committees in the future.
Recently, the Agriculture Committee engaged in a joint oversight
process with the Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure that
led to the successful passage of bipartisan legislation in the House
which would eliminate a costly, burdensome and duplicative regulatory
process for pesticides. While we wait for movement of the bill in the
Senate, we now turn our attention to another costly and burdensome
regulatory process that is both duplicative and dysfunctional.
In the process of reviewing individual pesticides under the Federal
Insecticide, Fungicide, and Rodenticide Act (FIFRA), the EPA assesses
more than 120 scientific studies evaluating the products' safety and
effectiveness. Pesticides distributed and sold in the United States
must be evaluated and registered by the EPA based on scientific data
showing that they will not cause unreasonable risks to human health,
workers, or the environment when used as directed on the EPA approved
product label.
As defined in the statute, the term ``unreasonable adverse effects
on the environment'' includes any unreasonable risk to man or the
environment, taking into account the economic, social, and
environmental costs and benefits of the use of any pesticide.
Once a pesticide is registered, the federal review process does not
end. In fact, the law mandates a process of registration review. The
registration review program makes sure that, as the ability to assess
risk evolves and as policies and practices change, all registered
pesticides continue to meet the statutory standard of no unreasonable
adverse effects.
Despite having a rigorous, science-based process in place to
register and periodically review pesticides, provisions of the
Endangered Species Act (ESA) require that the EPA ``consult'' with the
Fish and Wildlife Service or the National Marine Fisheries Service
(collectively, the Services), whenever there is any possibility,
however remote, that the use of the pesticide could adversely affect a
threatened or endangered species.
Though no credible evidence has been presented documenting a causal
link between the registration of a pesticide and the decline of any
listed species populations or rates of recovery, this lack of
scientific evidence has done nothing to impede environmental
extremists. Groups like the Center for Biological Diversity have been
clogging our court rooms with frivolous lawsuits that have cost
taxpayers tens of millions of dollars in litigation costs and have
further congested an already dysfunctional federal bureaucracy.
Consultation is a process meant to facilitate understanding among
and between agencies. Unfortunately, the consultation process under the
ESA is heavily biased towards the European model of a Precautionary
Principal. Should any expert agency ignore the opinion of one of the
Services, they risk civil and criminal penalties in the event of the
loss of a single plant or animal from a listed species.
Counter to the intent of consultation, the Services have
administered a process where they ignore scientific evidence presented
by the expert agencies. They refuse to consider or even accept public
comment, and in some cases they have simply ignored requests by EPA for
a consultation.
Recently, the Services have acknowledged that the scientific models
they have used in developing their biological opinions for pesticides
are fatally flawed. Thankfully, a request has been made by USDA, EPA,
Interior and Commerce to have the National Academy of Sciences conduct
a review of the models used by the Services. I am hopeful--and would
expect confirmation from each of the Federal agencies here today--that
the scope of the work that is contracted will be a comprehensive review
of not only the scientific models used by the Services, but also of the
models used to analyze the economic impacts of any suggested
alternatives.
Of further concern is the fact that while waiting for the
completion of this scientific peer review, EPA is still being asked to
implement the recently finalized biological opinions which the agency
has repeatedly and publicly challenged. Given the admission of
fundamental flaws in the Services models, I would suggest that the
Services consider seeking re-initiation of consultation when scientific
models have been developed, validated, and agreed upon.
One final note. . .Prior to this hearing, Chairman Hastings and I
received a letter from the four departments suggesting that due to
concerns over pending litigation, they would be unable to answer many
of the questions the Committees would be raising. I would like to make
clear that while I recognize certain questions regarding pending
litigation are sensitive, Congressional oversight is equally as
important and I hope the panelists will be as responsive as possible. I
will tell you now that just because a question may be difficult, or may
cause some degree of embarrassment for the bureaucracy, it does not
mean that the question should be off limits to Congressional oversight.
I look forward to a cooperative dialogue with all of our witnesses
today and am now happy to yield to my Ranking Member, Representative
Peterson for his opening statement.
______

STATEMENT OF HON. COLLIN C. PETERSON, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF MINNESOTA

Mr. Peterson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman and good morning
everybody. Thank you and Mr. Hastings for holding this hearing.
Today we are reviewing pesticide registration consultations
under the Endangered Species Act as they are carried out
between the EPA and either of the Services, as Mr. Lucas
characterized them. Unfortunately, several opinions coming from
the National Marine Fisheries Service failed to respond to and
incorporate concerns voiced by EPA.
It is important for these agencies to work collaboratively
in reaching conclusions on complex issues such as the one we
are dealing with this morning. And while it is not unusual to
see different agencies reaching different opinions, it is
unusual for reasonable people not to understand how those
conclusions are reached.
When the agencies fail to be transparent and fail to base
their conclusions on the best available science, the decision
is often left in the hands of the courts, leaving those outside
of agriculture to make a ruling. This should not be the case.
We need someone to step up and resolve these issues and perhaps
this is something that Congress should address.
This hearing comes as we are beginning to see the potential
effects of these differences of opinion can have. The
questionable environmental data used in assessing potential
harm to endangered species has producers in the Pacific
Northwest and California, facing a potential, unprecedented
restriction on the use of pesticide products labeled and
registered by the EPA and this restriction could conceivably
affect the rest of the country.
Many in agriculture have expressed concern about the lack
of transparency, lack of state and stakeholder participation,
use of less than best available science and the lack of an
economic impact assessment on the restrictions contemplated by
the National Marine Fisheries Service. I share those concerns,
so I am looking forward to hearing from today's witnesses on
these issues.
And again, I want to thank the Chairs for holding today's
hearing.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Peterson follows:]

Statement of The Honorable Collin C. Peterson, Ranking Member,
Committee on Agriculture

Good morning. Thank you Chairman Lucas and Chairman Hastings for
holding today's hearing.
Today we are reviewing pesticide registration consultations under
the Endangered Species Act as they are carried out between the
Environmental Protection Agency and either the National Marine
Fisheries Services or the Fish and Wildlife Service.
Unfortunately, several opinions coming from the National Marine
Fisheries Service fail to respond to and incorporate concerns voiced by
the EPA.
It's important for these agencies to work collaboratively in
reaching conclusions on complex issues such as the one we are dealing
with this morning. While it is not unusual to see different agencies
reaching differing opinions, it is unusual for reasonable people not to
understand how those conclusions are reached. When the agencies fail to
be transparent and fail to base their conclusions on the best available
science, the decision is often left in the hands of the courts, leaving
those outside of agriculture to make a ruling. This should not be the
case. We need someone to step up and resolve these issues. Perhaps this
is something that Congress should address.
This hearing comes as we're beginning to see the potential effects
these differences of opinion could have.
The questionable environmental data used in assessing potential
harm to endangered species has producers in the Pacific Northwest and
California facing a potential unprecedented restriction on the use of
pesticide products labeled and registered by the EPA. This restriction
could conceivably affect the rest of the country.
Many in agriculture have expressed concern about the lack of
transparency, a lack of state and stakeholder participation, use of
less than best available science and the lack of an economic impact
assessment on the restrictions contemplated by the National Marine
Fisheries Service. I share those concerns.
I am looking forward to hearing from today's witnesses on these
issues. Again, I thank the Chairs for holding today's hearing.
______

Mr. Lucas. The gentleman yields back. The Chair now turns
to the Chairman of the Committee on Natural Resources, Chairman
Hastings, for his opening statement.

STATEMENT OF HON. DOC HASTINGS, A REPRESENTATIVE IN CONGRESS
FROM THE STATE OF WASHINGTON

The Chairman. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Earlier this year, President Obama signed Executive Order
12866, which seeks to reform Federal regulations to ensure that
they, and I quote, ``protect public health, welfare, safety,
and our environment while promoting economic growth,
innovation, competitiveness, and job creation.''
The Executive Order further notes regulations, and I quote
again, ``must be based on the best available science,'' ``must
allow for public participation and an open exchange of ideas,''
and ``must promote predictability and reduce uncertainty.''
I couldn't agree more with these goals. Regrettably, the
Executive Order is completely disconnected from the
Administration's own actions arising out of its dual regulatory
responsibility of Federal pest control registration and safety
and the Endangered Species Act.
Farmers, forest managers, and other resource industries
that provide water, food, fiber, and energy are caught in the
middle of Federal bureaucratic dysfunction. This situation
discourages economic growth and jobs, and encourages lawsuits.
For the past 20 years, the National Marine Fisheries
Service and the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service have received
hundreds of millions of dollars annually to implement and
enforce Federal regulatory activities involving ESA-listed
species. Today's oversight hearing will focus on ESA Section 7
consultations and more specifically NMFS and Fish and Wildlife
Service biological opinions for Federally registered crop
protection and other pest control products.
Over the past 20 years, NMFS has listed 28 populations of
salmon as endangered in the Pacific Northwest and California.
These salmon have thrived amidst one of the most productive
agriculture areas in the nation. Washington State alone
produces nearly $10 billion annually in fruit, wheat, grain,
potatoes and other exported commodities. NMFS's own 2010 report
to Congress touted stable or increasing trends for two-thirds
of the listed salmon populations.
Washington experienced record runs with salmon fisheries
opening up in some areas for the first time in years, yet NMFS
concluded in its biological opinions, beginning in 2008, that
all 28 populations of salmon would be jeopardized by continued
use of pesticides long registered and labeled by the EPA.
NMFS's questionable requirements included nearly a quarter-mile
buffer zone around water bodies that would affect as much as 60
percent of agriculture lands in Washington State alone.
Implementation of these measures, as written, would
literally force farmers out of business, cripple the food
production capacity in the Northwest, and potentially the rest
of the nation. Ironically, the head of the EPA office with
authority and responsibility for scientific review of hundreds
of pesticides, certainly no lightweight in environmental
regulation, found over 14 significant flaws in NMFS's
biological opinions.
State agriculture agencies have raised concerns that NMFS
not only failed to utilize their available data information,
but refused to allow any transparent process to receive,
review, and revise draft opinions to ensure the best available
science. Fish and Wildlife, the agency with jurisdiction over
most of the endangered species, is not immune from concerns.
Correspondence between EPA and Fish and Wildlife reveals a lack
of cooperation between the two agencies on a process involving
nearly four dozen incomplete pesticide consultations two years
after they were originally submitted.
The Administration responded recently by sending a vaguely
worded request for the National Academy of Sciences to review
NMFS and EPA's confusing and conflicting regulations--perhaps
the most candid acknowledgment of the agency's flawed science.
Instead, unless they are stopped, the interim, uncertain
policies will result in even more lawsuits that threaten
economic growth.
A recent suit filed by the Center for Biological Diversity
seeks to eliminate 380 pesticides used in 49 states. Americans
expect and deserve better from their government. So I look
forward to hearing from representatives of these Federal
agencies, the State of Washington, and Northwest growers. I
very much appreciate Chairman Lucas and the House Agriculture
Committee joining us in this hearing to provide oversight on
this very important topic.
And with that, I recognize the gentleman from Massachusetts
for his opening statement.
[The prepared statement of Chairman Hastings follows:]

Statement of The Honorable Doc Hastings, Chairman,
Committee on Natural Resources

Earlier this year, President Obama signed Executive Order 12866,
seeking to reform federal regulations to ensure that they ``protect
public health, welfare, safety, and our environment while promoting
economic growth, innovation, competitiveness, and job creation.''
The executive order further notes regulations ``must be based on
the best available science,'' ``must allow for public participation and
an open exchange of ideas,'' and ``must promote predictability and
reduce uncertainty.''
I couldn't agree more with these goals. Regrettably, the executive
order is completely disconnected from the Administration's own actions
arising out of its dual regulatory responsibilities of federal pest
control registration and safety and the Endangered Species Act.
Farmers, forest managers and other resource industries that provide
food, water, fiber and energy are caught in the middle of federal
bureaucratic dysfunction. This situation discourages economic growth
and jobs, and encourages lawsuits.
For the past 20 years, the National Marine Fisheries Service and
the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service have received hundreds of millions
of dollars annually to implement and enforce federal regulatory
activity involving ESA-listed species.
Today's oversight hearing will focus on ESA section 7
consultations, and more specifically, NMFS and the FWS' biological
opinions for federally-registered crop protection and other pest
control products.
Over the past 20 years, NMFS has listed 28 populations of salmon as
endangered in the Pacific Northwest and California. These salmon have
thrived amidst one of the most productive agricultural areas of the
nation. Washington produces nearly $10 billion annually in fruit,
wheat, grain, potatoes, and other exported commodities, which fuels
thousands of jobs.
NMFS' own 2010 Report to Congress touted stable or increasing
trends for two-thirds of the listed salmon populations. Washington
experienced record runs, with salmon fisheries opening in some areas
for the first time in years.
Yet, NMFS, concluded in biological opinions beginning in 2008 that
all 28 populations of salmon would be jeopardized by continued use of
pesticides long registered and labeled by the Environmental Protection
Agency. NMFS' questionable requirements included nearly a quarter mile
buffer around water bodies that would affect as much as 60 percent of
agricultural lands in Washington State alone.
Implementation of these measures as written would literally force
farmers out of business, devastate rural communities and cripple the
food production capacity of the Northwest and potentially the rest of
the nation.
Ironically, the head of the EPA office with authority and
responsibility for scientific review of hundreds of pesticides--
certainly no lightweight on environmental regulation--found over 14
significant flaws in NMFS' biological opinions.
State agriculture agencies have raised concerns that NMFS not only
failed to utilize their available data and information, but refused to
allow any transparent process to receive, review and revise draft
opinions to ensure the best available science.
FWS, the agency with jurisdiction over the most endangered species,
is not immune from concerns. Correspondence between EPA and FWS reveals
a lack of cooperation between the two agencies on a process involving
nearly four dozen incomplete pesticide consultations--two years after
they initially were submitted to FWS for review.
The Administration responded recently by sending a vaguely-worded
request for the National Academy of Sciences to review NMFS and EPA's
confusing and conflicting regulations--perhaps the most candid
acknowledgment of the agencies' flawed science.
Instead, unless they are stopped, the interim, uncertain policy
will result in even more lawsuits and threats to economic growth and
jobs nationwide. A recent suit filed by the Center for Biological
Diversity seeks to eliminate 380 pesticides used in 49 states.
Americans expect--and deserve--better from their government.
I look forward to hearing from representatives of the federal
agencies, the State of Washington, and Northwest growers, and I
appreciate Chairman Lucas and the House Agriculture Committee's joining
in this hearing to provide needed oversight on this important topic.
______

STATEMENT OF HON. EDWARD J. MARKEY, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF MASSACHUSETTS

Mr. Markey. Thank you, Mr. Chairman and welcome Chairman
Lucas and Ranking Member Peterson.
With the opening of the Pacific Coast salmon fishing
season, I am looking forward to sitting down to my first king
salmon steak dinner of the season. As we all know, the key to
salmon is in the balance. Don't cook it too long or it will dry
out. Don't oversalt the fish or you will lose the sweetness.
The same kind of balance must be struck when we regulate
pesticides. We call it Iron Chef Washington edition and the
special ingredient is Federal oversight. Just like salt, when
properly used pesticides can help aid the production of
agriculture crops. And just like salt, when used
indiscriminately or in too large a quantity, it can render a
meal or an entire fish population inedible.
As the regulatory chefs, we must serve up the right balance
between producing food and protecting endangered species--
fisheries, water supplies, and human health. We must ensure
that the Federal Government works in harmony to ensure a safe,
abundant food supply while producing our natural resources.
According to the United States Geological Survey, 90
percent of America's surface streams and rivers contain
measurable amounts of multiple pesticides. High levels of
pesticides in our waters harm our commercial fisheries and
impair the recovery of endangered salmon throughout the West.
Fully restoring salmon populations in the Northwest alone would
add over $5 billion a year to the regional economy and would
revitalize the commercial and recreational fisheries in the
region.
The human health impacts from pesticides exposure are also
severely disconcerting. In addition to decades of laboratory
animal studies that have linked many pesticides to various
adverse health outcomes, just last week three independent,
public health studies were released which found that mothers
who are exposed to frequently used pesticides, including the
ones being discussed today, give birth to children who have
poorer memory and lower IQ scores than their peers by the time
they have reached school age. We cannot afford to ignore these
negative impacts.
While I understand that ongoing litigation makes it
difficult for the Federal agencies present to respond to
specific questions relating to these pending cases, I look
forward to discussing more generally how the EPA's registration
process for pesticides can incorporate the protective standards
of the Endangered Species Act. We must ensure that the Federal
agencies work together to provide the full level of
environmental protection that our endangered species
desperately need.
It is important to remember that the consultation process
required under the Endangered Species Act is a vital part of
every Federal agencies' obligation to preserve the existence of
endangered species. Streamlining a regulatory process does not
require a race to the bottom on environmental protections. We
should not and do not need to operate at the lowest common
denominator of protection when it comes to issues as important
as health and human safety, water quality, and endangered
species.
Instead, we must first ensure that the EPA, the National
Marine Fisheries Service, and the Fish and Wildlife Service
have the resources they need to complete their endangered
species consultations in a timely manner. Second, we should
support efforts to ensure that the best, most up-to-date
scientific information is utilized by the agencies when
consultations occur.
Finally, we should ensure that the consultation process is
transparent to the public, allowing for full stakeholder
participation. Because of the multiple environmental impacts,
including pesticides, three years ago the West Coast salmon
fishery experienced a closure that was unprecedented in
magnitude and duration. This closure rippled up and down the
coast, decimating livelihoods and communities that depend on
this natural resource.
With that, I would like to thank the witnesses for being
here today and I look forward to learning more about these
issues. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Markey follows:]

Statement of The Honorable Edward J. Markey, Ranking Member,
Committee on Natural Resources

Thank you Chairman Hastings.
With the opening of the Pacific coast salmon fishing season, I am,
looking forward to sitting down to my first king salmon steak dinner of
the season.
As we all know, the key to salmon is in the balance. Don't cook it
too long, or it will dry out. Don't oversalt the fish, or you'll lose
the sweetness.
The same kind of balance must be struck when we regulate
pesticides.
We'll call it Iron Chef: Washington Edition. And the special
ingredient is federal oversight.
Just like salt, when properly used pesticides can help aide the
production of agricultural crops.
And just like salt, when used indiscriminately, or in too large a
quantity, it can render a meal, or an entire fish population, inedible.
As the regulatory chefs, we must serve up the right balance between
producing food and protecting endangered species, fisheries, water
supplies and human health.
We must ensure that the federal government works in harmony to
ensure a safe, abundant food supply while protecting our natural
resources.
According to the United States Geological Survey, ninety percent of
America's surface streams and rivers contain measureable amounts of
multiple pesticides. High levels of pesticides in our waters harm our
commercial fisheries and impair the recovery of endangered salmon
throughout the West. Fully restoring salmon populations in the
Northwest alone would add over five billion dollars a year to the
regional economy and would revitalize the commercial and recreational
fisheries in the region.
The human health impacts from pesticide exposure are also severely
disconcerting. In addition to decades of laboratory animal studies that
have linked many pesticides to various adverse health outcomes, just
last week, three independent public health studies were released, which
found that mothers who are exposed to frequently used pesticides,
including the ones being discussed today, gave birth to children who
have poorer memory and lower I.Q. scores than their peers by the time
they reached school age.
We cannot afford to ignore these negative impacts. While I
understand that ongoing litigation makes it difficult for the federal
agencies present today to respond to specific questions related to
these pending cases, I look forward to discussing more generally how
the EPA's registration process for pesticides can incorporate the
protective standards of the Endangered Species Act. We must ensure that
the federal agencies work together to provide the full level of
environmental protection that our endangered species desperately need.
It is important to remember that the consultation process required
under the Endangered Species Act is a vital part of every federal
agency's obligation to preserve the existence of endangered species.
Streamlining a regulatory process does not require a ``race to the
bottom'' on environmental protections. We should not, and do not, need
to operate at the lowest common denominator of protection when it comes
to issues as important as human health, water quality, and endangered
species.
Instead, we should first ensure that the EPA, the National Marine
Fisheries Service, and the Fish and Wildlife Service have the resources
they need to complete their endangered species consultations in a
timely manner. Second, we should support efforts to ensure that the
best, most up-to-date scientific information is utilized by the
agencies when consultations occur. Finally, we should ensure that the
consultation process is transparent to the public, allowing for full
stakeholder participation.
Because of multiple environmental impacts, including pesticides,
three years ago, the west coast salmon fishery experienced a closure
that was unprecedented in magnitude and duration. This closure rippled
up and down the coast decimating livelihoods and communities that
depend on this natural resource.
With that, I would like to thank the witnesses for being here today
and look forward to learning more about these issues.
______

The Chairman. I thank the gentleman from Massachusetts.
I note, and have been advised, not surprisingly, that there
are a number of people who want to listen to this hearing. We
do have an overflow hearing room down the hall, 1334. So
anybody that is standing up and wants to have a little bit more
comfortable area, you are certainly welcome to go down the hall
to 1334, if that would work out for you.
At this time, I would like to recognize again the Chairman
of the Agriculture Committee, Mr. Lucas, to introduce the first
panel. Mr. Lucas.
Mr. Lucas. Thank you, Chairman Hastings. We would like to
welcome to this joint hearing today our first panel, Dr. Joseph
Glauber, Chief Economist, United States Department of
Agriculture; Dr. Steven Bradbury, Director, Office of Pesticide
Programs, U.S. Environmental Protection Agency; Mr. Rowan
Gould, Acting Director of the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service;
and Mr. Eric Schwaab, Assistant Administrator of the National
Marine Fisheries Service, National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration.
And I would yield to the Chairman.
The Chairman. I just want to point out that in front of
you, you have the five-minute clock and your full statement
will appear in the record, so that will be part of the record.
But we do ask that, as you can see the interest here, that your
oral statement be only five minutes if you can do that. We try
to adhere to that. And in fact, we are trying to come up with
some prize for any witnesses that do it in five minutes or
less. So I just want to remind you that your full statement
will appear in the record.
So I thank the gentleman for yielding to allow me to make
that statement on how we run our Committee here, and I am sure
your Committee does exactly the same thing. So I yield back to
the gentleman from Oklahoma.
Mr. Lucas. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And the Chair now
recognizes Dr. Glauber.

STATEMENT OF DR. JOSEPH GLAUBER, CHIEF ECONOMIST, U.S.
DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE

Dr. Glauber. Thanks very much Chairman Hastings, Chairman
Lucas, Ranking Members Markey and Peterson and members of the
Committees. Thank you for the opportunity to testify on the
effects of the Endangered Species Act consultation process for
pesticides on agriculture.
In my written testimony, I focus on how this process
affects agriculture stakeholders, including America's farmers,
ranchers, forest owners, and registrants of crop protection
tools and on some of the tools and capabilities USDA brings to
improve the science behind pesticide registration and
consultation stakeholder outreach and to assist farmers and
ranchers.
As you are aware, pesticides are important inputs for
American farmers. The introduction of pesticides and
fertilizers along with the development of improved seed
varieties have contributed to much of the productivity gains
that we have witnesses in agriculture over the last 60 years.
Pesticides have enabled crop producers to manage insects,
diseases in weeds, to prevent crop yield or quality losses
while reducing labor and tillage cost for pest control. Over
900,000 farmers reported using pesticides in 2007. And USDA's
economic research service forecasted farm pesticide
expenditures this year will approach $12 billion. Almost 77
percent of these farms reported using chemicals to control
weeds, grass, or brush on more than 226 million acres in 2007
and about 40 percent of farms reporting pesticide use applied
in insecticides on more than 90 million acres. About 10 percent
of farms using pesticides for controlling diseases in crops and
orchards are on more than 12 million acres.
The USDA also values mosquito-control chemicals as these
insecticides are important for the protection of livestock as
well as rural populations. USDA's veterinary services must have
such insecticides available for quarantine use in the event of
a large-scale outbreak such as Rift Valley Fever.
Last, pesticide use is important for international trade.
The mere presence of quarantine pest in agricultural
commodities can disrupt exports and international trade. The
international community has long recognized the potential poor
effects resulting from certain pests, diseases and weeds by
prohibiting the importation of quarantine pests.
The U.S. is able to export many agriculture products
because pesticides are used to eradicate pests like medflies.
Systems approaches in conjunction with chemical pest control
are used by the U.S. and its trading partners. For example,
exports of apples to Taiwan rely upon a systems approach that
includes use of chemical controls for codling moths.
In my testimony, I give extensive coverage to an analysis
that we were asked to prepare back in 2003, which was
associated to look at the potential impacts to agriculture to
the proposed no-spray buffers requested as injunctive relief in
the Washington toxic case.
In the analysis, we analyze the effects of no-spray buffers
affecting 54 pesticide active ingredients. These active
ingredients were subject to an injunctive order imposing the
20-yard no-spray buffer for ground spraying around salmon-
bearing waters and 100-yard no-spray buffer for aerial
application.
The analysis assumed that land in the buffers would be
retired and thus would provide no return. I might add this is a
fairly consistent assumption with how it has been treated by
the Services themselves in some of their analyses.
The short version is that the analysis predicted losses in
gross revenue, ranging from $37 million to $583 million,
depending upon the no-spray buffers were applied to perennial
as well as intermittent water bodies and whether the pesticide
applications were usually accomplished using aerial or ground
spraying.
The written testimony goes through in much more detail
here. I think the important thing to point out is we are
looking at the BiOps for salmon is buffer strips would
potentially extended up to 1,000 feet for some active
ingredients in some affected areas. And depending on final
determination, the impact could thus be larger than what we
estimate. And again, a lot of this depends much on what
mitigation measures are possible and how easy it is to
substitute other acceptable pesticides or control systems.
Again, my written testimony covers a lot of potential
mitigation effects offered by the USDA, such as the
Conservation Reserve Program, buffer strips, and Environmental
Quality Incentives Program (EQIP). Many of these, of course,
Chairman Lucas you are well aware of and Congressman Peterson
that we talk every day in the Ag Committee.
I would just conclude that our Office of Pest Management
Policy at USDA works extensively with the Services, both in
looking at measures and alternatives helping the Services and
EPA with understanding the effects of pesticides on agriculture
and the potential uses of alternatives and integrated pest
management schemes.
With that, let me conclude and I will be happy to take any
questions.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Glauber follows:]

Statement of Joseph Glauber, Chief Economist,
U.S. Department of Agriculture

Chairman Hastings and Chairman Lucas, Ranking Members Markey and
Peterson, and members of the Committees, thank you for the opportunity
to testify on the effects of the Endangered Species Act (ESA)
consultation process for pesticides on agriculture. I will focus my
remarks on how this process affects agricultural stakeholders,
including America's farmers, ranchers, forest owners, and registrants
of crop protection tools, and on some of the tools and capabilities
USDA brings to improve the science behind pesticide registration and
consultation, stakeholder outreach, and to assist farmers and ranchers.
The U.S. Department of Agriculture's (USDA) interest in the
biological opinions and resulting label changes from the ESA and the
Federal Insecticide, Fungicide, and Rodenticide Act (FIFRA)
consultation process is multi-fold. FIFRA sets out a number of
responsibilities for the Secretary of Agriculture under the law in
areas that include research and monitoring, identification of pests,
and review of cancellation actions. USDA agencies, such as the Forest
Service, which manages 193 million acres of National Forests and
Grassland under sustainability and multiple use principles, use
pesticides at times to deal with invasive species, noxious weeds, and
to manage utility rights of way. In addition, USDA conducts pest
control programs to suppress or eradicate pests or diseases on public
and private lands to safeguard plant and animal health. USDA consults
with the National Marine Fisheries Service (NMFS) or the United States
Fish and Wildlife Services (FWS) to ensure our federal actions are
properly protective of endangered species and their habitats. Examples
include consultation on large-scale control programs such as
grasshopper suppression (Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service) in
the western states and insecticide treatment of seed orchards (Forest
Service).
USDA's Office of Pest Management Policy (OPMP) provides USDA input
to the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) actions on pesticides and
risk mitigation plans, including information for EPA on agricultural
use of pesticides during registration review; coordinates the
collection of information for EPA on pest management strategies
employed by growers, including the growers' need for certain pesticide
products during registration review; and provides reviews and estimated
effects on agriculture of various EPA policies and pesticide
registration notices (drift reduction notice, worker protection
standards, fumigant buffers). OPMP coordinates the development and
implementation of integrated pest management strategies and other
economically and environmentally sound pest management tools and
practices.
Private land use and agricultural production often involves use of
pesticides. Thus, USDA has a vital interest in sound regulation of
pesticide use that ensures USDA can fulfill its mission of ensuring an
abundant, affordable, and safe food supply and a healthy farm and rural
economy while ensuring protection of the environment and threatened and
endangered species.
Agricultural Use of Pesticides
The introduction of pesticides and fertilizers, along with the
development of improved seed varieties, has contributed to much of the
productivity gains that we have witnessed in US agriculture over the
past 60 years. Pesticides have enabled crop producers to manage
insects, diseases, and weeds and to prevent crop yield or quality
losses while reducing labor and tillage costs for pest control
(Fernandez-Cornejo et al. 2009).
While agricultural pesticide expenditures have grown dramatically
over the past 60 years, applications as measured by pounds of active
ingredient have fallen. The Economic Research Service forecasts that
farm pesticide expenditures will top $11.9 billion in 2011, a record
high in nominal terms and the third highest level adjusting for
inflation (figure 1). However, only 480 million pounds of pesticide
active ingredients were used in 2007 in agricultural production in the
United States (Fernandez-Cornejo and Jans 2009) down from 579 million
pounds of active ingredients used in 1997 (table 1).
The growth in the use of herbicides like glyphosate has occurred in
conjunction with adoption of no-till practices and bio-tech crops with
herbicide resistant traits (Fernandez-Cornejo and Caswell 2006). No-
till agriculture reduces energy use, sequesters carbon helping to
control greenhouse gas emissions, and helps control erosion, with the
technique using herbicides rather mechanical means to deal with weeds.
Pesticide use varies widely by location and by crop. Herbicide use
by producers of spring-planted row crop like corn, soybeans, cotton and
spring wheats is quite high--typically over 95 percent of the area is
treated (table 2). Insecticides are widely used by cotton producers and
many fruit and vegetable producers. Fruits and vegetable producers also
tend to be large users of both insecticides and fungicides.
The 2007 Census of Agriculture data reports that over 900 thousand
out of 2.2 million total farm operations used pesticides in 2007 (table
3). Almost 77 percent of these farms reported using chemicals to
control weeds, grass or brush on more than 226 million acres in 2007.
About 40 percent of farms reporting pesticide use applied insecticides
on more than 90 million acres. About 10 percent of farms using
pesticides were controlling diseases in crops and orchards on more than
12 million acres.
USDA also values mosquito control chemicals as these insecticides
are important for the protection of livestock as well as the rural
population. USDA Veterinary Services must have such insecticides
available for quarantine use in the event of a large scale outbreak,
such as Rift Valley Fever. The Agricultural Research Service carries
out extensive research in collaboration with DOD and the IR-4 Program
and the OPMP has assisted the American Mosquito Control Association
(American Mosquito Control) on the reregistration and registration
review of mosquito control chemicals.
Lastly, pesticide use is important for international trade. The
mere presence of a quarantine pest in an agricultural commodity can
disrupt exports and international trade. The international community
has long recognized the potential deleterious effects resulting from
certain pests, diseases and weeds by prohibiting the importation of
quarantine pests. The United States is able to export many agricultural
products because pesticides are used to eradicate pests like medflies.
Systems approaches in conjunction with chemical pest control are used
by the United States and its trading partners. For example, exports of
apples to Taiwan rely upon a systems approach that includes use of
chemical controls for codling moths.
Economic Consequences Resulting from Biological Opinions
As a result of the 2002 order in Washington Toxics Coalition v.
EPA, EPA initiated consultation on its authorization of 37 pesticide
active ingredients and the effects on listed Pacific salmonids under
NMFS' jurisdiction and associated designated critical habitats in the
states of California, Idaho, Oregon, and Washington. Consequently,
under these Biological Opinions (BiOps), the affected area encompasses
some freshwater, estuarine, marsh, swamps, nearshore, and offshore
marine surface waters of California, Oregon, and Washington. The action
area also includes some freshwater surface waters in Idaho.
The NMFS BiOps for listed salmonids identify reasonable and prudent
measures that if followed, afford farmers protection from the penalties
associated with the prohibition on incidentally taking a listed species
under the ESA. EPA would then enact these measures through pesticide
labels and informing the public through Endangered Species Protection
Program Bulletins. Three BiOps have been issued and a fourth is due to
be issued by June 30, 2011 covering 18 of the 37 pesticides requiring
consultation (on salmonids) as a result of the Washington Toxics case.
A fourth BiOp covering 6 pesticides has been released. Pesticide
product label changes recommended by the EPA in response one or more of
the BiOps include the following elements, which potentially could have
impacts on farmers:

Ground and Aerial Application No-Use (or Pesticide
Free) Buffers

Maximum wind speed 10 mph for pesticide spraying

Prohibit application within 48 hours of a predicted
storm event likely to produce runoff or when soil is at field
capacity

Requirement to report all fish kills occurring within
four days after application
In addition to the anticipated pesticide label changes, the EPA must
monitor water quality in off-channel habitats for seven consecutive
days, three times per year in numerous locations according to a
monitoring plan to be specified by NMFS.
These no-application zones adjacent to aquatic features (channels,
agricultural ditches, and streams, and any channels temporally
connected to surface waters) vary in size depending on the pesticide
but range from 25 to 1000 feet for the first six pesticides assessed.
There are many variables that potentially could factor into any
analysis of the impacts resulting from these buffers, including the
crop under cultivation, the cost and efficacy of any alternative
products available to control the target pest, impacts due to the
expected market for the crop (domestic or export), increased
application costs associated with irregular application patterns which
avoid the buffer, substitute crops that could be grown using other
pesticides, and substitute uses for the land, such as enrollment in a
conservation program.
Total agricultural production in the affected counties in
California, Idaho, Oregon and Washington totaled $32.5 billion in 2007
(table 4). Significantly, over 90 percent of the crop value produced in
Oregon and Washington was in counties affected by the actions.
Individual crop production figures for each state are given in tables
5-8.In 2003, the Office of the Chief Economist prepared an analysis of
the potential impact to agriculture of the proposed no-spray buffers
requested as injunctive relief in the Washington Toxics Coalition v EPA
case (U.S. Department of Agriculture 2003). In the analysis prepared
for the Washington Toxics case, we analyzed the effects of no-spray
buffers affecting 54 pesticide active ingredients. These active
ingredients were subject to an injunction order imposing 20 yard no-
spray buffers for ground spraying around salmon bearing waters and 100
yard no-spray buffers for aerial application. Many of these active
ingredients are critical to production of the high value fruit, berry,
vegetable, and tree nut crops produced in Oregon and Washington.
The analysis assumed that land in buffers would be retired and thus
would provide no return. This assumption is consistent with how others
have examined the effects of no-spray buffers (e.g., National Oceanic
and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) 2005). The parcels affected by
the buffers are generally small and irregularly shaped and may not
warrant cultivation (eg., see figure 2). Livestock may not be a viable
enterprise in the buffer areas in such a small scale and due to
environmental concerns about animal impacts on water bodies. Some
producers may be able to reduce losses by enrolling the buffer lands in
the Conservation Reserve Program. Loss of export markets due to the
presence of quarantine pests from untreated areas, such as codling
moth, was also not examined.
The analysis predicted losses in gross revenue ranging between $37
to $583 million, depending upon whether the no-spray buffers were
applied to perennial as well as intermittent water bodies and whether
the pesticide application were usually accomplished using aerial or
ground spraying. Within the Columbia River watershed, it was estimated
that 85 percent of the economic impacts were concentrated in Washington
and these are primarily in the orchard and vineyard crops. In Oregon,
estimated losses were about the same between row crops and orchards.
Some geographic regions would be disproportionately affected. The
analysis concluded that regions specializing in apples, pears, stone
fruits and vineyard would experience greater losses. Orchard crops
would experience the greatest revenue losses and small grains the
least. The analysis estimated sector-wide impacts and thus did not
address impacts on individual farmers. Some individual growers would be
disproportionately affected from the no-spray buffers, especially where
their property is adjacent to meandering streams or ditches that
transect the field.
The injunction imposed by the Court imposed 20 yard no-spray
buffers for ground application and 100 yard buffers for aerial
application until such time that consultation between the EPA and NMFS
on a particular active ingredient had concluded. Excepted from this no-
spray buffer order were USDA pesticide applications where the USDA
agency had previously consulted with either NMFS or FWS and was issued
a BiOp for that use.
Under the NMFS BiOps for salmonids, buffer strips would be
potentially extended to up to 1,000 feet for some active ingredients
and some affected areas. Depending on the final determination, the
impact could thus potentially be larger than estimated under the
Washington Toxics injunction order (Washington State Department of
Agriculture 2010).
Mitigation Efforts
The Food, Conservation and Energy Act of 2008 (Public Law 110-246)
offers several programs which may provide financial assistance to
producers to help mitigate some potential losses. The Conservation
Reserve Program (CRP) uses contracts with agricultural producers and
landowners to retire highly erodible and environmentally sensitive
cropland and pasture from production for 10-15 years. Enrolled land is
planted with grasses, trees, and other cover, thereby reducing erosion
and water pollution and providing other environmental benefits.
Under CRP, farmers and ranchers plant grasses and trees in crop
fields and along streams or rivers. The plantings reduce soil and
nutrients from washing into waterways, reduce soil erosion that may
otherwise contribute to poor air and water quality, and provide
valuable habitat for wildlife. Plant cover established on the acreage
accepted into the CRP will reduce nutrient and sediment runoff in
rivers and streams.
In addition, the states of Oregon and Washington have established
Conservation Reserve Enhancement Programs (CREP), which provide
additional incentives to producers to enroll targeted land to restore
and improve salmon and steelhead habitat on private land. Practices
addressing water quality issues include: forested riparian buffers;
riparian hedgerows, grass filter strips, and wetland enhancement. Land
enrolled in 10-15 year CREP contracts is removed from production and
grazing. In return, landowners receive annual rental, incentive,
maintenance, and cost share payments for establishing one of the CREP
practices.
Table 9 shows the cumulative acres enrolled in the CRP (and CREP)
targeting filter strips and riparian buffers. In the four state region,
over 50 thousand CRP acres were in filter strips while almost 80
thousand acres were in riparian buffers. Enrollment has been limited
due to the fact that CRP (and CREP) rental rates are low relative to
opportunity costs for irrigated land. (For example, average rental
rates for irrigated farmland in Yakima County, Washington in 2009 were
reported by NASS as $148 per acre as compared to an average CRP rental
rate of $43 per acre and an average CREP rental rate of $108 per acre
as reported by the Farm Service Agency.) However, this could change as
pesticide restrictions potentially limit cropping alternatives.
One of the objectives of the Environmental Quality Incentives
Program (EQIP) is to promote agricultural production and environmental
quality as compatible national goals and to optimize environmental
benefits by assisting producers in complying with local, State, Tribal
and Federal regulatory requirements. Through the EQIP program,
producers could receive financial and technical assistance for the
design and implementation of the buffer areas or filter strips. In some
cases, producers may receive up to 75% of the cost of installing these
vegetated areas. Socially disadvantaged producers could receive up to
90%. While not an annual payment, producers may be able to graze or hay
these acres allowing for some income to be obtained.
Producers could also take advantage of the Conservation Stewardship
Program (CSP). CSP is a voluntary conservation program that encourages
producers to address resource concerns in a comprehensive manner by
undertaking additional conservation activities and improving,
maintaining and managing existing conservation activities. Existing
activities, such as buffers, grassed waterways, conservation tillage
and contoured farming already installed or in use, decrease soil
erosion, improve soil quality and water quality, increase plant and
animal diversity, and improve air quality. Additional activities, such
as extending existing buffers, implementing an Integrated Pest
Management system, or adding a cover crop enhance the benefits already
flowing from the existing activities. CSP participants receive payments
tied to estimated benefits associated with the existing and additional
conservation activities. Generally, payment per legal entity cannot
exceed $40,000 yearly ($200,000 over five years). For a joint venture
or general partnership, payment cannot exceed $80,000 yearly ($400,000
over five years). Federally recognized Indian tribes and Alaskan Native
corporations are exempt from payment and contract limits.
Summary
During the past 60 years, U.S. farmers have achieved increases in
productivity, due, in part, to pesticides. Farmers will face increasing
challenges due to FIFRA label changes resulting from the ESA
consultations and subsequent BiOps.
Historically, USDA agencies have worked closely with NMFS and FWS
on ESA consultations for individual agency actions, some of which
involve pesticide application, outside the context of the consultations
on the registration of pesticides. The USDA's OPMP is responsible for
working with the EPA Office of Pesticide Programs (OPP) on pesticide
issues and regularly responds to requests for information on
agricultural pesticide use and potential pest or disease impacts on
agricultural production. In recent years, OPMP has engaged in an
ongoing dialogue with OPP regarding data needed to support their ESA
consultation packages for pesticide registrations.
That completes my statement. I would be happy to answer any
questions.
References
Fernandez-Cornejo, J. and Caswell, M. The First Decade of Genetically
Engineered Crops in the United States. U.S. Department of
Agriculture, Economic Research Service, Economic Information
Bulletin 11, April 2006.
Fernandez-Cornejo, Jorge and Sharon Jans. Pest Management in US
Agriculture. US Department of Agriculture, Economic Research
Service. Agricultural Handbook No. AH717, October 1999.
Fernandez-Cornejo, Jorge, Richard F. Nehring, Elizabeth Newcomb Sinha,
Arthur Grube and Alexandre Vialou. ``Assessing Recent Trends in
Pesticide Use in US Agriculture.'' Paper presented at the 2009
Annual Meeting of the Agricultural and Applied Economics
Association, July 26-28, 2009, Milwaukee, Wisconsin.
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration. Final Economic
Analysis of Critical Habitat Designation for Seven West Coast
Salmon and Steelhead ESUs. August 2005.
U.S. Department of Agriculture. Office of the Chief Economist.
``Economic Impact of Spray Buffers on Agriculture in the
Pacific Northwest.'' Mimeo. August 13, 2003.
Washington State Department of Agriculture. ``The Endangered Species
Act and the Impacts of Pesticide Registration and Use.''
October 2010.
______

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6204.010

.eps[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6204.011

.eps[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6204.012

.eps[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6204.013

.eps[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6204.014

.eps[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6204.015

.eps[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6204.016

.eps[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6204.017

.eps[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6204.018

.eps[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6204.019

.eps[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6204.020

.epsResponse to questions submitted for the record by the U.S.
Department of Commerce, U.S. Department of Agriculture, U.S. Department
of the Interior, and U.S. Environmental Protection Agency

Hastings/Lucas 1. (NMFS/FWS): Prior to finalizing any of the
biological opinions, what input did your agencies receive from
state agriculture departments and/or other non-federal experts
in developing your conclusions? Did NMFS summarize comments
submitted by applicants, States and other stakeholders,
including how key points raised were either incorporated or set
aside in the biological opinions issued? If so, please provide
the Committees with the summaries of comments received and how
they were considered. If not, please provide the Committees
with relevant documentation supporting the claim that all data
and information received was considered.
Answer: During the comment period for each NMFS biological opinion,
input from state agencies and/or other non-federal experts was often
posted to the docket EPA established for the salmonid consultations.
For the fourth biological opinion, NMFS also received letters, and/or
participated in meetings with state agencies or non-federal experts.
NMFS considered all information received on its biological opinions,
including information from state agencies, and made modifications to
the opinions as appropriate. Unlike a federal rulemaking, there is no
formal response to comments requirement for consultations conducted
under Section 7 of the Endangered Species Act (ESA). Comments received
are included in our administrative record. In the fourth biological
opinion, NMFS is providing an explanation of modifications in the final
opinion based on a specific comment or group of comments received. The
Fish and Wildlife Service has not developed any recent biological
opinions that would be relevant to this question.
Hastings/Lucas 2 (NMFS): On August 19, 2011, EPA requested that NMFS
undertake three critical steps relative to population model
which the Agency described as the ``cornerstone of the
jeopardy/no-jeopardy determinations.'' Specifically, EPA
requested that:
1)  The population model undergo a rigorous sensitivity
analysis that identifies inputs that ``drive'' the model and
those that have less significance;
2)  NMFS more fully define the model assumptions and clarify
the rationale by which these assumptions were chosen;
3)  NMFS publically release the model and its code.
Has NMFS cooperated with these three requests? If so, please provide
the Committees with relevant documentation. If not, when does
NMFS intend to respond to these requests?
Answer: The population model used in the first three opinions is
described in an appendix to each opinion. Following issuance of the
first biological opinion, the model was published in Ecological
Applications. (Baldwin, D.B., J.A. Spromberg, T.K. Collier, and N.L.
Scholz. 2009. A fish of many scales: extrapolating sublethal pesticide
exposures to the productivity of wild salmon populations. Ecological
Applications. 19(8): 2004-2015). Assumptions associated with the model
are described either in the appendix describing the model or in the
text of the opinion where the model is discussed. Justifications for
those assumptions are also included in the text. Although the model
could be recreated in a spreadsheet program from the information
provided in the appendix, at EPA's request NMFS provided them with the
code for the version used in the analysis, which is implemented in a
commercially available program called MatLab. NMFS has also provided
updated versions of the model to EPA following subsequent opinions,
reflecting modifications that have resulted from EPA's suggestions.
Later versions have been modified to address some of EPA's concerns
regarding the portion of the population exposed. Scientists at NMFS
Northwest Fisheries Science Center (NWFSC) continue to refine the
population model, which has been presented and discussed in several
national and international fora. NMFS and EPA expect continued
refinements to occur as this work continues, including those relating
to sensitivity testing of the models.
Hastings/Lucas 3. (NMFS): Do you consider NOAA Fisheries' current
process of developing Biological Opinions with significant
impact adequate to allow for broad public participation and
solicitation of, and response to comments before biological
opinions are finalized?
Answer: NMFS provides draft biological opinions on pesticides
registrations to EPA for comment. EPA makes those drafts publicly
available and solicits public comment. NMFS considers all comments EPA
receives on the draft biological opinion before finalizing the opinion.
In addition, NMFS seeks to maintain ongoing communications with the
applicants throughout the consultation. NMFS has sponsored several
public meetings to explain to stakeholders the consultation process and
the analysis in its biological opinion, and it looks forward to
continuing to explore opportunities for expanded engagements within the
constraints of existing budgets and court ordered schedules. Finally,
NMFS has participated in a grower-sponsored workshop to discuss its
analytical process and agricultural information the grower community
may be able to provide.
Hastings/Lucas 4. (NMFS/FWS): Do NMFS and the FWS have separate
processes and different science standards to evaluating impacts
to endangered species?
Answer: NMFS and FWS have similar general approaches to conducting
evaluations of effects on listed species through a shared approach to
the consultation processes under the ESA, its implementing regulations
and their ESA Consultation Handbook. While the general standards and
approaches are similar, the specific methodologies used in each
specific consultation are determined by the technical and scientific
aspects of the affected species and their habitats, which of course
vary widely.
Hastings/Lucas 5. (EPA): Since the EPA has submitted approximately 170
consultation packages to the Services over the last several
years, but there has been little effort made by the Services to
prepare biological opinions, it seems reasonable to assume that
the Services do not consider pesticides to be a significant
threat to listed species. Given there is little or no evidence
that pesticides are a significant threat to listed species,
combined with the fact that over the last two decades pesticide
use has declined and older pesticides have been replaced by
lower risk products, does EPA believe that the FIFRA risk
assessment and regulatory process sufficient to ensure
continued protection of listed species?
Answer: EPA's risk assessment methodology provides a reliable basis
for evaluating whether use of a pesticide active ingredient has the
potential to affect adversely the growth, survival or reproductive
capacity of an individual organism. EPA also considers toxicity data on
pesticide formulations, and, when such data indicate a potential for
enhanced toxicity, EPA performs a risk assessment for the product.
These assessments do not, however, predict how effects on individual
organisms could affect the overall population in a local area. This
issue is one of several that EPA, the Services, and USDA have asked the
National Academy of Sciences (NAS) to address. On the whole, regulatory
measures for reducing the risks to non-target wildlife generally will
help to protect listed species. But, because of the uncertainties
inherent in assessing population level effects on listed species, the
expertise and views of the Services are key in making such judgments.
Hastings/Lucas 6. (NMFS/FWS): Under the Counterpart Regulations issued
by the Services in 2005 there is a provision that allows EPA to
develop its own Biological Opinions for review by the Services.
Given the Services' inability to prepare Biological Opinions
for over 170 consultations submitted by EPA over the last
several years and given that EPA is planning to use the
registration review program to become compliant with ESA, which
could require up to 70 consultations per year for the next
decade, if EPA decides to prepare its own Biological Opinions
do I have your commitment to provide EPA the biological
information they need on listed species and their habitat and a
commitment to review these opinions according in an expedited
manner?
Answer: NMFS and FWS are working with EPA and USDA to engage the
assistance of the NAS in addressing key issues of science. Once we have
heard from the NAS, we are committed to working with EPA to develop and
implement an effective process for completing consultations on
registration review decisions.
Hastings/Lucas 7. (NMFS/FWS): Do the Services commit to complying with
counterpart regulations with respect to accepting EPA's ESA
pesticides submission?
Answer: NMFS and FWS are working with EPA and USDA to engage the
assistance of the NAS in addressing key issues of science. Once we have
heard from the NAS, we are committed to working with EPA to develop and
implement an effective process for completing consultations on
registration review decisions.
Hastings/Lucas 8. (EPA): I understand EPA's pesticide program is
trying to develop consultation packages that would contain
enough information to support drafting of a Biological Opinion.
To do that they need ready access to information on the species
they are trying to protect. Have the Services provided EPA with
current, accurate location maps of adequate resolution for each
listed species in GIS format?
Answer: NMFS and FWS have and will continue to seek to provide EPA
with up to date information on the status of the species and their
habitats, including available mapping information on species location--
budgets and schedules permitting. More specifically, NMFS has provided
EPA with links to the GIS shapefiles for designated critical habitat of
listed salmonids, but has not provided specific GIS information on the
locations of ``off-channel habitat''. EPA and NMFS continue to explore
opportunities to address refinements in these mapping data to increase
their accuracy and utility.
Hastings/Lucas 9. (EPA): Have the Services provided EPA access to a
centralized, organized database containing biological
information for each listed species for EPA and other federal
action agencies to use?
Answer: The FWS is developing a system called IPAC, which will
ultimately provide both location and biological information for listed
species at some point in the future. NMFS does not have a centralized
database containing biological information for each listed species;
most of the biological information on listed species known to NMFS is
posted on its website.
Hastings/Lucas 10 (NMFS): How does the Service define economic
feasibility in terms of development of a Reasonable and Prudent
Alternative (RPA)? With regard to the three biological opinions
completed, please provide all data, assumptions and a complete
description of the methods used to determine economic impact of
your proposed RPAs.
Answer: Reasonable and prudent alternatives (RPAs) must be
consistent with the intended purpose of the Federal action (in this
case registration and use of pesticides), and they must be economically
and technologically feasible. The Services give deference to, and rely
on, the expertise of the Federal action agency to determine whether a
particular alternative is economically and technologically feasible for
it to implement. A traditional cost analysis (or cost/benefit analysis)
may be conducted by the expert Federal action agency as part of their
determination of economic feasibility, but such an analysis is not
required by the ESA to be separately conducted by the Services as part
of a Section 7 consultation. The Services do not as a general practice
undertake formal, quantitative assessments of economic and technical
feasibility.
Hastings/Lucas 11 (NMFS): Page 4-43 of the Endangered Species
Consultation Handbook states, ``When a reasonable and prudent
alternative consists of multiple activities, it is imperative
that the opinion contain a thorough explanation of how each
component of the alternative is essential to avoid jeopardy
and/or adverse modification.'' For each of the three salmonid
biological opinions completed, please provide the Committees
with the sections in the biological opinions where the
``thorough explanation of how each component of the alternative
is essential to avoid jeopardy'' can be found.
Answer: The RPA section of each of the three completed biological
opinions contains a discussion of the elements of each of the
Reasonable and Prudent Alternatives. Please see http://
www.nmfs.noaa.gov/pr/consultation/pesticides.htm for further
information.
Hastings/Lucas 12. (NMFS): Page 4-43 of the Endangered Species
Consultation Handbook states, ``The action agency and the
applicant (if any) should be given every opportunity to assist
in developing the reasonable and prudent alternatives.'' Please
provide a detailed description (including meeting dates) of how
applicants were provided opportunities to assist in the
development of reasonable and prudent alternatives for each of
the three salmonid biological opinions completed.
Answer: NMFS met with applicants, the pesticide companies holding
registrations for the pesticides that were the subject of the
Biological Opinion, for the first biological opinion following release
of the draft biological opinion. During that meeting in the summer of
2008, NMFS explained the consultation process, the findings in the
biological opinion and requested the applicants' assistance in further
developing the RPA. The applicants advised NMFS that they would not
contribute to the development of the RPA because, as we understood at
the time, they disagreed with the premise of the RPA that the proposed
action would jeopardize the species in the first place. NMFS has met
with applicants for the second, third and fourth biological opinions at
the very beginning of consultation to inform applicants of the
consultation process and to request information pertinent to the
consultation. NMFS then provided applicants a draft of the description
of the proposed action for review and comment to ensure that it has
accurately characterized the labeled uses of each active ingredient.
NMFS also met with applicants again immediately following issuance of
the draft biological opinion to EPA. The purpose of those meetings was
to discuss the opinion and to seek applicants' input into the
development of the RPA. Following issuance of the second draft
biological opinion for the fourth consultation, NMFS met again with
applicants to discuss changes made to the RPA based on comments
received from applicants.
Hastings/Lucas 13. (NMFS): According to the joint regulations (51 Fed.
Reg. 19926, 19963 (June 3, 1986)), formal consultation is
supposed to conclude within 90 days after its initiation unless
extended by mutual agreement. In the case of consultations
involving ``applicants''--which would include all of the
pesticide consultations--the Services and EPA agency can agree
to extend the consultation ``provided that the Service submits
to the applicant. . .a written statement setting forth: (1) The
reasons why a longer period is required, (2) The information
that is required to complete the consultation, and (3) The
estimated date on which the consultation will be completed. A
consultation involving an applicant cannot be extended for more
than 60 days without the consent of the applicant.'' You
testified that none of the consultations were completed in the
requisite time. Were the applicants provided written
notification as required by the regulations? If so, please
provide copies of the written notifications and documentation
of consent for extension of the deadline by the applicants. If
not, why were your own regulations not followed?
Answer: Each of the biological opinions NMFS has issued on
pesticides registrations have been issued pursuant to a timeline
established through a Court ordered settlement. No applicants were
identified by EPA for the first consultation until after the draft
biological opinion was issued, so NMFS was unable to inform those
applicants of the schedule for consultation. Following issuance of that
draft, the applicants requested NMFS seek an extension of the deadline
for issuing the final biological opinion from the Court. NMFS requested
and received that extension. The applicants were kept informed of
deadlines following the extensions. After the first biological opinion,
EPA contacted prospective applicants on behalf of NMFS several months
in advance of consultation to inform them of the schedule for the
consultation and to seek their participation in the consultation
process. Applicants for the second, third, and fourth consultations
have all requested that NMFS seek extensions from the Court for each
consultation. NMFS has sought and received those extensions. The
applicants were kept informed of the extensions granted and the changes
in dates for these consultations. If the Committee wishes documentation
on these specific judicially approved extensions, NMFS is prepared to
provide it.
Hastings/Lucas 14. (NMFS): The quality of science that underlies our
regulations is vital to the credibility of our Federal agency's
decisions and ultimately the effectiveness of regulations
protecting human health and the environment. One important way
to ensure decisions are based on defensible science is to have
an open and transparent peer review process.

Were any of the biological opinions involving salmonids
subject to peer review prior to finalization? [Note: By peer
review--as distinct from peer input--the Committees mean a
documented critical review of the biological opinions, by
qualified individuals (or organizations) who were independent
of those who performed the work, and who are collectively
equivalent in technical expertise (i.e., peers) to those who
performed the original work.] If so, please provide the
Committee supporting documentation of the peer review.
Answer: NMFS regularly seeks scientific reviews of its biological
opinions which it believes is necessary and appropriate to satisfy the
``best available scientific and commercial information'' standards of
the ESA. As the question proposes to define formal external peer
review, in the instances of these four opinions, NMFS has not sought
independent formal peer reviews. Rather, the effects section of each
opinion, which includes the evaluation of toxicity data, fate data,
other related information, and the conclusions based on those data were
closely reviewed by toxicologists at NMFS Northwest Fisheries Science
Center (NWFSC).
Hastings/Lucas 15. (NMFS): The Final Information Quality Peer Review
Bulletin'' (the ``Bulletin'') issued by the Office of
Management and Budget (OMB) established government-wide
guidance aimed at enhancing the quality and credibility of
government science documents practice through the practice of
peer review. The Bulletin establishes ``that each agency shall
conduct a peer review on all influential scientific information
that the agency intends to disseminate.'' Furthermore, the
Bulletin states that if a scientific assessment ``is novel,
controversial, or precedent-setting or has significant
interagency interest,'' the information is considered ``highly
influential scientific assessment'' and more rigorous peer
review requirements apply. OMB broadened the initial definition
of ``highly influence scientific assessment'' to include this
``narrative test'' because a strictly economic test ``may be
difficult to apply for many influential scientific assessments
whose policy or economic impact is uncertain.'' OMB concluded
that for certain assessments, ``the narrative criteria will
prove to be more important.''

On what basis did NMFS exempt the salmonid biological
opinions from the requirements of the Bulletin?

Why were these biological opinions not designated
``highly influential scientific assessments'' based on the
narrative test in the definition?
Answer: NMFS relied on the narrative criteria in determining
whether the consultations on re-registration of pesticides under the
Federal Insecticide, Fungicide, and Rodenticide Act (FIFRA) constituted
a `highly influential scientific assessment' under the narrative
criteria. Only the scientific information in a biological opinion is
subject to peer review. The scientific information used in these
consultations came from public sources and published literature. NMFS
used population and acute toxicity models that represent accepted risk
analyses and are extensions of existing peer-reviewed models, which
extrapolate pesticide exposures to the viability of salmonid
populations.
Hastings/Lucas 16 (EPA): The preamble to the Services' joint
regulations relating to consultations state, ``In no way does
the Service intend to use the consultation procedures of
section 7 to establish substantive policy for Federal
agencies.'' Have the Services challenged EPA to take into
account issues beyond what the Agency considered part of a
pesticide registration as currently defined by EPA's policies
and regulations? If so, please provide the Committees with
examples.
Answer: NOAA's recent biological opinions concerning salmonids in
the Pacific Northwest and California contain recommended RPAs to avoid
jeopardy that, if adopted, would involve EPA changing some of its
existing policies and procedures. For example, the RPAs indicate that
EPA should undertake significant water monitoring programs, and that
EPA should direct pesticide users to report incident information to
EPA. For other consultations, FWS has asked EPA to collect additional
data and information.
The Services have also asked EPA to change the ways it assesses the
risks of pesticide exposure to listed species and their habitats. EPA
has been working with the Services to address issues they have raised
and to develop methodologies not currently in EPA's suite of assessment
tools. EPA has offered a variety of approaches currently outside EPA's
standard risk assessment methodologies, to address more fully this
issue. EPA and the Services are continuing to discuss this issue, and
other key issues. EPA and the Services are hopeful that the NAS review
will provide useful guidance on these complex topics.
Hastings/Lucas 17. (EPA): For each lawsuit where a consultation
schedule has been set, please provide the Committees with (a) a
complete list of products identified in the suit, (b) a listing
of species to be considered, (c) a listing of States affected,
(d) the estimated ``action area'' in acres, (e) the date EPA's
biological assessment was completed, or is estimated to be
completed, (f) where relevant, the date of the request to
initiate formal consultation.
Answer: Please see attached PDF file (titled LITIGATION PESTICIDES
AND SPECIES 6 1 11.pdf) which contains a summary of what species have
been reviewed for each pesticide active ingredient subject to a
litigation directed schedule, and information for each lawsuit as
requested. Please note that the compounds identified in each law suit
were active ingredients in pesticide products rather than pesticide
products themselves. Also, EPA has not calculated the acres included in
the action area for each assessment.
Hastings/Lucas 18. (EPA): Based on experience to date in developing
biological assessments requiring formal consultation for a
limited number of species, please estimate EPA monetary
resources required to (a) complete a nationwide biological
assessment for a typical pesticide under registration review
prior to initiation of consultation, and (b) from initiation to
completion of formal consultation.
Answer: Based on our experience to date, EPA estimates the costs of
a nation-wide assessment and endangered species effects determination
for one pesticide active ingredient to be 2.3 FTE and $30,000. For
initiation of consultation to implementation of a biological opinion is
estimated at 2 FTE of EPA resources with annual, foundational funding
of $300,000 for our ``Bulletins Live!'' application, independent of the
number of biological opinions being implemented per year.
Hastings/Lucas 19. (NMFS): You testified that an interagency workgroup
of senior policy leaders were formed to ``craft a multi-faceted
strategy to address the challenge.'' On what date was this
group formed? When were U.S. Geological Survey (USGS) and the
USDA Office of Pest Management Policy invited to join? Please
provide the Committees with meeting dates, agendas,
participants and outcomes/action items to date. What is the
schedule for future meetings?
Answer: The interagency workgroup of senior policy leaders was
initially established in December of 2009, and consisted of Dr. Jane
Lubchenco (NOAA), Mr. Steve Owens (EPA), and Mr. Michael Bean (DOI).
There is also an interagency group of SES-level managers for these
agencies that began approximately the same time. An interagency group
of technical staff from each of the agencies has been meeting to deal
with technical issues since July 2009. Membership in the senior policy
level group has shifted some over time, and Dr. Larry Robinson and Mr.
William Stelle currently represent NOAA. The senior policy group was
expanded to include USGS and USDA representatives in the fall of 2010.
This group meets on a somewhat regular basis to discuss issues that
arise related to these consultations. Most recently the group convened
several times to develop a framework for the NAS evaluation of the
coordination between ESA and FIFRA mandates and objectives.
Hastings/Lucas 20 (NMFS): Several Members asked if NMFS considered the
specific economic costs to ``farmers'' and other users of
reasonable and prudent alternatives that were included in the
salmonid biological opinions. You responded repeatedly that
``costs are factored in discussion with the action agency.''
Please provide documentation of the specific costs identified
and/or economic analyses that were completed in support of the
reasonable and prudent alternatives that NMFS included in each
of the three salmonid biological opinions finalized.
Answer: Please refer to the answer to Question #10.
Hastings/Lucas 21. (NMFS/FWS/EPA): In December 2007, EPA and the
Services met in Shepherdstown, WV in an attempt to work out
differences among the agencies with respect to the consultation
process. Please provide the Committees with meeting notes
resulting from that meeting.
Answer: The participants in the December 2007 meeting at
Shepherdstown, WV, prepared a Power Point presentation that summarized
the understandings reached at the meeting. The presentation appears in
the attached file (WV WORKSHOP UNDERSTANDINGS FINAL.pdf).
Hastings/Lucas 22. (NMFS): In late 2002/early 2003, NMFS drafted a
document entitled, ``Guidance for Conducting Literature
Searches for Section 7 Consultations.'' Has NMFS finalized this
guidance? If so, was the guidance subject to peer review or
notice and comment? If not, what criteria does NMFS rely on to
include or exclude data or information that appear in published
literature? Please provide the Committee with documentation
outlining criteria currently used?
Answer: NMFS has not finalized that guidance. NMFS and FWS issued a
joint policy in 1994 on Information Standards in the ESA which
addresses this topic. That policy requires Service biologists to
evaluate all scientific and other information that will be used to
prepare biological opinions and incidental take statements. It requires
biologists:
a.  To gather and evaluate all scientific and other information
that will be used to determine the species' status, develop and
implement recovery plans, monitor delisted species and to
prepare biological opinions and permits.
b.  To gather and impartially evaluate biological, ecological,
and other information that disputes official positions,
decisions, and actions proposed or taken by the Services during
their implementation of the Act.
c.  To the extent consistent with sections 4, 7, and 10 of the
ESA, and to the extent consistent with the use of the best
scientific and commercial data available, use primary and
original sources of information as the basis for
recommendations to make a determination of whether a Federal
action is likely to jeopardize a proposed, threatened, or
endangered species or destroy or adversely modify critical
habitat. These sources shall be retained as part of the
administrative record supporting an action and shall be
referenced in all official Federal Register notices and
biological opinions prepared for an action.
d.  To collect, evaluate, and complete all reviews of
biological, ecological, and other relevant information within
the schedules established by the Act, appropriate regulations,
and applicable policies.
e.  To conduct management-level review of documents developed
and drafted by Service biologists to verify and assure the
quality of the science used to establish official positions,
decisions, and actions taken by the Services during their
implementation of the Act.
Hastings/Lucas 23. (EPA): As of today, how many requests for
consultation have been sent by EPA to one of the Services
regarding pesticides, under court order or settlement, to which
the Service has not substantively responded? As of today, how
many additional pesticide product/species combinations is EPA
under court order or settlement to send to one of the services?
When do you expect EPA to send those to a Service?
Answer: As of May, 2011, EPA has submitted 147 consultation
requests to either the FWS or NMFS, under court order or consistent
with a schedule in a settlement agreement or stipulated injunction.
These requests date from July 2002 to the present. Of these
consultation requests, the NMFS has responded to 21 through issuance of
final Biological Opinions. An additional two consultations were
requests for informal consultation on which the NMFS non-concurred in
EPA's determination that the pesticide was Not Likely to Adversely
Affect the species being reviewed. Another 47 consultations were the
subject of a letter from the FWS which it could not complete based on
the information provided by EPA. If each of the above categories is
considered to be a substantive response, there remain 77 consultation
packages with FWS for which EPA has not received any substantive
response. Of those, EPA is aware that the NMFS plans to address 13
through issuance of additional Biological Opinions between now and
April 30, 2012.
Hastings/Lucas 24 (NMFS): In your letter to EPA on January 14, 2009,
you said NMFS did not have the staff capability to respond to
EPA with regard to registration review consultations within
normal statutory timelines. EPA has scheduled 70 registration
reviews a year for each of the next 7 years. How many more FTEs
would be required for you to keep up with EPA's schedule,
including a 90 day response time in each? What increase in your
budget would be required?
Answer: NMFS estimates approximately 40 additional FTEs would be
needed to consult within the 90-day statutory deadline and promptly
complete the biological opinions (within 45 days thereafter).
Approximately $6 million per year would be needed to support these
FTEs.
Hastings/Lucas 25. (NMFS): In a letter from Dr. Debra Edwards,
Director of the Office of Pesticide Programs of the
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) dated April 10, 2009 that
is addressed to James Lecky, NMFS Director of Protected
Resources, EPA conveyed several serious concerns about its
March 18, 2009 Draft Biological Opinion relative to potential
effects of carbaryl, carbofurn or methomyl to Pacific salmon
and steelhead species. Among those is the comment that the
Draft ``seems not to acknowledge that agricultural chemicals
are secondary stressors and therefore are considered to be a
minor factor in species survival relative to other factors.''
Please provide NMFS' explanation as to what NMFS considers to
be primary stressors as opposed to secondary stressors to
salmon. Please also identify what studies or scientific basis
you have for this opinion.
Answer: Unlike EPA pesticide risk assessments, which typically
consider the effects of a single active ingredient, biological opinions
must consider the effects of the stressors of the proposed action in
context with the other stressors which the listed organism may
concurrently experience. There are a number of locations where the
Services typically evaluate and describe the overall range of stressors
which are applicable to specific species. Firstly, at the time of
deciding to list a species as threatened or endangered under the ESA,
the Services conduct extensive and rigorous review of the status of the
species and the threats to their survival over time though public
notice and public comment rulemaking. These listing documents are an
excellent place to understand the ``big picture'' of the threats these
species face. Secondly, these additional stressors are described and
documented with brevity in the environmental baseline section of each
biological opinion. The general status and population trends of species
addressed in the opinion are also described in this baseline section of
specific opinions. Thirdly, to the extent that the Services have
completed draft or final recovery plans, which are done on a species by
species basis either individually or with multiple species bundled
together into a single geographic region, these recovery plans go into
considerably greater detail on the types and severity of threats that
such species confront
Hastings/Lucas 26. (NMFS/FWS): Do the Services (NMFS and FWS) have
administrative discretion to re-open biological opinions to
consider additional or more current science or data? Has this
occurred for any NMFS or FWS biological opinion regarding the
affects of agricultural chemicals on salmon in the past?
Answer: The implementing regulations provide four discrete
``triggers'' for re-opening a completed consultation and one of those
triggers is that new information reveals effects of the action that may
affect listed species or critical habitat in a manner not previously
considered (see 50 CFR 402.16(b)). EPA has not reinitiated, nor has
NMFS requested that EPA reinitiate consultation on the biological
opinions it has issued on national pesticides registrations. In 1989,
the FWS completed a reinitiated consultation with EPA regarding
selected portions of five previous biological opinions.
Hastings/Lucas 27. (NMFS): Page 11 of NMFS' 2010 Report to Congress on
the Pacific Coastal Salmon Recovery Fund indicates that two-
thirds of the 28 ESA-listed salmon populations are categorized
as either ``stable'' or ``increasing'' over the past 10 years.
During the same past decade, various labeled pesticides were
utilized by farmers, foresters, weed control districts,
mosquito control districts, and others. How do you reconcile
the increasing trends of 18 of the 28 populations of salmon
with NMFS' conclusion in these biological opinions that all 28
species would be jeopardized with the use of the same
pesticides?
Answer: Salmon and steelhead stocks face a wide range of major
stressors that have caused their decline over the last century,
including extensive losses of habitat functions across a wide range of
habitat stressors, including the adverse effects of past forestry, the
filling and diking of riparian areas, the pollution of rivers, streams
and estuaries, and the hardening of shorelines. Considerable progress
has occurred in addressing a number of these topics over the last
decade, and yet much work remains to achieve the health and
productivity of these stocks which will lead to their delisting under
the ESA.
The PCSRF Annual Report compiles the activities and accomplishments
of the states and other parties in protecting or restoring at-risk
salmon populations in Alaska, California, Oregon, Washington, and Idaho
over the course of the applicable reporting year. The report also notes
the general status of all of the listed salmon stocks across this same
extensive geography.
In contrast, these consultations are prospective in nature,
examining the future effects of a proposed action on the prospects of
survival and recovery of these species. Specifically, these
consultations examine the likely continued adverse effects of pesticide
and herbicides uses on these stocks over time, and whether these uses
might appreciably reduce the likelihood of their survival or recovery
over time or adversely modify the critical habitat that has been
designated. In short, the current status of a species as either stable,
declining or improving does not address the question of the effects of
a future action on those stocks, which is the focus of the
consultations.
Hastings/Lucas 28. (NMFS): Does NMFS maintain data for all California
stocks of salmon listed under ESA? The 2010 Report to Congress
suggests that NMFS did not have sufficient data for northern
California coastal coho, California Central Valley steelhead,
California coastal chinook, northern California steelhead,
central California coastal steelhead, south central California
steelhead and southern California steelhead. If your agency
cannot provide Congress the current status of these salmon
populations, please describe what information NMFS'
``jeopardy'' conclusions are based on in NMFS' biological
opinions for pesticides issued in 2008, 2009 and 2010. When
will you have sufficient data to determine status of these
stocks?
Answer: There is less population and trend data available for
northern California coastal coho, California Central Valley steelhead,
California coastal chinook, northern California steelhead, central
California coastal steelhead, south central California steelhead and
southern California steelhead than for some of the other species
addressed in the pesticide opinions. This situation is discussed in the
status of the species section in each biological opinion. Final
determinations, including jeopardy and non-jeopardy decisions, are
based on available data. Information considered included what was known
about distribution of the species, life history, and population trends.
NMFS reviews recovery plans every five years per statute, and this
includes an update on status, if it has available information.
Hastings/Lucas 29. (NMFS/FWS): On January 26, 2004, both the NMFS
Administrator and the FWS Director signed a letter to the EPA
Office of Prevention. Pesticides and Toxic Substances
confirming that both agencies had reviewed EPA's ``Overview of
EPA's Ecological Risk Assessment Process'' and found that EPA's
process appropriately assessed the effects of pesticides on
listed species and critical habitat. Have your agencies,
individually or collectively, changed their opinion of EPA's
risk assessment process, and if so, how does it need to be
modified to meet your agencies' risk assessment approval?
Answer: Many of the issues that were covered in the letter are
among those that we have referred to the NAS and we believe the NAS's
advice will be an important element in deciding whether any
modifications to EPA's or the Services' risk assessment protocols are
needed.
Hastings/Lucas 30. (EPA): In 2007 and 2008, EPA submitted 64 pesticide
assessments for ESA formal consultation regarding the
California red-legged frog to the FWS under the 2004
counterpart regulations. Did the FWS respond to EPA regarding
these pesticide assessments within the timeframe required by
law? Did they respond at all?
Answer: EPA received a letter from the FWS dated January 14, 2009,
that addressed 47 consultations EPA initiated between March 2007 and
October 2008. That letter expressed the FWS position that each of the
47 consultation packages was deficient and that additional information
will be required for each request. The letter also refers EPA to a
previous letter dated February 11, 2008, in which the FWS did not
concur on EPA's determinations regarding potential effects of atrazine
to the Alabama sturgeon and the dwarf wedgemussel based on the
information available. Of the 47 consultations, all but one (the
consultation regarding seven freshwater mussels) were initiated under
the provision in the ``counterpart regulations'' at 50 CFR part 402.46,
Optional Formal Consultation Procedures for FIFRA actions. The January
2009 FWS response to consultations initiated between March 2007 and
October 2008 did not meet the timeframes or the substantive
requirements established in 50 CFR part 402.46. EPA responded to the
January 14, 2009, letter clarifying that under the Services'
counterpart regulations, Service requests for additional information
are addressed as part of the consultation process and that EPA and the
Services, therefore, remain in consultation regarding these
submissions.
EPA initiated informal consultation on atrazine for these and other
species on August 31, 2006. After numerous discussions with the FWS
regarding their comments, EPA amended its analyses and resubmitted the
package for informal consultation on March 21, 2007. FWS did not concur
with EPA's determination.
Hastings/Lucas 31. (FWS): Does the FWS follow its own Endangered
Species Consultation Handbook posted on its website and adhere
to the 90 day timeframe requirements for formal consultations?
Answer: Yes. FWS follows the timeframe whenever possible, given
available resources.
Hasting/Lucas 32. (FWS): The FWS has listed over 60 species of
beetles, flies and moths under the ESA, including the Delhi
Sands flower-loving fly in California. The range for the listed
Delhi Sands flower-loving fly is nearly the entire state of
California. As part of FWS recovery plans for this species of
fly, has the FWS evaluated the usage of pesticides or
herbicides in all parts of the state of California? How would
FWS' ``reasonable and prudent alternatives'' differ from NMFS'
with regard to its jeopardy conclusions in the first three
Pacific salmon biological opinions?
Answer: The FWS has not evaluated the usage of pesticides or
herbicides in California for possible effects to the Delhi Sands
flower-loving fly so it is not possible to know at this time whether
any ``reasonable and prudent alternatives'' would be necessary or
whether they would differ from those developed by NMFS in the first
three Pacific salmon biological opinions.
Hastings/Lucas 33. (FWS): The Fish and Wildlife Service's public
website includes a statement about the impact of invasive
species on endangered species. To control invasive and aquatic
nuisance species, does FWS utilize pesticides or chemicals that
are labeled by EPA? Please provide the Committee with a
comprehensive description of all national refuges and other
federal land areas in which endangered species and invasive
species coincide with your management responsibilities.
Answer: Yes, the FWS uses pesticides that are labeled by the EPA.
When using these pesticides, the Service follows Department of the
Interior and Service policies that require that we use EPA-registered
pesticides in complete conformance with the EPA label. That is a legal
requirement of FIFRA. The Service conveys this requirement in several
training courses for our land managers related to integrated pest
management, pesticides, and invasive species. In addition, the
Service's Regional Integrated Pest Management Coordinators review the
Pesticide Use Proposals that they review to ensure that the proposed
uses comply with the labels.
With regard to your request for information on the presence of
invasive species and endangered species, unfortunately, it is likely
that there are invasive species present on most, if not all, of the
National Wildlife Refuges at some or all times of the year. 356
National Wildlife Refuges provide the home for one or more threatened
or endangered species. The degree to which invasive species are
threatening the recovery of a listed species is not fully known in all
cases. However, there are several examples where invasive species are
of specific concern to the Service with respect to the conservation and
recovery of listed species. A well-known example would be zebra mussels
on the Upper Mississippi River National Wildlife and Fish Refuge where
they pose a conservation concern for a number of listed native
mollusks. Another high-profile emerging issue of conservation concern
is the impacts of cheatgrass on sage grouse (a candidate species under
the ESA). Lesser known examples include the chytrid fungus and Wyoming
toad recovery on Mortenson Lake NWR and plague impacts (from the non-
native bacteria) on black-footed ferrets at the Charles M. Russell
National Wildlife Refuge In Montana. Our National Wildlife Refuges in
both Florida and Hawaii have long-standing issues with invasive plants
and animals that both directly and indirectly hamper the conservation
of numerous listed species throughout those geographic regions both on
and off national wildlife refuges. The James Campbell NWR in Hawaii is
home to the Hawaiian stilt and Hawaiian coot, both of which are
impacted by the presence of invasive rats, cats, and mongoose. The
brown tree snake on the Island of Guam (Guam NWR) poses a major concern
to the conservation of the Guam Micronesian kingfisher. Through the
recent investments in the National Wildlife Refuge System's Inventory
and Monitoring effort we have, not coincidentally, identified both
threatened and endangered species and invasive species as priority
initiatives. Significant resources are being committed to gather the
needed information to better understand these relationships across the
National Wildlife Refuge System.
Hastings/Lucas 34. (NMFS): Two studies over the past five years (in
2005 and 2010) have been conducted by Florida labs on the
impacts of a critical mosquito control product, naled, in fresh
and salt water environments. These studies revealed a much
actual lower impact than if the NMFS modeling in recent
biological opinions issued for impacts to Pacific salmon had
been utilized. Has NMFS factored this data into its biological
opinions, and if not, does it intend to for future modeling?
Answer: NMFS considered several field studies regarding ultra-low
volume (ULV) aerial applications of mosquito adulticides. Two of these
studies are described in the opinion (pages 562-565). One (Pierce et al
2005) evaluated naled use in the Florida Keys, and another (Bolton-
Warburg et al 2007) considered naled use in South Carolina. These
studies were considered, along with modeling estimates and monitoring
data, to arrive at conclusions regarding naled. NMFS is unaware of
which 2010 study to which the Committee is referring.
Hastings/Lucas 35. (NMFS/FWS): The Center for Biological Diversity
recently sued to restrict the use of naled in Florida, alleging
it adversely impacts a number of ESA-listed species. Do the
NMFS and FWS intend to apply 500 to 1000 foot buffers in
Florida's lakes, streams and other water bodies similar to
those advocated in the biological opinions for salmon in the
Pacific Northwest and California? Will NMFS and FWS take into
account all Florida state agriculture data and other studies,
since it apparently did not in the recent salmon biological
opinions?
Answer: The Services have not received a request for consultation
from EPA on the use of naled in Florida. NMFS has consulted on EPA's
registration of naled, but per a court settlement, NMFS only evaluated
the effects of that registration on Pacific salmonids. Should NMFS or
FWS consult with EPA on the registration of naled and its effects on
listed species in Florida, the agencies will take into account any
Florida state agriculture data, along with other studies and any other
pertinent scientific information. Any discussion of potential buffers
is premature at this time.
Hastings/Lucas 36. (NMFS): Does NMFS analyze the impact of actions in
biological opinions on certain specific populations or broadly
to include all 28 populations of salmon?
Answer: NMFS analyzes the impact of any listed species under our
jurisdiction on a species-by-species basis, or, more precisely, on a
species, subspecies, or ``distinct population unit'' of a species,
depending upon what is listed at the time of the consultation. In
analyzing the effects of a proposed action on the listed species, NMFS
typically starts by looking at the effects on individuals, then on the
populations which those individuals comprise, and then rolling up the
population level effects to the level of listed species--in those
instances where the listed ``unit'' is comprised of multiple
populations, which is the case with most salmonid listings. In the
pesticide consultations, the effects analysis is limited to listed
salmonids in the Pacific as part of Court settlement agreements.
Hastings/Lucas 37. (NMFS/FWS): Do either NMFS or the FWS have experts
on staff that are able to fully analyze the impacts of your
proposed ``reasonable and prudent alternatives'' on agriculture
production, forestry, weed control and mosquito districts? What
is the level of consultation your experts have engaged with
other experts on these issues in the Department of Agriculture
and state departments of agriculture?
Answer: Please see the answer to #10, above. Typically NMFS works
with Federal action agencies to determine the economic and technical
feasibility of a potential RPA. USDA has not had a significant role in
the FIFRA consultations between EPA and NMFS to date. However, NMFS,
FWS, EPA, and USDA are part of the interagency workgroup examining
issues related to these consultations. That interagency group should
provide a valuable avenue to access USDA's expertise in this area.
Hastings/Lucas 38. (NMFS/FWS): How do the NMFS and FWS determine the
action area that is to be evaluated for impacts to listed
species in a section 7 consultation? Does NMFS or the FWS
consider critical habitat designation maps as the area that
would be covered for potential impacts to species, or is there
some other measurement that your agency utilizes? Please
explain.
Answer: The action area is defined by regulation as the area where
direct and indirect effects of the action may occur. It is determined
on a case-by-case basis for each proposed action. For the purposes of
the salmonid pesticide consultations, the action area was limited to
areas within the states of California, Idaho, Oregon, and Washington.
Hastings/Lucas 39. (NMFS/FWS): How do NMFS and the FWS define an
affected ``stream'' for purposed of potential ``reasonable and
prudent alternatives'' including buffers, for pesticide
applications?
Answer: In its RPAs, NMFS did not specifically define ``streams''.
As a general matter, NMFS defined salmonid habitats as freshwaters,
estuarine habitats, and nearshore marine habitats including bays within
the listed species' ranges, including migratory corridors. The
freshwater habitats include intermittent streams and other habitats
temporally connected to salmonid-bearing waters when those habitats
contain water. For the first three biological opinions, freshwater
habitats also include all known types of floodplain habitats as well as
drainages, ditches, and other man-made conveyances to salmonid habitats
that lack salmonid exclusion devices (e.g., fish screens).
Hastings/Lucas 40. (NMFS/FWS): For rivers and streams that include
multiple listed fish species (i.e. salmon, smelt and bull
trout), did FWS prepare a separate biological opinion or review
NMFS' data or modeling to determine impacts to freshwater
species and were the same mitigation measures used as were for
salmon in these biological opinions?
Answer: The Fish and Wildlife Service has not completed
consultations for the pesticides covered in the NMFS biological
opinions, nor has the Service commented on NMFS' data or models.
Hastings/Lucas 41. (NMFS/FWS): How do NMFS and the FWS resolve
differences in scientific data or modeling relating to
Endangered Species Act consultations?
Answer: The ESA requires the Services and consulting agencies to
use the best scientific and commercial data available in addressing a
federal agency's duty to insure that its actions are not likely to
jeopardize the continued existence of any listed species or result in
the destruction or adverse modification of designated critical habitat.
The Services gather all available data and assess the relevance of that
data to addressing the substantive duties imposed by section 7(a)(2).
In keeping with the statutory construct to ``insure'' that federal
agency actions are not likely to jeopardize the continued existence of
listed species or cause the destruction or adverse modification of
critical habitat, the ESA has been interpreted to provide the benefit
of the doubt to the species in situations where the available data are
less than fully dispositive.
Hastings/Lucas 42. (NMFS/FWS): On January 18, 2011, the President
issued Executive Order 13563, ``Improving Regulation and
Regulatory Review.'' Section 6 of that Order calls for a
``Retrospective Analyses of Existing Rules.'' Have NMFS or FWS
identified the joint rules governing consultations as one of
the regulations that should be ``modified or streamlined. . .so
as to make the agency's regulatory program more effective or
less burdensome?'' Please explain each of your agencies' plans
to implement this executive order relative to ESA.
Answer: The Services have specifically identified the establishment
of a new regulatory definition of ``destruction or adverse modification
of critical habitat'' in the joint rules governing interagency
consultation as needed to improve the implementation of the ESA. This
is one of many adjustments being considered by the Services in their
joint ESA rulemaking currently underway.
Markey 1a. (EPA): During the hearing, I asked you whether the Office
of Pesticide Programs (OPP) considered the impacts of inert
ingredients on endangered species when it reviews an active
pesticide ingredient under FIFRA. Could you please elaborate as
to precisely what stage of the FIFRA inquiry this evaluation
occurs and provide the FIFRA regulatory authority under which
this occurs?
Answer: As part of its current ecological risk assessment process
conducted under the authority of FIFRA section 3, EPA reviews data
submitted by the pesticide manufacturer on the active ingredient and,
when available, on formulated products. Generally, six acute toxicity
tests are required for a product's registration. Additionally, EPA
requires end-use product data for terrestrial plants on the following
types of products: products applied directly to water (e.g., aquatic
herbicides, mosquito larvicides); products whose expected concentration
in water exceeds half the median lethal dose; and products formulated
with an ingredient expected to enhance the toxicity of the active
ingredient (a synergist). EPA also reviews available open literature to
determine whether any data exists in the public realm related to a
formulated product. Through analysis and comparison of toxicity data on
the active ingredient and that for the formulated product, EPA
determines whether the additional constituents in the formulated
product (including inert ingredients) render it more toxic than the
active ingredient alone. If the formulated product data shows the
product is more toxic than the active ingredient alone, EPA will use
the formulated product data quantitatively to assess the risk to non-
target listed and non-listed species. The comparison of available data
on the formulated product and with data on active ingredient alone
allows EPA to determine whether there may be a potential for concern
with a formulated product that is not accounted for by considering the
potential effects of the active ingredient alone.
Markey 1b. (EPA): Would it be accurate to state that the OPP's inquiry
on the impacts of inert ingredients occurs primarily after the
FIFRA initial screening process, and during the Biological
Evaluation that the OPP completes as a prerequisite to formal
consultations with the NMFS or FWS under ESA? If not, why not?
Please also provide an example to the Committee to help
illustrate exactly when and how OPP evaluates the effect of
inert ingredients on a specific listed species. Has EPA ever
undertaken any such efforts (a) in the absence of an ongoing or
anticipated ESA consultation or (b) in the absence of a court
ordered mandate or settlement? If the answer is yes for either
(a) or (b), please provide a complete description, including a
timeline, related to each such instance.
Answer: OPP's analysis, as described above, to determine whether
inert ingredients in pesticide products are adding to the potential
risk from use of the product is currently an integral part of the
ecological risk assessment conducted to support a registration or
registration review decision for a pesticide. This analysis is
conducted independently of whether there are concerns for federally
listed threatened or endangered species.
Markey 2. (EPA): Determining the impacts of multiple environmental
stressors is a highly complex endeavor. During the hearing, you
were asked whether OPP considered how multiple pesticides may
interact and threaten the existence of endangered species, and
you responded that OPP considers this during the FIFRA
registration process. Could you please explain and elaborate on
the scientific difficulties involved in such an inquiry, given
that in any given body of water, the mix of different
pesticides and other chemical substances can change? When
during both (a) the full FIFRA review and (b) ESA consultation
does OPP consider such potential synergistic impacts on
endangered species? Please also provide us with any guidance or
other materials used by EPA to assess such impacts. Please also
provide to the Committee a specific example of a pesticide
registration to help illustrate exactly when and how this
analytical inquiry occurs.
Answer: The same type of information that informs EPA's analysis of
whether inert ingredients in a pesticide product increase the toxicity
of the formulation, also informs EPA's consideration of the effect of
multiple stressors. Through review of the same data, EPA can compare
the toxicity of the active ingredient alone, to that of the products
that contain multiple active ingredients to determine whether the
combination of active ingredients results in toxicity not accounted for
by the single active ingredient alone. Further consideration of
multiple chemical stressors is complicated by factors on both the
hazard and exposure sides of the risk equation. For example, the hazard
expressed in toxicity studies of a multiple active ingredient compound
may not be what occurs in the real world after a product is applied
because the different constituents in the product may degrade at
different rates. Variable degradation, along with differences in how
the constituents move through the environment, makes it very
difficult--if not impossible--to predict the level of each active
ingredient a species may encounter simultaneously. How best to account
for such variability in predicting toxicity and exposure to multiple
chemical stressors in the environment is one of the questions the
federal government is putting before the NAS for their consideration
and advice.
Markey 3. (EPA): Does the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) have
the authority to use some of the fees it collects under the
Pesticide Registration Improvement Act (PRIA) to refund the
Fish and Wildlife Service (FWS) or the National Marine
Fisheries Service (NMFS) for increased consultation workloads
in the future? If yes, please describe how such authority might
be used in the future.
Answer: Fees assessed under PRIA have historically been based on
the costs to EPA to review applications and to offset the expedited
review schedules imposed on EPA by PRIA. Allowing reimbursement to
``supporting programs'' outside of EPA would require an increase in the
fees assessed to achieve the same goals and may require additional
legislative authority.
Markey 4a. (EPA): Do you believe that the Endangered Species Act (ESA)
consultation process is entirely duplicative of the Federal
Insecticide, Fungicide, and Rodenticide Act (FIFRA)
registration process?
Answer: While the ecological risk assessments that EPA performs on
pesticides are relevant to its duties under both FIFRA and the ESA, it
is clear that the statutes themselves are not entirely duplicative. The
challenge for the federal government is how to ensure that analyses
performed by different segments of the agencies are complementary. The
Services can bring to bear important expertise on species' biology and
geographic distribution that is not currently available to EPA. EPA and
the Services are working to determine how to better align analyses of
pesticide toxicity and fate characteristics in bringing this pesticide-
specific information to bear on risk assessments for listed species.
Markey 4b. (EPA): Is there any data that the NMFS or FWS is required
to consider during the ESA consultation process that is not
required to be considered by the OPP during the registration
and re-registration process? If yes, please describe. If no,
has the OPP always considered such data in the past?
Answer: The ESA requires consideration of the best scientific and
commercial data available. However, the ESA statute itself does not
define ``best available scientific data'' nor does it prescribe
specific standards governing data quality, given the very wide variety
of plants, birds, animals and fish which are addressed by the program.
Several decades of case-law speak to the issue of the general
obligation to use best available science, but that same case-law gives
little supplemental guidance on the boundaries of the concept. Through
its regulations at 40 CFR part 158, EPA has established a standard
suite of data required to support registration of a pesticide under
FIFRA. However, EPA can and does consider additional relevant
information in conducting its assessments under FIFRA.
Markey 5. (EPA): FIFRA guards against ``unreasonable adverse effects''
on the environment. But FIFRA defines this term to require the
EPA to consider the overall economic benefits to agriculture as
part of this unreasonableness inquiry. If the economic benefits
of the registration of a pesticide slightly outweigh the
estimated environmental damage would EPA be authorized under
FIFRA to cancel the pesticide? For example, if registration
creates $10 million dollars in economic benefits, and
simultaneously causes $9 million in environmental damage (e.g.
from higher water treatment costs) would EPA be authorized
under FIFRA to cancel the pesticide? Under this scenario, would
EPA be authorized under FIFRA to require a new condition of use
(labeling, etc) for the pesticide? If the response is yes to
either question, has EPA ever exercised such authority and if
so, please describe the circumstances?
Answer: In addressing the hypothetical circumstances identified
above, it is important first to understand that, as defined in FIFRA
section 2(bb), the statutory standard of ``unreasonable adverse effects
to the environment'' is not a risk-benefit standard with respect to
human dietary risk. Rather, section 2(bb) requires that the human
dietary risk from a pesticide meets the section 408(b) Federal Food
Drug and Cosmetic Act safety standard. Under that ``risk only''
standard, which requires that EPA find a ``reasonably certainty of no
harm,'' EPA evaluates whether dietary exposures are ``safe'' in
determining whether to permit or further regulate the use of a
pesticide. Thus, in the hypothetical circumstance above, EPA would not
balance the economic benefits of pesticide use against the risks from
human exposure to drinking water and the costs of appropriate water
treatment. For risks other than human dietary risk, FIFRA directs EPA
to take into account the ``economic, social, and environmental costs
and benefits'' of the use of pesticides. Under this standard, EPA
balances the risks from the use of a pesticide against the benefits
that accrue from the use of the pesticide in deciding whether to
register or cancel a pesticide, or to seek lesser restrictions on a
registered pesticide--such as labeling amendments (which are also
accomplished through the cancellation process absent registrant
agreement). If EPA concludes that the risk-benefit balance weighs in
favor of further restrictions on the use of a pesticide, it will pursue
regulatory action under FIFRA. If it comes to the contrary conclusion,
it will not pursue regulatory action.
With respect to the assumptions underpinning the risk-benefit
balancing suggested in the hypothetical question, EPA must note that
FIFRA does not require the Agency to monetize risks and benefits in
either registering a pesticide or taking cancellation action, and EPA
cannot recite an instance where it has been possible to completely and
accurately monetize all the risks and benefits associated with a
particular action.
Markey 6. (EPA): In Washington Toxics Coalition v. U.S. Dept. of
Interior, 457 F. Supp. 2d 1158, 1184 (D. Wash 2006), the Court
stated that ``EPA's risk assessment process is not only less
protective than Service determinations, there is overwhelming
evidence on the record that without a Service check, EPA risk
assessments (leading to pesticide registrations) would actually
result in harm to listed species.'' Do you believe that the
Court's conclusion that EPA-OPP's risk assessment procedures is
less protective was erroneous, and if so, why?
Answer: In the case cited above, the issue before the court was
whether the ESA could be interpreted to permit action agencies, such as
EPA, to satisfy their ESA consultation duties in certain lower risk
situations (those involving actions that are ``not likely to adversely
affect'' listed species) without first obtaining the written
concurrence of the Services on every such action. The court's
commentary on EPA's risk assessment process was therefore not intended
to serve--and does not serve--as the authoritative ruling of the court.
EPA agrees with the court's overall observation that aspects of the
Services' assessments were more conservative in nature than the
methodologies being used by EPA in the early 2000's.
Markey 7. (EPA): In 1989, the Fish and Wildlife Service completed a
Biological Opinion on the impacts of over 100 pesticide active
ingredients, including all of the pesticides at issue in the
West Coast Salmon Biological Opinions. This biological opinion
examined the effect of these pesticides on more than 125
endangered species, and concluded that the use of nearly all of
the pesticides being considered would cause jeopardy to at
least one of these endangered species. The Fish and Wildlife
Service recommended an array of Reasonable and Prudent
Alternatives (RPAs), including buffer zones between 20 yards
and \1/4\ mile in size to protect endangered species where
jeopardy was found. EPA never implemented any of the
recommendations by the Fish and Wildlife Service. Does EPA
believe that its decision not to implement the RPAs recommended
by FWS has resulted in further harm to these species? If not,
why not?
Answer: EPA is currently involved in litigation in U.S. district
court (CBD v. EPA, No. CV110293 (N.D.Cal.)) regarding, among other
things, EPA's response to the 1989 FWS biological opinion identified in
this question. Responding to this question at this time could prejudice
EPA's defense of that litigation. Respectfully, therefore, EPA must
decline to address this question at this time.
Markey 8. (EPA): How many effects determinations does EPA-OPP intend
to conduct this year in Biological Evaluations or Biological
Assessments on the impacts of pesticides on endangered species
where there is no court ordered settlement or consent decree
mandating that EPA take such action? Please provide a
description of all such efforts, including specific timelines
and milestones.
Answer: As mentioned in testimony, EPA intends to meet its ESA
obligations for pesticide registrations via the Registration Review
Program. Through this program, EPA will be re-evaluating the safety of
every pesticide registration at least once every 15 years. EPA's
approach is to analyze pesticides' potential to affect endangered and
threatened species in the ecological risk assessments supporting
regulatory decisions under the registration review program. EPA intends
to begin the registration review process for 72 pesticides in 2011 and
an additional 70 pesticides in 2012. The schedule for completing
assessments on these pesticides will vary depending on whether and to
what extent EPA needs to call in data from pesticide manufacturers.
Markey 9. (EPA): Previous lawsuits against EPA for failure to consult
with the FWS and NMFS have resulted in interim restrictions on
uses of certain pesticides in environmentally sensitive areas,
such as critical habitat for the endangered red-legged frog in
California, while EPA engages in the required consultations. Is
EPA enforcing these interim restrictions in order to prevent
harm to this species? If yes, please describe all such steps
taken as part of these efforts, including information on the
number of inspections performed, and list the remaining steps
that EPA is considering taking. If not, why not?
Answer: The settlements and court orders arising from the lawsuits
referred to in this question have not imposed FIFRA-enforceable
obligations on pesticide users that would authorize EPA to take
enforcement action against persons not complying with the terms of the
settlements and orders. For example, in CBD v. Johnson, No. 02-1580-JSW
(N.D. Cal., Oct. 20, 2006), the ``red-legged frog case,'' the
stipulated injunction entered by the court provides the following:
``This Order does not require EPA to take any action under the
Federal Insecticide, Fungicide, and Rodenticide Act including, but not
limited to, any action to suspend, cancel, or modify the registration
of any pesticide.''
Accordingly, the Order did not require a FIFRA regulatory action
that would give rise to amended product labeling bearing the terms of
the interim restrictions that EPA could enforce.
In connection with the Washington Toxics Coalition v. EPA (No. C01-
132C, order of Jan. 22, 2004) litigation, EPA likewise made clear
through a ``question and answer'' provided on its website that the
court-ordered injunctive relief in that action was not a FIFRA action
that EPA could enforce. The text of that ``question and answer'' is as
follows:
``6. Is it a violation of FIFRA to use a subject pesticide
within the buffer zones?
In an earlier order, the Court made clear that it would neither
order EPA to take regulatory action under FIFRA nor would its action
setting aside the registrations in the buffer zones constitute a
regulatory action under FIFRA. Although failure to comply with the
court order is not a violation of FIFRA, EPA recognizes the legal
effect of the Court's Order and is providing through our web site and
other avenues, information for pesticides users to understand the
provisions of the Order.''
Because EPA's sole authority to enforce pesticide use violations is
through its FIFRA authority, EPA cannot enforce the terms of these
settlements and court orders in the absence of FIFRA action that
modifies the terms of the subject pesticide registrations.
Markey 10. (EPA): Please describe for each of the 50 states the method
the EPA uses to track the use of pesticides. Is the EPA able to
track pesticide applications at county level (versus the state
level)? If yes, please provide a list of the States in which
the EPA is able to track pesticide applications on the county
level. Does the EPA have the capability to track pesticides on
a finer, more localized, scale? If yes, please indicate where
this level of tracking occurs.
Answer: Although FIFRA does not require EPA to track pesticide
usage at the state level, EPA does routinely obtain and use information
on pesticide usage in its regulatory decisions. Also, when considered
necessary for individual pesticides, FIFRA section 3(c) authorizes EPA
to require pesticide manufacturers to submit information to support the
continued registration of a pesticide. EPA has used this authority to
require reporting of pesticide usage information. For the most part,
however, EPA obtains pesticide usage data from other sources including
USDA, private companies, and the States. USDA's National Agricultural
Statistics Service (NASS) provides data for on-farm use of agricultural
chemicals in States with major agricultural production. EPA also
purchases data from a private research company, GfK Kynetec, that
surveys a statistically representative sample of pesticide users and
various crops and then projects that data to the State and national
level. Some states provide information regarding pesticide usage, but
these data sources (with the exception of California) generally are not
as comprehensive or systematic as NASS and GfK Kynetec information and
do not provide information on pesticide usage at the county or more
geographically refined scales. California requires use reporting for
all pesticide applications (excluding home and garden and most
industrial and institutional uses), and collects comprehensive data on
pesticide applications at the state, county, and sub-county level. EPA
has access to the data collected by California.
Markey 11. (EPA): Recent research has linked atrazine exposure to
cancer, birth defects, and endocrine disruption in humans, as
well as significant biological harm to wildlife. Although
banned by the European Union, this EPA-approved pesticide is
the most commonly used herbicide in the United States. Has the
EPA ever consulted with the Fish and Wildlife Service on the
impacts of atrazine to any listed species within the United
States? If so, please describe all such efforts. If not, why
not?
Answer: EPA has requested consultation with FWS or NMFS related to
the potential effects of pesticide products containing atrazine on a
variety of federally listed threatened or endangered species as
follows:

August 2003--Southern Oregon/Northern California coho
salmon and Central Valley California steelhead note: NMFS asked
EPA to provide additional information.

August 2006--Barton Springs salamander.

August 2006 (with further follow-up information to
the Service in 3/2007)--loggerhead turtle, leatherback turtle,
green turtle, Kemp's ridley turtle, shortnose sturgeon (note:
NMFS non-concurred on EPA's determination that atrazine was not
likely to adversely affect the species; no further consultation
has occurred), and dwarf wedge mussel in the Chesapeake Bay
watershed (MD, VA, DE).

August 2006 (with further follow-up information to
the Service in 3/2007)--Alabama sturgeon in the Alabama River
watershed.

March 2007--pink mucket pearly mussel, rough pigtoe
mussel, shiny pigtoe pearly mussel, fine-rayed pigtoe mussel,
heavy pigtoe mussel, ovate clubshell mussel, southern clubshell
mussel, and stirrup shell mussel.

September 2007--catspaw mussel, fat pocketbook
mussel, and northern riffleshell mussel.

September 2007--Pallid sturgeon.

September 2007--Topeka shiner.

February 2009--California red-legged frog and delta
smelt.
Markey 12. (EPA): Please describe in detail the EPA's interpretation
of the statutory mandates contained in section 1010 of the 1988
Amendments to the Endangered Species Act. Please describe the
actions and the specific year EPA took such actions to comply
with the mandates included in this provision of the law.
Answer: In 1988, Congress addressed the relationship between the
ESA and EPA's pesticide labeling program in section 1010 of Public Law
100-478 (enacted on October 7, 1988, concurrent with amendments to the
ESA). This provision required EPA to conduct a study and to provide
Congress with a report of the results (EPA's 1991 report to Congress:
Endangered Species Protection Program as it Relates to Pesticide
Regulatory Activities, EPA 540-09-91-120, May 1991) on ways to
implement EPA's endangered species pesticide labeling program in a
manner that both promotes the conservation of listed species and
minimizes the impacts to persons engaged in agricultural food and fiber
commodity production and other pesticide users and applicators. In
EPA's view, this law provided a clear sense that Congress desires that
EPA should fulfill its obligation to conserve listed species, while at
the same time considering the needs of agriculture and other pesticide
users.
Through a Federal Register notice published in March 1988, EPA
reviewed its progress in developing its Endangered Species Program and
invited public comment on a proposed program. Public meetings were held
around the country to obtain input. Over 600 sets of written comments
and recorded comments from the public meetings served to guide further
development of the program. In response to section 1010, EPA, the
Services and USDA formed a working group to study how EPA might proceed
to carry out its ESA obligations. The work of that group and its
consideration of the significant public input EPA received previously
were instrumental in developing EPA's 1989 proposal on its Endangered
Species Protection Program. The interagency working group further
studied best methods to develop maps, alternatives to mapping,
reasonable measures for mitigating risks, coordination methods, etc.
The result of the working groups deliberations and study were described
in EPA's May, 1991, Report To Congress as directed by section 1010(c).
Further, section 1010(a) directs EPA to take public comment on any
proposed pesticide labeling program imposed in order to comply with the
ESA. Pursuant to that provision, EPA issued and sought public comment
on its Endangered Species Protection Program in December 2002 (67 FR
71549, December 2, 2002). A final program Federal Register notice was
published in 2005.
Markey 13. (EPA): Under FIFRA authority, if EPA determines that the
current use of a pesticide causes unreasonable adverse effects
is it correct that EPA can only make changes to the pesticide
labeling if the pesticide manufacturer willingly volunteers to
change the labeling restrictions on its product? In the event
that the pesticide manufacturer does not voluntarily agree to
making product label changes, is EPA's only recourse the
cancellation process? Since 1980, how many times has the EPA
found that labeling changes are necessary, but the pesticide
manufacturer refused to voluntarily change its label? For each
of these cases did OPP invoke the cancellation process, and
what was the final result of that process?
Answer: If EPA determines that a registered pesticide, as currently
approved, causes unreasonable adverse effects on the environment, it
must pursue action under FIFRA in the absence of registrant agreement
to alter the terms of registration. In the vast majority of the
hundreds of cases where EPA has determined that either changes to
labeling or product cancellation are necessary, EPA and the pesticide
registrants have ultimately come to agreement regarding the terms and
timing for implementing additional limitations and restrictions. Since
1980, EPA has had to conduct only three contested cancellation or
suspension proceedings under section 6 of FIFRA. Each of these
proceedings resulted in either the cancellation of the pesticide
altogether or the deletion of certain uses from product registrations.
Markey 14. (EPA): Has EPA-OPP initiated consultation with the FWS or
NMFS for any species on any pesticide anywhere in the country,
in which at the end of the process, EPA fully implemented any
RPA designed to protect an endangered species? If so, please
provide examples and a description of such efforts taken,
including whether these efforts were taken as a part of a
court-ordered mandate or settlement of legal action.
Answer: The ecological risk assessments EPA performs under FIFRA,
and any resulting pesticide use limitations to protect non-target
organisms, may also provide protection for a variety of listed species.
As a result, looking only at specific actions taken following
consultation does not provide a complete picture of instances in which
EPA has protected listed species from the potential effects of a
pesticide. Nonetheless, EPA has fully implemented measures for the
protection of listed species on several specific occasions. These were
NOT related to litigation or court-ordered action. For example, EPA has
implemented protections for:

Attwater's prairie chicken relative to the pesticide
thiram.

Delmarva fox squirrel relative to the pesticide
carboxin.

Karner blue butterfly relative to the pesticide
methoxyfenozide.

Hine's emerald dragonfly relative to the pesticide
methoxyfenozide.
EPA has long stated that it intends to meet its ESA obligations for
pesticide registrations via the Registration Review Program. Through
this program, EPA will be re-evaluating the safety of every pesticide
registration at least once every 15 years. To date, EPA has initiated
consultations for several pesticides: formal consultations for
clomazone (April 2009) and fomesafen (April 2009), and informal
consultations for inorganic nitrates-nitrite (May 2010), carbon and
carbon dioxide (May 2010), and sulfur (May 2010). Each of these
consultations was initiated without court-ordered or mandated legal
settlement.
Markey 15. (EPA): When OPP completes a Biological Evaluation or a
Biological Assessment, is it required to consider the
application of a pesticide up to and including the legal limit
of what a pesticide applicator could apply to an area of land
or water as specified on a pesticide label?
Answer: EPA's ecological risk assessment procedures include
estimating the environmental concentrations from use of the pesticide
at its maximum labeled application rate.
Markey 16. (EPA): Do broad spectrum, organophosphate insecticides kill
beneficial insect species, including pollinators like bees,
predatory insects that naturally kill insect pests, and other
species like butterflies? If yes, please describe which of
these pesticides harm or kill beneficial species, and please
explain the types of impacts that might occur as a result of
exposure to these pesticides.
Answer: Some pesticides may have a specific mode of action that
affects only certain pest species. However, broad spectrum insecticides
would likely affect any insect species, including beneficial and other
non-target insects, if the insect is exposed at levels that result in
the effect. The specific effect exhibited by the insecticide on the
target pest would also occur in these non-target species. Exposure to
the organophosphate insecticides is expected to result in mortality due
to neurotoxic effects of the insecticide. EPA's ecological risk
assessments explore the potential for effects to non-target insects
(beyond honey bees) in part to characterize the extent of such effects
on the environment in general and on non-target species that may serve
as the prey-base for another species.
Markey 17 (NMFS): In the last few years, several endangered
Evolutionary Significant Unit (ESU) of salmon on the West Coast
have experienced population increases. However, most of these
populations still remain far below the population levels that
would allow for either downlisting from endangered to
threatened, or delisting under the Endangered Species Act
(ESA). In fact, the National Marine Fisheries Service's (NMFS)
report to Congress recognizes ``trends in abundance may not be
indicative of true recovery status. Other risk factors such as
low levels of abundance, lack of access to historical spawning
habitats, extirpation of component populations, and the lack of
spatial connectivity among extant component populations are
significant factors in determining recovery status.'' Please
describe the recovery criteria for delisting each salmon
Evolutionary Significant Unit (ESU) on the West Coast, and how
this relates to recent population trends and abundances that
indicate that some salmon ESUs are increasing.
Answer: The specific recovery criteria for each Evolutionarily
Significant Unit (ESU) with a proposed or final recovery plan are
included in the recovery plan documents available at the NMFS Northwest
Region (http://www.nwr.noaa.gov/Salmon-Recovery-Planning/ESA-Recovery-
Plans/Draft-Plans.cfm) and Southwest Region (http://www.swr.noaa.gov/
recovery/index.htm) websites. These voluminous reports and their
underlying scientific documents are reviewed briefly below.
After 27 Pacific salmon ESUs were listed as threatened or
endangered under the ESA, NMFS initiated a coastwide process to develop
recovery plans for these species. An important part of this process was
the creation of geographically-based Technical Recovery Teams--multi-
disciplinary science teams chaired by NMFS Northwest Fisheries Science
Center or Southwest Fisheries Science Center staff. NMFS asked the
Technical Recovery Teams to define ESU structure (i.e. the independent
and dependent populations that make up the ESU) and to develop
recommendations for biologically-based ESU and population viability
criteria.
NMFS encouraged each Technical Recovery Team to develop regionally
specific approaches while adhering to the same biological principles
for describing ESU and population viability. The biological principles
for viability used by all Technical Recovery Teams are described in a
NMFS technical memorandum, Viable Salmonid Populations and the Recovery
of Evolutionarily Significant Units (McElhaney et al. 2000 \1\). NMFS
defines a viable ESU as being naturally self-sustaining with a high
probability of persistence over a 100-year time period. Viable salmonid
populations are defined in terms of four parameters: abundance,
productivity (growth rate), spatial structure, and diversity. Each
Technical Recovery Team recommended criteria for these parameters
describing viable levels for an ESU and its component populations. An
ESU must meet or exceed these viability criteria for a sustained period
of time (e.g., 10-20 years or several salmon generations) to
demonstrate confidence that the ESU has attained a high probability of
persistence. For the 12 ESUs with recovery plans proposed or completed
so far, NMFS has largely adopted Technical Recovery Team
recommendations for biological viability criteria, with some
modifications. It is notable that to date, for all final recovery
plans, the biological viability criteria have been endorsed by key
stakeholders, including the states of Oregon and Washington, affected
tribes, local governments, and other stakeholders.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Available online at: http://www.nwfsc.noaa.gov/assets/25/
5561_06162004_143739_tm42.pdf
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The spatial structure and diversity components of the viable
salmonid population approach are the foundation of viable salmon
populations and ESUs; are critical components of conservation and
recovery efforts; and are required components to be considered in
progress towards recovery. The situation is analogous to managing a
financial portfolio: a well-diversified portfolio will be impacted less
by fluctuating market conditions than one concentrated in just a few
stocks. For example, the expression of a diversity of life-history
types (e.g., run timing of adults, timing of smolt ocean migration,
freshwater residency time, time spent in the marine environment) and a
distribution of spawning groups across the landscape can buffer
populations and ESUs from the impacts of environmental variation.\2\
Having populations appropriately distributed across the landscape
reduces the likelihood that a single catastrophic event (e.g., drought,
fire) would impact all of the populations in an ESU. High abundance and
productivity alone cannot make populations or ESUs resilient to changes
in environmental conditions. Accordingly, recovery planners are
emphasizing the need for salmon populations to be spread across the
landscape and in a variety of habitat types to support the diversity
and spatial structure necessary for population and ESU viability.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ Lindley et al. 2009. What caused the Sacramento River fall
Chinook stock collapse? U.S. Department of Commerce, NOAA Technical
Memorandum NOAA-TM-NMFS-SWFSC-447.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
In addition to biological viability criteria, each recovery plan
also must include threats criteria. Threats criteria are based on the
five listing factors in section 4(a)(1) of the ESA: (A) present or
threatened destruction, modification, or curtailment of [the species']
habitat or range; (B) over-utilization for commercial, recreational,
scientific or educational purposes; (C) disease or predation; (D)
inadequacy of existing regulatory mechanisms; or (E) other natural or
human-made factors affecting [the species'] continued existence.
Threats criteria describe conditions that, if met, would indicate that
the listing factors have been addressed sufficiently that the removal
of ESA protections is not likely to result in the re-emergence of the
threats.
The ESA requires that NMFS conduct a review of threatened and
endangered species at least once every five years to determine whether
it should retain its current listing status, remain listed but change
in status, or be delisted. NMFS is currently completing such a review
for ESA-listed West Coast salmon and steelhead. As part of this review,
the agency is updating the available status information for the
viability parameters and ESA listing factors, and evaluating recent
trends relative to the biological viability and threats criteria
detailed in proposed or final recovery plans, where they exist.
Several, but not all, ESA-listed salmon ESUs have increased in
abundance the last few years, in some cases following precipitous
declines since 2002. As described above, abundance is but one of many
parameters considered in evaluating overall ESU viability and progress
toward recovery goals. Additionally, improvements must be sustained for
a sufficient period of time to demonstrate a high probability of
persistence. While recent abundance trends for some ESUs may be
encouraging, they alone may not reflect true progress toward delisting
goals. NMFS Northwest Region expects to announce its 5-year status
review findings in the fall of this year. NMFS Southwest Region expects
to announce its finding also in the fall, 2011. Results will be
announced in the Federal Register, as well as posted at http://
www.nwr.noaa.gov and http://www.swr.noaa.gov.
Markey 18. (NMFS): Please describe what additional risks endangered
ESUs of salmon face if the factors affecting freshwater
survival of endangered salmon are not fully addressed,
especially since ocean conditions are variable and may revert
to less favorable conditions for salmon?
Answer: Put simply, threatened and endangered salmon ESUs are
unlikely to persist if the condition of their freshwater habitat is not
improved and protected. The quality and quantity of freshwater habitat
is particularly important to salmon during periods of poor ocean
conditions. When marine conditions are poor due to warm ocean
temperatures or decreased nutrient up-welling, salmon survival in the
ocean is often low. During these times, high survival in freshwater
becomes crucial to maintaining salmon abundance. If freshwater habitat
is degraded, (e.g., high stream temperatures, low levels of woody
debris, high level of contaminants, etc.) survival in the freshwater
environment may be low as well. When poor freshwater and marine habitat
conditions overlap in time, salmon populations can be driven to very
low abundance and extinction risk can increase significantly. As noted
in the response to Question 1, above, the distribution of salmon
populations across a variety of habitat types is essential for the
expression of diverse salmon rearing and migration behaviors. Such
life-history diversity allows salmon populations to be more resilient
to environmental change. For example, the diversity of life histories
in Chinook salmon (e.g., variations in size and age at migration,
duration of freshwater and estuarine residency, time of ocean entry)
has been described as an adaptive strategy for spreading mortality
risks in uncertain environments. For these reasons, NMFS' recovery
plans for West Coast salmon and steelhead emphasize the importance of
restoring and protecting freshwater habitat diversity, quality, and
quantity. Populations with properly functioning freshwater habitat are
at less risk during prolonged periods of unfavorable marine survival.
Markey 19. (NMFS): It is generally accepted that hatcheries currently
play a vital role for West Coast salmon fisheries, but are not
a substitute for wild salmon runs. Please discuss the
importance of wild salmon runs in building a sustainable, long-
term salmon fishery, and the benefits that wild runs provide to
fishing communities.
Answer: Hatchery programs were initiated for fishery enhancement
purposes as wild salmon runs became depleted, and as mitigation for
habitat loss resulting from the construction of dams and other
migration barriers. Although hatchery programs may provide near-term
benefits to abundance and productivity while habitat degradation and
other threats are addressed, over the long term, hatchery fish cannot
adequately replace the role of well-distributed and diverse wild salmon
populations in supporting healthy ecosystems, sustainable fisheries,
vibrant coastal communities, and the meaningful exercise of tribal
treaty rights and cultural practices. Despite considerable investments
in the hatchery production of salmon and steelhead, there are
dramatically fewer fish returning than was historically the case and
annual returns vary considerably. Long-standing evolutionary theory and
emerging empirical evidence suggest that hatchery operations can
undermine the diversity and productivity of nearby wild populations if
not properly operated. Moreover, hatcheries are dependent upon ongoing
infusions from the wild populations to maintain their own productivity
over time. Fisheries dependent upon genetically and behaviorally
homogeneous hatchery-produced salmon are more vulnerable to periods of
poor ocean conditions and have experienced significant limits on
harvest and, in some cases, fishery closures.\3\ In contrast, current
research demonstrates that well-distributed wild salmon populations
with diverse life histories demonstrate more resiliency to
environmental change and can support more prolific and sustainable
fisheries.\4\ Pacific coastal and inland communities whose economies
rely on sustainable salmon fisheries, in turn, benefit from a reliable,
sustainable wild salmon product that demands a market premium.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ The 2007 and 2008 closures of West-coast Chinook salmon
fisheries provide an example. The long-standing and ongoing degradation
of freshwater and estuarine habitats and the subsequent heavy reliance
on hatchery production were likely contributors to the collapse of the
fisheries during a period of poor ocean conditions. Over 150 years of
degradation and simplification of freshwater and estuary habitats have
changed Central Valley Chinook salmon from a highly diverse collection
of numerous wild populations to one dominated by fall-run Chinook
salmon from four large hatcheries. Naturally-spawning populations of
fall Chinook salmon are now genetically homogeneous in the Central
Valley, and their population dynamics have been synchronous over the
past few decades
\4\ Schindler, D.E., R. Hilborn, B. Chasco, C.P. Boatright, T.P.
Quinn, L.A. Rogers, M.S. Webster. 2010. Population diversity and the
portfolio effect in an exploited species. Nature 465:609-613. Available
on-line at: http://viewer.zmags.com/publication/5faee868#/5faee868/4
Hilborn, R., Quinn, T.P., Schindler, D., and Rogers, D.E. 2003.
Biocomplexity and fisheries sustainability. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences 100: 6564-6568.
Hilborn et al. 2003. Biocomplexity and fisheries sustainability.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 100: 6564-6568.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
In several of NMFS' recovery plans, the state and tribal
governments and local stakeholders are embracing ``broad sense'' goals
in excess of the levels needed for ESA delisting. These broad sense
goals call for enough wild salmon to provide for sustainable
recreational, commercial, and tribal treaty and trust fisheries, as
well as for other ecological, cultural, and social benefits.
Markey 20. (NMFS): Please discuss the ways that NMFS has provided for
public participation during the consultation process with EPA
in each of the four completed biological opinions for West
Coast salmon as well as public participation during the
upcoming biological opinions which will be completed in the
next several years. How have these efforts exceeded what is
normally afforded to the public during a typical consultation
with a federal agency?
Answer: NMFS issues draft biological opinions to EPA. EPA has
provided opportunity for public comment on each of these consultations.
In addition, NMFS meets with the applicants for each consultation to
seek the applicants' input into the biological opinions. NMFS has held
stakeholder workshops on these biological opinions and has participated
in one grower-sponsored workshop at the invitation of the growers.
Because interagency consultation is not a rulemaking process, NMFS does
not typically seek public comment on its draft biological opinion. The
process NMFS and EPA have engaged in to seek public input into these
pesticides consultations provides substantially more opportunity for
public participation than is available in most ESA consultations.
Markey 21. (NMFS): What steps has NMFS taken to refine and improve the
consultation process, taking into consideration lessons learned
as each Biological Opinion is completed?
Answer: As NMFS has completed each consultation, it has refined its
approach to the consultation process and has taken steps to engage
applicants in the process early in the consultation. NMFS issues draft
biological opinions to EPA. EPA has provided opportunity for public
comment on each of these consultations. In addition, NMFS meets with
the applicants for each consultation to seek the applicants' input into
the biological opinions as time and staffing allowed, given the very
tight court ordered schedules. Because interagency consultation is not
a rulemaking process, NMFS does not typically seek public comment on
its draft biological opinion. The process NMFS and EPA have engaged in
to seek public input into these pesticides consultations provides
substantially more opportunity for public participation than is
available in most ESA consultations. Over the course of these
consultations, NMFS, EPA, the states, the growers and the applicant
community have all become more mutually educated into the issues and
perspectives of each.
Markey 22. (NMFS): Please describe the average workload for NMFS
employees who are responsible for completing endangered species
consultations. Are additional resources needed that would allow
NMFS to complete consultations in a timely manner?
Answer: NMFS consults on a variety of federal actions that vary in
degree of complexity and geographic scope. Most consulting biologists
are working on multiple consultations at any given time. Although NMFS
consults on federal actions that are on known schedules, most requests
for consultations cannot be predicted. These factors affect staff
workload and completion times. NMFS has 6 FTEs dedicated to
consultations on EPA FIFRA registrations, which allow the application
of chemicals for multiple agriculture and non-agricultural purposes
over large areas. In addition to preparing the biological opinions,
those staff must also work on preparing for litigation, preparing for
and traveling to meet with stakeholders and participate in workshops,
and must respond to multiple requests for information related to these
consultations. With this level of staffing, NMFS will not be able to
handle the anticipated increase in consultations coming from EPA's
registration review programs. NMFS anticipates approximately 40
additional FTEs would be needed to meet future EPA FIFRA consultations.
Approximately $6 million per year would be needed to support these
FTEs, for salary, benefits, as well as for overhead costs such as
space, equipment, supplies and travel.
Markey 23. (NMFS): Does Section 1010 of the 1988 Amendments to the
Endangered Species Act place any new statutory obligations on
the NMFS? Does Section 1010 afford pesticide manufacturers any
special rights that are not typically afforded to the general
public during the consultation process?
Answer: Section 1010 of the 1988 Amendments to the ESA (Public Law
100-478, Oct. 7, 1988) require EPA to work jointly with USDA and the
Department of the Interior to identify appropriate alternatives for
implementing a program to protect listed species from pesticides, while
allowing agricultural, food and fiber commodity production to continue.
The amendments require EPA to investigate the best available methods to
develop maps, alternatives to mapping, and to identify alternatives to
prohibitions on pesticides use. The amendments also require EPA to
inform and educate fully those engaged in agricultural production of
the elements of any proposed pesticide labeling program and to provide
an opportunity to comment on the elements of such a program. The
amendments do not place any new statutory obligations on NMFS, nor do
they afford pesticide manufacturers any special rights in the
consultation process. However, many manufacturers may qualify as
applicants to these consultations.
Markey 24. (USDA): In the USDA's 2003 economic analysis referenced in
your testimony, which was originally prepared for the Court in
Washington Toxics v. U.S. Dept. of Interior, you provided an
estimate of the economic impacts of imposing no-spray buffers.
Please explain whether or not this economic analysis account
for the full set of costs and benefits of restricting
pesticides including:

Economic benefits to farmers that already engage in
alternative pest-control approaches;

Economic benefits to organic farmers;

Economic benefits to commercial or recreational
fishermen;

Water treatment costs;

Healthcare costs to farm workers that might be
exposed to pesticides; and

General reductions in healthcare costs to members of
the public, including children who are exposed to pesticides.
Answer: The 2003 economic analysis did not consider benefits to
organic farmers or farmers engaging in alternative pest control
approaches, benefits to fishermen, water treatment costs, or healthcare
costs to farm workers or the general public. The analysis assumed land
in the no-spray buffers would be retired from production resulting in
lost production and sales revenues.
Markey 25. (USDA): In the USDA 2003 economic analysis prepared for the
Court in the Washington Toxics case, you provided an estimate
of the economic impacts of imposing no-spray buffers. Was this
analysis limited to a worst case scenario that assumed that in
the absence of spraying a particular pesticide, the farmland
would lay fallow? During the time that this analysis was
prepared how likely was it that this worst case scenario would
occur? Did the analysis take into account the hundreds of other
registered pesticides that could have been used in the West
Coast states to treat infestations?
Answer: The analysis assumed that the 54 pesticide active
ingredients in the Washington Toxics case are critical to crop
production, alternatives result in unacceptably high yield losses and
that the loss-minimizing strategy for growers would be to retire the
land in the buffer strips. The likelihood of this outcome for every
potential crop was unknown. The likelihood that an alternative pest
control measure could be used effectively in the buffer parcels was
also unknown.
Markey 26. (USDA): In 2009, Washington State agriculture received over
$720 million in subsidies and $24 million in disaster relief.
When the USDA calculates the economic benefits and costs of
utilizing a particular pesticide, does it also take into
account the subsidies that agricultural entities receive from
the federal government in those cost/benefit analysis? If yes,
please describe how. If not, why not?
Answer: Agricultural subsidies would not be considered in cost-
benefit analyses of pesticides unless program eligibility or the size
of payments depended on pesticide use. Farm program payments to
producers are not related to a grower's use of pesticides. The expected
benefits from pesticide use in agricultural production are yield and
crop quality. Cost-benefit analyses of pesticides are generally limited
to primary effects but may consider secondary effects. Primary impacts
are yield, quality, and cost of the pesticide and its application.
Secondary impacts which may be measurable are effects on crop prices
from changes in aggregate production, effects on non-target organisms,
and effects on environmental quality including human health.
Markey 27. (USDA): According to the 2009 USDA Economic Research
Service report Emerging Issues in the U.S. Organic Industry,
``significant price premiums exist for fresh organic produce
and organic milk, the two top organic food sales categories,
compared with conventional products.'' Organic agriculture also
maintains ``the public-goods nature of environmental services,
such as biodiversity and water quality.'' According to the
report, the price charged for conventionally grown agricultural
products does not ``reflect the true social value of these
services.'' In the USDA 2003 economic analysis there is no
mention of public goods, such as biodiversity and water quality
protection, are these factors important in determining the
costs of applying pesticides? Did the USDA also take into
account the social value of ecosystem services in the 2003
analysis?
Answer: The social value of ecosystem services was not part of the
2003 economic analysis.
Markey 28. (USDA): Does the USDA's statistics from the National
Agricultural Statistics Service (NASS) shed light on whether
organic farms have higher or lower net income than conventional
farms? If so, please describe the differences in income
generated on conventional and organic farms in the most recent
year for which the USDA has sufficient data.
Answer: Some insight into the financial performance of organic and
conventional farms can be derived from the Agricultural Resource
Management Survey (ARMS). The ARMS data include detailed farm financial
information, such as farm income, expenses, assets, and debt, as well
as farm and operator characteristics on certain organic and
conventional farms. Analysis of milk producers in 2005 found organic
farms had net farm income of $61,732 compared to $109,451 for
conventional farms. In 2006, organic soybean producers had net farm
income of $91,099 compared to $72,874 for conventional. In 2009 organic
wheat producers has net farm income of $44,382 compared to $67,433 for
conventional. Relative returns depend on the relative commodity prices
in each year. For example conventional soybean prices in 2006 were less
than $7 per bushel, but have since moved above $13 per bushel.
Markey 29. (USDA): Do spray buffers provide habitat for beneficial
insect species, including natural crop pollinators and
predatory insects, birds, and mammals that control insect
pests? Do spray buffers also work as low-cost control measures
that reduce the impacts of pesticide drift and pesticide run-
off into nearby water-bodies?
Answer: Spray buffers are areas where no pesticide spray is
permitted. This type of buffer may include vegetated areas between the
field and other land uses. These no-spray buffers may provide habitat
for beneficial insects, pollinators, or predators of insect pests as
well as potentially providing habitat for insect pests. All vegetated
field buffers, regardless of purpose, may attract beneficial insect
species, pollinators, and predatory insects, birds, and mammals. The
no-spray buffers implemented in the Washington Toxics case were not
designed to provide habitat and may include unsprayed areas of
agricultural fields. In Washington Toxics, the no-spray buffers were
established to protect endangered salmon and their habitat. No-spray
buffers may reduce pesticide drift and run-off from reaching nearby
water-bodies, but whether buffers perform this function is dependent
upon their design. Vegetated field buffers may be valuable in further
reducing the potential impacts of pesticide drift and runoff into
nearby water. Vegetated buffers are not necessarily low-cost control
measures as they take land out of production, but producers understand
their value.
Gosar 1. (NMFS/FWS/EPA): Is there some way to merge the ESA required
assessment and the required EPA risk assessment into one
program to streamline the registration process for pesticides?
Answer: EPA and the Services believe that their risk assessment
methodologies should be closely aligned so as to promote the quality of
the scientific foundations of these assessment and to promote
regulatory efficiency, timeliness and predictability. The agencies do
not, however, believe that the risk assessment process and the ESA
assessment process should be merged into one program. The agencies
share the common goal of ensuring that pesticide use is not likely to
jeopardize endangered or threatened species or adversely modify their
designated critical habitat. To that end, EPA performs an extensive
evaluation of the risks for every pesticide product, which includes a
careful consideration of the potential for adverse effects on non-
target animals and plants. EPA's risk assessment process could be
modified to include a rigorous assessment of effects to endangered
species. Incorporation by EPA of a more rigorous assessment of
endangered species would streamline the ESA consultation process. EPA
and the Services believe EPA should perform the assessment of the
ecological risks of a pesticide so that the Services can use EPA's
assessments to quickly complete a consultation on EPA's proposed
regulatory decisions. The three agencies believe that reaching
agreement on the scientific methodology used to assess the ecological
risks of pesticides is a critical step that will support the
development of the transparent, efficient, and effective consultation
process that everyone seeks.
Gosar 2. (NMFS): Is it possible that the vast expansion of species
listed on the endangered species list (currently over 1800
plants and animals vs. 109 when first established) has created
a situation where consultations with other agencies cannot be
completed in a timely manner?
Answer: Yes. The large number of species now listed does create
additional challenges for national actions such as pesticide
registrations. However, the principal issues that have delayed these
specific consultations are discussions pertaining to the interpretation
of scientific information and how to deal with scientific uncertainty
under FIFRA and ESA.
Gosar 3. (EPA/NMFS): What is the connection between this consultation
process and the Clean Water Act regulations? What impact will
the expansion of jurisdiction proposed by EPA under the Clean
Water Act in the recently released guidance document have on
this process? If we are unable to complete consultations
between agencies now, will the expanded role of EPA in the
Clean Water Act further complicate this situation?
Answer: Under the ESA section 7, federal agencies are required to
ensure that their actions are not likely to jeopardize the continued
existence of threatened and endangered species or adversely modify
their designated critical habitat. This provision applies to EPA's
actions under the Clean Water Act (CWA), including the issuance of
permits under the National Pollution Discharge Elimination System
(NPDES) program. In 2010, EPA issued a proposed Pesticide General
Permit (PGP) that would cover certain application of pesticides in or
over, including near, waters of the United States. Specifically EPA's
PGP would cover pesticide applications in those jurisdictions for which
states did not exercise delegated authority to administer the NPDES
program under the CWA. Currently, EPA administers the entire NPDES
program in the District of Columbia, Massachusetts, Idaho, New
Hampshire, New Mexico, Oklahoma, and Alaska. EPA also administers the
NPDES program for most territories, tribal lands, and certain federal
facilities. These jurisdictions comprise the ``action area'' for the
PGP consultations.
EPA has prepared and submitted to FWS and NMFS a Biological
Evaluation to initiate consultations for the PGP. NMFS is in
consultation with EPA on the PGP and on June 17, 2011, NMFS submitted
to EPA a draft Biological Opinion. EPA took public comment on the RPAs
in the draft opinion until July 25, 2011.
There is no direct connection between the NMFS consultations on
EPA's regulation of specific pesticides under FIFRA and the ongoing
consultation on the PGP. There is, however, some overlap between the
action areas (e.g., Idaho) and some of the pesticide uses (e.g.,
malathion use in mosquito control) considered in the different
consultations.
EPA recently released the ``Waters of the U.S. Draft Guidance'' to
provide clearer, more predictable guidelines for determining which
water bodies are protected by the Clean Water Act, available at http://
water.epa.gov/lawsregs/guidance/wetlands/CWAwaters.cfm. EPA expects
that this proposed guidance will have no effect on the consultation
concerning the PGP or other consultations concerning EPA actions under
the CWA.
Schrader 1. (NMFS): What actual evidence is there of Salmon/fish being
killed as a result of pesticide use under FIFRA?
Answer: EPA maintains a database of incident reports, which include
some reports of fish kills. Kills have been reported for a range of
pesticides, including some of the active ingredients considered in the
consultations NMFS has completed. Reported kills affect a range of
species, and sometimes include salmonids.
The current incident reporting system, while useful, has some short
comings. If adverse effect information (such as a fish kill) is
reported to the registrant, the registrant is obliged to report that
information to EPA. However, as far as NMFS is aware, there is
currently no requirement for an individual who observes a fish kill
associated with or potentially associated with pesticide to report it
to the registrant. Fish kills may be reported to state, local, or
tribal governments, which may or may not a) investigate them or b)
report them to EPA for inclusion in the incident database. When
incidents are investigated it is not always possible to positively
identify the cause(s), although sometimes it is reasonable to link it
to a nearby pesticide application.
In short, many reports of incidents associated with a specific
pesticide are usually an indicator of a problem, but a lack of incident
reports does not necessarily indicate the reverse. If the pesticide
affects aquatic invertebrates or very small fish (including larval or
juvenile stages), the dead organisms may not be observed.
NMFS has attempted to address some of the current shortcomings in
the reporting system with a Reasonable and Prudent Alternative
delineating additional reporting.
Schrader 2 (NMFS): Is there any evidence in the field of deformities
in the Salmonid population as a result of properly used
pesticides?
Answer: NMFS is not aware of specific studies linking salmonid
deformities to a specific pesticide; however, we do note that such
cases do exist in aquatic systems. An example of this is sexual
reversal (``imposex'') in mollusks caused by the use of tri-butyl-tin
(TBT) as boat bottom paint.
Linking a specific deformity noted in the field to a specific
pesticide and then determining if that pesticide was used properly is
exceptionally difficult. It is not a one-step process, and generally
requires several lines of evidence, including laboratory studies to
determine the etiology of the deformity, a fish survey in the field to
determine incidence of the deformity, and an analysis of contaminant
inputs in the watershed to evaluate whether that pesticide is present
and in what quantities. Typically such a suite of studies is not
initiated unless distinct deformities have been noted in a specific
population.
Some deformities caused by pesticides and/or other contaminants are
externally obvious, such as spinal twists and eroded or missing fins.
These deformities might be noted in seasonal fish surveys, or possibly
even by casual anglers. Other deformities, such as malformed organs,
modifications in biochemical pathways, or genetic mutations would not
be obvious unless the fish was necropsied. Internal deformities also
may never appear in an adult fish population, but instead appear as
reduced abundance, because the fish with deformities never mature past
the larval stage.
Thus, while reports of deformities in salmonid populations
associated with pesticide use is an indicator of a problem, a lack of
such reports does not necessarily indicate they do not occur.
NMFS considers all available information, including laboratory
studies, and field studies to evaluate whether deformities could be
caused by pesticide use.
Schrader 3. (NMFS): Have there been any cases of outbreaks of human
illness as a result of eating pesticide laden fish?
Answer: (EPA) Although there are advisories against consuming fish
due to the possible presence of residues of some cancelled pesticides,
EPA is not aware of any outbreaks of human illness attributed to eating
fish with pesticide residues.
Schrader 4. (NMFS): Are your recommendations based on modeling or
actual field sampling?
Answer: NMFS recommendations are based on information from models,
field sampling and studies, and laboratory studies. When NMFS does the
exposure analysis we consider the range of potential environmental
concentrations, both modeled concentrations (estimated environmental
concentrations or EECs) and concentrations measured in the environment
through ambient and targeted monitoring programs (measured
environmental concentrations or MECs). When NMFS does the response
analysis, it is based primarily on laboratory studies, although NMFS
also considers field studies when they are available, especially those
which report population or community level effects. Because the
majority of toxicological information available relates to effects on
individuals, it has used models to link that information on individual-
level effects to predict population-level effects for the
cholinesterase-inhibiting active ingredients considered in the first
three opinions. Buffer widths and maximum concentration levels (MCLs)
in the RPAs and reasonable and prudent measures were developed using
modeling programs (AgDrift and PRZM-EXAMs) to develop estimated
environmental concentrations for particular application rates and
methods. AgDrift and PRZM-EXAMs are the same programs used by EPA.
Because application rates and methods are site-specific, it would be
exceptionally difficult, if not impossible, to develop buffer widths
and/or maximum concentration levels based on field sampling.
Schrader 5. (NMFS): What assumptions are made from modeling? If proper
instructions are followed on pesticide application, would
modeling yield same results?
Answer: Based on context, NMFS assumes this question refers to the
models which predict estimated environmental concentrations, such as
PRZM-EXAMs and AgDrift, rather than the salmonid population model.
Modeling inputs for PRZM-EXAMs and AgDrift include information on
the fate properties of the active ingredient and information on how the
active ingredient is applied. The critical underlying assumption for
both these models is that the receiving water body is next to the use
site, and that the water body is subject to runoff and/or spray drift
containing the active ingredient. Modeling inputs include the
application rate, method, and interval directly from the labels, thus
water concentrations estimated from the models should be similar to
what occurs in the environment if label instructions are followed and
other conditions (e.g., weather, landscape, and hydrology) correspond
to the conservative assumptions used by EPA. EPA describes
concentrations generated by PRZM-EXAMS as a ``conservative, high-end
estimate.'' The estimates of pesticide concentrations in water
generated by PRZM-EXAMS are consistently higher (often by orders of
magnitude) than residue levels detected through monitoring.
Nonetheless, NMFS believes PRZM-EXAMs, as implemented by EPA,
underestimates concentrations of active ingredients in small, low-flow
water bodies that serve as important habitat for juvenile salmonids. In
other situations, NMFS believes PRZM-EXAMs estimated environmental
concentrations are a reasonable estimate, although they do not reflect
the highest concentrations, nor account for additional stressors other
than the active ingredient.
Schrader 6. (NMFS) Do you ever randomly sample fish in streams near
major agricultural enterprises where pesticides are used? (e.g.
Hood River Orchard, CAFO Operations)
Answer: NMFS has not commenced any specific sampling. NMFS's
science centers may conduct specific sampling activities in these types
of freshwater systems episodically as part of their general scientific
investigations into salmon habitats in its West Coast salmon science
programs, but these field investigations are not part and parcel of any
systematic water quality or habitat monitoring program designed or
conducted by NMFS as part of its work with EPA on FIFRA consultations.
Ellmers 1. (FWS) This hearing is of particular interest to me as the
Town of Garner in my district is battling with the EPA and the
Fish and Wildlife Service to build a highway. Halting the
project is a dwarf wedge mussel, which is protected under the
Endangered Species Act. Because a handful of the mussels were
found in the path of the proposed highway, an alternate route
must be considered, one that would not disturb the mussels. The
selected alternative would not disturb any mussels because it
will go right through the Town of Garner, slicing it in half.
Countless homes, communities, and businesses would be destroyed
and Garner would lose millions in investments and hundreds of
jobs.
It is my understanding that a letter is now being circulated by the
Southern Environmental Law Center threatening legal action, as
the state legislature passed a law to prevent the alternative
route from going forward. Environmental groups like the
Southern Environmental Law Center routinely sue the government
on environmental issues because they get awarded attorney's
fees--even if they are only partially successful. The Federal
Government is literally paying someone to sue to force it to
act in a way it has decided is not in its best interests. This
is nonsensical and a waste of taxpayer dollars.
In your opinion, what can we do to stop these types of lawsuits?
Answer: Plaintiffs are only entitled to litigation fees when they
are a prevailing party. The best approach to avoid paying attorney fees
is for the government to comply with the statutes and prevail in court.
FWS regularly works with project proponents to develop modifications to
proposals to avoid and minimize negative impacts to listed species,
allowing projects to move forward in a manner consistent with the ESA.
Ellmers 2. (FWS): Should we be contemplating repealing them one by one
as each law comes up for reauthorization?
Answer: The citizen-suit provisions of environmental statutes such
as the ESA are an important tool to help ensure that our government
implements the laws and does so in a consistent manner. The FWS strives
to consult with applicants early in the planning process, allowing
questions to be raised and resolved to the maximum extent possible.
Conaway 1. (FWS): According to USFWS employees, the Service is
required to utilize the ``best available science'' when making
listing determinations. At a recent hearing in Texas, when
asked to clarify what counts as ``best available science,'' a
USFWS employee stated that ``We know it's the best available
science, because it is the science that is available.'' Could
you please expand on that logic? Is it your agency's position
that all scientific studies are equally rigorous? As I
understand it, the ``best available data'' surveyed less than
1% of lizard's the habitat in Texas. Does your agency consider
a lack of data to be a barrier to scientific understanding? Is
there a threshold or a yardstick that your agency uses to
determine the soundness of the data and science used in a
listing determination? Does your agency ever exclude available
science or data from a listing proposal? If so, for what
reasons?
Answer: The Service is required to use the best available
scientific and commercial data available to support our listing
determinations under the ESA. We gather and evaluate biological,
ecological, and other information to ensure it is reliable and
credible. We strive to use primary and original sources of information
as the basis for our listing decisions. These sources include peer
reviewed literature, grey literature (unpublished scientific reports),
and personal communications with experts on the species or threats we
are evaluating. We do not exclude available relevant science in our
determinations; however, when the science is not definitive or the
conclusions are unclear, we explain the uncertainties surrounding our
interpretation and use of the information. In many cases, we do not
have all the science that would be ideal, but we review and apply all
known relevant science that is available in our listing determinations.
One reason for the comment period and peer review on our proposed rules
is to allow for interested parties and experts to submit information
that we may have missed or that we were not aware of. This information
will be evaluated and used in our final rule.
Listing determinations focus on threats to the species and its
habitat. As such, population estimates can inform the status of the
species across their range, but these numbers are only one facet of the
information we use to evaluate the threats to the species. It is our
understanding that researchers from Texas A&M University will be doing
surveys for lizards and habitat delineation in Texas. We will include a
summary of this information in our final rule, if it is available.
Conaway 2. (FWS): Following the listing of the Concho Water Snake, a
ten-year long assessment of the snake was conducted, which
showed the snake never had been threatened or endangered--it
was simply misunderstood and poorly studied. Since the
publication of that study in 1996, your agency has demanded an
additional 12 years of study on the Snake. What is the
criterion the USFWS uses to judge the data for responding to a
delisting proposal? Is there a point where further research no
longer enhances scientific understanding? Do you believe that
the difference in scientific standards for listing and
delisting species confuses and angers the public?
Answer: The 10-year study of the Concho water snake that ended in
1996 was conducted by the Colorado River Municipal Water District. The
study provided much new information about the biology and ecology of
the snake, including that it could persist in reservoir environments.
However, a determination of whether or not a species is warranted for
listing as threatened or endangered under the ESA considers whether
there are sufficient threats (under the five factors identified in the
ESA that put a species in danger of extinction. Only after we consider
the best available information and determine that the species no longer
warrants protection under the ESA, is a species considered for
delisting. There is no difference in the scientific standards for
listing and delisting species under the Act. In the case of the Concho
water snake, the Service is evaluating a host of potential threats to
the snake to ensure that none of them are continuing to result in the
snake likely becoming endangered in the foreseeable future.
The ESA requires that we monitor the status of all species that
have recovered and been removed from the list of threatened and
endangered species for not less than five years. The Service has
drafted a post-delisting monitoring plan for the Concho water snake for
implementation should the snake be removed from the list of threatened
species. The current plan envisions monitoring the snake for 13 years
following delisting. The Service found this length of monitoring
necessary to ensure that the snake and its habitat remain secure from
the risk of extinction following the delisting. This will give more
time to evaluate the effects of ongoing reservoir operations on stream
flow rates and snake populations. This longer time period of post-
delisting monitoring is important because O.H. Ivey Reservoir has only
been in place for about 20 years--a relatively short timeframe. This
monitoring will be funded by the Service in cooperation with the Texas
Parks and Wildlife Department.
Conaway 3. (FWS): Recently, my office sent you a letter regarding the
longstanding delays in delisting the Concho Water Snake. Thank
you for your reply; I look forward to seeing the final
determination this summer. In my discussions with the
scientists in your agency, they have made it abundantly clear
that they support removing this snake from the endangered
species list. In my letter, I noted that it has been almost
three years since the Service first proposed to delist the
Concho Water Snake, even though the delisting has the vocal
support of the scientists who have the expertise to make these
decisions. Do you think that the Service's constant and
consistent delays in delisting the Concho Water Snake or other
recovered species have damaged its credibility in the eyes of
landowners, the affected municipalities, and the American
public? What steps are you taking to ensure that you publish
the Final Determination by the end of August? What resources
and staff do you have dedicated to ensuring that this deadline
is met?
Answer: We regret that the final determination on whether to delist
the Concho water snake has taken longer than we hoped. We have a team
of dedicated staff working to complete the final determination and
intend to have it completed this summer. While we strive to make these
kinds of decisions in a timely manner, it is equally important that the
decisions be fully evaluated and all considerations be examined and
vetted before determinations are made. It is imperative that our
findings be based on the best available science so they may be legally
defensible in the event they are challenged in court. We appreciate
your patience as we complete the final determination regarding
delisting of the snake.
Conaway 4. (USDA): Before deciding to abruptly terminate the Current
Industrial Reports did the Census Bureau consult with USDA to
determine how the reports are being used and the impact
discontinuing them would have on the ability to analyze and
anticipate market trends and price volatility for key
agricultural commodities and products, including wheat and
wheat flour, cotton and cottonseed oil and meal, and oilseeds,
vegetable oils, protein meal, and biodiesel? If so, please
provide comments and feedback received in those consultations.
Answer: Please note that this question and the remaining questions
were referred to the Census Bureau for a response. Once the President's
FY 2012 Budget was released in February 2011, the Census Bureau
contacted over 30 CIR stakeholders (trade association and other
government agencies such as the United States Department of
Agriculture) and met with over 20 of them on June 15, 2011 to discuss
the termination of the program and the possibility of restoring it on a
limited basis as a reimbursable project. The Census Bureau provided
cost estimates for over 20 surveys to the stakeholders and a schedule
of termination for the program by the end of the fiscal year. Feedback
and information is still being gathered from the attendees and other
stakeholders to determine if any of these surveys will be conducted on
a reimbursable basis.
Prior to reallocating the funding for the reports, the Census
Bureau consulted with the Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA) to assess
the impact on the National Accounts and quarterly estimates of Gross
Domestic Product (GDP). The availability of manufacturing product class
data from the Annual Survey of Manufactures (ASM) and the continued
collection of detailed product information in the Economic Census and
in the monthly trade statistics program will serve to mitigate the
effect of discontinuing the CIRs
Conaway 5. (USDA): Is the CIR program providing data that is
duplicative with other government surveys? Are there other data
sources that will match the detail and frequency of the CIR
program?
Answer: The CIR program does not duplicate any other government
surveys and there are no other government sources that produce data
with the same detail and/or frequency. The Census Bureau publishes
information on detailed manufacturing products on an annual basis at
the product class level (i.e. a higher aggregation than the product
level) for 121 categories through the Annual Survey of Manufactures
(ASM). The 47 CIRs accounted for approximately 5400 product categories
while the ASM has over 1700 product class categories. The consistency
between the CIR and the ASM allows a data user to continue to monitor,
evaluate, and understand the market. Because the ASM does not collect
data on quantity, unit cost data on an annual basis will be lost.
However, the Economic Census collects comparable data (value and
quantity) for the manufacturing sector that will allow users to derive
unit cost. Moreover, on balance the Census Bureau continues to measure
the manufacturing sector (e.g. new orders, capital and IT investments,
research and development, corporate profits, etc.) in far more detail
than any other economic sector.
Conaway 6. (USDA): Has there been any consideration to providing a
transition period rather than terminating the program with
virtually no advance notice and no consultation with private
sector and government subscribers?
Answer: To reallocate the $4.1 million in funding to higher
priority programs within the Census Bureau in FY 2012, the Bureau
proposes to end the CIR program at the end of this fiscal year
according to the schedule provided to stakeholders. The President's
Budget was published in February 2011 which allows almost seven months
for the Bureau to prepare data users for the end of the program. Once
the proposal was public, the Bureau contacted and met with data users
to offer them options and prepare them for the transition
Conaway 7. (USDA): What are the anticipated budget savings arising
from the program's elimination. Also, what is the total
economic activity generated by the sectors covered in the
report?
Answer: The termination of the CIR Program with the FY 2012 budget
is the result of a review of both ongoing and cyclical programs
necessary to meet the Census Bureau's core mission and required
difficult choices in balancing program priorities and fiscal
constraints. This review resulted in the termination of the Current
Industrial Report in order to fund higher priority programs within the
Census Bureau. The cost savings from eliminating this program are $4.1
million. The manufacturing sector as a whole accounts for about 11
percent of GDP.
______

Mr. Lucas. Thank you, Doctor.
The Chair now recognizes Dr. Bradbury for your testimony.

STATEMENT OF DR. STEVEN BRADBURY, DIRECTOR, OFFICE OF PESTICIDE
PROGRAMS, U.S. ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY

Dr. Bradbury. Good morning Chairman Hastings, Chairman
Lucas and Ranking Member Markey and Ranking Member Peterson as
well as the members of the Committees.
I am pleased to appear before you today to discuss how EPA
regulates pesticides under the Federal Insecticide, Fungicide,
and Rodenticide Act and the steps EPA is taking to protect our
nation's threatened and endangered species under the Endangered
Species Act.
EPA's Office of Pesticide Programs is charged with
administering FIFRA, which permits the registration of
pesticides that are sold or distributed in the U.S. so long as
the pesticide's use does not cause unreasonable adverse effects
on the environment.
When used properly, pesticides provide significant benefits
to society, such as controlling disease-causing organisms,
protecting the environment from invasive species, and fostering
a safe and abundant food supply. FIFRA requires EPA to weigh
these types of benefits against the potential harm to the
environment that may result from using a pesticide. EPA has the
authority to restrict the way a pesticide may be used to lower
its risks. And EPA may allow the use of a pesticide only if the
benefits outweigh the remaining risks.
Over the last 30 years, EPA has developed a well regarded
program for evaluating pesticide safety and making regulatory
decisions. EPA's regulatory processes are transparent and
provide for multiple opportunities for the public to review our
work, provide comments before we make decisions. EPA's high-
quality risk assessments use the best available peer reviewed
scientific data and models to estimate potential risks to human
health, to look at the fate of pesticides in aquatic and
terrestrial environments and to look at the risk to broad
categories of wildlife and plants.
When we encounter significant scientific challenges, we
turn to the FIFRA Advisory Panel, which is a Federal advisory
committee for independent, scientific peer review. Pesticide
regulatory actions are also subject to the ESA, which requires
all Federal agencies to ensure that their actions are not
likely to jeopardize threatened or endangered species or
destroy or adversely modify their critical habitat.
We believe FIFRA provides the agency with the authority to
protect endangered species consistent with the directives of
ESA. As part of a thorough ecological risk assessments, EPA
determines whether the use of a pesticide may affect an
endangered or threatened species and any designated critical
habitat.
Under the current ESA regulations, EPA consults with the
Services if a potential effect is identified and the Services
produce a biological opinion with their view of whether a
pesticide's registered use is likely to jeopardize the species
or destroy or modify critical habitat.
As a result of an EPA risk assessment or formal
consultation with the Services, EPA may change the pesticide's
use instructions and conditions that are specified on the
product's labeling. EPA has the authority to tailor any
necessary restrictions to specific geographic areas rather than
nationwide.
EPA has been sued under the ESA more than a dozen times
over the past ten years, challenging the registration of
hundreds of pesticides. While many of these cases were
dismissed, several required EPA to make effects determinations
for numerous pesticides and species, and as appropriate to
consult with the Services.
Both EPA and the Services are working with the Department
of Justice on new litigation which could significantly impact
pesticide registration actions generally and the development
and implementation of biological opinions for the affected
pesticides.
Developing an ESA program for pesticides has presented many
challenges, both scientific and procedural. In March 2011, on
behalf of the Departments of Agriculture, Commerce, and
Interior, EPA requested that the National Academy of Sciences
convene a committee of independent experts to review a suite of
very difficult, cutting edge scientific and technical issues
that have arisen as a result of our collective responsibilities
under the ESA and FIFRA.
EPA has long recognized that along with using the best
available science, enhancing the transparency of our processes
and providing meaningful opportunities for public participation
are critical for the success of our Endangered Species
Protection Program. EPA is committed to ensuring that every
step of the ESA process provides opportunity for public
participation so that all stakeholders can understand the basis
of our actions and provide information to help improve risk
assessments and risk management decisions.
In conclusion, EPA's pesticide program is committed to
fulfilling our ESA obligations without unduly burdening the
production of food and fiber products for this country. We are
committed to working with our Federal partners to build a more
efficient ESA consultation process that is grounded in the best
available peer reviewed science, that produces timely,
consistent, and transparent regulatory decisions and that
provide for meaningful public participation opportunities.
I am happy to answer your questions today. However, there
may be issues where I will have to refrain from commenting
because the government is actively engaged in litigation. And
with that understanding, I will make every effect to be as
forthcoming as I can in response to your questions. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Bradbury follows:]

Statement of Dr. Steven Bradbury, Director, Office of Pesticide
Programs, U.S. Environmental Protection Agency

Introduction
Good morning Chairman Lucas and Chairman Hastings, as well as other
Members of the Agriculture and Natural Resources Committees. My name is
Steven Bradbury. I have worked at the Environmental Protection Agency
(EPA) in various positions since 1985, serving as the Director of the
Mid-Continent Ecology Division in EPA's Office of Research and
Development, Director of the pesticide ecological risk assessment
division, and as Director of the division responsible for evaluating
existing pesticides. I currently serve as the Director of the Office of
Pesticide Programs. I am pleased to appear before you today to discuss
how EPA regulates pesticides under the Federal Insecticide, Fungicide,
and Rodenticide Act (FIFRA) and the steps EPA is taking to protect our
nation's threatened and endangered species and their critical habitats
under the Endangered Species Act (ESA). I will begin by describing our
commitment to protecting the environment and how the principles of
science and transparency are integral to EPA's program for regulating
pesticides.
EPA's Program for Regulating Pesticides
EPA's Office of Pesticide Programs is charged with administering
FIFRA, under which we must ensure that use of a pesticide does not
cause ``unreasonable adverse effects on the environment.'' FIFRA
generally requires that, before any pesticide may be sold or
distributed in the United States, EPA must license its sale through a
process called ``registration.'' During registration, EPA examines
every pesticide product to ensure that it can be used in a manner
consistent with the FIFRA standard.
FIFRA also requires EPA to re-evaluate previously registered
pesticides against contemporary scientific and safety standards. Under
EPA's registration review program, all registered pesticides are re-
evaluated at least every 15 years to ensure that products continue to
meet FIFRA's safety standards and that they are being lawfully marketed
in our country. Of course, EPA can at any time take regulatory action
to address newly identified risks.
When used properly, pesticides provide significant benefits to
society, such as controlling disease-causing organisms, protecting the
environment from invasive species, and fostering a safe and abundant
food supply. FIFRA's safety standard requires EPA to weigh these types
of benefits against any potential harm to human health and the
environment that might result from using a pesticide.
Over the last 30 years, EPA has developed a well-regarded program
for evaluating pesticide safety and making regulatory decisions. EPA's
high quality risk assessments consider the best available scientific
data from a variety of sources, including from pesticide companies,
other governments, or the published literature. EPA regulations require
a rigorous battery of tests in order to gain approval for a pesticide,
and these data requirements provide consistency across the EPA's risk
assessments. A typical new agricultural pesticide must undergo over 100
different tests to characterize its potential risks. This data set
provides, among other things: detailed information on where and how the
pesticide will be used; a full battery of human health toxicity
studies; data on the fate of the pesticide in the aquatic and
terrestrial environments; and a suite of toxicity studies representing
broad categories of wildlife and plants--birds, mammals, fish,
terrestrial and aquatic plants, algae, insects, and other
invertebrates. EPA has a public, well documented set of procedures that
it applies to the use and significance accorded to all data utilized in
regulatory decisions. Data generated in response to FIFRA requirements
are conducted under, and the results evaluated in accordance with, a
series of internationally recognized and harmonized scientifically
peer-reviewed study protocols designed to maintain a high standard of
scientific quality and reproducibility. Therefore, these data provide a
high level of confidence that the observed effects are reliably
associated with exposure to the particular pesticide in question.
EPA is committed to consideration of other sources of data as well,
including information submitted by the public as part of the regulatory
docket of a Federal action under FIFRA, and data identified from the
publicly available literature. In making the decision as to whether and
how such data are incorporated into an ecological risk assessment EPA
reviews the test methods employed and the conditions under which
studies were conducted to assure a standard of scientific quality and
reproducibility necessary to ensure confidence that the observed
effects are reliably the manifestation of exposure to the particular
pesticide in question.
EPA uses data and models to conservatively estimate how much
pesticide will remain in the environment after use and how those levels
compare with levels that could harm humans or the environment. EPA uses
public, externally peer-reviewed procedures to analyze data and models
to produce its science-based risk assessments that guide our risk
management decisions. EPA reaches its conclusions through a scientific,
systematic, objective evaluation of relevant information that uses
transparent, documented procedures at each step.
EPA has authority to restrict the way a pesticide may be used to
ensure that it meets statutory safety standards. Any restrictions on
the use of a pesticide identified through registration or registration
review as necessary for safe use appear on product labels. Examples of
restrictions include reducing application frequency or rates,
prohibiting certain application methods, establishing no-spray buffer
zones around sensitive areas and water bodies, limiting use only to
trained and certified applicators, or other restrictions. Our
regulatory partners, i.e., the state agencies, have the lead for
enforcing proper use of pesticides.
If an EPA assessment identifies a risk of concern for a pesticide,
pesticide registrants (i.e., manufacturers) will often agree to
mitigate the potential risk by making appropriate changes to the way
their pesticides may be used. If, however, companies do not voluntarily
adopt risk mitigation measures, EPA must pursue administrative
procedures to compel the changes. The process, referred to as
``cancellation,'' starts with an independent, external, scientific peer
review of the proposed regulatory restrictions by the FIFRA Scientific
Advisory Panel, together with review by the U.S. Department of
Agriculture (USDA) and the Department of Health and Human Services
(HHS). If requested by a registrant, EPA must then conduct a formal
adjudicatory hearing--an administrative trial with witnesses and
testimony before an Administrative Law Judge (ALJ). Under FIFRA,
registrants may ask the ALJ to refer questions of scientific fact to
the National Academy of Sciences (NAS). Because the cancellation
proceeding can be lengthy (often lasting three or more years before EPA
reaches a final decision), FIFRA also authorizes EPA to suspend
pesticide sale and use when needed to address an ``imminent hazard.''
Pesticides and Endangered Species
Certain pesticide regulatory actions may also be subject to the
requirements of the ESA. The ESA is administered by the U.S. Fish and
Wildlife Service (FWS) and the National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration's (NOAA) Fisheries Service (jointly referred to as the
``Services''). The ESA requires all Federal agencies, in consultation
with the Services, to ensure that their actions are not likely to
jeopardize species listed as either threatened or endangered (``listed
species'') or to destroy or adversely modify the critical habitat of
listed species.
EPA is committed under FIFRA to protecting endangered and
threatened species from adverse effects of pesticides. EPA evaluates
extensive toxicity and ecological effects data in order to estimate
potential risks to birds, fish, invertebrates, mammals, and plants from
the use of the pesticide. Approximately 75 FTE and $2 million in
contract dollars are devoted to ecological risk assessments annually.
Because endangered species may need special protections, EPA has
developed risk assessment procedures to determine whether a pesticide
has the potential to harm individual threatened or endangered animals
or plants. EPA provides to the public information about these risk
assessment procedures on our website.
EPA has determined in a number of well documented instances that
additional restrictions are necessary to address risks to endangered
and threatened species and other nontarget species.

DDT. A well known example is the cancelled pesticide
DDT, which acted as a reproductive toxicant for certain birds
species contributing to their decline, most notably certain
raptor species such as Bald Eagles and the Peregrine Falcon.
EPA took strong action and cancelled DDT in the U.S. in 1972,
and subsequently it was banned for agricultural use worldwide,
although limited disease vector control use continues. The
EPA's cancellation of DDT and the enactment of the ESA are
cited as a major reason for the comeback of Bald Eagle
populations.

Fenthion. The use of the avicide fenthion to control
pest birds in urban, industrial, and agricultural settings,
resulted in secondary poisonings of predatory birds (hawks,
owls, falcons) after they consumed poisoned pest birds, such as
starlings. The avicide product was cancelled on March 1, 1999.

Azinphos methyl. Use of azinphos methyl poses risks
to aquatic ecosystems. EPA has phased out registrations of
azinphos methyl products, with the last remaining uses
scheduled to end by September 2012.
As part of a thorough ecological risk assessment, EPA makes an
``effects determination'' regarding whether the use of a pesticide
``may affect'' or will have ``no effect'' on a listed species and any
designated critical habitat for the species. If EPA determines that the
pesticide ``may affect'' individual organisms in a species, EPA further
characterizes whether the use of the pesticide is ``likely to adversely
affect'' or ``not likely to adversely affect'' the species. Under the
current ESA regulations, EPA must consult with the Services regarding
any pesticide action that EPA finds may affect listed species or
designated critical habitat. EPA can engage the Services in an informal
consultation when EPA determines as a result of its risk assessment
conclusions that a pesticide's use ``may affect, but is not likely to
adversely affect'' a listed species. The result of this informal
process is typically a letter of concurrence or non-concurrence from
the Services, with EPA's determination.
If EPA determines that a pesticide ``may affect and is likely to
adversely affect'' a listed species, or if a Service does not concur
with EPA's determination that a pesticide's registered use is ``not
likely to adversely affect'' a species, EPA must engage in formal
consultation with the appropriate Service(s). During formal
consultation (as described under the Services' ESA regulations at 50
CFR part 402, Subpart B), EPA provides the Services with its detailed
assessment of potential risks and its effects determination. Under the
ESA the Services are required to produce a final Biological Opinion
within 135 days after initiation of the formal consultation procedure
unless the Service and action agency agree to an extension. A Service's
Biological Opinion provides the Service's view of whether a pesticide's
registration is likely to jeopardize the continued existence of the
species or destroy or adversely modify its critical habitat and, if so,
describes Reasonable and Prudent Alternatives (RPA) to avoid jeopardy
or destruction or adverse modification of critical habitat. The
Services also exemptany otherwise prohibited take of a species, once an
alternative is identified to avoid jeopardizing that species
``reasonable and prudent measures'' (RPM) to minimize the impact of the
take.
As a result of an EPA risk assessment or formal consultation with
the Services, EPA may determine that a pesticide's registration should
be altered to ensure use of a pesticide will not likely jeopardize the
continued existence of a listed species. In such cases, EPA may require
changes to the use conditions specified on the labeling of the product.
Often such changes are necessary only in specific geographic areas
(rather than nationwide) to ensure protection of the listed species. In
those cases, EPA will implement protections through geographically-
specific Endangered Species Protection Bulletins, which by reference on
the pesticide product's label become enforceable use limitations for
that product within that geographic area. These Endangered Species
Protection Bulletins will be developed and provided to pesticide users
through a web-based application called ``Bulletins Live!'' that was
developed with the assistance of the U.S. Geological Survey.
ESA Litigation
Litigation has been brought against EPA under the ESA more than a
dozen times over the past 10 years challenging the registration of
hundreds of EPA registered pesticides on hundreds of listed species
because EPA and the Services have not completed consultation. Nearly
all of these lawsuits challenged EPA's failure to consult with the
Services on the effects of particular pesticides on listed species.
Many of these cases were dismissed, but several resulted in court
orders, consent decrees, or settlement agreements that imposed a
schedule under which EPA must make effects determinations for numerous
pesticides and species, and, as appropriate, to consult with FWS or
NOAA.
Several of these cases also resulted in interim injunctive relief
during the pendency of those effects determinations and consultations.
Typically, the injunctive relief put in place ``no-use'' buffer zones
around waterbodies or other habitat that could contain threatened or
endangered species until the Services and EPA completed the ESA
consultation process.
These matters are summarized as follows:

Californians for Alternatives to Toxics v. EPA, No.
COO-3150 (N.D. Cal.). The September 2002 consent decree set
forth a schedule for effects determinations (and consultation,
as appropriate) regarding the effects of 18 pesticides on 33
listed species in California.

Washington Toxics Coalition v. EPA, No. C01-0132
(W.D. Wash). A series of court orders from 2002-2004 required
EPA to make effects determinations (and consult, as
appropriate) on 54 pesticides on 26 listed salmonid species and
imposed interim injunctive relief.

Center for Biological Diversity v. Johnson, No. 04-
cv-00126 (D.D.C.). The August 2005 settlement agreement set
forth a schedule for effects determinations (and consultation,
as appropriate) regarding the effects of six pesticides to one
listed species, the Barton Springs salamander.

Natural Resources Defense Council v. EPA, No. 03-CV-
02444 (D. MD). The March 2006 settlement agreement set forth a
schedule for determinations (and consultation, as appropriate)
regarding the effects of atrazine on approximately 20 listed
species.

Center for Biological Diversity v. Johnson, No. 02-
1580 (N.D. Cal.). Following district court finding on
liability, parties agreed to stipulated injunction in October
2006 setting forth schedule for effects determinations (and
consultation, as appropriate) regarding the effects of 66
pesticides on the California red-legged frog and providing for
interim injunctive relief.

Center for Biological Diversity v. EPA, No. C07-02794
(N.D. Cal.) The May 2010 stipulated injunction set forth a
schedule for effects determinations (and consultation, as
appropriate) regarding the effects of 75 pesticides on 11
species in Northern California and provided for interim
injunctive relief that included use limitations.
Pursuant to these settlements and orders, EPA has prepared ESA
assessments for various pesticides and species and has transmitted over
170 consultation requests to the Services. Over the last decade,
preparation of these ESA assessments has required a very significant
level of effort from EPA's pesticide program staff. For example, in
2010 alone, EPA expended nearly $4.5 million in contract funds and
staff salary to meet these court ordered or monitored schedules for
developing effects determinations for 13 species in California and
carrying out work to refine measures recommended by NOAA in two
Biological Opinions.
Where EPA determined the use of the pesticide may affect a listed
species, EPA requested ESA consultation. To date, EPA has received
three Biological Opinions from NOAA completing consultation on the
effects of 18 pesticides on threatened and endangered salmonid species
in Washington, Idaho, Oregon, and California. Recently EPA received a
draft of a fourth Biological Opinion, also addressing listed salmonids
in the Northwest, that when final will conclude another six pesticide
consultations.
In addition to the litigation noted above, EPA, NOAA, and FWS are
currently engaged in three significant cases that potentially could
have broad ramifications for the future of the Federal government's ESA
compliance efforts on FIFRA pesticide regulatory actions. On January 19
of this year, EPA was sued by the Center for Biological Diversity under
the ESA regarding EPA's alleged failure to consult with the Services on
the potential effects of more than 300 pesticides and approximately 200
listed species nationwide. The scope of the consultations at issue in
this lawsuit, by itself, is many times larger than those addressed in
all of the previous cases combined. The potential implications of this
case for EPA Office of Pesticide Program resources and its pesticide
Registration Review program generally are considerable. The case is
currently stayed so that the parties and others can discuss how a case
of this magnitude might proceed.
The other two cases, Dow AgroSciences v. NMFS (pending in the U.S.
District Court for the District of Maryland) and Northwest Center for
Alternatives to Pesticides (NCAP) v. EPA (pending in the Western
District of Washington), involve challenges related to the first two of
NOAA's recent Biological Opinions on pesticide actions that stem from
the consultations on listed salmonids ordered in the Washington Toxics
Coalition litigation, outlined above. In Dow AgroSciences, plaintiffs
argue that NOAA's scientific conclusions in the first of those
Biological Opinions were arbitrary and capricious, that NOAA failed to
rely on the best available data as required by their own regulations,
and that NOAA failed to comply with statutory and regulatory procedural
requirements in issuing its opinions. Recently the 4th Circuit ruled
that this matter is subject to judicial review in U.S. District Court.
In the NCAP case, several non-governmental organizations assert EPA
violations of the ESA for allegedly failing to implement NOAA's first
two salmonid Biological Opinions.
Both EPA and the Services are working in close coordination with
the Department of Justice in addressing this pending litigation.
Obviously, these cases have the potential to have a significant impact
on pesticide registration actions generally and the development and
implementation of Biological Opinions for the affected pesticides.
Improving the Consultation Process
In EPA's view, a more efficient and effective consultation process
should include the following attributes:

The FIFRA risk assessment process and the development
of Biological Opinions would rely on best available information
and peer-reviewed scientific procedures and models would be
developed to evaluate and estimate the potential effects on
listed species resulting from the use of a pesticide and to
determine what measures would provide adequate protections;

The risk assessment, consultation, and risk
management processes is transparent and provide meaningful
opportunities for public participation so that the public
understands the basis for proposed and final actions and can
provide information to help improve risk assessments and risk
management decisions;

The risk management process would employ risk
mitigation measures that are adequate to protect listed
species, and are tailored to specific uses and applicable to
specific geographic areas based on species location and
biological information to minimize the burdens on pesticide
users. Risk mitigation measures necessary for the protection of
listed species would be reasonable and clearly communicated to
pesticide users; and

In order to make the best use of agencies' and
stakeholders' resources, and to provide protections where and
when needed, the risk assessment, consultation, and risk
management processes operate in a consistent, efficient, and
timely fashion.
Addressing Scientific Issues. As I indicated above, EPA and the
Services have been addressing the myriad difficult scientific issues
involved in evaluating whether and how pesticides may affect listed
species. To this end, in 2009 the three agencies formed a work group of
technical experts from EPA's Office of Water and Office of Pesticide
Programs and their counterparts from FWS and NOAA. As charged by the
senior management in the three agencies, the workgroup has to date,
identified and resolved some key issues that arise in no small part due
to the different statutory schemes and regulatory frameworks of the
various agencies that are not easily reconciled. For example, under
FIFRA, EPA is required to weigh the benefits of use against the risks
while under the ESA, Federal agencies are required to ensure that their
actions are not likely to jeopardize the continued existence of any
listed species.
In March 2011, on behalf of the Departments of Agriculture,
Commerce, and Interior, EPA requested that NAS convene a committee of
independent experts to review scientific and technical issues that have
arisen as a result of our collective responsibilities under the ESA and
FIFRA. The recent experience of completing consultations under the ESA
for FIFRA related actions affecting Pacific salmon has illustrated a
number of scientific issues. The scientific and technical topics on
which we seek advice pertain to the approaches utilized by EPA and the
Services in assessing the effects of proposed FIFRA actions on
endangered species and their habitats. These topics include the
identification of best available scientific data and information;
consideration of sub-lethal, indirect, and cumulative effects; the
effects of chemical mixtures and inert ingredients; the use of models
to assist in analyzing the effects of pesticide use; incorporating
uncertainties into the evaluations effectively; and the identification
of pertinent geospatial information and biological and other datasets
that can be employed in the course of these assessments. To provide for
the review, EPA and the Services will provide EPA's risk assessments
and NOAA's Biological Opinions to the NAS as examples of the different
scientific approaches. The issues before the NAS are scientifically
complex and of high importance. A concerted, closely coordinated effort
to address them openly and actively will assist in the proper execution
of the statutory responsibilities under the ESA, FIFRA, and other
applicable laws.
The Executive Branch is in the early stages of formulating the
specific charge to the NAS panel. Based upon preliminary discussions
with the NAS, we believe that the external review could be completed in
18 months, once the panel is convened.
Transparency and Public Participation. The Administration has made
transparency a priority to promote accountability and provide
information for citizens about what their Government is doing. ESA
section 7 consultation is not subject to notice and comment procedures
by law. Nonetheless, EPA is, along with using the best available
science, enhancing the transparency of our processes and providing
meaningful opportunities for public participation are critical for the
success of pesticide program.
Accordingly, through our pesticide registration review web site and
our endangered species protection web site, EPA has provided the public
with access to our assessments and effects determinations, draft
biological opinions we have received, our comments on those opinions,
and final opinions from the services whether this work was conducted
pursuant to litigation or as a matter of course in our registration
review program. This input has served to improve our work.
It is through our endangered species web site as well that EPA
provides general information about the status of consultations and
expected dates for receipt of Draft Biological Opinions; makes
available such Drafts; and solicits public input on the recommendations
contained in those Draft opinions. EPA then considers such input in our
responses to the Services regarding their Draft documents.
As noted above, EPA is focusing its ESA compliance resources
primarily on its registration review program. As EPA conducts the
statutorily mandated reevaluation of a previously registered pesticide,
we will perform an ESA assessment of all uses of the pesticide, and, as
necessary, initiate consultation with the Services. Using the
registration review program provides an established framework. EPA's
Pesticides Program incorporates public participation as an integral
part of its existing processes of registration and registration review.
The registration review process generally encompasses three
opportunities for public comment that may include input and information
relative to the ecological risk assessments and endangered species
effects determinations developed as a matter of course, to support
registration review. First EPA opens a public docket which contains
EPA's plan on how it will proceed with a particular pesticide. As part
of this docket, EPA develops and publishes a problem formulation that
articulates the scientific work that will be conducted, including any
work relative to listed species. The second stage of registration
review results in publication of a draft risk assessment that would
include EPAs analyses relative to all non-target species including
listed species. Subsequently a final risk assessment and proposed
registration review decision are published. This decision may contain
mitigation EPA believes is necessary to ensure that the risks of
continued registration outweigh the benefits--the FIFRA standard for
ecological effects, as well as any mitigation EPA proposes is necessary
for the specific protection of listed species. Finally, the EPA will
publish its final registration review decision. At each of the three
steps prior to the final decision, EPA solicits public input. That
input is reviewed and analyzed and a response to comment document is
developed and issued along with the products in the next phase so that
the public may see how their input was considered.
Tailoring risk mitigation measures. Our website also provides a
portal to the application called ``Bulletins Live!'' which is the
system developed with the assistance of the US Geological Survey, to
provide Endangered Species Protection Bulletins to pesticide users.
When changes to a pesticide's use are necessary to protect a listed
species, the pesticide label will carry a generic statement that refers
the user to our Bulletins Live! web site for information on how to use
the pesticide in their geographic area. The generic label statement
also will contain a toll free phone number that people can use to
request information on use limitations and have an Endangered Species
Protection Bulletin mailed to them, in the event they do not have
internet access. As noted earlier, these Bulletins set geographically
specific pesticide use limitations for the protection of endangered or
threatened species and their designated critical habitat where such
limitations on use of a pesticide have been determined to be necessary.
The Bulletins contain a map of the selected county, a description of
the species being protected, pesticide(s) of concern, pesticide use
limitations, and the month for which the Bulletin is valid. EPA and the
U.S. Geological Survey are currently developing a more interactive,
geo-coded platform to provide this information, which will make it
easier to be more geographically specific in terms of where pesticide
use may need to be limited in some manner to protect listed species.
While EPA is moving ahead to develop improved tools to communicate
geographically specific information, this information will be only as
specific and focused as permitted by the species location data and
biological information available deemed reliable from the Services.
Currently, such information and data are not available in geospatial
layers for the more than 1,200 listed species across the nation.
Efficiency, Consistency, and Timeliness. ESA consultations and
implementation of protections for threatened and endangered species
need to be done in a consistent, timely, and predictable manner. Our
efficiency will improve significantly once all agencies follow the same
durable, accepted scientific methodology for performing ESA
assessments, an outcome EPA hopes will be achieved using the
recommendations from the National Academies report and with ongoing
conversations between EPA, FWS, and NOAA. Measures, such as internal
peer review and quality control programs--also will help produce
consistent outcomes across different assessors. We need to set and hold
ourselves to schedules for conducting assessments, completing
consultations, and making decisions about implementation of protection
measures. We need to plan and allocate resources to achieve the level
of timeliness our external stakeholders expect. And recognizing the
enormity of the consultation effort that lies ahead, we need to be as
efficient as absolutely possible. Among other things, this will mean
using data about species location and biology, that will enable
assessors to perform spatially and temporally explicit assessments. EPA
is committed to achieving these ends.
Conclusion
EPA's pesticide program is a highly regarded program that makes
more than 10,000 regulatory decisions a year, including evaluating
approximately 20 new pesticide active ingredients and reevaluating 70
previously approved pesticides annually, as well as reviewing thousands
of proposed changes to existing products, among other statutorily
mandated decisions. Fulfilling our ESA obligations and meeting our
other legal responsibilities will require careful management of our
resources, and wise setting of priorities. Conducting ESA assessments
for currently registered pesticides and implementing Biological
Opinions from the Services will continue to require very significant
expenditures of staff and contract resources. We must find ways to make
the consultation process more efficient, and streamlining reviews. We
should, to the greatest extent possible, strive to avoid duplicating
work
I am pleased that the senior leadership of all three agencies
recognizes the importance of compliance with the ESA, and the need for
fundamental change in how we have operated in the past. Although it
will not be easy, by incorporating guidance from the NAS on the
critical scientific issues, we can further develop a consultation
process that is grounded in the best available science, that is
transparent and participatory, and that produces timely and consistent
regulatory decisions which fully protect threatened and endangered
species without unduly burdening the ability to produce food and fiber
products for this country.
[NOTE: The responses to questions submitted for the record by the
Administration can be found on page 23.]
______

Mr. Lucas. Thank you. And the Chair now recognizes Dr.
Gould for your testimony.

STATEMENT OF DR. ROWAN GOULD, ACTING DIRECTOR, FISH AND
WILDLIFE SERVICE, U.S. DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR

Dr. Gould. Good morning Chairman Hastings and Chairman
Lucas. Thank you for the opportunity to testify on behalf of
the Service.
The focus of my testimony will be on the Service's role on
consulting with the Environmental Protection Agency as required
under Section 7 of the Endangered Species Act, the significant
challenges we face in addressing this requirement and our
commitment to continue working with our Federal partners on
EPA's actions under FIFRA.
The ESA and FIFRA have different, but complementary
purposes and the statutes create a set of obligations for the
EPA, Services, and the National Marine Fisheries Service. The
purpose of the ESA is to provide a means for conserving the
ecosystems upon which endangered and threatened species depend
and a program for the conservation of such species.
The ESA directs all Federal agencies to participate in
conserving these species, specifically, Sec. 7(a)(1) of the ESA
charges Federal agencies to aid in the conservation of listed
species and Sec. 7(a)(2) requires the agencies, through
consultation with the Service to ensure that their activities
are not likely to jeopardize the continued existence of listed
species or adversely modify designated critical habitats.
One of the Service's roles in carrying out its
responsibilities under the Endangered Species Act is to advise
Federal agencies on the conservation needs of endangered and
threatened species. In order to fulfill that role, the Service
requires specific information from Federal agencies that
describes the nature and extent of the proposed action, the
area to be affected by the proposed action, a description of
any listed species or critical habitat that may be affected, a
description of the manner in which these species may be
affected, and any other relevant reports, including any
environment impact statement, environmental assessment or
biological assessment.
With that information in hand, the Service conducts its
assessment of whether the proposed action, when combined with
the current status of the species and any cumulative effects is
likely to jeopardize the continued existence of any listed
species or result in the destruction or adverse modification of
critical habitat.
The Service's assessment is relayed to the Federal agency
on a document called The Biological Opinion. It is this
Biological Opinion upon which Federal agencies, such as EPA
rely in fulfilling their responsibility to ensure their actions
are not likely to jeopardize the continued existence of any
listed species or result in destruction or adverse modification
of critical habitat.
The Section 7 consultation provisions of the ESA are not
commonly applied to discrete Federal actions that have a
limited, temporal, and geographic scope, such as approval of a
grazing permit or a lease or a construction project. The
Service conducts thousands of such consultations each year and
these consultations play an important role in promoting the
conservation of an endangered and threatened species.
EPA's pesticide registration actions are very different in
that they typically cover large geographic areas are in effect
for a lengthy period of time, typically up to 15 years and
provide data on toxicity to standardized test species and
extrapolate that information to potential effect on listed
species. These differences create key scientific and technical
issues that must be resolved.
Another important challenge is how to provide for effective
involvement of registrants and stakeholders in the consultation
process so that measures directed at conserving listed species
will have minimal impacts to food and fiber commodity
production.
Over the past year, the Service, NOAA, and EPA have been
working cooperatively through an interagency working group to
address the scientific issues and we expect the group to
continue its efforts. Recently, the working group and USDA have
agreed to contract with the National Academy of Sciences
National Research Council to help clarify these issues. The
Service also believes that we must take full advantage of the
knowledge of pesticide registrants and other stakeholders to
help refine the assessment of effects on listed species.
The Service is committed to working with EPA, NOAA, and
USDA to establish an efficient process that satisfies EPA's
obligations under FIFRA and provides a means for the
conservation of threatened and endangered species required
under the ESA, while minimizing the impact to affected
pesticide users and applicators.
I appreciate the opportunity to testify today and will be
happy to answer any questions. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Gould follows:]

Statement of Rowan Gould, Acting Director, Fish and Wildlife Service,
U.S. Department of the Interior

Good morning Chairman Hastings and Chairman Lucas. I am Rowan
Gould, Acting Director for the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service
(Service). Thank you for the opportunity to testify on behalf of the
Service. The focus of my testimony will be on: the Service's role of
consulting with the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), as required
by Section 7 of the Endangered Species Act of 1973 (ESA); the
significant challenges we face in addressing this requirement; and our
commitment to continue working with our Federal partners on EPA's
actions under the Federal Insecticide, Fungicide, and Rodenticide Act
(FIFRA).
The ESA and FIFRA have different but complementary purposes and the
statutes create a set of obligations for the EPA, Service, and the
National Marine Fisheries Service (NOAA-Fisheries).
SERVICE'S ROLE
The purposes of the ESA are to provide a means for conserving the
ecosystems upon which endangered and threatened species depend and a
program for the conservation of such species. The ESA directs all
Federal agencies to participate in conserving these species.
Specifically, section 7(a)(1) of the ESA charges Federal agencies to
aid in the conservation of listed species, and section 7(a)(2) requires
the agencies, through consultation with the Service, to ensure that
their activities are not likely to jeopardize the continued existence
of listed species or adversely modify designated critical habitats.
One of the Service's roles in carrying out its responsibilities
under the Endangered Species Act is to advise Federal agencies on the
conservation needs of endangered and threatened species. In order to
fulfill that role, the Service requires specific information from
Federal agencies that describes the nature and extent of the proposed
action, the area to be affected by the proposed action, a description
of any listed species or critical habitat that may be affected, a
description of the manner in which those species may be affected, and
any other relevant reports including any environmental impact
statement, environmental assessment, or biological assessment. With
that information in hand, the Service conducts its assessment of
whether the proposed action, when combined with the current status of
the species, and any cumulative effects, is likely to jeopardize the
continued existence of any listed species or result in the destruction
or adverse modification of critical habitat. The Service's assessment
is relayed to the Federal agency in a document called a ``Biological
Opinion.'' It is this biological opinion upon which Federal agencies
such as EPA rely in fulfilling their responsibility to insure their
actions are not likely to jeopardize the continued existence of any
listed species or result in destruction or adverse modification of
critical habitat.
CHALLENGES
The section 7 consultation provisions of the ESA are most commonly
applied to discrete Federal actions that have a limited temporal and
geographic scope--such as approval of a grazing permit/lease or a
construction project. The Service conducts thousands of such
consultations each year and these consultations play an important role
in promoting the conservation of endangered and threatened species.
EPA's pesticide registration actions are very different in that they
typically cover large geographic areas (sometimes the entire nation),
are in effect for a lengthy period of time (typically up to 15 years,
and provide data on toxicity to standardized test species and
extrapolate that information to potential effects to listed species..
These differences create key scientific and technical issues that must
be resolved. Some of these key issues include:

How to extrapolate toxicity data from standardized
test organisms to effects on listed species;

How sub-lethal effects to individuals cascade to
effects on populations and species;

How the toxicity of the active ingredient relates to
the toxicity of the product as applied and combined with other
registered products;

How to manage uncertainty, and

How to use historical agricultural production and
pesticide use data when assessing risks over the 15 year
duration of a registration decision.
Another important challenge is how to provide for effective
involvement of registrants and stakeholders in the consultation process
so that measures directed at conserving listed species will have
minimal impacts to food and fiber commodity production.
PATH FORWARD
Over the past year, the Service, NOAA, and EPA have been working
cooperatively through an interagency working group to address these
scientific issues and we expect that group to continue its efforts.
Recently, the working group and USDA also agreed to contract with the
National Academy of Sciences' National Research Council to help clarify
these issues. The Service also believes that we must take full
advantage of the knowledge of pesticide registrants and other
stakeholders to help refine the assessment of effects to listed
species. There are numerous opportunities within the consultation
process to incorporate such information including when EPA is preparing
its risk assessment, when the Service is beginning preparation of its
biological opinion, when the Service has developed its draft biological
opinion, and when reasonable and prudent alternatives or reasonable and
prudent measures are being developed by the Service and EPA.
COMMITMENT
The Service is committed to working with EPA, NOAA, and USDA to
establish an efficient process that satisfies EPA's obligations under
FIFRA and provides a means for the conservation of threatened and
endangered species required under the ESA, while minimizing the impact
to persons engaged in agricultural food and fiber commodity production
and other affected pesticide users and applicators.
CONCLUSION
The Service appreciates the leadership, and the interest and
efforts of both Committees in supporting the conservation of the
nation's fish and wildlife resources. I appreciate the opportunity to
testify today and would be happy to answer any questions.
[NOTE: The responses to questions submitted for the record by the
Administration can be found on page 23.]
______

Mr. Lucas. Thank you. The Chair now recognizes Mr. Schwaab
for your testimony.

STATEMENT OF MR. ERIC SCHWAAB, ASSISTANT ADMINISTRATOR FOR
FISHERIES, NATIONAL MARINE FISHERIES SERVICE, NATIONAL OCEANIC
AND ATMOSPHERIC ADMINISTRATION, U.S. DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE

Mr. Schwaab. Good morning Chairman Lucas, Chairman
Hastings, Ranking Members Markey and Peterson, members of the
Committees. Thank you for the opportunity to testify today.
Section 7 of the Endangered Species Act requires Federal
agencies to consult with the National Marine Fisheries Service
or the Fish and Wildlife Service on any action they authorize,
fund, or carry out that could have an impact on endangered or
threatened species or their critical habitats. The EPA's
registration of pesticides pursuant to the Federal Insecticide,
Fungicide, and Rodenticide Act is a Federal authorization that
requires ESA Section 7 consultations.
In 2008, following litigation and pursuant to a settlement
agreement, EPA and the National Marine Fisheries Service began
consulting on the effects of 37 pesticides on threatened and
endangered Pacific salmon. Pacific salmon are a valuable
economic resource and an icon of the Pacific Northwest and
California.
So far, we have issued three final biological opinions
related to this settlement agreement. The first biological
opinion in 2008 analyzed the effects of three pesticides. Of
the 37 pesticides that NMFS is scheduled to consult on with EPA
under the settlement agreement, these three present the
greatest risk to threatened and endangered species of salmon.
In our 2008 biological opinion we recommended risk
reduction measures to reduce exposure of listed salmon to these
pesticides from field runoff and drift. In 2009 and 2010, we
issued two additional biological opinions covering 18
pesticides and are finalizing a draft biological opinion on 6
more pesticides for June of this year. We must complete
consultation on the remaining pesticides by April 30, 2012.
We recognize that other stakeholders are affected by the
implementation of our biological opinions. Throughout the
consultation process, we and the EPA have sought and continue
to seek input from affected pesticide registrants. Before the
resulting biological opinion is finalized, EPA also provides an
opportunity for public comment on the draft, reasonable and
prudent alternatives presented in the biological opinions.
In an effort to enhance public awareness, we have hosted
stakeholder forums in Portland, Oregon and Sacramento,
California to explain the consultation process. Additionally,
the Fisheries Service, EPA, and the Fish and Wildlife Service
are convening a workshop with the Minor Crop Farmer Alliance on
pesticide registration review and ESA consultations to inform
grower representatives of the processes and analyses used by
our agencies to identify risk and mitigation options. This
forum will also be used to identify grower level data that
could enhance the risk identification and risk mitigation
decision process.
We recognize the complexity of integrating the conservation
of endangered species into the administration of FIFRA. To
address this challenge, EPA, NOAA, and the Fish and Wildlife
Service have formed an interagency workgroup of senior policy
leaders to address core, scientific issues underlying this
integration. EPA, NOAA, USDA, and the Fish and Wildlife Service
have also asked the National Academy of Sciences to convene a
panel to provide its expert advice on certain core, scientific,
and technical issues that serve as the foundation for assessing
risks to listed species.
Seeking independent advice on certain scientific issues
will help improve the scientific and technical foundations of
the registration process and ESA consultation processes.
Enhanced consistency and approaches to these issues within the
involved agencies will expand the public understanding of the
scientific methods and approaches and their underlying
rational.
We have requested the National Research Council of the
National Academy of Sciences to provide us with advice on the
following topics: best available scientific data and
information, sublethal, indirect and cumulative effects,
mixtures and ingredients, risk and exposure modeling,
interpretation of uncertainty, and geospatial information and
data sets. We have developed terms of reference for this review
and are currently working with the Academy to convene a panel
and proceed with this important work. We expect to receive the
panel's recommendations and report within 18 months.
The interagency workgroup is also exploring the potential
utility of additional data and modeling capabilities in future
consultations. Specifically, it will examine the capability of
the Agriculture Research Service and the Natural Resources
Conservation Service to refine projections of pesticide and
herbicide uses and potential environmental and aquatic
exposures. It will also undertake parallel work with relevant
state pesticide programs to further refine the information
utilized in the consultation process.
Finally, it will explore the possibility of expanding USGS
water quality monitoring programs and modeling capability to
help refine projection of exposures likely to occur of the 15-
year life of a registration.
Finally, NMFS, Fish and Wildlife Service, and EPA recognize
the importance of expanding the opportunities for public
participation in the consultation process. We will pursue
expanded opportunities to participate in the consultation
processes to registrants, the affected states, farming
organizations, and other interested parties. We will solicit
recommendations on improving access to scientific information,
monitoring data and other information pertinent to the ESA
consultation issues up front in the early preparation of
biological assessments by EPA and over the course of the
preparation of biological opinions by both NMFS and the Fish
and Wildlife Service in the case of formal consultations. Thank
you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Schwaab follows:]

Statement of Eric Schwaab, Assistant Administrator, National Marine
Fisheries Service, National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration,
U.S. Department of Commerce

Mr. Chairman, my name is Eric Schwaab and I am the Assistant
Administrator for Fisheries, within the Department of Commerce's
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA).
Thank you for the opportunity to discuss the National Marine
Fisheries Service's (NMFS) activities to implement the Endangered
Species Act (ESA) interagency consultation provisions related to the
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency's (EPA) registration of
pesticides.
An Overview of ESA Requirements for Federal Agencies
The ESA provides for the conservation of species that are
endangered or threatened throughout all or a significant portion of
their range, and conserves the ecosystems upon which they depend. The
responsibility of implementing the ESA is shared between the U.S. Fish
and Wildlife Service (FWS) and NMFS (collectively the Services).
Generally, FWS manages freshwater and land-dependent species, and NMFS
manages marine and anadromous species, including 73 of the total listed
species.
Section 7(a)(2) of the ESA requires Federal agencies, in
consultation with NMFS and FWS, to insure that any action they
authorize, fund, or carry out is not likely to jeopardize the continued
existence of any endangered or threatened species or result in the
destruction or adverse modification of those species' critical habitat.
The interagency consultation process, or section 7 consultation,
generally occurs between two Federal agencies--the agency that proposes
an action that may affect threatened or endangered species and either
NMFS or FWS, depending on the species affected. Generally, the
consultation process begins with the action agency's preparation of a
biological assessment evaluating the impacts of its action on listed
species and designated critical habitat. Upon completion of the
consultation process, the Services will develop a biological opinion,
which documents their determination as to whether the Federal agency's
action is likely to jeopardize the continued existence of listed
species, or result in the destruction or adverse modification of
critical habitat. Should an action be determined by the Services to
jeopardize a species or adversely modify critical habitat, the Services
will suggest Reasonable and Prudent Alternatives (RPAs) to the proposed
Federal action in the biological opinion that, if implemented, will
avoid the likelihood of jeopardizing the continued existence of a
listed species or resulting in the destruction or adverse modification
of critical habitat. The biological opinion will also include an
incidental take statement, which may contain Reasonable and Prudent
Measures (RPMs) to minimize the impact of incidental take of
individuals of the species.
ESA Consultation Process for EPA Registration of Pesticides
EPA's registration of pesticides pursuant to the Federal
Insecticide, Fungicide, and Rodenticide Act (FIFRA) is a Federal
authorization that is subject to the interagency consultation
requirement of the ESA. Following litigation and pursuant to a
settlement agreement, NMFS began consulting with EPA on the effects of
37 pesticides on threatened and endangered Pacific salmon and steel
head (salmonids) in 2008. Salmonids are anadromous species that are a
valuable economic resource and an icon of the Pacific Northwest and
California. Protection and recovery of Pacific salmonids will help
restore the economic vitality of salmonid-dependent industries and
ensure the long-term survival of these important and iconic species.
NMFS issued its first biological opinion covering 3 of the 37
pesticides in late 2008 and issued two subsequent final biological
opinions covering 15 additional pesticides in 2009 and 2010. NMFS is
preparing a draft biological opinion on an additional 6 pesticides and
will issue the final biological opinion on June 30, 2011. NMFS must
complete consultation on the remaining 13 pesticides by April 30, 2012.
NMFS is completing these complex consultations on a tight schedule with
resource constraints.
NMFS and the plaintiffs developed a schedule for completing
consultation on these 37 pesticides as part of a court settlement
agreement designed to address the pesticides of greatest concern for
endangered species first. The first biological opinion in 2008 analyzed
the effects of malathion, diazinon, and chlorpyrifos to 28 listed
Pacific salmonids. Of the 37 pesticides that NMFS is scheduled to
consult on with EPA under the settlement agreement, these three present
the greatest risk to threatened and endangered species of salmonids. In
addition, they are broad spectrum pesticides, meaning that the
pesticide can harm or kill not only endangered species of concern, but
the prey upon which they feed. As a result, in its 2008 biological
opinion NMFS recommended risk reduction measures to reduce exposure of
listed salmonids to these pesticides from field run-off and drift.
Stakeholder Involvement in Consultation Process
When a proposed action involves the Federal agency formally
approving or authorizing an activity of a non-Federal entity, the
applicant for the Federal authorization can also play a role in the
consultation process. With regard to the pesticides consultations, EPA
and NMFS meet with the pesticides registrants during several stages of
the process to exchange information. If NMFS reaches a jeopardy
determination, EPA and NMFS will seek input from the registrants into
the development of reasonable and prudent alternatives to the action to
minimize risk to listed species. EPA also provides the public an
opportunity to comment on the draft reasonable and prudent alternatives
in the biological opinions.
NMFS and EPA recognize that the implementation of the biological
opinions affect other stakeholders and are increasing the participation
of those stakeholders in the consultation process, both in EPA's
preparation of biological assessments and in NMFS' biological opinions.
This year, NMFS hosted stakeholder forums in Portland, Oregon and
Sacramento, California to explain the consultation process. In
addition, NMFS, EPA, USDA, and FWS are participating in a workshop with
the Minor Crop Farmer Alliance on pesticide registration review and ESA
consultations. The workshop, which will be held May 24-25, 2011, in
Denver, Colorado, is designed to provide grower representatives an
understanding of the processes and analyses used by our agencies to
identify risk and mitigation options and to identify grower level data
that may be available that would enhance the risk identification and
risk mitigation decision process.
The Way Forward
The Administration recognizes the scope and complexity of the
challenge of the conservation of endangered species and the
administration of FIFRA. It has through EPA, NOAA and FWS formed an
interagency workgroup of senior policy leaders to craft a multi-faceted
strategy to address the challenge. Joining in that group are
representatives of the U.S. Geological Survey (USGS) and the USDA
Office of Pest Management Policy because of their specialized expertise
in the topic area.
One major element of this effort is to address core scientific
issues underlying the effective integration of FIFRA and ESA
responsibilities. EPA, NOAA, USDA, and FWS asked the National Academy
of Sciences to convene a panel to provide its expert advice on certain
core scientific and technical issues that serve as the foundation for
assessing risks to listed species associated with EPA's FIFRA-related
activities. We believe that seeking independent advice on certain
scientific issues involved in these processes, will provide the
scientific and technical foundation for successful agency
collaborations on consultations, enhance consistency in approaches to
these issues within the involved agencies, and expand the public
understanding of the scientific methods and approaches and their
underlying rationale. We requested the National Research Council of the
National Academy of Sciences to provide us with its advice on the
following topics: (1) best available scientific data and information;
(2) sub-lethal, indirect and cumulative effects; (3) mixtures and inert
ingredients; (4) modeling; (5) interpretation of uncertainty; and (6)
geospatial information and datasets. We developed Terms of Reference
for this review, and are currently working with the Academy to convene
a panel and proceed with this important work. Once the panel is
convened, we expect to receive the panel's recommendations and report
within eighteen months. The agencies will consider the advice of the
panel and will work together with the goal of developing an agreed upon
risk assessment methodology for addressing the requirements of the ESA.
The interagency workgroup is also exploring the potential utility
of additional data and modeling capabilities in future consultations.
It will undertake work with relevant state pesticide programs to
further refine the information utilized in the consultation process.
Finally, it will explore the possibility of expanding USGS's water
quality monitoring program and modeling capability to help refine
projections of exposures that are likely to occur over the 15 year life
of a registration.
Finally, NMFS, FWS, and EPA recognize the importance of expanding
the opportunities for public participation in the consultation process
associated with these FIFRA actions. We intend to pursue expanded
opportunities to participate in the consultation processes for the
registrants, the affected states, farming organizations and other
interested parties. The agencies will solicit recommendations on
improving access to scientific information, monitoring data, and other
information pertinent to the ESA consultation issues ``up-front'' in
the early preparation of biological assessments by EPA, and over the
course of the preparations of biological opinions by both NMFS and FWS
in the case of formal consultations.
Thank you again for the opportunity to provide an update on NMFS'
activities to implement the ESA section 7 consultation processes
related to the EPA's registration of pesticides. We are available to
answer any questions you may have.
[NOTE: The responses to questions submitted for the record by the
Administration can be found on page 23.]
______

Mr. Lucas. Thank you. I would like to thank the panel for
their testimony and remind the Members that the Committee will
be operating under the five-minute rule on questions. And with
that, I turn to Chairman Hastings for his questions.
The Chairman. Thank you. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
My question is to Dr. Bradbury. Over two years ago on April
10, you sent a ten-page letter to NMFS, to the Director of
Protected Resources. And in that letter you outlined over a
dozen significant concerns you had about the BiOp.
I am going to cite four of those concerns, and I want to
read them in full because I think they are illuminating at
least to the concerns that EPA had. The first one is, and I am
quoting from the letter, ``There seems to be no explanation of
the criteria that were used to determine what information was
included or excluded.''
The second concern was, ``It is generally not transparent
as to what methodology NMFS's employed to collect information
beyond which was provided by EPA.'' The third one is, ``The
draft seems not to acknowledge that agriculture chemicals are
secondary stressors and therefore considered to be a minor
factor in species survival relative to other factors.''
And the final concern was ``Given the significant nature of
our comments, I request EPA be provided further opportunity to
discuss the draft and to review and comment on the revised
draft biological opinion prior to NMFS's issuing its final
opinion.'' All of these were quoted from the letter.
Now it has been two years since that letter was submitted,
so my question is really pretty straightforward. Has NMFS
responded in any way, written or otherwise as to addressing the
concerns that you outlined in this April 10, 2009 letter, Dr.
Bradbury.
Dr. Bradbury. As my colleagues from the Services have
discussed, EPA working with our senior scientists and senior
policy leaders with our colleagues in the Services have been
addressing many of the issues that you outlined in our letter
of a couple of years ago. Issues concerning best available
information, how to collect it, how to interpret it in the
context of an EPA effects determination as well as a biological
opinion, how to ensure transparency in our scientific
processes, how to look at cumulative effects, the interaction
of multiple stressors and how to work in a process in our
efforts in EPA and in our work with the Services in our
biological opinion process to ensure there is openness and
enough time for stakeholders to get involved.
The scientific issues that you discussed are reflected in
many ways the charge that we have provided to the National
Academy of Sciences and they are getting at issues like best
available information, how to collect it, how to interpret it,
how to ensure that uncertainties in the science are adequately
articulated and the impacts of those uncertainties describe how
to do cumulative effects.
So yes, the conversations have been going on. They have
been very intense and they are reflected in our pathway forward
in using input from the National Academy of Sciences as we go
forward.
The Chairman. Dr. Bradbury, my time is running out. And my
question was I think pretty straightforward. You expressed a
dozen concerns. I outlined four of them and I asked
specifically has NMFS responded to you in writing as to the
those concerns that you requested in your letter of two years.
Have they responded in writing to your concerns?
Dr. Bradbury. The response by NOAA I believe is reflected
in the charge to the National Academy of Science, the scope of
the National Academy of Science.
The Chairman. No, no, no. That is a different one. I am
talking about specifically the letter that you sent two years.
It is a pretty straightforward question. Chairman Lucas said
that some of these questions may be a little hard to answer
sometimes. Apparently, this was a hard one to answer, but it is
a pretty straightforward question. I am just asking have they
responded to you in writing with four of the dozen concerns
that you outlined in that letter of April of two years ago.
Dr. Bradbury. In the context of that specific biological
opinion, the conversations have been in terms of the broader
issues that that biological opinion reflects in terms of
looking at sublethal effects, cumulative effects. So the
conversations and the information that has being exchanged
between the agencies are reflective of the broader challenges
that our letter reflected.
The Chairman. I am not sure that I got the answer. And the
only reason I say that in all respect is that I opened my
opening statement regarding the President's executive order
that information must be based on the best available science
and you are responding and asking information based on that
science. And what I am hearing you say, Dr. Bradbury is that
you have not received a response from NMFS regarding this, but
you have had conversations. But you haven't gotten a response,
is that true?
Dr. Bradbury. That is true. And we are working on how to
move forward.
The Chairman. That is all I need to know. Thank you very
much. I yield back.
Mr. Lucas. The Chair now recognizes the Ranking Member, Mr.
Markey, for his questions.
Mr. Markey. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, very much.
Inert ingredients to improve effectiveness of a pesticide
often make up more than 50 percent of a pesticide product,
despite the term an ``an inert'' ingredient does not mean the
chemical is not harmful.
In fact, Xylene, a common inert ingredient used in almost
900 pesticide products is a potent neurotoxin associated with
brain cancer and leukemia in humans and is also harmful to
aquatic organisms, including salmon.
Mr. Schwaab, when conducting biological opinions under the
Endangered Species Act, does the National Marine Fisheries
Service consider the impacts of inert ingredients such as
Xylene on endangered species?
Mr. Schwaab. Yes, sir, Mr. Markey.
Mr. Markey. Yes?
Mr. Schwaab. Yes, we do.
Mr. Markey. Thank you. Dr. Bradbury, under the law
governing pesticide registrations, FIFRA, does the EPA consider
the impacts of any inert ingredients on endangered species when
it reviews an active pesticide ingredient?
Dr. Bradbury. Yes.
Mr. Markey. You do? There are many ways in which pesticides
can threaten the existence of an endangered species. Mr.
Schwaab, please answer yes or no to the following questions. In
conducting biological opinions on the impacts of pesticides on
endangered species, does the National Marine Fisheries Service
consider how pesticides affect food sources and prey of
endangered species?
Mr. Schwaab. Yes, sir. We do.
Mr. Markey. How pesticides influence migration and
reproduction of endangered species?
Mr. Schwaab. Yes, sir.
Mr. Markey. How multiple pesticides may interact and
threaten the existence of endangered species?
Mr. Schwaab. Yes.
Mr. Markey. Dr. Bradbury, under FIFRA, in conducting
ecological risks assessments on the impacts of pesticides on
endangered species, does the EPA consider how pesticides affect
food sources and prey of endangered species?
Dr. Bradbury. Yes.
Mr. Markey. How pesticides influence migration and
reproduction of endangered species?
Dr. Bradbury. Yes.
Mr. Markey. How multiple pesticides may interact and
threaten the existence of endangered species?
Dr. Bradbury. Yes.
Mr. Markey. Has EPA done so in the registrations completed
over the last 30 years?
Dr. Bradbury. We do those evaluations in our consultation
packages. They are submitted to the Services.
Mr. Markey. So they are in the completed registrations, is
that correct?
Dr. Bradbury. Detailed analyses are in our consultation
packages. Scoping analyses are done in our registration
decisions.
Mr. Markey. So you are saying that you, in fact, do the
same work that is done by Mr. Schwaab's office?
Dr. Bradbury. No, I didn't say that because that wasn't
what you asked. What we both do in our respective organizations
is try to tackle this very complex set of scientific issues
that you have raised. And it is those examples of very complex,
scientific questions that we are taking to the National Academy
of Sciences to provide all our agencies expert advise on how to
take on those issues that you have described.
Mr. Markey. So do you ask for this information as part of
the registration?
Dr. Bradbury. As part of the information.
Mr. Markey. As part of the registration.
Dr. Bradbury. Yes, as part of the information that is
submitted to support our registration decision, EPA has
approximately 100 toxicity studies, including sublethal and
chronic and short-term studies in the mammalian species, mice,
rats, rabbits as well extensive toxicity data associated with
birds, with fish, with aquatic invertebrates, both fresh water
and salt water, looking at a variety of end points from acute
effects to chronic sublethal effects.
And in our detailed analyses we take a look at all that
information to determine what is the likelihood of direct
effects on those particular species as well as what could be
the indirect effects. Say for example, a reduction in
invertebrate prey base and how that may affect fish
populations.
Mr. Markey. So do you believe that FIFRA, although it does
function to screen out some of the most obvious risks to the
environment is also capable of giving us the full picture of
what these chemicals do after they enter the environment?
Dr. Bradbury. Yes, I do.
Mr. Markey. You do? Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Lucas. The gentleman yields back. The Chair yields
himself five minutes.
Gentlemen, in a letter dated March 10, 2011, EPA
Administrator Jackson on behalf of the Departments of USDA,
Commerce, and Interior requested that the National Research
Council convene an independent science review of several issues
related to the Federal Government's responsibilities under ESA
and FIFRA.
This letter is a clear recognition that the science on
these biological opinions is flawed and that the Federal
agencies appear unable to resolve the concerns. Can you
gentlemen commit today that this peer review will be a
comprehensive review of all aspects of the biological opinion
process, including a review of the method by which economic
impacts are evaluated?
And as Mr. Markey would say, that sounds like a yes or no
question. Mr. Schwaab?
Mr. Schwaab. Mr. Chairman, I listed in my both written and
oral testimony the specific areas of investigation that we have
articulated in consultation with the other agencies as a focal
point of that review. I would be happy to review them again if
that would be to your----
Mr. Lucas. Dr. Gould?
Dr. Gould. The NRC study was very specific and it has been
defined by my colleague from NOAA Fisheries and I don't believe
it includes specifically an economic review as part of a
science evaluation.
Mr. Lucas. Dr. Bradbury?
Dr. Bradbury. The scientific issues that my colleagues have
touched upon in their testimony I believe as in my testimony as
well reflects the significant scientific issues that we have
faced in the past and which become crystallized, if you will,
in the biological opinions.
At this point the charge to the NRC doesn't include
economics sciences, if you will, in terms of the charge that we
have placed before the National Academy.
Mr. Lucas. Gentlemen, I must admit to you I am disappointed
because what I am hearing is that this will not be a truly
comprehensive process. And I think that is one of the many
things that many of us on both committees are concerned about
is that if the EPA Administrator took the efforts on behalf of
so many agencies of the Federal Government to request that this
National Research Council convene such an independent review
that perhaps it does need to be comprehensive in nature and
cover all the aspects.
Dr. Glauber, in your view what is the impact of the no
spray drift buffers on agriculture?
Dr. Glauber. I think as I outlined in my testimony, Mr.
Chairman, the no spray buffer I think for the most part the
assumption is that there would be very little agriculture that
could be grown in that area just because of the fact that there
is no other alternative available. I mean a lot depends on the
specifics of what is being prohibited, but certainly in the
assumptions that we made in looking at this analysis of the
toxic case that is the assumption we used and it is an
assumption that has been used by the Services in some of their
analyses.
Mr. Lucas. So along that line, Dr. Glauber, is it fair to
say there is a role for increased economic analysis of the
impact of these decisions and rules.
Dr. Glauber. In think insofar as the measures and the
alternatives are concerned, I think that is where you get the
economic impacts and that is what needs to be analyzed I think
and an appreciated. Yes.
Mr. Lucas. And it would seem that the economics, the issues
that we would be looking at in such a study depend on what the
alternatives are that are available, do you feel that enough
consideration has been given to reasonable and prudent
alternatives?
Dr. Glauber. I think there again we are certainly willing
to extend our expertise. I think the Services have been calling
on us as of late, but I think that is where more information
could be brought to the process. Absolutely.
Mr. Lucas. On the April 5, the EPA received a letter from
Representative Markey and others, asking whether the EPA would
initiate cancellation procedures for any of the pesticides
dealt with under the first biological opinions received from
the National Marine Fisheries Service. Can you please outline
the cancellation procedure under Section 6 of FIFRA, with
specific emphasis on the due process rights of the registrants
and the burden of proof you must meet regarding EPA safety
assessment of the product in furtherance of a cancellation
proceeding. Step up guys.
Dr. Bradbury. I will quickly go through that. The steps in
a cancellation process start with EPA issuing a draft notice of
intent to cancel. And in that document we lay out the
scientific issues and other aspects of the registration
information before us that leads us to that conclusion.
There is then a requirement that the scientific advisory
panel, which I referred to in my oral and written testimony,
then does a scientific peer review. At the same time, the
Department of Agriculture, and if the product has a public
health implication, Health and Human Services also performs a
review on our draft notice for intent to cancel.
Once those reviews are done the agency then evaluates that
input. And if we conclude that we still need to proceed with
the cancellation, we will issue a final cancellation notice. At
that time the registrant, the manufacturer of the pesticide has
the right to request an administrative hearing, handled by an
administrative law judge. And in that hearing there will be
testimony presented, witnesses presented.
During that time frame, if the registrant requests due to
scientific issues of fact, there can be a request for a
National Academy of Sciences review as part of this overall
process. Once that is done, if the agency still concludes the
product should be canceled, the registrant has the ability to
go to the Federal courts for additional effort.
The burden of proof the registrant has the responsibility
to establish that its product can meet FIFRA's standards. So
the agency's role is to look at the science and determine
whether or not it can still meet that standard and/or whether
or not there is sufficient uncertainty that draws into question
whether or not the product is meeting the standard. And the
registrant has to provide the information to establish that it
does meet the standard under FIFRA.
Mr. Lucas. Mr. Chairman, thank you for indulging me. And I
would just note I don't know how you move forward with a
cancellation process or maybe any other process if there is a
conflict between the view of science from the various Federal
agencies. And with that, the Chair would recognize Mr. Cardoza
for five minutes.
Mr. Cardoza. I would like to ask Dr. Bradbury, Dr. Gould,
or Mr. Schwaab if one of you can walk us through the exact
steps of a Section 7 consultation and in light of these
multiple lawsuits how do you know when you have adequately
completed a consultation?
Dr. Bradbury. I can go through the steps real quickly. What
happens when you have an action undertaken by a Federal agency
they have under the law a responsibility to conserve and
protect ESA-listed species. So they actually send a biological
assessment of the action they are undertaking to the consulting
agencies, which would be the Fish and Wildlife Service, the
National Marine Fisheries Service.
We then go through that information about the action and we
go further than just reproductive effects or kill/no kill
mortality effects. We look at cumulative effects. We look at
effects on behavior. We look at things like how that particular
action is addressed in concert with other stressors that are
affecting a particular species. We look at the geographic scope
of the action they are talking about. Very often the action is
going to affect an endangered species in a very limited area
and if we determine there is a potential jeopardy or adverse
modification of critical habitat, then we will go back to the
action agency with some reasonable and prudent alternatives.
And that is our little discussion with them.
Mr. Cardoza. Thank you, sir.
Let me drill in a little bit here. How does your agency
ensure that it has done a good enough job to prevent legal
action against you, if you could answer briefly? Is there a
method by which you review your own work to ensure that you
don't get sued and is that something that you contemplate
happens pretty regularly?
Dr. Bradbury. We use the best scientific information we
have available to us and to the action agency. If we follow the
time lines that are required, we usually are protected from
suit.
Mr. Cardoza. How many consultations have the Services
completed in the last ten years and how many more are in the
queue?
Dr. Bradbury. In the last ten years? We literally do tens
of thousands a year.
Mr. Cardoza. Tens of thousands?
Dr. Bradbury. Yes.
Mr. Cardoza. In EPA's experience, is there a difference
between the amount of a pesticide actually used in the field
and the amount of a pesticide allowed by the pesticide label?
Dr. Bradbury. Typically, as we do our risk assessments,
especially our reevaluation risk assessments we look at what is
on the label as well as what information we are getting from
the USDA or the states in terms of how the products are
actually used. Typically, the amount that growers are using is
less than what is specified on the label.
Mr. Cardoza. That is what I thought. So it would
inconceivable to assume that every producer of every crop would
apply every allowable pesticide at the maximum dose.
Dr. Bradbury. I would believe that would be a low
probability event.
Mr. Cardoza. Back to Dr. Gould. Is the current process that
you engage in is it the most efficient use of taxpayer dollars
to achieve the taxpayer's goal, which would be to protect the
public, yet allow farmers to be able to produce the crops?
Dr. Gould. What we carry out is consistent with the law,
the ESA. And we believe with the resources we have we are very
efficient in providing advice.
Mr. Cardoza. That is not my question, sir. Do you think we
could have more efficient processes that would both protect the
consumers and protect farmers?
Dr. Gould. We believe that the law could be improved
administratively to increase efficiencies in the processes.
Mr. Cardoza. Thank you, sir.
Mr. Lucas. The gentleman yields back his time. The Chair
would note to the Members that we will rotate between majority
and minority members of each Committee back and forth. And with
that, the Chair would recognize the gentleman from Tennessee,
Mr. Fleischmann, for five minutes.
Mr. Fleischmann. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
My first question is for Dr. Bradbury. Dr. Bradbury, what
evidence, if any, has been provided by the Services to EPA to
support a conclusion that currently registered pesticides are a
leading factor contributing to the endangered and threatened
status of specific species, sir?
Dr. Bradbury. With respect, I think this question should
also be answered by my colleagues from the Services who are the
expert agencies in looking at the causes for species being
listed and the relative role in the listing.
In our effects consultations in our analysis and our
biological opinions that we are working through with the
Services, understandably the focus is on our Federal action,
which is the registration of a pesticide. So the document and
the work that we are doing with the Services are focused on the
role of the pesticides with some effort to look at cumulative
effects. But I could defer to my colleagues from the Services
to discuss the relative role of pesticides and listed species
decisions.
Mr. Fleischmann. That would be fine if they would like to
answer.
Mr. Schwaab. Thank you, Mr. Fleischmann.
I would simply echo that we use the best available science
to identify both direct as well as some of the indirect effects
that were articulated previously to assess the potential
implication and potential harm associated with the use of these
pesticides in both the ways prescribed on the label and in
application rates that might be at less than full label use.
Those factors come into a finding of jeopardy and also factor
into the discussion with the action agency regarding reasonable
and prudent alternatives.
Dr. Gould. I might add from the Service's perspective that
we really focus in not only on the direct, indirect, and
cumulative effects, but the geospatial effects. But we are also
looking at potential behavioral effects, olfactory endocrine,
endocrine disruptors. That sort of thing that have a broader
impact on a species based on the environment, even to a larger
extent greater than the pesticide area of use.
Mr. Fleischmann. Thank you.
My next question is for Mr. Schwaab and Dr. Gould. Can you
tell me how both of your respective agencies define an effected
stream for purposes of potential buffer zone for pesticide
application?
Mr. Schwaab. Mr. Fleischmann, my best understanding is that
this would be either a stream where there has been denoted the
presence of affected listed species or in some cases streams
that would flow into other water bodies in ways that house
affected species.
Dr. Bradbury. Sir, the Fish and Wildlife Service hasn't
really participated at this point or conducted a consultation
that would be related to stream buffers, so I would have to
defer to my colleague from NMFS at this point. So I don't have
a specific answer I can give you.
Mr. Fleischmann. Thank you. Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Lucas. The gentleman yields back. The Chair recognizes
the gentleman from California, Mr. Garamendi for his five
minutes.
Mr. Garamendi. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And the
participants who are here at the hearing thank you very much.
During your testimony I was diverted to look at the history
of this, the time lines going back to 1980, the Endangered
Species Act, the EPA's responsibility on pesticides and the
rest and it appears to me that since 1980 this has been a
wrestling match that has gone on and on and on. And ultimately,
the Courts have instructed the parties at the table to get on
with enforcing the law, is that correct? Are you being ordered
by the Courts to do what the law says you are supposed to do?
Dr. Bradbury. As I indicated in my testimony, as you
indicated 20 plus years of challenge in implementing the ESA,
including efforts in the late eighties/early nineties when the
agency was trying to move forward with protection measures that
frankly weren't as sophisticated as they can be today and
Congress was concerned that our activities in trying to do
endangered species protection could be jeopardizing food and
fiber production.
So we spent a number of years trying to develop the methods
to refine our approaches to ensuring endangered species
protection. And you are correct, over time the agency was sued
for failing to consult on pesticides as its methodologies were
being developed. And my written testimony refers to some of
those cases.
Mr. Garamendi. I appreciate that. And I think I will just
forego the answers to the others. What we are trying to deal
with here is to sort out how best to implement the law, which
requires consultation. And for 20 years for years, some of it
having to do with administrative decisions by one or another
administration or lawsuits we haven't gotten there.
It seems to me what we are dealing with here are poisons.
Poisons to humans, poisons to aquatic as well as terrestrial
species and we are trying to figure out how best to regulate
the use of those poisons. Is that the case? Is that what we are
trying to do here?
Dr. Bradbury. What we are trying to do here, in my opinion,
and I defer to my colleagues too to give their thoughts on this
issue, is we are working toward integrating the processes and
directives that are within FIFRA and blending those or
connecting those requirements that we have in the Executive
Branch with the requirements that the Endangered Species Act
provides. And we are working toward a handoff, if you will, to
ensure that the risk assessments that we do and the regulatory
decisions that we do in EPA to ensure those products do not
cause unreasonable adverse effects to the environment when we
need to have a consultation to then work with the Services to
bring their expertise to bear to ensure that we are protecting
listed species appropriately.
Mr. Garamendi. And in addition to the expertise of the two
agencies, Fish and Wildlife and NOAA, you are now reaching out
to the National Academy of Sciences and asking for their
assistance in providing additional scientific input, is that
correct?
Dr. Bradbury. That is correct.
Mr. Garamendi. Do you have a time line for the completion
of this process?
Dr. Bradbury. The work that we are doing with the NRC, and
we are getting the details worked out on the contract with NRC,
at this point they are estimating 18 months to complete the
peer review process.
Mr. Garamendi. Just a comment then. There was a question
asked earlier about whether you got a specific response to a
letter. You may not have, but what you seem to have is a
specific contract amongst the three agencies to carry out a
scientific study, is that correct?
Dr. Bradbury. I would term it a peer review. So in other
words, we are going to provide the National Academy different
perspective, approaches to dealing with these scientific issues
and get their feedback on methodology as we go forward.
Mr. Garamendi. My final question has to do with my own
history. I have been listening to this and involved in these
debates since 1974 and always it seems to come down to we can't
do it because it is going to be economically difficult. On the
other hand, if the economic difficult is poisoning people and
animals and other creatures it is very significant. I want you
to get your work done as quickly as you possibly can. Buffer
zones are very common. There are many ways to deal with buffer
zones and the like.
But I can tell you as a person that lives in an
agricultural area when the aerial spraying goes over my house I
get really upset because I know there are certain creatures
living in that house that are affected by that spray. And so I
am equally upset when that spray goes over the river or into
the ditches and hence, into the environment.
I hope you carry on your task expeditiously. Thank you. I
yield back my time.
Mr. Lucas. The gentleman yields back. The Chair now
recognizes the gentleman from Illinois, Mr. Johnson, for his
five minutes.
Mr. Johnson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you Ranking
Member and thank you Mr. Chairman Hastings and Ranking Member.
Let me direct a couple of questions to Mr. Schwaab and hope
that you can maybe fill us in a little on your direction and
thought. Does your agency consider, and if you do, to what
extent the specific economic costs to farmers and other users
as well of the reasonable and prudent alternatives for the
reasonable and prudent measures that are outlined? And if so,
could you maybe bring us up-to-date on how that is evolving and
how effective that is?
Mr. Schwaab. Yes, sir. Costs are factored in, in discussion
with the action agency around reasonable and prudent
alternatives and that is the place at which costs, in fact, are
factored in. As to further detail, I am not sure honestly what
it is you are seeking.
Mr. Johnson. I guess I am seeking specifically what your
agency does and what you do to consider and to what extent do
you consider the cost to farmers. I mean I share some of Mr.
Garamendi's comments, but I am also concerned as I assume he is
and other members of the Committee are what this is doing to
our economic infrastructure. I am concerned that your agency,
at least in my observation, perhaps do as complete a job in
analyzing what those costs as I would like to see done.
I guess I want to know how that process is going and how
specifically you deal with those issues of cost? Is that clear
enough for you or do you want me to say it again?
Mr. Schwaab. No, apologies, sir. The steps that are taken
to address the costs of alternatives is something that is
frankly undertaken iteratively with the action agency. So we
deal with an action agency who is ultimately then responsible
to the end users who are affected by the action of that agency.
So the discussion of potential reasonable and prudent
alternatives is generally and largely an iterative process. It
is possible that Dr. Gould might have some additional thoughts
on that from the Fish and Wildlife Service perspective.
Dr. Gould. We usually have a very specific----
Mr. Johnson. Actually, I have a limited time and I was
wanting a response from Mr. Schwaab, so I appreciate that.
Maybe you could do that later on, but I only have two minutes.
So how do you make the determination Mr. Schwaab as to what
economic feasibility is in regard to these proposed RPAs? How
do you make that determination?
Mr. Schwaab. So the focus is on taking steps that would
remove jeopardy to the affected species as a result of the
proposed action and the iterative with the action agency would
focus----
Mr. Johnson. What does iterative mean?
Mr. Schwaab. I am sorry.
Mr. Johnson. For those of us who use normal words, what
does that mean?
Mr. Schwaab. In discussion with the action agency, we would
propose alternatives and then we would have some discussion
around what some alternative actions might be that would be
least costly to the end users, but achieve the objective of
removing jeopardy or adverse habitat modification.
Mr. Johnson. And again for Mr. Schwaab, what are your
estimated cost, specifically for agriculture and I guess for
others that use the products here that are outlined in your
first NMFS pesticide biological opinion?
Mr. Schwaab. Sir, I don't have that data with me. I would
be happy get that.
Mr. Johnson. Yes, if you could just provide that to our
Committee staffs, that would be great.
Mr. Schwaab. Thank you.
Mr. Johnson. And I guess my last question is really a
comment. And that is I don't think there is any member of
either Committee who doesn't share the concerns your agencies
oversee or the concerns of a citizenry and a wildlife citizenry
that is protected. But I also don't think, at least speaking
for myself, that there are many members of this Committee who
don't also have a substantial concern about what is happening
in the economy and how what you are doing directly or
indirectly impacts that. So I hope you will be advised that
among other things we are concerned about the overall structure
of things.
Thanks for your testimony and your time.
Mr. Lucas. The gentleman yields back. The Chair would offer
two housekeeping notes. Number one, any responses or
information should be provided to the staffs of both
Committees. Number two, in the order up will be Mr. Costa, Mr.
Fleming and then Mr. DeFazio. With that, the Chair recognizes
Mr. Costa for five minutes.
Mr. Costa. Thank you very much both Chairmen and Ranking
Members for your efforts here.
I stepped out for a moment, but Dr. Bradbury I am trying to
understand better whether or not you believe or the EPA
believes that further legislation is necessary or whether or
not you have the ability to deal with efforts on the biological
opinions through some efforts with a memorandum of
understanding that would be I think far more expeditious and
flexible in terms of how you work with your neighboring
agencies that are there on the desk. Could you comment on that,
please?
Dr. Bradbury. Certainly. The agency doesn't believe
change----
Mr. Costa. I am talking about process here.
Dr. Bradbury. Yes. And we don't believe there is a need in
FIFRA or a change in the Endangered Species Act to move
forward. The challenge is working through these scientific
issues that I described, working through a public participation
process, coming up with the risk mitigation measures that are
tailored and focused and come up with an efficient process. We
can do those things with the existing statutes. The challenge
before us to get those relationships to be efficient and to
move forward.
Mr. Costa. I mean I think there is a general acknowledgment
that that is the case, but in practice I think--and of course,
we all know from our local areas in terms of our own
experiences that we have had in this case at a Federal and
state level. But it seems to me in the case of California where
I have some experience that when we have talked about
registration, for example, of both herbicides or pesticides
that a very rigorous process that we have in California some
would say more rigorous than your process in terms of
determining before various pesticides or herbicides could be
registered that that cooperation or that process that
information some would say is totally ignored.
Dr. Bradbury. If you could elaborate a bit, totally ignored
in what context?
Mr. Costa. In terms of the materials, the information that
has developed in this case at the state level as to the
efficacy, the methodology, the best science used for
application of registration.
Dr. Bradbury. Thank you for the clarification.
Mr. Costa. I want to be clear.
Dr. Bradbury. No, I appreciate that. I believe that our
pesticide program and our colleagues in the California
Department of Pesticide Regulation actually have a very close
working relationship. And certainly, in our reevaluation
process we use the use information that California collects as
a very valuable source of information to understand how
pesticides are used, which helps us to create very
sophisticated and detailed risk assessments.
I think your point about the role of the states and growers
in the broader Endangered Species Act effort that we are
talking about today is very important. And I think my
colleagues from NOAA, Eric Schwaab, could talk a bit about how
we are working together to bring in the state expertise as well
as the growers.
Mr. Costa. I would like to hear that. I would also like to
find out from you whether or not you think the current process
is flawed or not, whether it can be improved? I mean there are
some that argue that, and I think in this area, generally
speaking, our relationship has been better from California with
the Environmental Protection Agency than it has been with some
of the other agencies there that are being represented,
frankly. But some believe that you are hiding behind these
court-imposed deadlines to complete your tasks rather than
focusing on making sure you get the best science and data
available.
Dr. Bradbury. I would like to have my colleagues also
comment on your perspective. Certainly, we in EPA are focusing
on improving the situation.
Mr. Costa. So you think the process could be improved?
Dr. Bradbury. Of course, so that is why we are going to the
National Academy of Sciences. That is why we are having
stakeholder meetings with growers and state lead agencies to
better get their input into the process while we are working
with our Federal advisory committee to get better----
Mr. Costa. Yes. I want to get this question in on the
record before my time expires.
If no agreement can be reached regarding the economic
effect in the National Academy of Sciences' inquiry, can we
have a commitment from all the agencies that a hold would be
put in place before further action takes place? You can all
respond.
Dr. Bradbury. I will let my colleagues jump in as well, but
I think the comments that Chairman Lucas raised and you are
raising around the economic issues is something we should take
back to our agencies and take a look at the charge of the NAS
and see about that.
Mr. Costa. Let me suggest you do that. And I will ask both
Chairs to indulge just for a moment and consider possibly
sending a letter that could be signed to make that request
because I think, frankly, these need to--we have put a lot of
faith in the National Academy of Sciences to provide this. They
are in the process on a different matter, but somewhat related
reexamining the biological opinions in areas that both
Congressman Garamendi and I are working on in a separate issue.
But good science is what we always want to be used. And of
course, the more that we learn on these things the more we need
to understand its impact on a daily basis. So if both Chairmen
if you would be willing to follow through on that I think it
would be meritorious and be supported on a bipartisan basis.
Mr. Lucas. The gentleman's point is very well made. The
gentleman's time has expired.
Mr. Costa. Thank you.
Mr. Lucas. The Chair now turns to the gentleman from
Louisiana, Mr. Fleming, for his five minutes.
Mr. Fleming. I thank the Chairman.
One thing I would like to address before I get to my
question is this idea that we can have any regulation, any
restriction no matter what the cost. I think as we approach a
$15 trillion debt in this country we have to understand that
any study has got to include the cost, cost versus benefit. Any
business, any municipality, any other government always has to
examine that. So as was just acknowledged, a reasonable and
prudent alternative must be economically feasible.
If you can't agree to ask the NSA to review your economic
models, then I am afraid the NSA review will be insufficient to
resolve these complex issues. So I wanted to be sure that we
address that.
I want to talk a moment about my home state Louisiana, but
this issue goes far beyond Louisiana and certainly will in
future years. In my home state aquatic plants have a serious
impact on the wetland ecosystems, specifically giant salvinia,
a plant species native to Brazil has taken over two key lakes,
Caddo Lake and Lake Bistineau located in Northwest Louisiana.
These giant mats have rapidly grown into dense blankets that
kill the vegetation and fish below the surface by blocking the
penetration of sunlight to the water. And this stuff grows
inches by the day. It is an amazing type of plant.
Salvinia infestation reduce boating and fishing
opportunities because boats cannot maneuver, obviously, through
these thick mats. So my question, Dr. Bradbury, are what
herbicides, if any, are currently used to control or eradicate
giant salvinia. Go ahead and answer that first and then I will
follow up on a question.
Dr. Bradbury. I don't have that information with me, but I
can certainly get that information to you when I get back to
the program.
Mr. Fleming. I would appreciate it if you would get that to
me in writing, or at least to the staffs and we will distribute
that.
And I would also like to know in follow-up, how would the
biological opinions dealing with the impacts of pesticides on
listed salmon affect the use of herbicide use to treat fresh
water plants like salvinia, which are now found as far west as
Southern California? So the idea is (a) what is available to
us? In fact, we are going to have a field hearing in June,
including my colleague, Mr. Gohmert, from Texas on this very
subject and we need to know what the impact of those
alternatives, those options, the herbicides, what effects they
are going to have on certainly other species.
My follow up question I think is just going to be too long
in the period of time I have. So with that, I will yield back.
Mr. Lucas. The gentleman yields back. The Chair now
recognizes the gentleman from Oregon, Mr. DeFazio, for his five
minutes.
Mr. DeFazio. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Schwaab, I am concerned a little bit about NMFS, its
resources and capabilities. And this goes to in this case three
BiOps have been done, about half of the 37 pesticides. Now you
are going to consult--and that is on a limited number of
species. Now we are going to review on 200 species. I have been
trying to get your agency to process a simple bar scale thing,
that is, gravel mining which takes place with accumulated
winter deposited rocks in a river where the people removing the
rock never touch the water. I can't think of any more benign
way to get aggregate. I can't get that out of your agency
because you don't have resources and time.
Then we have individual timber sales that have to be
consulted on and now we are looking at all new forest
management practices with the new opinion on the spotted owl.
Where are you going to get the resources to do all this stuff?
And as I understand it my colleagues on the other side of the
aisle are proposing to cut your agency? Can you complete these
in 120 days?
Mr. Schwaab. Balancing a number of these challenges is a
tall order for us as an agency. It is something that we
struggle with, both in prioritizing and in responding on a
daily basis.
I will say that beginning in Fiscal Year '08 we received
approximately $1 million specifically for pesticide
consultation. There are six full-time equivalent positions that
conduct these consultation and yet, we continue to be
challenged to meet all of the deadlines, both in this specific
area as well as in others.
Mr. DeFazio. Isn't the statutory, once you begin formal
consultation, 120 days.
Mr. Schwaab. Yes, sir.
Mr. DeFazio. And have you met that for anything recently?
Mr. Schwaab. I would have to get back to you with a more
detailed answer on that. The short answer is no.
Mr. DeFazio. Right. So this is a concern. And I mean this
needs to be put in the context of how we deal with this.
Is there, and I would asked anybody there, is there a
better way to coordinate this process among the agencies up
front in terms of an evaluation which is somehow--I mean we
have critical habitat designation. We have other ways of
dealing with species concerns, which can cover very large
areas. Is there any way that this could be approached more
efficiently, coordinated among the agencies and get done
without an individual consultation on every pesticide, on every
species with these six people? I would expect that they will
all be retired long before they have accomplished this task and
then it will be intergenerational. So anybody got an idea how
we can do this better?
Mr. Schwaab. The only thing that I would offer at the
outset, and it is not specific to this pesticide consultation
issue is the opportunity that we have availed ourselves of with
the Fish and Wildlife Service to move in the direction of
developing integrated biological opinions where we have
multiple species that are impacted.
Mr. DeFazio. That is what I am getting at. Would there be a
way, within a region or within at least a watershed, to cover a
wide range of species with one consultation as opposed to 37
times 200?
Dr. Gould. I agree with Eric in this case. We need to get
to a place where we do integrated consultations.
Mr. DeFazio. Do you need different legal authority to do
that? Can you do that under existing law? Can you do that under
the court mandates?
Dr. Gould. We would have to make some administrative
changes to the process, which could be done through an
administrative process, Federal Register process to get that
done, but we could do it.
Mr. DeFazio. Is that underway because this seems very
desirable to me because we are never, ever going to get to the
end of 37--I mean this is just one court case, 200 times 37,
right?
Dr. Gould. Congressman, we are working on it right now.
Mr. DeFazio. Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Lucas. The gentleman's time has expired. The Chair now
recognizes the gentleman from Texas for five minutes, Mr.
Neugebauer.
Mr. Neugebauer. Thank you Chairman Lucas and Chairman
Hastings for holding this very important hearing.
Director Gould, I represent the 19th Congressional District
and my constituents are very concerned about your agency's
potential listing of the sagebrush lizard. And I want to thank
you for reopening the comment period. And as you know, there
were a couple of listing sessions just the past couple of weeks
with a fairly major outpouring, a number of people that showed
up at those hearings. And I am certainly hoping that the agency
was listening to the folks that showed up for those hearings
because, as you know, they were largely attended.
There was an AP article regarding the dunes sagebrush
lizard dated April 28. It said that, and I quote, ``Neither the
environmentalists nor the Federal wildlife managers have
population estimates for the lizard, but they point to
distribution studies that show about a quarter of those sites
where lizards were once found were no longer occupied.'' Is
that a true statement?
Dr. Gould. Sir, I am familiar with that particular article
or the science behind the lizard that you are referring to, but
I will get back to you with an answer to that question.
Mr. Neugebauer. You said you are familiar with the science,
is that correct?
Dr. Gould. No, I am not familiar with the science related
to that particular situation.
Mr. Neugebauer. Would it be fair to say that it is a policy
of the agency to list certain species when you don't have
population data?
Dr. Gould. I am not going to comment. I will get back to
you because I believe we have to have population data, best
available science to make a determination because it is not
only based on the population status. It is based on threats.
And I understand there is concern and that is why we reopened
the comment period and that is why we are very willing to take
input such as you just indicated that is going to affect our
decision.
Mr. Neugebauer. I think it is very disturbing. I think it
would disturb Members on both sides of the aisle here if we
felt like that the agencies were making decisions based on
assumptions. And particularly, what we are hearing more and
more is that some of the environmental agencies are being
lawsuit driven in their decision making and not science driven.
And just because somebody files a lawsuit against you, even
if they prevail in that lawsuit I think we have to be careful
that we are reactionary and we make up some assumptions so we
can follow through with that.
Dr. Gould. We are science-driven.
Mr. Neugebauer. When I hear that you don't have population
counts. Have you ever been quail hunting?
Dr. Gould. Yes. Several times.
Mr. Neugebauer. You know the covey isn't always where they
were the year before.
Dr. Gould. I understand.
Mr. Neugebauer. But it doesn't mean the quail are gone. It
just means the covey moved. This is a very important listing
that is being proposed here. This has a huge impact on our
nation, not just the 19th Congressional District or eastern New
Mexico. But I mean this impacts our country because in the area
that we are potentially listing about 20 percent of the
nation's domestic oil production occurs in that area. And so
when you start talking about a listing and then potential
shutting down of wells or restricting the ability to produce
additional energy resources for the American people that is no
small matter. And certainly a decision that should be made on
science.
I won't even go down the road today of should we hold up
America's energy supply for a lizard, but I am certainly
bringing a point to your agency today. I believe that I and
other Members, and I think one of them is sitting next to me,
would concur that we are going to be watching this process very
closely.
And I know that overwhelming the testimony that has been
heard, both in these recent hearings is opposed to this and
question the science.
The Chairman. Will the gentleman yield?
Mr. Neugebauer. I would yield.
The Chairman. I just wanted to say welcome to the club. You
only have one listing. In my district I mentioned in my opening
statement about all the listings of salmon and in addition to
that we have the grey wolf and we have spotted owl, and I am
sure I am overlisting. So I will just simply say welcome to the
club from the standpoint of understanding how this has an
impact on our economic well being. And I don't say welcome in
the sense like come on aboard. I am just simply saying you are
there, but I thank the gentleman for yielding.
Mr. Neugebauer. And I appreciate both Chairman Lucas and
Hastings. This is a very important hearing. And I see my time
has expired. I will be looking forward to that information.
Mr. Lucas. The gentleman's time has expired. The Chair now
turns to the gentleman from the Northern Marianas, Mr. Sablan,
for your five minutes.
Mr. Sablan. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
First, I would like to commend the agencies before us for
undertaking a National Academy of Sciences review on the
specific scientific and technical issues related to the risk of
pesticides on endangered salmon. But I have questions, and a
yes or no answer would probably suffice.
On pesticide and toxicity in use, Mr. Schwaab, are
pesticides in question here harmful to juvenile salmon?
Mr. Schwaab. Yes, sir. They certainly can be, both directly
and indirectly.
Mr. Sablan. Is there anyone on the panel that disagrees
with this answer?
Dr. Bradbury. I think the key to Mr. Schwaab's answer is
that they can be. The evaluation of risks is a combination of
what is the level of exposure combined with what the hazard is
to determine whether or not there is risk or the potential for
an adverse affect.
Mr. Sablan. Dr. Gould?
Dr. Gould. Could you repeat your question again?
Mr. Sablan. Yes. Are the pesticides in question here today
harmful to juvenile salmon?
Dr. Gould. I am going to have to defer to my friend from
National Marine Fisheries Service, specifically because his
agency is specifically responsible for the salmon.
Mr. Sablan. And Dr. Glauber, just yes or no.
Dr. Glauber. I would say yes, but I would also second what
EPA has said. I think this is a question of risk and trade-offs
when you get to the measures and alternatives.
Mr. Sablan. Now on the availability and use of data, Mr.
Schwaab, does the National Marine Fisheries utilize the best
available scientific information when formulating its
biological opinions?
Mr. Schwaab. Yes, we do. We use the best available science.
And at the same we continually strive to improve on that
science.
And Mr. Sablan, if I could just clarify on that previous
answer, or be more precise. It is dose and time of exposure
that ultimately factor into----
Mr. Sablan. The answer was no. And does the Service ignore
or refuse to consider any data when formulating a biological
opinion?
Mr. Schwaab. No, sir. We give consideration to any data
that is made available to us.
Mr. Sablan. And did the Service use the USDA pesticide use
data when formulating the biological opinion? You don't have to
answer that if you can't.
Mr. Schwaab. I am not sure exactly what data you are
referencing there.
Mr. Sablan. The data used for formulating the opinion, the
USDA pesticide data.
Mr. Schwaab. So if it were labeled concentrations and
ingredients, the answer is yes.
Mr. Sablan. Thank you.
And on the consultation process again, Mr. Schwaab, would
you please discuss the ways that the National Marine Fisheries
Service has provided for public participation during the
consultation process.
Mr. Schwaab. So generally, the consultation, sir, is
between the action agency and the evaluating resource agency,
and in this case the National Marine Fisheries Service. So
often draft biological opinions are made available. There are
then further opportunities for discussion in the process, both
with the action agency and sometimes extension into affected
communities. That is something as we spoke of in our collective
statements an area we want to build upon going forward.
Mr. Sablan. And I am assuming now that with the continuing
process there has been improvement with each subsequent
biological opinion.
Mr. Schwaab. Yes, sir. We have created opportunities,
particularly as it relates to pesticides to reach out more
directly to affected communities in several different ways.
Mr. Sablan. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Mr. Lucas. Would the gentleman yield before he yields back.
Mr. Sablan. Yes, I do.
The Chairman. I want to follow up on a question that you
asked about the best available science and Mr. Schwaab, you
answered very definitively yes. In my earlier questions, and I
asked Dr. Bradbury if NMFS had responded to some concerns they
had and one of them was this, and I will quote, ``The draft
seems not to acknowledge the agricultural chemicals are
secondary stressors, therefore considered to be a minor factor
in the species survival relative to other factors.''
Now that seems to me some sort of a scientific aspect to
that. And Dr. Bradbury said you hadn't responded. Could you
respond to this Committee specifically on that question and how
the best available science that you are employing is relative
to what that statement was?
Mr. Schwaab. Yes, sir, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. The time is running out. I just want you to
tell me that you will respond to that quote that EPA had sent
you over two years ago. If you could respond to that, on how
that works in with the best available science I think the
Committee would like to have an answer to that because you
answered affirmatively to Mr. Sablan saying that best available
science was being used. So if you could respond, I would
appreciate that.
Mr. Schwaab. Do you want me to do that now?
The Chairman. No, respond in writing because my time is
obviously up.
Mr. Schwaab. OK.
The Chairman. Thank you. Thank you, gentleman, for
yielding.
Mr. Lucas. And the gentleman's time has expired. The Chair
now recognizes the gentleman from Florida, Mr. Southerland for
five minutes.
Mr. Southerland. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Florida agriculture is the second largest economic
contributor in the state with a $12 billion economic impact.
However, Florida's many diversified crops are relying upon safe
and reasonable access to crop protection tools and pesticide
production. I want to ask Dr. Glauber this question.
What is the impact or potential impact on Florida's ability
to continue to provide wholesome food supplies to our nation
through these overlapping regulations, which may not be based
on the best available scientific information?
Dr. Glauber. Congressman, I think again a lot depends on
what measures and actions are put in place. If we are talking
about no spray buffers or whatever and there is no potential
substitute biological or cultural controlled method, then it
could be very adverse in the sense of prohibiting no production
along those waterways.
Mr. Southerland. Moving on, I know agriculture accounts for
70 to 80 percent of all pesticides in use. Mr. Schwaab and Dr.
Gould, do the Services consider the cost of to farmers and
other pesticide users of the reasonable and prudent
alternatives, the RPAs, and the reasonable and prudent
measures, RPMs, outlined in the biological opinions?
Mr. Schwaab. Yes, sir.
Mr. Southerland. I know you have been asked that.
Mr. Schwaab. As I indicated earlier, the cost is factored
in, in the development and choice amongst reasonable and
prudent alternatives.
Mr. Southerland. So not just the cost and the use of the--
so you are saying that the economic challenges is factored into
your decisions?
Mr. Schwaab. That would be factored into the selection of
reasonable and prudent alternatives. Yes, sir.
Mr. Southerland. All right. Now how does the Fisheries
define what is economically feasible with regard to proposed
RPAs in your biological opinions. Define that for me.
Mr. Schwaab. I am not sure I can give you, sir, here today
an all encompassing definition of that. That would be something
that would be developed on a situation-by-situation basis. It
is true that we have to take actions to remove jeopardy or to
avoid actions that would allow jeopardy to continue. So the
economic factors are in a sense, by statute, secondary to that.
But they are factored in once you look at the available tools
that would be there to either avoid jeopardy or to prevent
adverse modification of habitat.
Mr. Southerland. Is there any effort on the Service's part
to incorporate input from industry groups and those who
actually utilize these, farmers and those in agriculture to
determine what reasonable is, or is it solely based reasonably
defined by individuals that are Federal employees?
Mr. Schwaab. Sir, I would say first, as I indicated
earlier, this is first and foremost a conversation that occurs
between the action agency and the reviewing agency. Obviously,
in addition to that we are always, particularly as we are
looking to do in this case, reaching out with that action
agency as well as independently to gain a better of
understanding the particular perspectives of the stakeholders.
Mr. Southerland. Is that a no, though? Is there a no that
there are no industry individuals, companies, or farmers their
input is not used in defining what is reasonable?
Mr. Schwaab. No, I would not say that is a no. I would say
that is a yes, although predominately through the action agency
at this point.
Dr. Gould. We, the Fish and Wildlife Service and NMFS have
when we work with the action agency we may come up with some
initial RPAs, reasonable and prudent alternatives. We have an
opportunity to work with the action agency to work with the
affected stakeholders. And we would welcome additional RPAs
that maybe even developed by them for consideration. We are not
going to do this in a vacuum because we understand the effects
of our actions on those particular folks.
Mr. Southerland. I want to reiterate. I know we have talked
about comprehensive reviews of your recommendations and your
studies. I know we have talked about reaching out with the
National Academy of Sciences and I just want to implore that
the economic impact has to be considered.
I know that Mr. DeFazio made reference to cutting your
budget. Who pays for your budget? Who funds your budget? It is
the hardworking men and women in the small farms and those that
support agriculture who produce tax revenue that comes into the
Treasury, and that is the only way that you get an increased
budget. And as these rules are passed down and eliminates small
businesses, it is hard for you to have, though, a growing
budget with a decreasing agriculture environment where people
cannot survive. So if you are going to have a comprehensive
study, it has to include economic impact. I yield back.
Mr. Lucas. The gentleman's time has expired. The Chair now
recognizes the gentlelady from Hawaii and then the gentleman
from Georgia will proceed after her. You are now recognized.
Ms. Hanabusa. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
I would like to start with Mr. Schwaab. During Mr. Markey's
questioning, people may have gotten the impression that the
FIFRA registration process and the ESA consultations are
duplicative. In your opinion, are these two statutes redundant
in the information they provide, or do these two laws have to
work together to adequately protect the endangered species?
Mr. Schwaab. Thank you Congresswoman. We obviously have the
greatest expertise as it relates to implementation of the
Endangered Species Act. That is a process that is set up and
importantly directed to the protection of rare, threatened, and
endangered species. We see opportunities, as we have in this
process, for greater integration of the processes and goals of
FIFRA with the processes and goals of the Endangered Species
Act and think there is a place for and benefit to be derived
from each.
Ms. Hanabusa. Along that line, do you believe that the way
to improve this process by meeting the requirements of the
Endangered Species Act that is somehow--how are you going to do
it without compromising the FIFRA registration process?
Mr. Schwaab. Thank you. A number of concerns in that regard
are particularly the focus of the terms that are articulated in
this National Academy of Sciences study, reconciling some of
the risks and exposure modeling, some of the ways in which we
deal with consideration of ingredients, exposure levels,
different levels of impact, direct/indirect, sublethal and the
like, cumulative, et cetera, all areas that are ripe for
further investigation as we look to better integrate these two
processes.
Ms. Hanabusa. Do you anticipate that it may result with
some sort of new regulations that will have to be instituted?
Mr. Schwaab. I think it would be premature to judge that.
Ms. Hanabusa. I would like to now ask some questions of Dr.
Bradbury.
Dr. Bradbury, when you began your testimony, you made the
statement that when used properly pesticides provide
significant benefits to society, such as controlling disease-
causing organisms and so forth, yet, throughout the testimony
what we are hearing is this conflict with the consultation
process. My first question is on the consultation process you
also listed in your testimony a whole line of cases that
obviously you are contending with. Is the consultation process
that was anticipated under the Endangered Species Act is that
different from the consultation process which you must engage
in as a result of a court injunction or the court orders that
you have listed?
Dr. Bradbury. I believe the challenge that we are working
through with our colleagues in the Services transcends a
litigation case versus our registration process in folding the
consultation process into that. What we are working through is
how to ensure that the science we use in our registration
analysis has the kinds of information and analysis that then
allows for an efficient consultation process if we determine
that we need to go into consultation. So the work has been
ongoing with our technical workgroup and now getting some
advice from the National Academy of Sciences is directed toward
how, as I think I said in my opening comments--really the
question is how to create a very efficient and effective hand
off between the science we do under FIFRA and the science that
has to happen in the consultation process.
Ms. Hanabusa. And you may not have enough time to respond,
so you may have to do this in writing. I see in your testimony
also the reference to a review process every 15 years. I also
see that the registration process is a condition, of FIFRA, and
the consultation process seems to be a condition of the
Endangered Species Act. So at what point does one trump the
other? In other words, does the consultation process trump
FIFRA or the registration process and/or at what point do you
make a determination that you must engage in the consultation
process? Because in your synopsis of the cases you made it very
clear in parentheses consultation if necessary. So there is a
determination process and consultation is necessary.
I see we are out of time so, Mr. Chair, can you ask him to
respond in writing, please?
Mr. Lucas. Absolutely. The gentleman will respond to both
Committees.
Ms. Hanabusa. Thank you very much.
Mr. Lucas. The gentlelady's time has expired. And the Chair
now turns to the gentleman from Georgia for his five minutes.
Mr. Austin Scott of Georgia. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And I want to go back to what my colleague Mr. Southerland
was talking about. And my question specifically for you, Mr.
Schwaab would be when you are in the rulemaking process are the
economic consequences and recreational opportunities for the
American citizen considered and taken into account in the
rulemaking process? All I hear is best available science, best
available science, best available science. And I want to know
if the economic consequences of that rule and the impact on the
American citizen from a recreational standpoint are taken into
account.
Mr. Schwaab. Yes, sir. Overwhelmingly so in our rulemaking
processes. We are speaking here particularly about a
consultation process and the economic circumstances are
factored in, in that reasonable and prudent alternative
development phase.
Mr. Austin Scott of Georgia. You say overwhelmingly so. I
want to get back to, and it doesn't seem to me that it matters
what we are talking about. We have a problem here in that we
don't trust you in the rulemaking process. I mean that is the
bottom line. We are not scientists. We have to work together
and yet, what I see, and I have only been in Congress for four
months, so it is indifference, if you will, from agencies
toward the American citizens and toward, quite honestly,
Congress in many cases when we ask the questions. And I just
tell you a gentleman from Georgia when Matheson and Stevenson
was passed expressed concern with your agency, the Tampa office
specifically, over the fact that they were using science to
change the limits on fish in the Gulf of Mexico. And they
determined that instead of four snapper you should be allowed
to keep two.
Now this person fished a lot in the Gulf of Mexico and
truly believed that changing the seasons was the better
alternative because of the by-product. When you throw a snapper
back it is dead, basically. That is the real science.
The agency then turned around and cut the limit. Turn
around the next year and used the science again to say we
should have shortened the seasons. We are going to shorten the
season. I tell you the person that made that phone call that
was basically told by the people in Tampa that they didn't care
what they thought was me. And I mean what happens when American
citizens are treated that way by your agencies they become
reluctant to support you, even when you have the common goal of
sustainable fisheries.
And I guess my question is where do we find the balance
between science, the economy, and the American citizen and what
they need with regard to recreation and a safe environment?
Mr. Schwaab. Thank you, sir, for that example because
perhaps it also gives me an opportunity to clarify my use of
overwhelming because fishery management decisions were the
context in which I was particularly thinking in that regard
where extensive social and economic evaluations of the
implications of all the rules that we put forward are a
significant part of that process.
The other thing I would note for you is that particularly
as it relates to seeking the balance in a fishery management
context we work very closely with eight regional fishery
management councils. Those councils are made up of recreational
fishermen, commercial fishermen, state agency heads. And it is
often those councils that make those decisions around, for
example, season lengths and the trade-offs between----
Mr. Austin Scott of Georgia. Mr. Schwaab, I apologize for
interrupting. We are short on time and I going to say this and
I am going to yield back.
With all due respect, and I don't know you, but one is I
would like to see the Director of the Office of Sustainable
Fisheries at some point to discuss it with them. But there was
little to no regard for the recreational fisherman in the
rulemaking process with regard to snapper in the Gulf of
Mexico. Thank you.
Mr. Lucas. Would the gentleman yield to me before he yields
back.
Mr. Austin Scott of Georgia. Yes, sir.
Mr. Lucas. I would just like to offer an observation that
the Services assert they use the best available data, yet in
acknowledging their models are fundamentally flawed they have
asked NAS to help define best available data. Clearly, the
Services aren't using the best available data as they have
suggested today, considering the economic impact where their
opinions could have on agriculture and forestry. I had hoped
that we would first fix our models before we began discussing
implementation of those opinions.
The gentleman yields back. The Chair now recognizes the
gentleman from Arizona for five minutes.
Mr. Grijalva. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I appreciate all the conversation. The issue of balance and
where economic benefit becomes part of the balance process both
in consultation and under FIFRA with EPA. But let me for the
moment interject another species into the discussion.
EPA estimates that between 10,000 to 20,000 farmer workers
are poisoned to one degree or another by the use of pesticides,
that the children have the highest risk of exposure to
pesticides through drift around their schools, their parks,
their backyards. And that Ranking Member Markey mentioned those
three studies. One of them in particular talked about one of
the pesticides being used and there was a study on farm worker
women and their children and found that by the age of seven
there was a determinable drop in IQ and developmental ability
on the part of children under seven.
I mention those because my question is, Dr. Bradbury, is it
true that under FIFRA the EPA can register pesticides that pose
a risk of concern to humans as long as it can be shown that the
economic benefit outweighs the risk? Is that true?
Dr. Bradbury. That is not true. If the pesticide is a food
use pesticide, so it is used on crops that get into the human
food supply then we operate under the Federal Food, Drug, and
Cosmetic Act and that is a risk only statute so they have
unreasonable adverse effects. Any reasonable certainty--no harm
we don't register the product.
Mr. Grijalva. So following that logic then the EPA when you
measure adverse effect, does that chronic and long-term health
effects on humans? Is that part of the study process?
Dr. Bradbury. Among the hundred plus studies that we
receive from the registrant, that includes chronic studies,
cancer, bioacidities in rats and reproductive developmental
studies. In addition, we look at the published literature,
looking at epidemiology studies.
In fact, in the last year or so we have met with our
Science Advisory Panel to get advice on how to better interpret
epidemiology studies and how to bring those studies into the
overall risk assessment process.
Mr. Grijalva. Back to that study, chlorpyrifos that is
still listed as permissible use, yet studies seem to indicate
that it has the kind of adverse effect on humans that I
mentioned with the study of farm worker and the women and
children. So how do you balance what you just said with that?
Dr. Bradbury. So we are in the process of reevaluating
chlorpyrifos. Right now we have a scientific advisory panel
meeting scheduled for June, in a couple of months to take a
look at the science associated with chlorpyrifos. These studies
that just came out our scientists are reviewing them and will
at least be bringing forward some of the concepts in these
epidemiology studies to the Science Advisory Panel.
The challenge in looking at epidemiology studies, which
creates statistical associations between exposure and effects
and we are working toward how to understand that kind of
information and link it with information----
Mr. Grijalva. With the perpetual debate around linkage,
right?
Dr. Bradbury. How to integrate that information with animal
toxicology studies, which gives a better hand of dose response.
Mr. Grijalva. So I am assuming with that process there are
also the revisions to the worker protection standards is
something that will be ongoing since that has been quite a
while since that has been looked at.
Dr. Bradbury. One of my program's highest priorities is to
move forward on the work of protection.
Mr. Grijalva. I appreciate that. I agree that there is a
balance issue at hand here, but there is also a health and
safety issue at hand. And the Endangered Species Act has
afforded, up to this point, and it is very gratifying to hear
your comments, sir, the best opportunity for that human health
and safety issue to be incorporated in those consultations. So
thank you very much. And I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Lucas. The gentleman's time has expired. The Chair
would note that we have at this point three remaining Members
for questions, Mr. Flores followed by Mr. Thomas followed by
Mr. Bishop. And with that, the Chair recognizes the gentleman
from Texas for five minutes.
Mr. Flores. Thank you, Chairman Lucas and thank you
Chairman Hastings for hosting this hearing today.
I wanted to remind everybody about the title for this
hearing is At Risk American Jobs, Agriculture, Health and
Species--the Cost of Federal Regulatory Dysfunction. And we
have talked a lot today on your side of the room about science.
What you are hearing from this side of the room predominately
is about economics and jobs. And so I am going to reiterate
several comments that we have said today about economic
analysis not being included in these studies.
As I am sure each of you are aware, the ESA has a charge
that economic analysis will be included, particularly as it
affects folks in agriculture when you look at regulations
moving forward. And also we have a new executive order, 13563,
that requires that we look at the impact of new regulations
while promoting economic growth, innovation, competitiveness,
and job creation.
So my question, and I would like about a 15-second answer
from each of you, when are we going to get back to looking at
economic analysis as with respect to agriculture and the ESA
and also Executive Order 13563 as we go through this process?
So I would start with Dr. Glauber.
Dr. Glauber. The gentleman on my left will be able to
respond a bit more to this. But my understanding of the ESA for
a critical habitat designation, for example, there is cost-
benefit analysis put in there.
As I mentioned, we have talked about many times during the
consultation process development of prudent and reasonable
alternatives. I think there is a very important place for
economics as well.
Dr. Bradbury. In the aspect of moving into an endangered
species consultation when has to happen from EPA's perspective,
the first step is making that registration decision. And
through that process, the first step is getting the science
right and ensuring that we have the best available science,
using public participation to refine that science.
If we need to make risk mitigation measures to again get
public input to try to optimize any mitigation that needs to
happen, that includes an economic analysis to try to minimize
the economic burden in the context of the risks that we have to
protect against.
If we have to go into consultation, then there could be
another iteration of that, and that is the edge of where we are
now in trying to make that linkage.
Mr. Flores. Dr. Gould?
Dr. Gould. As was indicated by Dr. Glauber, the critical
habitat stage of the Endangered Species Act does require us to
do economic analysis. But in terms of the relations between
FIFRA and the consultations on FIFRA, I agree that we should be
considering the economic impacts along with the action agencies
at the RPA stage.
Mr. Schwaab. I would just make the same observations, sir.
Mr. Flores. OK. I have one more question since I have some
time. This has to do with a constituent in my district. This is
for Director Gould. There is an electric transmission
distribution provider in Texas, which began an application with
Fish and Wildlife Service for a 30-year Endangered Species Act
Sec. 10(a)(1)(B) permit in 2008.
And it was my understanding that this constituent worked
diligently with FWS to meet all Federal requirements and
establish goal of completing the process by June of this year.
However, due to delays in his permitting process they are
concerned that this goal is no longer within reach.
I wanted to highlight this issue as well as a letter that I
sent to you and Secretary Salazar on April 15. I would ask
unanimous consent that this letter be inserted in the record.
Dr. Gould will you be able to update me on this process in a
timely manner
Dr. Gould. Yes, sir. I will.
Mr. Flores. Thank you. I yield back.
Mr. Lucas. The gentleman yields back. The Chair now
recognizes the gentleman from Pennsylvania for five minutes.
Mr. Thompson. I thank the Chairman and Ranking Members.
Thank the panel for your testimony.
Dr. Glauber, in your written testimony you talked about the
mitigation efforts consultation programs, obviously an area of
particular interest. And I thought you coined it well, a great
metric for measuring wise investments in terms of taxpayer
resources and the outcomes we are looking for. You talked about
payments tied to estimated benefits.
I wanted to just to get your thoughts on how effective have
we been at tying the payments of these programs to actual
benefits. What kind of outcomes are you seeing?
Dr. Glauber. That is a challenge. And I think I mentioned
in the testimony just problems, for example, in Washington
where you do the per-acre costs, the opportunity cost for a
farmer for irrigated land is pretty high. And so trying to
encourage that sort of land to come in is, of course, very
expensive. And you are talking about a conservation program
that may not have a lot of dollars. So that is the challenge is
how to do that most effectively.
But obviously, there are a lot of potential benefits in
those programs. I think if they are well targeted and are
trying to get certain environmental benefits I think there is
some real potential there. The problem is there are not a lot
of dollars.
Mr. Thompson. I look forward to certainly continuing our
communications in the future as we prepare for the next farm
bill and critically evaluating what works and what does not
work, and look forward to your experience.
My district is very rural. It is home to significant forest
lands and makes up nearly a quarter of Pennsylvania. And we
have dealt with the gypsy moth for many years and are always
watching the Emerald Ash Borer.
Dr. Glauber, what in your view are some of the unintended
consequences of the Endangered Species Act on managing invasive
species, such as specifically the Emerald Ash Borer, which is
presenting a tremendous threat to our forests in Pennsylvania?
Dr. Glauber. Let me just say obviously this a big effort to
try to control invasive species. And to the degree that that
comes in conflict with the Endangered Species Act
determinations, I think they are, as we are working out through
these consultations, this is exactly where the rubber hits the
road I think in developing prudent and reasonable alternatives.
Mr. Thompson. Dr. Bradbury, you mentioned in your written
testimony three lawsuits that EPA is currently dealing with
that have ``the potential to have significant impact on
pesticide registration actions generally.''
In my opinion, certainly some individuals of environmental
organizations are purposely using the legal system to try and
expand upon the basic congressional intent and jurisdiction of
the current law. I also think they are using it as a very
successful fund-raising programing as well since the Federal
Government reimburses most of those costs for them.
In other words, they sue the EPA, the Forest Service,
whatever agency to force a court decision and hopefully get a
sympathetic judge to rule in their favor. My question really is
to all the panelists. I assuming this is something you are
seeing that is impacting all of your agencies, the filing of
these lawsuits that basically is interfering with really
legislatively congressionally directed public policy.
Dr. Gould. From the Fish and Wildlife Service's
perspective, these suits have been particularly problematic
because sometimes they are on process. There are very specific
time lines under the ESA for our listing process and other
responsibilities. And we are seeing some of these petitions of
well over 200--300 species coming in at a time. We literally
are swamped.
Dr. Bradbury. I believe my written testimony gave you an
estimate of 2010 and the investment we had to make to deal with
litigation.
I think what we are all trying to say today is that,
looking forward, if we can develop the scientific process, the
public participation process, the focus tools to make well-
informed decisions and ensure there is good public
participation, we get the efficiency. So, hopefully, we can get
past where we are and get to a system that is more efficient
and more effective and not have to use litigation to get there.
Mr. Thompson. Let me in the time remaining, just for a one
statement and see if you agree or don't agree. Frankly, if what
you are doing, and I have heard many times best science
mentioned. I don't know how many times, but a lot. If best
science really is being used in administering the laws that are
passed in Congress are these lawsuits a costly distraction to
best public policy delivered with congressional legislative
authority, would you agree with that?
Mr. Schwaab. I would just say this perhaps also related to
the last question. While the lawsuits might drive us into
review of particular circumstances, it is ultimately still the
use of best available science that dictates the ultimate
decision of the agency in any particular circumstance.
Dr. Gould. We have through our budget processes looked for
budgetary protection from some of these suits in that we have
so much money to complete our listing processes. So there are
legislative ways to resolve these issues. But ultimately, what
we need to do is administratively increase our efficiency and
effectiveness through multi-species consultations and that sort
of thing to make us more efficient. Hopefully, by taking those
actions we can resolve some of our problems meeting the
specific time lines that are outlined in the Act.
Mr. Thompson. My time has expired. My frustration is that I
think there are frequent times that these lawsuits actually try
to redefine science and that is very frustrating.
Mr. Chairman, I appreciate your tolerance and I yield back.
Mr. Lucas. The gentleman yields back. The Chair now
recognizes the gentlelady from California for a key role of
potentially concluding this round of questions for this panel.
Mrs. Napolitano. Since I was skipped, can I have double
time? Thank you, Mr. Chair. And as the Ranking Member of the
Water and Power Subcommittee, I do strongly support our
government's role to protecting our waters from harmful
pesticides.
According to the USGS, a report in 2006 pesticides
frequently are present in streams and groundwater and have been
found in some streams at levels that exceed the human health
benchmark. And they occur in many streams at levels that may
affect aquatic life or fish eating wildlife. And EPA has
reported that 16,000 miles of rivers and streams, 1,368 miles
of bays and estuaries, 370,000 acres of lakes in the United
States are currently impaired or threatened by pesticides. And
EPA suggest that these estimates may be low because some of the
states do not monitor all the different pesticides that are
currently being used.
Mr. Chairman, I ask unanimous consent to place into the
record again two EPA reports that show the use of pesticides as
the number one cause of impairments to water quality in my
State of California. I would like to ask for an update from EPA
because this is a 2006 report, but it is still a good report.
This means that all the waters in California that are found
through testing and monitoring to be impaired or polluted under
the Clean Water Act pesticides are the most significant cause
of these problems.
And I am very concerned about the effects that these
pesticides have on our health of our rivers and streams
drinking water supplies and thereby the health of our citizens.
It is worrisome. The House has already passed a bill to
permanently exempt pesticide applications from the Clean Water
Act without substantive review. I support the work of Vector
control agencies to maintain the public health of our
communities. I am worried that the House has overreached in
deregulating other pesticide applicators that pollute our
waters. We must not create an exemption from water quality
protection requirements without considering the impacts to
waters that are already impaired by pesticides as in my State
of California.
And I can speak from the Superfund listed--in California
that one of the main components of the huge contaminate
underwater body was pesticides and it was several other things
that came to mind and my mind is frozen. Fertilizers, plus
other cold war manufacturing leftovers they were leached into
the aquifer. To me those are some of the things we need to be
able to ensure that we don't have.
And Mr. Cardoza asked Dr. Bradbury about the farmers use
less of some of these pesticides. However, is there any data
that will show that this continued use is maybe leaching into
the aquifers, thereby creating problems that we will not see
for decades to come?
Dr. Bradbury. In our risk assessments that we perform to
evaluate the registration of a new pesticide or to look at
existing pesticides some of the data that we get in those
hundred plus studies include leaching studies, so we are taking
a look at the potential of a chemical to move through the soil
and to get into aquifers.
In fact, some of our preregistration decisions, our last
cycle of reevaluating compounds are a number of decisions we
made to stop the use of certain pesticides because of their
ability to leach into shallow aquifers it could a source of
water for private wells.
Mrs. Napolitano. And the waters do move into the aquifers.
Dr. Bradbury. And that is part of the scientific analysis
that we undertake.
Mrs. Napolitano. And Mr. Southerland, my colleague on the
other side talked about the cost of farmers and they pay for
this. I think the general fund everybody pays for it and we
have not had any estimates or guesstimates for that matter on
the cost to the human health to the cities and the states that
have to provide for those citizens to be able to take care of
carcinogens that being found in children and many adults, the
untreated wastewater and other factors that we know about.
One of the other questions, Dr. Bradbury, is California has
a robust program that tracks pesticide usage throughout the
state. In what ways is California's program distinct from
others?
Dr. Bradbury. I am sorry. I couldn't hear the very end of
your question.
Mrs. Napolitano. In what way is California's program
distinct?
Dr. Bradbury. The California program provides county level
information in terms of pesticide use, which is very valuable
and we use that data extensively.
Mrs. Napolitano. Do other states use it?
Dr. Bradbury. I don't want to speak for other states to the
extent that they use that information because there is some
extrapolation that needs to happen from unique settings of
California and how relevant that information may be for a
specific state.
Mrs. Napolitano. And Mr. Schwaab, if EPA and the states
provide more robust data on actual pesticide usage to the
Service, would the Service be able to develop more refine
measures to protect the endangered species in the future?
Mr. Schwaab. Yes. That is an area that we are looking at
right now.
Mrs. Napolitano. Would be able have information provided to
this Committee so that we understand what your findings are?
Mr. Schwaab. Yes. We are happy to provide some follow up
information regarding the nature and the extent of those
discussions to date.
Mrs. Napolitano. Thank you. And Mr. Chair, I would love to
continue, but I would like to ensure that give these handouts
that I mentioned for the record. These are very valuable. Thank
you, Mr. Chair.
Mr. Lucas. No objection. The gentlelady's time has expired.
All time has expired for this panel. The Chair yields back to
Chairman Hastings.
The Chairman. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, for
conducting this hearing with this panel.
I want to thank the panel for their very valuable
testimony. And I want to thank the Members for their questions.
Many times there are some follow up with questions to the
panel, so if you would respond in a very quick time frame I
would appreciate it very much if Members have additional
questions.
And I would also like to encourage this panel, although we
can't compel you to, to stick around for the second panel. As
you know, you are a panel made up of people that implement the
law. Now the second panel who is designed for people that are
affected by the law. And I hope it would be very, hopefully,
instructive to you if you could hang around and hear what they
have to say. There might be some synergism that we would want
to follow up because we want to get the maximum amount of
benefit we can out of this hearing.
So once again, I want to thank you. Under Committee Rule
4(h), the record will be open for ten business days for
whatever responses need to be. And with that, I will dismiss
this panel and I want to take about a four-minute recess and
call the second panel. The gentleman from the Northern
Marianas.
Mr. Sablan. I just ask for unanimous consent request to
submit a letter into the record from 65 nonprofit environmental
groups who support the science-based solution.
The Chairman. Without objection, so ordered.
Mr. Sablan. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. Thank you.
[Whereupon, a four-minute recess was taken.]
The Chairman. The Committee will reconvene, and I want to
warmly welcome our second panel of witnesses. We have with us
Ms. Beehler, who is a district manager of the Benton County
Mosquito Control District in my home state of Washington. As a
matter of fact, in my district. Mr. Barry Bushue, the President
of the Oregon Farm Bureau on behalf of the American Farm
Bureau; Dr. Debra Edwards, Senior Managing Science, the
Exponent Engineer and Scientific Consulting firm; Mr. West
Mathison, President, Stemilt Growers, in Wenatchee, again in my
district; Dan Newhouse, who is the Director of the Washington
State Department of Agriculture, a sometime member of my
district when he is not working in Olympia. And Mr. Zeke
Grader, Executive Director of Pacific Coast Federation of
Fishermen's Associations.
We will go right to the panel and Ms. Beehler, you are
recognized for five minutes. I would remind the panelists once
again that the little device in front of you is a five-minute
clock. Your full statement will appear in front of the record.
As long as the green light is on, you have four minutes. When
the yellow light goes on, it means you have 30 seconds. And I
would ask you to try to wrap up your comments. And when the red
light goes on, that means the five minutes have expired. But
your full statement will appear in the record.
So Ms. Beehler, you are recognized for five minutes.

STATEMENT OF ANGELA BEEHLER, DISTRICT MANAGER, BENTON COUNTY
MOSQUITO CONTROL, DISTRICT #1

Ms. Beehler. Good afternoon, Mr. Chairman, members of the
Committee.
My name is Angela Beehler, and I am the Vice President of
the Northwest Mosquito and Vector Control Association. I also
manage the Mosquito Control District in Benton County,
Washington.
I am pleased to testify on the profound effects that
regulatory dysfunction can exert on public health for I take my
mandate to protect the health of my community seriously. For
the purpose of this hearing, I will focus on the salmon and
steelhead Endangered Species Act consultations between the EPA
and National Marine Fisheries Service.
Over 1 million people die worldwide each year from
mosquito-transmitted diseases. While fatalities in the United
States are relatively rare due to a long history of successful
mosquito control programs, the cost associated with the
treatment of mosquito-borne sickness runs into the millions of
dollars each year. The human costs are far greater.
Alarmingly, the future of public health mosquito control is
in jeopardy due to the increasing cost needed to register our
pesticides, burdensome regulations of Clean Water Act permits,
if enacted, and some ill-advised Endangered Species Act
protections. These cost divert scarce resources away from our
primary mission of protecting public health and compromise both
the quality and extent of the protections we can offer the
public.
All pesticides sold in the United States must be registered
by the EPA in accordance with the Federal Insecticide,
Fungicide, and Rodenticide Act. As a condition of registration,
the applicant must demonstrate that the use of pesticide in
accordance with its label will not present any unreasonable
risks to man or the environment, taking into account both the
costs and the benefits of the use of that pesticide. Thus,
protection for listed wildlife is already built into the
statute and practiced by mosquito control personnel.
I am aware that provisions of the Endangered Species Act
did not mandate that NMFS consider the public health benefits
when evaluating the effects of Naled, a mosquito adulticide on
Northwest salmon and steelhead.
A recent biological opinion rendered by NMFS ultimately
determined that the use of Naled could jeopardize salmon and
they recommended that label changes be made. However, it was
evident that proper care was not taken to obtain actual usage
data from public health pesticide applicators. As a result, the
biological opinion grossly over estimated the amount of
Malathion used for mosquito control in the Northwest, while
under estimating the public health importance of this product.
Unfortunately, the faulty assumptions made during the
consultation could eliminate adult mosquito control over much
of Washington, Oregon, and California.
When field surveys indicate that mosquito numbers are above
the treatment threshold or when mosquitos in my district are
found to be carrying disease, I initiate wide area spraying to
reduce the numbers below a transmission threshold. It is
important to note that these applications are not made directly
to water, but to the air column above and the adjacent
vegetation.
These vegetated areas serve as a preferred resting place
for adult mosquitos. Failure to control the mosquitos in these
areas will result in an increased risk of mosquito-borne
disease as they migrate outward to find hosts.
I am entirely sympathetic with NMFS' fear that, without a
buffer surrounding water bodies, pesticides could enter the
water and kill sources of food for salmon and steelhead.
However, aerial sprays applied perpendicular to the prevailing
wind direction actually move pesticide away from the water
body, significantly reducing the risk to aquatic and vertebras.
Over the past two years, West Nile virus infested mosquitos
were found in large numbers in Washington State. As much as 61
percent of the State of Washington is critical habitat for
salmon and steelhead populations. I have no doubt that spray
buffers in forests at the time of these outbreaks would have
cost human lives. Moreover, the quality of life for the victims
that suffer long-term symptoms and their caretakers would be
severely compromised.
The Endangered Species Act must be modified to make
considerations for public health uses. I do not believe it was
the intent of the EPA or the Services to put people at risk,
but this is the consequence of the statute in its present form.
The case involving Northwest salmon sets a precedent for
hundreds of pesticide active ingredients in endangered species
and should proceed with the utmost caution. Lives and
livelihoods are at stake.
Furthermore, the consultation must be more clearly defined
to reduce inconsistencies in the biological opinions. Ample
time for public comment, peer reviewed scientific input, and
stakeholder participation is essential if the Endangered
Species Act is to full provide the benefit for which it was
intended. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Beehler follows:]

Statement of Angela Beehler, District Manager, Benton County Mosquito
Control District #1, West Richland, Washington; Vice President,
Northwest Mosquito and Vector Control Association, and Co-Chair,
Endangered Species Act Subcommittee, American Mosquito Control
Association

This testimony serves as an addition to original testimony
submitted before the House Committees on Natural Resources and
Agriculture on May 3, 2011 and is offered for inclusion into the
Congressional Record.
The Effect of Regulatory Dysfunction on Public Health
The future of public health mosquito control is in jeopardy due to
increasing costs needed to register our pesticides, burdensome
requirements of Clean Water Act permits if enacted, and some ill-
advised Endangered Species Act (ESA) protections. These costs divert
scarce resources away from our primary mission of protecting public
health and compromise both the quality and extent of protection we
offer the public.
The ESA is intended to protect species that are threatened with
extinction and maintain their critical habitat. The current manner in
which the ESA is being implemented can impede mosquito control programs
in achieving their goals, namely protecting the public's health and
welfare from nuisance causing and disease carrying mosquitoes. In
addition, endangered species such as Whooping Cranes and Sandhill
Cranes are affected by mosquito-borne disease. Any compromise to
mosquito control activities is bound to affect them as well.
EPA provides its analysis on potential environmental effects from a
pesticide, including those on endangered or threatened species, to the
Fish and Wildlife Service and National Marine Fisheries Service (NMFS)
which are charged with administering the ESA. The Services develop and
issue Biological Opinions (BiOps) reflecting their conclusions of
potential impacts in addition to providing recommendations for
mitigation.
The provisions of the Endangered Species Act do not mandate that
NMFS assess the human health benefits when evaluating effects of
pesticides on salmon and steelhead. The third BiOp rendered by NMFS
ultimately determined that naled, a mosquito control adulticide, could
jeopardize salmonids and recommended label changes be made. However, it
was evident that proper care had not been taken to obtain actual usage
information from the public health pesticide applicators. As a result,
the BiOp grossly overestimated the amount of naled used by mosquito
control in the Northwest, while underestimating the public health
importance of this product. The assumptions made during the
consultation could eliminate adult mosquito control over much of
Washington, Oregon, and California.
This analysis forms the basis of Service-recommended Reasonable
Prudent Alternatives and Reasonable Prudent Measures sent to the EPA
for implementation. Even though the basis for the proposed mitigation
measures may not be well founded, EPA is nonetheless left with
implementing them. This can include significant label restrictions that
preclude use of pesticide products to protect public health and
welfare.
Resource shortfalls in staffing and funds make it extremely
difficult for the Services to render timely BiOps. Even when BiOps are
completed and opened for public comment, stakeholders are not provided
adequate time to review the documents and provide meaningful feedback.
The determination of the potential impacts of public health
pesticides on endangered and threatened species should be heavily
dependent on the expert review performed by the EPA Office of Pesticide
Programs as part of the registration review processes. The analysis and
conclusions of the EPA in this regard should be strongly considered by
the Services in the development of the BiOps. That analysis and
conclusions should only be set aside where the Services have validated
information which demonstrates that the EPA's analysis is faulty.
The Endangered Species Act must be modified to make considerations
for public health uses. I do not believe it is the intent of the EPA or
the Services to put people at risk, but that is the consequence of the
statute in its present form. The case involving NW salmon sets a
precedent for hundreds of pesticide active ingredients and endangered
species and should proceed with the utmost caution. Furthermore, the
consultation process must be clearly defined to reduce inconsistencies
in the Biological Opinions. Ample time for public comment, peer-
reviewed scientific input, and stakeholder participation is essential
if the Endangered Species Act is to fully provide the benefits for
which it was intended.
NMFS Overestimated Salmon Exposure to Mosquito Control Pesticides in
Models
The EPA registration process fully addresses water quality impacts
of adult mosquito control products. Ultra Low Volume (ULV) applications
to control public health vectors at sites under conditions specifically
prescribed by the Federal Insecticide, Fungicide, and Rodenticide Act
(FIFRA) label should not be subject to further requirements under ESA.
The droplet size, application timing and meteorological parameters for
ULV operations are specified on the insecticide label per FIFRA. The
minute size of the droplets minimizes deposition on non-targets, while
facilitating both impingement on mosquitoes in flight and rapid
breakdown to inert substances. Per label specification, ULV operations
are subject to clearly defined meteorological parameters, i.e. wind
speed (
.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6204.025

.eps[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6204.026

.eps[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6204.027

.eps[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6204.028

.eps[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6204.029

.eps__

The Chairman. That is absolutely incredible timing. Thank
you very much for that.
Mr. Bushue, you are recognized for five minutes.

STATEMENT OF MR. BARRY BUSHUE, PRESIDENT, OREGON FARM BUREAU
TESTIFYING ON BEHALF OF THE AMERICAN FARM BUREAU FEDERATION

Mr. Bushue. Chairman Lucas, Chairman Hastings and members
of the Committee I want to thank you for holding this important
hearing today.
My name is Barry Bushue. I am here as a farmer and I am
privileged to represent Oregon Farm Bureau as its President and
the American Farm Bureau Federation as its Vice President.
My farm is located approximately 20 miles due east of
Portland, Oregon. My wife and I started a diverse horticultural
operation where we raise ornamental nursery stock, bedding
plants, flowering baskets, vegetables, berries, and pumpkins
that are destined for both retail and wholesale markets.
Our markets are far from certain and are impacted by
competition and the overall state of the economy, but nothing
is more costly or devastating than a crop loss. There are times
when the only way we can save or protect a crop is by using
crop-protection products. The availability of these products is
important, not only to my farm but to agriculture in general.
The farm community relies on the judicious use of these
products based on labeled rates as determined by FIFRA.
The Farm Bureau has concerns with the BiOps resulting from
the consultation between EPA and NMFS. I attended a meeting in
Portland, Oregon, hosted by NOAA to discuss the BiOps and the
methods used to make its determinations. After hearing from
scientists who developed the BiOps, in the ensuing discussion
it became clear that our concerns about the hypothetical and
inaccurate data used in the BiOps were justified.
I was frankly stunned by the reluctance and even refusal to
utilize the actual use data available from the Department of
Agriculture and other sources in the development of these
BiOps. Scenarios using maximum rates for the maximum number of
applications for all crops listed on the label clearly do not
reflect real world conditions or an accurate picture of use
data for a study area.
Assumptions were incorporated for crops not raised in the
Northwest. Some assumptions were apparently made based on
superceded labels that weren't even accurate at the time of the
studies. Perhaps even more egregious was the use of a static
pond model for drift and exposure data. A 6-inch deep static
pond is a far cry from the moving streams that salmonid
inhabit. These extremely conservative, worst-case scenario
assumptions and flawed modeling do nothing to help agriculture
or salmon.
The results of the BiOps are buffers that far exceed those
incorporated on the labels by EPA. The existing buffers on
labels were developed by a competent and experienced team of
EPA scientists. The buffers on the label for chlorpyrifos are
25 feet for ground and 150 feet for aerial. In contrast, NMFS
has indicated that the buffer for this insecticide should be
500 feet for ground and 1000 feet for aerial.
To put this into perspective, my home farm is approximately
980 feet long. It borders an intermittent stream that is part
of a basin system that supports salmonid. Five hundred feet is
seven-and-a-half acres, or more than half of my retail
production. If an aerial application is required, the BiOp
would block the use of critical crop protections on my entire
retail farm.
Economics has to be part of any sustainable farm. To put
any farm at risk due to the use of flawed and inaccurate data
is unforgivable. And scenes like those occurring in Oregon and
the Pacific Northwest have the potential to be played out
throughout the United States. In fact, the Center for
Biological Diversity has filed a lawsuit in the Federal
District Court alleging that EPA violated ESA Section 7 by
failing to consult with either the Fish and Wildlife Service
and NOAA Fisheries on 381 products for their possible effects
on 214 species listed under ESA that will impact every single
state, except Alaska.
The duplication of the risk assessment requirements for
crop protection registration by EPA and for Section 7
consultation by the Services is a prime example of the
duplication and waste that exist in our Federal Government.
Because both FIFRA and the ESA specifically require EPA and the
Services, respectively to perform risk assessment procedures,
we submit that legislation is needed to reconcile the roles of
these respective agencies and to mesh two risk assessment
requirements into one.
A starting point for discussion might be counterpart
regulations that were promulgated in 2004. The process is
hopelessly broken. It cannot and has not worked in an effective
way for anyone--growers, regulators, or endangered species.
Congress must intervene. Implementation of the existing or any
future BiOp should be stopped until another effective solution
is found. No individuals are more important for the protection
and preservation of salmon habitat than those of us who manage
the land. By imposing blunt instrument restrictions that are so
unrealistic and unnecessarily conservative you alienate the
very people that are the most critical for salmon protection,
generally.
The Farm Bureau stands ready to assist you in finding a
workable solution to this problem.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Bushue follows:]

Statement of Barry Bushue, President, Oregon Farm Bureau, and Vice
President, American Farm Bureau Federation, on behalf of the American
Farm Bureau Federation

Chairman Lucas, Chairman Hastings, Ranking Member Peterson and
Ranking Member Markey, thank you for holding this important hearing
today.
My name is Barry Bushue. I am here as a farmer, and am privileged
to represent Oregon Farm Bureau as President and American Farm Bureau
as Vice President.
My farm is located approximately 20 miles East of Portland, Oregon.
I am the third in my family's history to own and operate the farm. My
wife and I started a diverse horticultural operation where we raise
ornamental nursery stock, bedding plants, flowering baskets, vegetable
starts, strawberries, raspberries, tomatoes, various vegetables and
pumpkins that are destined for both retail and wholesale markets. We
farm less than 70 acres and our primary retail operation, including an
on-farm market, is on the ``home farm'' that is comprised of fewer than
14 acres. We are also involved in our local Farmers Market.
Our retail operation has been successful because of our commitment
to our local community and the environment, our attention to detail,
and most importantly, a consistently high quality product.
Quality does not come easily. Nutrients, water and other inputs
must be monitored regularly. The environment in the greenhouses must be
monitored and regulated. Managing for pests is constant and critical.
We use a variety of pest management tools on our farm, including
mechanical, biological and chemical methods, and our strategies for
different commodities vary depending on their needs and market. Crop
rotations, watering schedules, cover crops and cultivation methods are
all important. In addition, recycling of water in our nursery container
yard and grass strips for water control are all integral to our farm,
and, as a member of the Local Advisory Committee, I participated in the
development of the Agricultural Water Quality Management Plan for the
Clackamas River Basin for the Oregon Department of Agriculture. My
experience is typical of many farms in Oregon and the Northwest.
We have a tremendous capital investment in plants, greenhouses,
equipment, personnel, irrigation systems, land and buildings. We have
clearly made a commitment to sustainability and to the future of our
farm for generations to come. There is nothing more sustainable than a
productive farm that supports generation after generation.
Our markets are far from certain and are impacted by competition
and the overall state of the economy, but nothing is more costly or
devastating than a crop loss.
There are times when the only way we can save or protect a crop is
by using crop protection products. The availability of these products
is important not only to my farm but to agriculture in general. The
farm community relies on the judicious use of these products based on
labeled rates as determined under the Federal Insecticide, Fungicide,
and Rodenticide Act (FIFRA), which is administered by the Environmental
Protection Agency (EPA). The label is the law.
It is incumbent on the pesticide registrant to provide data
sufficient for the EPA to make the scientific evaluation that the
product may used for its intended purpose (according to the label)
without presenting any unreasonable adverse effect on humans, the
environment or non-target species, including species listed under the
Endangered Species Act (ESA).
Tremendous amounts of money and time have gone into the development
of these products and the scientific data utilized to register these
products. This includes not only toxicological studies on vertebrates
and invertebrates but also environmental risk assessments.
Farm Bureau has concerns with the Biological Opinions (BiOps)
resulting from the consultation between EPA and the National Marine
Fisheries Service (NMFS), which is part of the National Oceanic and
Atmospheric Administration (NOAA Fisheries of the U.S. Department of
Commerce). The BiOps were prepared as a result of litigation brought by
activist groups against EPA, alleging that EPA's registrations of
pesticides under FIFRA violated the ESA, because the pesticides had
allegedly adversely affected 26 ``evolutionarily significant units'' of
salmon in the Pacific Northwest, including in Oregon, where our farm is
located. I attended a meeting in Portland, Oregon hosted by NOAA to
discuss the BiOps and the methods used to make its determinations.
There were representatives from Oregon, Washington, California and
Idaho, including Departments of Agriculture, individual farmers and
commodity groups.
After a lengthy presentation from the NOAA scientists who developed
the BiOps and the ensuing discussion with them and the larger group, it
became clear that our concerns about the hypothetical and inaccurate
data used in the BiOps were justified. I was stunned by the reluctance
and even refusal to utilize the actual use data available from
Departments of Agriculture and other sources in the development of the
BiOps. Scenarios using maximum rates for the maximum number of
applications for all crops listed on the label clearly do not reflect
real-world conditions or an accurate picture of use data for a study
area. Assumptions were incorporated for crops not raised in the
Northwest. Some assumptions were made based on superseded labels that
weren't even accurate at the time of the studies. Perhaps even more
egregious was the use of a static pond model for drift and exposure
data. A six-inch deep static pond is a far cry from the moving streams
that salmonids inhabit. These extremely conservative worst-case
scenario assumptions and flawed modeling do nothing to help agriculture
or salmon.
In a follow up meeting with James Lecky, Director, Office of
Protected Resources in NOAA, my concerns were not abated by his
assertion that NOAA needed to use the most conservative assumptions and
modeling in order to forecast all possible use scenarios 15 years out.
Forecasting based on flawed assumptions instead of actual use and real
life data puts my farm, and our entire industry, at risk. They are
certainly not compatible with farm sustainability.
Additionally, the modeling did not appear to incorporate any
appreciation or consideration for the huge investment from farmers,
departments of agriculture, soil and water conservation districts and
USDA, through NRCS and FAS, in on-the-ground conservation work and
riparian area work already done to improve water quality and conditions
on the land that impact it.
The Oregon Department of Agriculture has active water quality
programs to address pesticide issues, and, in conjunction with the
Oregon Department of Environmental Quality, coordinates successful
Pesticide Stewardship Partnerships with growers.
The results of the BiOps are buffers that far exceed those
incorporated on the labels by EPA. The existing buffers on labels were
developed by a competent and experienced team of EPA scientists. The
buffers on the label for Lorsban Advanced (chlorpyrifos) are 25 feet
for a ground boom and 150 feet for aerial. In contrast NMFS has
indicated that the buffer for this insecticide should be 500 feet for
ground and 1000 feet for aerial. Similar scenarios run by the
Pesticides Division of the Oregon Department of Agriculture show
similar overzealous buffers for Diazinon at 575 feet and Malathion at
175 feet, both for ground application. Aerial applications are at 1000
feet.
To put this into perspective, my home farm is approximately 980 ft
long. It borders an intermittent stream that is part of a basin system
that supports salmonids. Every 67 feet is the equivalent of an acre. An
acre represents approximately five tons of strawberries, two tons of
raspberries, up to 7,500 trees, tons of tomatoes, beans, pumpkins and
untold other crops. 500 feet is 7.5 acres or more than half of my
retail production. If an aerial application is required, the BiOp would
block the use of critical crop protectants on my entire farm. Economics
has to be part of any sustainable farm. To put any farm at risk due to
the use of flawed and inaccurate data is unforgivable.
No individual is more important to the protection and preservation
of salmon habitat than the grower who manages the land. By imposing
blunt-instrument restrictions that are so obviously flawed, unrealistic
and unnecessarily conservative, you alienate the very people that are
the most critical for salmon protection.
The BiOps stemming from this one lawsuit will eventually deal with
37 pesticides. To a minor crop producer in a state that raises more
than 220 commodities, every tool is important. Rotation and resistance
management are critical key to any successful operation.
Scenes like those occurring in Oregon and the Pacific Northwest
have the potential to be played out throughout the United States.
The stark reality is that, although EPA has determined that each
pesticide it registers will not cause unreasonable adverse effects on
the environment, it has consulted with NMFS or the U.S. Fish and
Wildlife Service (FWS) on only a very few crop protection registrations
so far. EPA's alleged failure to comply with procedures under the ESA
leaves the registrations exposed to legal challenge by groups bent on
curtailing pesticide use.
In fact, the Center for Biological Diversity (CBD) has filed
several lawsuits seeking to halt pesticide use due to EPA's alleged
failure to comply with the procedural requirements of the ESA when it
registers pesticides. Most recently, CBD filed suit in the Federal
District Court for the Northern District of California alleging that
EPA violated ESA Sec. 7(a)(2) by failing to consult with either the FWS
or NOAA Fisheries (collectively, the Services) on registrations of at
least 381 pesticide products used throughout the country for their
possible effects on 214 species listed under the ESA. Neither EPA nor
the Services have the money or the staff to conduct consultations for
every registered crop protection product.
Many of the problems that have spawned this current regulatory
quagmire stem from the fact that both FIFRA and the ESA require EPA and
the Services, respectively but duplicatively, to conduct these reviews.
FIFRA \1\ requires prospective pesticide registrants to provide
voluminous data to the EPA before a product may be registered. Some of
the data required by EPA are studies on the impacts of prospective
products on species that are listed under the ESA \2\. EPA conducts
risk assessments on the possible impacts of proposed products on plant
and animal species, including listed species, as one factor in its
consideration whether and under what conditions to register a pesticide
product. Once a product is registered, FIFRA provides for re-
registration in order to assure the continued safety of the product.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ 7 U.S.C. 136 et seq.)
\2\ 16 U.S.C. 1531 et seq.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Similarly, the ESA also contains a process by which a federal
agency (such as EPA) consults with FWS or NMFS to ensure that any
action the agency authorizes, funds or carries out is not likely to
adversely affect wildlife species protected by the ESA. In the course
of this consultation process, FWS and NMFS are supposed to conduct
evaluations of the proposed agency action, very similar to the risk
assessments already undertaken by EPA in the registration or re-
registration of crop protection products.
Under any circumstances, risk assessments are expensive, time-
consuming and data-intensive exercises. Current procedures are
duplicative. They require that EPA and the Services both conduct
essentially the same risk assessments for the same products on the same
species. All three agencies conduct thorough and comprehensive
assessments on listed species. All three agencies have the scientific
expertise to perform their respective assessments. All three agencies
have developed information and data that would be useful to the others,
but which are not shared. EPA and the Services effectively duplicate
each other's work. Having two or possibly three agencies repeating the
same work is redundant, inefficient and a waste of taxpayer money. It
also leads to the regulatory gridlock confronting farmers and ranchers
as a result of the failure of these agencies to reconcile their
procedures.
President Obama's Executive Order 13563, ``Improving Regulation and
Regulatory Review,'' requires federal agencies to identify outdated,
overlapping and redundant regulations and regulatory processes as a
means to streamline government and make it work more efficiently. In
times of fiscal constraint and tighter agency budgets, eliminating
agency duplication and waste is even more important.
The duplication of the risk assessment requirements for crop
protection registration by EPA and for section 7 consultation by the
Services is a prime example of the duplication and waste that exists in
our federal agencies. Both EPA and the Services have legitimate roles
to play by virtue of the responsibilities that Congress has given them
in the FIFRA registration process and in the ESA section 7 consultation
process. Good government demands that EPA and the Services get together
to determine how best to work with one another to satisfy the missions
of both FIFRA and ESA through one, joint process.
Let us be clear. We are not proposing to strip away any protections
from either FIFRA or the ESA. We are simply proposing that two
redundant procedures be meshed into one. It is not a FIFRA issue or an
ESA issue. It is a good government issue.
Because both FIFRA and the ESA specifically require EPA and the
Services, respectively, to perform risk assessment procedures, we
submit that legislation is needed to reconcile the roles of these
respective agencies, and to mesh two risk assessment requirements into
one. A starting point for discussion might be counterpart regulations
that were promulgated in 2004 between the EPA and the Services that
were partially set aside in another lawsuit brought by activist groups,
because of their perceived inconsistency with the existing statutes.
Farm Bureau stands ready to assist you in finding a workable
solution to this problem.
______

Response to questions submitted for the record by Mr. Barry Bushue,
President, Oregon Farm Bureau

FROM RANKING MEMBER EDWARD J. MARKEY:
Question 1
In your testimony, you state that you were ``stunned by the
reluctance and even refusal to utilize the actual use data available
from Departments of Agriculture and other sources in the development of
the BiOps.'' Please provide copies to the Committee of all data and
other sources of information that you believe that the National Marine
Fisheries Service (NMFS) ignored during the development of the
biological opinions (BiOps) between 2004 and 2009. For data not in your
possession, please provide accurate citations to the data and other
information that NMFS ignored during this time period.
Response:
a) Data for USDA NRCS contributions are listed in the response to
Question 2 below.
b) Water monitoring data were provided to NMFS from WA, CA and OR
(data from Oregon appears to have been provided later in the BiOp
process). State agency staff were told at meetings that state generated
data would be ``considered'', although it is entirely unclear how it
was ``considered'' (a vague term) and what impact it made on the
analysis. State Agency staff were also told at meetings that the data
could not be used because it was not clear to NMFS which data, if any,
were collected from ``off-channel habitats'' and floodplains. According
to NMFS, this is critical habitat for young salmonids. Please note when
water samples are collected, they are typically collected from
``representative areas.'' ``Representative areas'' are commonly thought
of as areas with flowing water, rather than water from possibly
stagnant or pooled water areas from off-channel habitats/flood plains.
The URL for the Oregon Department of Environmental Quality Oregon
Laboratory Analytical Storage and Retrieval (LASAR) database is http://
deq12.deq.state.or.us/lasar2/).
Point 2: Pesticide Use Data was provided by both Washington and
California. Washington also provided land cover data. I do not have
URLS for these data sets.
Question 2
In your testimony, you also state that efforts were made in Oregon
by USDA through the NRCS and FAS ``to improve water quality and
conditions on the land that impact it.'' Please provide to the
Committee all data that demonstrate where and how water quality
conditions have improved within the State as a result of these efforts,
and explain how the NMFS should have considered this information.
Response:
An account of activities made in Oregon to improve water quality
and conditions that impact it through NRCS and its partners (generally
Soil and Water Conservation Districts) for 2010 is listed below. This
information came from http://ias.sc.egov.usda.gov. This table below is
an example of one year's worth of records from the website. If needed
NMFS could work with the NRCS to provide a summary of multiple years of
data to help NMFS characterize activities being implemented to improve
water quality and conditions on the land. The numbers in the table are
not additive, as many times, two or three practices will be installed
on the same acres to achieve the full effect (example, cover crop and
conservation crop rotation or irrigation system and irrigation water
management). This provides a summary of efforts by landowners through
the help of NRCS and FSA to do activities to improve water quality and
conditions on the land that impact it. This table does not take into
account activities completed by landowners through their own funds and
efforts or other programs not linked to the NRCS (for example, the
Oregon Watershed Enhancement Board Grant program, and EPA 319 grant
program).
NRCS and FSA are not funded to collect data that demonstrate where
and how water quality conditions have improved within the state as a
result of these efforts. Measurements of water quality conditions in
Oregon are primarily collected by the Oregon Department of Water
Quality (DEQ) and can be found at http://www.deq.state.or.us/lab/wqm/
wqimain.htm. Data collected by DEQ is not suitable for establishing the
impact of efforts by programs such as the NRCS and FSA but rather looks
at the cumulative impacts of all uses and programs.
NMFS should consider these efforts as they indicate a huge effort
by landowners to address water pollution by controlling sediment,
creating buffers to filter water, and developing riparian zones. All of
these contribute to addressing transport of material to streams that
may be toxic to fish.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6204.030

.eps__

The Chairman. Thank you very much Mr. Bushue. Dr. Edwards,
you are recognized for five minutes.

STATEMENT OF DR. DEBRA EDWARDS, Ph.D., SENIOR MANAGING
SCIENTIST, EXPONENT ENGINEER AND SCIENTIFIC CONSULTING

Dr. Edwards. Thank you and good morning. I appreciate the
opportunity to testify today.
My name is Debra Edwards and I am the former Director of
EPA's Office Pesticide Programs. I am currently employed by
Exponent, a scientific consulting firm. I am also engaged with
Texas A&M University as an independent contractor.
In 2001, a coalition of environmental organizations filed a
lawsuit against EPA for failure to consult with the National
Marine Fisheries Service on the effects of 54 pesticides on
endangered and threatened salmon species in the Pacific
Northwest.
In 2002, the Court ordered EPA to initiate consultation
with the Fisheries Service on the pesticides named in the
lawsuit by December of 2004. EPA fully complied with that court
order. In 2007, another lawsuit was filed. This time against
the Fisheries Service for unreasonable delay in completing the
consultations that were requested by EPA.
On July 31, 2008, the Fisheries Service provided EPA with
its first 482-page draft biological opinion, which included
broad species jeopardy findings for the three organophosphate
insecticides. After some negotiation, the Fisheries Service
ultimately agreed to allow only 46 calendar days for EPA review
of the draft opinion.
On September 15, 2008, I signed EPA's formal comment letter
to the Fisheries Service regarding their July 31 draft opinion.
In that letter I expressed a number of concerns related to data
selection and the lack of transparency regarding the scientific
methodology used to develop the opinion. Specifically, the
opinion provided no target levels of exposure that would not
result in jeopardy. It didn't address current pesticide use
patterns.
It assumed routine, unlawful misuse. It included
unrealistic assumptions regarding concurrent use of multiple
insecticides at the same time in the same location. It didn't
take into account data that were provided regarding actual
product usage in California and Washington. It relied upon
outdated water quality monitoring data. It made incorrect
assumptions regarding the manner in which pesticides are
aerially applied for mosquito adulticide control.
And finally, it lacked transparency in the methods, the
underlying data, the assumptions, and the calculations
associated with the population model, such that neither EPA nor
the public were able to reproduce the model outputs.
In November of 2008, the Fisheries Service issued its final
biological opinion for the three pesticides. The final opinion
continued to include broad jeopardy findings and also specified
if reasonable and prudent alternatives to avoid jeopardy,
including large spray drift buffers. Two and a half years
later, despite more litigation and numerous interagency
meetings and communications this biological opinion has not
been implemented.
The National Academy of Sciences review that has been
discussed here today is likely to require at least 18 months,
as you have been told. But that does not include the time it
will take the Services and EPA to begin to implement its
recommendations.
In the meantime, if EPA is mandated to proceed to
cancellation of a pesticide for which a biological opinion
already exists that cancellation process will also likely take
at least 18 months and constitute a significant resource
commitment for EPA's pesticide program.
Further, I believe there is a reasonable likelihood that
such a cancellation proceeding would be unsuccessful due to the
many scientific uncertainties and the lack of transparency
associated with existing biological opinions, plus nearly a
decade after the 2001 lawsuit was filed against EPA no
meaningful resolution appears likely for at least several more
years.
In addition to my concerns regarding the scientific
transparency of the existing biological opinions, I am
concerned for the future sustainability of the pesticide ESA
consultation process in general. There are more than 900
pesticide active ingredients and nearly 20,000 pesticide
products registered for use in the United States. Under the
current consultation paradigm each use pattern for each product
must be reevaluated every 15 years, taking into consideration
each geographic use area and each of the approximately 1,200
listed endangered or threatened species or their critical
habitat within each use area.
This complex, multi-faceted pesticide use situation will
require literally hundreds of thousands of analyses and
decision points and in my opinion constitutes a significant
resource challenge for the departments and the agency involved.
I hope my remarks today have helped to illustrate the
degree to which the ESA consultation process for pesticides
needs attention, both from a scientific and a process
prospective. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Edwards follows:]

Statement of Debra Edwards, Ph.D., Senior Managing Scientist,
Exponent Engineer and Scientific Consulting

Good morning Chairman Doc Hastings, Chairman Frank Lucas, Ranking
Members Markey and Peterson, and members of the committees.
Thank you for the opportunity to testify on this important topic
today. I hope that my participation will help to focus Congressional
attention on the need for an improved Endangered Species Act (ESA)
consultation process for pesticides.
My name is Debra Edwards and I am the former director of EPA's
Office of Pesticide Programs. I joined EPA's Pesticide Program in 1985
as an Environmental Scientist and retired from the position of Program
Director in 2010. In 2009, I was honored to receive the Presidential
Rank Award for Meritorious Service as a Senior Executive. In my career
with the Agency, I held several other leadership positions within the
Pesticide Program in both scientific and regulatory areas, including
Director of the Special Review and Reregistration Division, Director of
the Registration Division, Associate Director of the Antimicrobial
Division, Associate Director of the Health Effects Division, and Chief
of both the Risk Characterization and Analysis and Chemistry/Tolerance
Support Branches within the Health Effects Division. From 1997 to 1999,
the Agency granted me ``leave without pay'' status so that I could
volunteer for service in the United States Peace Corps. I served in
Guatemala as an Agricultural Extension Specialist and taught courses in
pesticide safety, U.S. pesticide regulation, and sustainable
agriculture. Prior to joining EPA, I earned a Ph.D. in Plant Pathology
from The Ohio State University and completed a post-doctoral
appointment at USDA's Pesticide Degradation Laboratory.
I am currently employed as a Senior Managing Scientist within the
Chemical Regulation and Food Safety Center of Exponent, an engineering
and scientific consulting firm with headquarters in Menlo Park,
California. I am also engaged with Texas A&M University's Norman E.
Borlaug Institute for International Agriculture as an independent
contractor, working on sanitary and phytosanitary capacity building
activities related to pesticide registration and use in developing
countries.
I'd like to begin by explaining what the Environmental Protection
Agency does, routinely, as part of its pesticide registration and
periodic re-evaluation activities to assess and manage identified risks
to non-target organisms, including birds, mammals, plants, fish and
other terrestrial and aquatic wildlife. Within the Pesticide Program
headquarters office in Arlington, Virginia, there are approximately 75
toxicologists, biologists, chemists and environmental modelers working
within the Environmental Fate and Effects Division. These scientists
use publicly available, peer reviewed scientific data and methods to
assess potential risks associated with the use of pesticide products.
In 2008, EPA's Pesticide Program completed re-registration decisions
for nearly 400 pesticide chemical cases and through this process many
pesticide uses were further restricted in their use or eliminated
entirely to protect wildlife. Under the current FIFRA-mandated
registration review program, each active ingredient will be re-assessed
at least every 15 years, to ensure registrations remain in compliance
with the FIFRA risk/benefit standard. Further, prior to registration of
any new pesticide use, a full environmental effects assessment is
completed to determine whether the pesticide use should be registered
at all or, if registered, how ecological risks can be managed to
mitigate any identified risks of concern. All of these actions and
decisions are managed through a robust, deliberative public
participation process that includes public dockets and detailed Agency
responses to public comment.
In November of 2001, a coalition of environmental organizations and
fishing groups filed a lawsuit, Washington Toxics Coalition (WTC) v
EPA, against EPA for failure to consult with the National Marine
Fisheries Service (NMFS) on the effects of 54 pesticides on endangered
and threatened salmon species in the Pacific Northwest. In July of
2002, the Court ordered EPA to initiate consultation with NMFS on the
pesticides named in the lawsuit by December 2004. EPA fully complied
with that Court order.
In November of 2007, another law suit was filed by several
environmental organizations, this time against NMFS for unreasonable
delay in completing consultations requested by EPA. In July 2008, NMFS
reached an agreement with the plaintiffs, committing to complete the
EPA consultations within four years. On July 31, 2008, NMFS provided
EPA with its first 482-page draft Biological Opinion, which included
broad species jeopardy findings for three organophosphate insecticides.
After some negotiation, NMFS ultimately agreed to allow only 46
calendar days for EPA review of the draft Opinion. EPA posted the draft
Opinion on its web site on August 14 to allow public viewing and a
limited comment period on the document.
On September 15, 2008, I signed EPA's formal comment letter to
NMFS' regarding their July 31 draft Biological Opinion. In that letter
I expressed a number of concerns related to NMFS' jeopardy findings. In
addition to concerns related to the limited time granted for review and
comment, the letter summarized a number of significant concerns related
to data selection and the lack of transparency regarding the scientific
methodology used to develop the Opinion. Specifically, the Opinion: (i)
provided no target levels of exposure that would not result in
jeopardy, (ii) didn't address current pesticide use patterns which had
been significantly altered through EPA's re-registration process, (iii)
assumed routine unlawful product misuse, (iv) included unrealistic
assumptions regarding concurrent use of multiple insecticides at the
same time, in the same location, at maximum use rates, (v) didn't take
into account data that were provided regarding actual product usage in
CA and WA, including time and location of use, (vi) relied upon
outdated and inappropriate water quality monitoring data, (vii) made
incorrect assumptions regarding the manner in which pesticides are
aerially applied for mosquito adulticide control, and (viii) lacked
transparency in the methods, underlying data, assumptions, and
calculations associated with the population model, such that neither
EPA nor the public were able to reproduce the model outputs.
In November of 2008, NMFS issued its final Biological Opinion for
the three pesticides. The final Opinion continued to include broad
jeopardy findings and also specified ``reasonable and prudent
alternatives'' (RPAs) to avoid jeopardy, including 500-1000 foot spray
drift buffers, among other restrictions. Two and a half years later,
despite more litigation and numerous inter-Agency meetings and
communications, this Biological Opinion has not been implemented.
Within the past year, there have been unsuccessful attempts by EPA to
seek voluntary compliance; a lawsuit brought by the pesticide
manufacturers against NMFS, claiming violation of the Administrative
Procedures Act; a lawsuit brought by environmental organizations
against EPA for failure to implement the Opinion; and formal petitions
to EPA from the pesticide industry as well as from grower groups asking
for rulemaking to establish transparent procedures.
In March of this year, EPA Administrator Jackson, on behalf of EPA
and the departments of Agriculture, Interior and Commerce, wrote to
Ralph Cicerone, Chairman of the National Research Council, requesting
that the NRC convene a committee of independent experts to review
scientific and technical issues related to FIFRA consultations under
the ESA. The NRC expert panel is likely to require at least 18 months
to conclude its deliberations, not including the time it will take the
Services and EPA to begin to implement the panel recommendations. In
the meantime, if EPA is legally or otherwise mandated to proceed to
cancellation of a pesticide for which a Biological Opinion already
exists, that cancellation process will likely take at least 18 months
and constitute a significant resource commitment on the part of EPA's
Pesticide Program. Further, I believe there is a reasonable likelihood
that such a cancellation proceeding would be unsuccessful, due to the
many scientific uncertainties and the lack of transparency associated
with existing Biological Opinions. Thus, nearly a decade after the 2001
lawsuit was filed, no meaningful resolution appears likely for at least
several more years. Clearly, this is a frustrating and expensive
situation for stakeholders on all sides of the issue.
In addition to my concerns regarding the scientific transparency of
conclusions reached in existing Biological Opinions, I am concerned for
the future sustainability of the pesticide ESA consultation process in
general. There are more than 900 pesticide active ingredients and
nearly 20,000 pesticide products registered for use in the United
States. Under the current consultation paradigm, each use pattern for
each product must be re-evaluated at least every 15 years, taking into
consideration each geographic use area and each of the approximately
1,200 listed endangered or threatened species or critical habitat
within each use area. This complex, multi-faceted pesticide use
situation will require literally hundreds of thousands of analyses and
decision points and, in my opinion, constitutes a significant resource
challenge for the departments and the agency involved.
I hope my remarks today have helped to illustrate the degree to
which the ESA consultation process for pesticides needs attention, both
from a scientific and a process perspective. Thank you.
______

Response to questions submitted for the record by Dr. Debra Edwards,
Senior Managing Scientist, Exponent Engineer and Scientific Consulting

FROM RANKING MEMBER EDWARD J. MARKEY:
1.  As you are probably aware, the National Marine Fisheries Service
(NMFS) does not engage in consultations unless the
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) first independently
determines that the registration of a pesticide may affect an
endangered species. If the EPA had determined that the use of
these pesticides had no effect on endangered salmon,
consultations would not have occurred. Therefore, which of the
following EPA conclusions from its Biological Evaluations do
you believe were erroneous and why:

EPA's determination that the use of pesticide
products containing chlorpyrifos, diazon, and malathion may
affect multiple evolutionary significant units (ESUs) of
endangered salmon

EPA's determination that the use of pesticide
products containing carbaryl, carbofuran, and methomyl may
affect multiple ESUs of endangered salmon

EPA's determination that the use of pesticide
products containing bensulide, dimethoate, ethoprop,
methidathion, naled, phorate, and phosmet may affect multiple
ESUs of endangered salmon.
Response:
None of the above statements are erroneous. However, a ``may
affect'' finding under the ESA clearly does not constitute a finding
that use of these pesticides is likely to jeopardize the continued
existence of any endangered or threatened species or result in
destruction or adverse modification of critical habitat. The purpose of
biological assessment consultations is to determine if such jeopardy
exists and to develop ``reasonable and prudent alternatives'' to
minimize potential impacts. As I stated on page 2 of my September 15,
2008 letter to NMFS regarding their July 31, 2008 Biological Opinion
for chlorpyrifos, diazinon and malathion, ``it is difficult to see how
a conclusion could be reached that use of these pesticides jeopardizes
the continued existence of all 28 ESUs or DPSs of Pacific Salmon and
Steelhead.'' I do not believe any empirical evidence exists that use of
these pesticides is appreciably reducing the likelihood of survival or
recovery of these ESUs or DPSs of Pacific Salmon.
2.  You mention in your testimony that you wrote a letter to NMFS
expressing concerns about the data and assumptions made in the
biological opinions, but you do not mention earlier requests
for information from NMFS to EPA before completing the
Biological Opinion in order to resolve these uncertainties.
These requests are listed in the Consultation History section
of the Biological Opinion, including a request for simple
toxicity data on these three pesticides. Are you aware of those
requests from NMFS?
Response:
In my capacity as Pesticide Program Office Director, I was aware of
the occurrence of information requests and exchanges between EPA and
NMFS staff prior to the completion of the 2008 Biological Opinion.
Though I believe EPA did provide all of the information requested by
NMFS in a timely manner, I do not currently have access to the
documentation of such exchanges. I recommend that the Pesticide Program
be queried directly on this matter if such documentation is needed.
3.  Do you believe that the ESA consultation process is entirely
duplicative of the Federal Insecticide, Fungicide, and
Rodenticide Act (FIFRA) registration process? Is there anything
that the NMFS or FWS considers in the ESA consultation process
that is not considered by the Office of Pesticide Programs
during the registration and re-registration process?
Response:
EPA does not currently have full access to all of the species
biology and location data housed within the Services. I believe if EPA
did have access to such information, it would be able to run an
efficient and effective regulatory process such that pesticide
registrations are not only in compliance with FIFRA, FFDCA and PRIA,
but also with the ESA. At minimum, I believe the public would be better
served in terms of scientific resource utilization if EPA is given the
authority, perhaps through a new counter-part regulation, to fully
manage ESA considerations for pesticide uses for which EPA makes a
``may affect, but not likely to adversely affect'' finding.
In August of 2008, in an effort to gain access to critical species
biology and location data, EPA prepared a draft ``Request for
Proposals'' (RFP) for the development of an information system to house
and to analyze biological, habitat and behavioral (species profile)
information as well as spatially explicit location information relative
to federally listed threatened and endangered species and their
critical habitat. This information was to be ``best available'' from
all credible sources, including Federal Agencies, universities, public
interest organizations, and States and Tribes. Standards for defining
what is ``best available'' were to be developed by the federal
government through a facilitated process. Our reason for preparing this
RFP was based in our belief that the development of such a data base
would promote efficiency and transparency in the endangered species
consultation process. Further, we believed the availability of such a
data base would be useful not only for EPA's pesticide consultations
but essentially for all Federal Action Agencies, including the
Environmental Protection Agency, the Department of Interior, the
Department of Commerce, the Department of Agriculture, the Department
of Homeland Security, the Department of Transportation and the Federal
Energy Regulatory Commission. The system also could be made accessible
to state agencies, academia, and the general public.
To date, I do not believe the Services or EPA have issued an RFP
for the development of this species information data base. However, I
continue to believe that such a data base could be invaluable in
improving quality, consistency and efficiency in the identification of
potential impacts on endangered and threatened species and in the
development of reasonable and prudent alternatives and measures to
preclude such impacts.
4.  FIFRA guards against ``unreasonable adverse effects'' on the
environment. But FIFRA defines this term to require the EPA to
consider the overall economic benefits to agriculture as part
of this unreasonableness inquiry. If the economic benefits of
the registration of a pesticide slightly outweigh the estimated
environmental damage would EPA be authorized under FIFRA to
cancel the pesticide? For example, if registration creates $10
million dollars in economic benefits, and simultaneously causes
$9 million in environmental damage (e.g. from higher water
treatment costs) would EPA be authorized under FIFRA to cancel
the pesticide? Under this scenario, would EPA be authorized
under FIFRA to require a new condition of use (labeling, etc)
for the pesticide? If the response is yes to either question,
has EPA ever exercised such authority and if so, please
describe the circumstances?
Response:
Actually, to my knowledge, FIFRA's definition of ``unreasonable
adverse effects on the environment'' makes no mention of agriculture
and certainly is not confined to economic benefits. Rather, the
definition, at FIFRA Section 2(bb), is as follows:
``The term `unreasonable adverse effects on the environment' means
(1) any unreasonable risk to man or the environment, taking into
account the economic, social, and environmental costs and benefits of
the use of any pesticide, or (2) a human dietary risk from residues
that result from a use of a pesticide in or on any food inconsistent
with the standard under section 408 of the Federal Food, Drug, and
Cosmetic Act (21 U.S.D. 346a).''
I am personally unaware of any situation in which the EPA
considered cancellation or retention of a pesticide use based solely on
a strict mathematical weighing of dollar trade-offs, as described
above. As to whether EPA would be ``authorized'' under FIFRA to cancel
a pesticide in the circumstances described above, I would defer to the
Agency's attorneys.
EPA has an excellent record of success in requiring new conditions
of use for pesticide products as a means of risk management through its
routine registration and re-evaluation programs under FIFRA. It is not
uncommon, during registration and re-evaluation activities, for the
Agency to identify a risk of concern for human or non-target organism
exposures. In these circumstances, the Agency contacts the pesticide
registrant to request voluntary changes in the existing or proposed
registration (e.g., labeling) to mitigate the identified risks. Non-
target organism risk management tools commonly used to achieve risk
mitigation include: reduction in application rate, reduced number of
permissible applications per season, changes in method of application
(e.g., application equipment) and spray drift buffers. Registration
applications may be voluntarily withdrawn or existing registrations
voluntarily cancelled when no practical risk mitigation can be
identified that would sustain product utility. I believe the
demonstrated success of EPA in achieving voluntary compliance with
requested risk mitigation and labeling changes can be directly
attributed to the fact that EPA runs a transparent, open public
participation process in its re-evaluation program and, more recently,
in its registration program. On many occasions, I have heard non-
government environmental advocacy organizations, e.g., representatives
of the NRDC and the American Bird Conservancy, state that the public
participation process run by EPA's Pesticide Program is a model for
good government.
I believe that the reason the industry has not voluntarily complied
with the ``reasonable and prudent alternatives'' (i.e., recommended
product use changes) recommended by NMFS in conjunction with its recent
Biological Opinions is that they were not developed through such an
open, deliberative process.
5.  In Washington Toxics Coalition v. U.S. Dept. of Interior, 457 F.
Supp. 2d 1158, 1184 (D. Wash 2006), the Court stated that
``EPA's risk assessment process is not only less protective
than Service determinations, there is overwhelming evidence on
the record that without a Service check, EPA risk assessments
(leading to pesticide registrations) would actually result in
harm to listed species.'' Do you believe that the Court's
conclusion that EPA-OPP's risk assessment procedures is less
protective was erroneous, and if so, why?
Response:
It is difficult to say whether Service determinations are or will
be more ``protective'' than those of EPA because so very few of them
have been produced and the ones that do exist are generally lacking in
transparency as to how the conclusions were reached. I believe the
principle concerns voiced by the Court were related to many of the
topics the National Research Council has recently been asked to address
by EPA, the Services, and USDA, i.e., ``identification of best
available scientific data and information; consideration of sub-lethal,
indirect and cumulative effects; the effects of chemical mixtures and
inert ingredients; the use of models to assist in analyzing the effects
of pesticide use; incorporating uncertainties into the evaluations
effectively; and the use of geospatial information and datasets that
can be employed by the departments and agencies in the course of these
assessments.''
The EPA's Pesticide Program, as I noted in my written testimony,
has on staff a large number of highly qualified toxicologists,
biologists, chemists and environmental modelers who are experienced in
the evaluation of potential non-target organism effects related to
pesticide use. In fact, in many of the consultation documents EPA
scientists have delivered to the Services, current pesticide uses that
``may affect'' (directly) endangered and threatened species have been
identified. Nevertheless, instead of providing well-referenced and
documented Biological Opinions in response to such requests for
consultation, the Services' reaction has typically been: (i) no
response at all, (ii) rejection of the EPA consultation package as
``incomplete'' or (iii) when faced with a lawsuit for failure to
respond, a Biological Opinion that cannot be implemented due to failure
to document the scientific rationale for onerous ``reasonable and
prudent alternatives'' recommendations. At minimum, it is unclear to me
how refusal of the Services to provide any Opinion or advice to EPA on
how best to address a documented, direct ``may affect'' finding for a
pesticide use can be deemed by anyone as ``protective.''
6.  Given that many of the pesticides considered in the Biological
Opinions are regularly found in water bodies throughout the
country, do you believe that the regional offices of NMFS on
the West Coast, the experts on salmon conservation, should have
a role in evaluating the impacts of these pesticides on salmon?
Please explain what role you believe that NMFS should play in
protecting endangered salmon from pesticides.
Response:
As I have noted above in response to question #3, EPA does not
currently have full access to all of the species biology and location
data housed within the Services. For salmon species, those data are
likely housed within the NMFS Regional Offices on the West Coast.
Further, under existing laws and regulations, I believe NMFS has a
legal obligation under the ESA to provide timely Biological Opinions to
Federal Departments and Agencies that ``consult'' regarding actions for
which ``may affect'' findings have been made with respect to endangered
or threatened species or their critical habitat. Historically, for EPA
pesticide consultations, NMFS has not met its obligations in this
regard and only recently (as a result of legal action against NMFS) has
begun to provide EPA with Biological Opinions. Some of these Biological
Opinions are in response to consultation requests submitted more than 5
years prior by EPA.
In my opinion, the pesticide-related Biological Opinions issued by
NMFS are not in compliance with President Obama's Directives regarding
(1) Transparency and Open Government (January 2009) or (2) Scientific
Integrity (March 2009). Below are some pertinent quotes from these
Directives:
``My Administration will take appropriate action, consistent with
law and policy, to disclose information rapidly in forms that the
public can readily find and use.''
``To the extent permitted by law, there should be transparency in
the preparation, identification, and use of scientific and
technological information in policymaking.''
Further, John P. Holdren, Director of Science and Technology
Policy, in his December 2010 Scientific Integrity Memorandum to the
Heads of Executive Departments and Agencies stated:
``...agencies should expand and promote access to scientific and
technological information by making it available online in open
formats. Where appropriate, this should include data and models
underlying regulatory proposals and policy decisions.''
``Agencies should communicate scientific and technological findings
by including a clear explication of underlying assumptions; accurate
contextualization of uncertainties; and a description of the
probabilities associated with both optimistic and pessimistic
projections, including best-case and worst-case scenarios where
appropriate.''
In summary, if the Services ``should'' continue to play a role in
pesticide matters related to the Endangered Species Act, I believe they
should be required to provide timely response to consulting agencies
and to produce Biological Opinions that are in compliance with this
Administration's stated commitments to transparency and scientific
integrity.
______

The Chairman. You didn't even need that seven seconds that
you required. Thank you.
Mr. Mathison, you are recognized for five minutes.

STATEMENT OF WEST MATHISON, PRESIDENT, STEMILT GROWERS, LLC,
BOARD PRESIDENT, WASHINGTON STATE HORTICULTURAL ASSOCIATION

Mr. Mathison. Thank you Chairman Hastings and distinguished
members of both Committees.
My name is West Mathison. I am the President of Stemilt
Growers in Wenatchee, Washington. I am also the Board President
of the Washington State Horticultural Association. I am a five
generation farmer and I grew up living on a fruit orchard. The
Town of Wenatchee is a farming community that has a passion for
recreation and conservation.
Our family and our company developed a program called
Responsible Choice and our mantra is to enrich the soils where
we live, work, and play. This culture has led us in partnership
with our independent growers to being the largest grower of
organic tree fruit in the U.S.
Humbly speaking, I feel our many awards around food safety
and environmental stewardship speak for themselves. Washington
State may be well known for Boeing, Starbucks, and Microsoft,
but perhaps less well known is its diverse agricultural
products, such as apples, pears, cherries, wheat, grapes, hay,
milk, potatoes, forest products, hops berries, and more, to
name a few.
In Washington, agriculture production is valued at $9.5
billion, trading 82,000 permanent jobs with $1.5 billion in
wages, $2.2 billion in proprietor income and $16 billion in
total economic impact annually. The tree fruit industry alone
exceeds 25 percent of this number. Seasonal workers add another
100,000 jobs for pears, apples, and cherries. With only 2
percent of the apples we grow being consumed in Washington, it
is not surprising that we depend on both domestic and export
markets insomuch that we export 30 percent of our apples and
cherries.
I want to affirm the motivation to have reasonable
regulation. I strongly urge your support to remedy the
dysfunctional process underway between the Services and the EPA
regarding ESA consultation and the development of BiOps for
protection of salmon.
With the first series of BiOps, we face losing our ability
to manage large sections of our farms in Washington. If not
remedied, this precedent will endanger the future use of all
pesticides which EPA believes may affect endangered or
threatened species, both for conventional and organic farming
practices. I am deeply concerned that this will put my business
and others in agriculture into great jeopardy, if implemented.
Moreover, these ideas of mitigation would destroy jobs and
hurt many rural communities around the nation. And how is this?
The proposed mitigation includes 100, 500, and 1000-foot no
spray buffers around all conveyances of water, including
ditches of any size and seasonal streams. This would have a
devastating impact on existing farms.
A map, which is an exhibit that is shown here, is from the
Washington State Department of Agriculture for two counties in
the state and shows that mitigation measures would prevent the
use of some pesticides on up to 75 to 85 percent of farmland.
For a quick horticultural lesson, the two most pervasive pests
for pears and apple growers are psylla and codling moth. Both
are prolific flyers and can travel large distance in spreading
the next generation as they go. To leave as little as 10
percent of an orchard untreated is to leave a nursery for these
pests to continue their devastation of our crops.
Buffers may sound reasonable from a horticultural
perspective, but they may and could and would stimulate the
need for more pesticides because of the infestation of pests
that harbor in these buffers. I like many other growers would
rather not spray or spray as little as possible. Simply
speaking, these enhanced buffers can make this issue worse. And
why is managing the orchard important? Damaged fruit cannot be
sold in the fresh market. Growers cannot stay in business
producing anything but the most marketable fruit per acre.
Clearly, the Services failed to assess the economic effects
of their mitigation measures. The jobs of thousands of rural
people and the livelihood of many American farmers should be
considered. As growers, we consider this a national crisis
affecting 50 states.
In March, the EPA and the U.S. Departments of the Interior,
Commerce, and Agriculture sent a letter to the National Academy
of Sciences stating that the process is flawed. Based on this,
we would recommend to suspend the implementation of the three
BiOps and any further work until NAS completes its work and a
process is established based on the peer-reviewed science.
I am proud to grow apples, pears, and cherries--all healthy
fruits which the new dietary guidelines in the medical
community say that we should eat more to fight obesity and
improve health and IQ. It is ironic that today this issue
threatens to disrupt the production of the very same crops. If
our production declines, American consumers will simply enjoy
more imported products by foreign competitors with less
stringent food safety requirements.
As farmers, we want to be a part of crafting the solution
that protects the listed species, while enabling them to
produce safe and affordable food.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Mathison follows:]

Statement of West Mathison, President, Stemilt Growers, LLC, and Board
President, Washington State Horticultural Association, Wenatchee,
Washington

Good morning Chairman Hastings, Ranking Member Markey, Chairman
Lucas, Ranking Member Peterson and distinguished members of both
Committees.
My name is West Mathison and I am President of Stemilt Growers, in
Wenatchee, Washington. I am also Board President of the Washington
State Horticultural Association. In partnership with our independent
growers, Stemilt is the nation's largest supplier of sweet cherries and
organic tree fruits, as well as a key supplier of Washington-grown
apples, pears and stone fruit.
The Stemilt company roots trace back to 1893, when my great-great
grandfather Thomas Cyle Mathison, homesteaded 160 acres on Stemilt Hill
overlooking the Columbia River and the town of Wenatchee. I represent
the fifth generation of our family owned and operated business. My
family has long understood the strong connection between the success of
our business and stewardship of the land and respect for our
environment.
In 1989, my grandfather, Tom Mathison launched the Responsible
Choice program, stating that ``the truth of the matter is we are just
caretakers of the land for a very short time. It's important that we
leave it as good as we possibly can, or better if we can.'' Through
this program we became an early adopter of sustainable agriculture,
reducing chemical use as well as utilizing integrated pest management
programs and beneficial predators such as falcons to ward-off fruit
damaging birds. (See attachment 1: ``Responsible Choice'').
I strongly believe that our commitment to the environment will play
an integral role in ensuring the success of our business for
generations to come. That being said, our future also depends on
continued access to critical crop protection tools needed for pest and
disease control.
Agriculture in the State of Washington
Washington State may be well known for Boeing and Microsoft but
perhaps less well known is its diverse agricultural output of apples,
pears, cherries, wheat, grapes, hay, milk, potatoes, forest products,
hops, berries and more. We provide nearly 2/3 of the fresh apples
consumed in the US and export nearly a third of our crop. Overall
agricultural production is valued at $9.5 billion creating 82,000
permanent jobs with $1.5 billion in wages, $2.2 billion in proprietor
income, $219 million in taxes and $16 billion in total economic impact.
. ..annually. Tree fruits alone exceed \1/4\ of this total. Seasonal
workers add another 100,000 jobs for pears, apples and cherries alone.
With only 2% of the apples we grow being consumed in Washington State
it is not surprising that we depend on both domestic and export
markets. Fruit and vegetable products account for 51% of the traffic
moving to export markets through the Ports of Seattle and Tacoma.
Endangered Species Act and Pesticides
Thank you for the opportunity to speak today about the impact of
federal regulatory activities on the Endangered Species Act (ESA) and
pesticide use. Under current pesticide law, EPA must evaluate the risk
of harm to human health and the environment (including fish, wildlife
and ``non-target'' plants) before approving a pesticide.
Under the ESA, EPA is required to consult with the Interior
Department's U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service and the Commerce
Department's National Marine Fisheries Service (the ``Services'') when
EPA determines its actions may affect a listed species under ESA.
Over the last decade, EPA has been repeatedly sued to require
consultations with the Services for hundreds of pesticides across the
nation and has agreed to do so. In the Pacific Northwest, which is
affected by the first series of biological opinions (BiOps), we face
losing our ability to manage large sections of our orchards, farms and
ranches due to questionable use restrictions proposed by the Services
for certain key crop protection tools. These products have already met
EPA safety standards as required under federal law. If not remedied,
this precedent will endanger the future use of all pesticides which EPA
believes may affect endangered or threatened species, both for
conventional and organic agricultural production.
I want to affirm the motivation to have reasonable regulations.
But, I strongly urge your support to remedy the dysfunctional process
underway between the Services and EPA regarding ESA consultation and
development of BiOps for protection of listed salmon. The approach is
seriously flawed. I am deeply concerned that it will put my business
and others in agriculture--in Washington State and beyond--into great
jeopardy if implemented.
Both the Services and EPA claim they use appropriate science to
conduct pesticide evaluations and develop mitigation measures. However,
the lack of collaboration between the Services and EPA has resulted in
contradictory risk assessments for the pesticides subject to completed
BiOps. For example, the Services failed to consider pertinent data and
instead relied on outdated and irrelevant studies. EPA did not consider
the Services' recommendations sound enough to require their adoption by
pesticide registrants. This has led to yet another lawsuit to force EPA
to implement unnecessary pesticide restrictions.
Washington Stream Sampling Results Ignored
Serious questions remain about the approach used by the Services in
the development of these three BiOps that suggest they are fatally
flawed.
One is particularly close to home. Six years worth of in-stream
testing conducted by Washington State Department of Agriculture and
Department of Energy showed no readings above the minimum EPA
established level which presents a risk to salmon. On the contrary, the
salmon population is actually increasing and last August the Oregonian
newspaper reported that that the Columbia River experienced a sockeye
salmon run that was ``the highest since the Bonneville Dam started
operating in 1938.'' Yet, the BiOps use modeling data from Mid-West
studies dealing with standing bodies of water, not the swift moving
rivers in the Pacific Northwest.
Pesticide applicators are already careful to follow the EPA label,
as shown by the in-stream testing. The BiOps assume all pesticides
within the group under review will be present and/or used at the same
time and at their maximum label rate. Neither is accurate. It would be
like assuming that when I have a headache I take the maximum dosage of
Tylenol, Advil and Aspirin. This exaggeration of risk by the Services
led to their conclusion that there is substantial risk which requires
mitigation while real-world scientific data that indicates otherwise.
The proposed mitigation includes 100, 500 and 1,000 foot no-spray
buffers around all conveyances of water, including ditches of any size
and seasonal streams. This would have a devastating impact on existing
farms and orchards in Washington. Studies by the Washington State
Department of Agriculture of existing farms and orchards show upwards
of 10 percent would be within the 100 foot buffer, 50 percent would be
within the 500 foot zone and nearly 80 percent would be within 1,000
feet. A map developed by the Washington State Department of Agriculture
for two counties in the state shows that the NMFS mitigation measures
would prevent the use of affected pesticides on up to 75 to 85 percent
of the farmland (See illustration below).
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6204.021

.epsFor a quick horticultural lesson; the two most pervasive pests
for pear and apple growers are psylla and codling moth. Both are
prolific flyers and can travel large distance spreading the next
generation as they go. If we are to achieve our goal of fewer pesticide
applications--remember, pesticides are expensive to use and apply--then
maximum efficacy must be obtained from every application. To leave 10%
or more of your orchard untreated is to leave a nursery for these pests
to continue their devastation of our crops. Buffers may sound
reasonable but from a horticultural perspective they would stimulate
the need for more pesticides because of infestations of pest that would
harbor in these buffers. Simply speaking, buffers make the problem
worse.
Damaged fruit cannot be sold into the fresh markets; neither do
processors want pest riddled fruit. Growers cannot stay in business
producing anything but the most marketable fruit per acre. Warehouses
that package and market the grower's fruit can only sell high quality,
pest free fruits. In short, the entire system depends upon highly
effective means of pest control whether that fruit is grown
organically--which does not mean pesticide free--or conventionally.
Despite the impact these mitigation measures could have on farm
practices, the Services failed to assess their economic effects. This
should be considered as decisions are made.
Congress recognized the serious impacts that ESA could have upon
the nation's agricultural community. As a result, the ESA Amendments of
1988 were passed which included Section 1010 mandating that ESA
compliance for EPA's pesticide program be designed to minimize the
impact on agricultural producers and other affected pesticide users and
applicators. This provision should be adhered to.
Growers need to know that pesticides will be available to protect
their crops, whether apples, pears and cherries in Washington or other
crops across the country. The Services now face a lengthy backlog of
litigation-driven BiOps. If this continues, additional pesticides will
face this dysfunctional consultation process between EPA and the
Services. Consequently, the use of more products will be thrown into
jeopardy if pesticides scheduled to go through reregistration are also
subject to this process.
While some may say that alternative products are available to
replace those in the completed BiOps, these too could face the same
future unless the failed process is fixed. Growers need clarity and
confidence about the crop protection tools we need and use.
Growers Seek Involvement in Process
Now I want to affirm the EPA. They have been effectively monitoring
the plant protection materials used by farmers, ranchers and
orchardists. The EPA has achieved this by having a level playing field
where all can be heard. As key stakeholders, growers seek an
opportunity to provide input into the BiOps and mitigation measures
identified by the Services. This is the process that has worked so well
at the EPA for registering pesticides. In this process, the EPA sets a
level of acceptable risk and growers participate in determining
permissible usage and application rates to remain within these risk
parameters.
But in the consultation between the Agencies and EPA we have been
largely left out. The court-managed process has resulted in growers,
who have a very legitimate interest in the outcome, being bound to a
single recommended practice into which they had no input. There is no
``comment period'' as is required by law when EPA makes its pesticide
decisions. For example, growers provide information to EPA about
production practices, recommendations on the impacts of various
mitigation options, and other issues. Our future will be affected by
the BiOps, yet we do not have a bona fide seat at the table.
The National Marine Fisheries Services (NMFS) has started talking
informally with producer representatives, after encouragement by
Congress. However, this is at the agency's discretion and does not
address the flawed process that has already been concluded with the
first three completed BiOps. With additional lawsuits filed, NMFS is
unlikely to have the staff capacity to go back and fix the earlier
BiOps. This informal consultation may be discontinued if the agency
faces court-ordered consultation on hundreds of additional products
across the country.
A clear and open official process is needed to involve
stakeholders. It could be patterned after the deliberative process
adopted after passage of the 1996 Food Quality Protection Act that
enabled EPA to develop its science policies and practices to implement
the new law. In that case, USDA and EPA worked closely with
stakeholders and their advisory committees to solicit recommendations,
gather real-world data and explain decisions.
A National Crisis
With the recent filing of a nationwide lawsuit against EPA, this
ESA pesticide issue is now a national crisis affecting growers and
imperiling their crops across the country. The suit involves more than
380 pesticides and 214 threatened or endangered species.
In March, EPA and the U.S. Departments of the Interior, Commerce
and Agriculture acknowledged that this consultative/BiOp process is
broken when they sent a joint letter to the National Academy of
Sciences (NAS) requesting an independent review of key science issues.
It is critical that the conflict be resolved between the Service and
EPA on scientific risk assessment and evaluation for pesticides subject
to ESA consultation.
Since the government itself recognizes that the process is flawed,
implementation of the three BiOps and further work should be suspended
until the NAS completes its work and a process is established based on
the best available peer-reviewed science.
I am proud to grow apples, pears, and cherries--all healthy fruits
which the new Dietary Guidelines, the medical community and health
officials say we should eat more of to fight obesity and improve
health. It is ironic that at the same time the dysfunctional BioOp
process threatens to disrupt production of these very same specialty
crops. If our production declines, American consumers will simply
increase enjoy more imported fruit produced by foreign competitors.
Farmers want to be part of crafting a solution that protects listed
species while still enabling them to produce safe and affordable food.
I urge you to encourage the Administration to achieve this goal for the
benefit of America's consumers and American agriculture.
[NOTE: Attachments have been retained in the Committee's official
files.]
______

Response to questions submitted for the record by Mr. West Mathison,
President, Stemlit Growers, LLC

FROM RANKING MEMBER EDWARD J. MARKEY:
1.  In your testimony, you state ``the Services failed to consider
pertinent data and instead relied on outdated and irrelevant
studies.'' Please provide copies to the Committee of all data
and other sources of information that you believe that NMFS
ignored during the development of the BiOps between 2004 and
2009. For data not in your possession, please provide accurate
citations to the data and other information that NMFS ignored
during this time period.
West Mathison Response
It is my understanding that the services dismissed available
surface water monitoring data collected by the state of Washington as
not being representative of likely salmonid exposure to the
agricultural chemicals. Since this data was gathered in a way designed
specifically to estimate risk to salmonids of pesticides in water it
should have been a bigger part of the risk assessment. The data is
available at: http://agr.wa.gov/PestFert/natresources/SWM/.
2.  In your testimony, you state that the ``BiOps use modeling data
from Mid-West studies dealing with standing bodies of water,
not the swift moving rivers in the Pacific Northwest.'' Please
provide specific citations to the BiOps where such assumptions
are made.
West Mathison Response
NMFS uses a very conservative modification of the EPA's ``farm
pond'' model to estimate worst case scenarios for pesticide
contamination in shallow water habitats that I do not believe
represents the majority of surface waters where salmonid habitat exists
in rivers of the inland Pacific Northwest. Since this shallow water
risk scenario is a prominent feature of the biological opinions it
should be easy to reference upon review of any of the opinions.
______

The Chairman. I thank you. And Mr. Mathison thank you very
much for describing the agricultural mix in my district because
everything that you listed is grown in my district, so I
appreciate that very much.
Secretary Newhouse, you are recognized for five minutes.

STATEMENT OF MR. DAN NEWHOUSE, DIRECTOR, WASHINGTON STATE
DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE

Mr. Newhouse. Thank you Chairman Hastings, Chairman Lucas,
members of the Committee. I do thank you for convening this
hearing today on the Federal Endangered Species Act, the ESA,
the consultation process for pesticides.
My name is Dan Newhouse. I am the Director of Agriculture
for the State of Washington. And just as importantly, I am a
farmer from the small town of Sunnyside, Washington, where I
raise hops, grapes, apples, and other kinds of fruit as well as
some row crops.
I am also testifying on behalf of the National Association
of State Departments of Agriculture, NASDA, which represents
the commissioners, secretaries, and directors of the State
Departments of Agriculture in all 50 states and 4 territories.
We as Ag Departments are responsible for a wide range of
programs, including food safety and the spread of plant and
animal pests and diseases as well as fostering the economic
vitality of our rural communities.
In 43 states, including my own, we have the delegated
authority from EPA to enforce the Federal Insecticide,
Fungicide, and Rodenticide Act, known as FIFRA. We regulate
pesticide labeling, distribution and use.
First, let me say that we do support the goals of the
Endangered Species Act. We want prudent, effective protections
for threatened and endangered species of fish and animal
populations. But we also want an environment where farmers can
also be successful. We do not believe that these two things are
mutually exclusive.
That being said, we remain concerned about the current
pesticide registration regulatory process. Over the past ten
years, we in the Pacific Northwest have watched this process on
the impacts of pesticides on endangered salmon play out between
EPA and NMFS, the National Marine Fisheries Service.
Under court-ordered consultations, NMFS has already issued
biological opinions on 24 pesticides. The mitigation measures
identified by NMFS to protect salmon include expanded buffers,
preventing pesticide use ranging from, as you have heard from
100 to 1000 feet around all water bodies. And we can't
underscore this enough. That means all streams, whether, in
fact, they are natural or man-made, all drainage, ditches,
canals, even intermittent stream beds.
The impact these expanded buffers will have on Ag
production across my state is significant. For example, as you
have just seen in the map in the Skagit Delta, some of the most
productive farmland in the country, a 500-foot buffer impacts
almost half the Ag land. A 1000-foot buffer, three quarters of
the Ag land. This will effectively prohibit the use of certain
pesticides critical to the protection of some very high-valued
crops.
Now you must ask the question will these expanded buffers
improve water quality in salmon-bearing streams? My own agency,
along with our own State Department of Ecology has been
conducting surface water monitoring since 2003. And our data
shows that today's agricultural practices in water sheds across
the state result in pesticide concentrations that are already
consistently below the levels of concern set by NMFS and EPA in
these biological opinions. But rather than incorporating our
real world data, NMFS defers to conservative modeling in their
identified potential problems.
The one-year implementation time line is also a concern.
Our growers may not have a viable alternative pesticide already
registered for use. Without these appropriate substitutes plant
pests and disease will impact the viability of Ag production as
well as our ability to meet the expert requirements of our
trading partners.
I am encouraged about the recent changes to the
consultation process. NMFS has adopted quantifiable targets to
determine what constitutes jeopardy to endangered salmon. Now
we do have a better understanding of what is needed to protect
the listed species. Furthermore, NMFS Regional Administrator
Will Stelle has organized several meetings to facilitate
communications between NMFS, EPA, USDA, states and other
stakeholders. Ongoing discussions with EPA's Larry Elworth and
others have resulted in open communication channels that have
truly been very helpful. But it is our impression that NMFS and
EPA are not communicating well with each other through this
process.
Correspondence between them shows that there is little
agreement on data and methods used in these assessments. We do
think that the National Academy of Sciences outside review will
go a long way to resolving disagreements, but we are concerned
the time-ordered time line is going to be too long to improve
the consultation process. We must see a review of the initial
biological opinions. Any new process must include opportunities
for state and Ag producers to make additional comments on these
opinions.
What we have seen in the Northwest has now become a
national issue. This recent lawsuit now takes into effect 300
pesticides and 214 species and it could impact pesticide
registrations in virtually every major Ag region in the
country. I know that many of your states have a greater number
of threatened and endangered species than I do in my own state.
Given these logistical challenges and time lines, I fear that
the consultation between the two agencies on an even larger
scale will be unsustainable and due to the lack of Federal
resources will be unsustainable.
In my state, due to unresolved challenges to the recent
biological opinions, growers continue to operate in an
uncertain environment. I now hear from my colleagues and I know
that each one of them at some point in the future would like to
be here in this chair to express to you their concerns to the
industry in your states.
So thank you very much for attention to this issue. I look
forward to working with you in the future.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Newhouse follows:]

Statement of Dan Newhouse, Director, Washington State Department of
Agriculture, on behalf of the National Association of State Departments
of Agriculture

Chairman Hastings, Chairman Lucas, Ranking Member Markey and
Ranking Member Peterson, thank you for convening this hearing today on
the Federal Endangered Species Act (ESA) consultation process for
pesticides. I appreciate the opportunity to testify today and share a
state agency perspective on this important topic.
I am testifying today on behalf of the Washington State Department
of Agriculture as well as the National Association of State Departments
of Agriculture (NASDA). NASDA represents the commissioners,
secretaries, and directors of the state departments of agriculture in
all fifty states and four territories. State departments of agriculture
are responsible for a wide range of programs including food safety,
combating the introduction and spread of plant and animal diseases, and
fostering the economic vitality of our rural communities. Environmental
protection and conservation are also among our chief responsibilities.
Forty-three of NASDA's members are co-regulators with the
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) under the state primacy
provisions of the Federal Insecticide, Fungicide, and Rodenticide Act
(FIFRA). Our agencies are the lead state agencies responsible for
administering, implementing and enforcing the laws regulating pesticide
labeling, distribution, and use in our states. In addition to our
pesticide regulatory responsibilities, state departments of agriculture
use pesticides in their administration of invasive-species control
programs such as the control of apple maggot in Washington State.
I am here today because the pesticide registration process faces
serious challenges from litigation to compel compliance with ESA. While
we all seek to protect threatened and endangered species, a litigation-
driven process that fails to adequately incorporate the expertise of
state agencies and other stakeholders and does not recognize the
impacts on end users of pesticides, is not acceptable.
Over the past ten years, we in the Pacific Northwest have seen up
close the implications of an ESA consultation process that is badly
broken. In 2002, the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) was
sued by a coalition of environmental groups for failure to consult
under the ESA on 54 pesticides used for crop protection in the Pacific
Northwest that could potentially affect threatened or endangered
salmon.
Later that year, the U.S. District Court for the Western District
of Washington found that EPA failed to consult with the National Marine
Fisheries Service (NMFS) on the effects to salmon from 54 pesticides.
The court ordered EPA to make ``effects determinations'' for all
pesticides in question by August 1, 2003.
EPA's initial assessment determined 37 of the 54 pesticides ``may
affect'' listed salmonid species. These 37 pesticides were submitted to
NMFS for formal consultation. However, NMFS failed to initiate
consultation after receiving EPA's effect determinations. As a result,
in November 2007 the Northwest Coalition for Alternatives to Pesticides
et. al. sued NMFS for failure to complete the consultation on the 37
pesticides. On August 1, 2008, NMFS and plaintiffs negotiated a
stipulated agreement that requires them to complete the biological
opinions by February 2012, which is nearly 10 years after the original
court ruling against EPA.
In compliance with the 2008 court order, NMFS has authored the
first four biological opinions that include sweeping new requirements
for pesticide use. To reduce the chance for jeopardy to threatened and
endangered salmon species occurring as a result of application of the
pesticides of concern, NMFS specified mitigation measures known as
Reasonable and Prudent Alternatives (RPAs) to protect listed salmon.
These measures are expected to affect an extensive amount of
agricultural land in California, Oregon, Idaho and Washington.
The RPAs outlined in the biological opinions for protecting salmon
include drift and runoff buffers, application limitations when wind
speed exceeds 10 mph, application prohibitions when soil moisture is at
field capacity or a storm event is likely in 48 hours following the
application, reporting of all incidents of fish mortality, and
effectiveness monitoring. Of these requirements, three specific
elements of the RPAs have generated substantial concern:
1. The definition of water bodies to which the RPAs apply
According to NMFS, ``salmonid habitats are defined as freshwaters,
estuarine habitats, and nearshore marine habitats including bays within
the evolutionary significant unit ranges including migratory corridors.
The freshwater habitats include intermittent streams and other
temporally connected habitats to salmonid-bearing waters. Freshwater
habitats also include all known types of off-channel habitats as well
as drainages, ditches, and other manmade conveyances to salmonid
habitats that lack salmonid exclusion devices.''
The definition presented by NMFS is overly broad and includes water
bodies that are not salmon bearing. Washington State fish and wildlife
experts have explicitly defined the extent of salmon habitat in
Washington; using state specific data would allow NMFS to provide a RPA
that focuses more on where the fish are and less on general
assumptions.
2. The size of the buffers specified
The initial biological opinions rely heavily on buffers ranging
from 100 to 1000 feet around waterbodies identified as salmon habitat.
The impact these buffers will have on agricultural production across
the state is significant. For example, in the Skagit Delta in Western
Washington a 500-foot buffer would affect an estimated 48 percent of
agricultural lands, while a 1000-foot buffer would affect an estimated
75 percent of agricultural lands. Notably, buffers were not calculated
for all ditches and intermittent streams because their locations are
not known with specificity. The actual agricultural acres affected are
likely greater than estimated due to the presence of ditches and
intermittent streams and because farmers typically do not partially
treat a field and to do so is not generally an effective treatment for
a pest. Similar statistics were calculated for the Wenatchee Valley in
eastern Washington.
Buffers this size applied to salmon habitat, as defined in the
initial biological opinions, will effectively result in a prohibition
of use for those pesticides within the Skagit Delta, Wenatchee Valley
and similar areas.
3. One-year implementation timeline for the RPAs
The one-year timeline specified in the biological opinion may allow
EPA time to implement the specified RPAs. However, one year is not
adequate to allow for exploration of alternative pest control
strategies for farmers. Minor crops may not have a viable replacement
pesticide registered for use or an alternative pesticide may not work
well with integrative pest management (IPM) programs that balance pest
control with beneficial insect populations and use of specific
pesticides. Another concern for minor crops is whether a Maximum
Residue Level (MRL) has been established for replacement pesticides in
export markets. If a MRL is not established for a replacement
pesticide, international trading opportunities are severely limited.
Correspondence between NMFS and EPA indicates there is little
agreement on the data and the underlying assumptions used to assess
effects of pesticides on salmon in the consultation process. Due to
conflicting statutory requirements and litigation-driven consultation,
the working relationship between EPA and the Services can be described
as fractured at best and, at its worst, openly antagonistic. As a
result, there is little give and take between EPA and the Services as
envisioned within the ESA consultation handbook for conducting ESA
section 7 activities.
One area that needs to be resolved is the use of water quality
monitoring data versus modeled exposure values. Washington has
conducted targeted water monitoring which shows concentrations are
below levels of concern for salmon. However, NMFS defers to modeled
exposures for pesticides in salmon-bearing streams that show
concentrations of concern. Assessment of the effects of listed species
to pesticides must balance real-world exposure with conservative
modeled values.
I am encouraged that EPA and the Services requested the National
Research Council to convene a committee to review the scientific and
technical issues that have arisen through the consultation process.
However, I am concerned the review will take a minimum of 18 months and
NMFS is still required by the courts to complete their biological
opinions for salmon next year. Further, it is critical that as EPA and
the Services resolve their differences on the technical issues and
procedures, the biological opinions completed to date should be
reassessed using the agreed upon procedures.
Transparency and accessibility is another area that has been
lacking in the consultation process. Consultation for ESA compliance
takes place between two federal agencies and, unlike the pesticide
registration and review process, state agencies and other stakeholders
have limited opportunity to participate in meaningful ways. Typically,
the only opportunity to comment is when EPA makes a draft biological
opinion available during a 30-day comment period. The biological
opinions are highly complex technical documents that can be more than
1000 pages. This short review time is a function of the consultation
schedule NMFS must follow that was negotiated through the courts.
The ESA requires the Services to implement RPAs that are
economically and technologically feasible. Unfortunately, this
requirement is applied to the action agency which in this case is EPA,
not the end user. Therefore, no consideration has been given to the
economic consequences for the RPAs to the farmer. This is especially of
concern to states where minor crops are grown and the availability of
alternative pesticides may be limited.
Progress is being made. In the most recent biological opinions,
NMFS has incorporated quantifiable targets to define what constitutes
jeopardy. This allows states and stakeholders to clearly understand
what level of protection is needed to protect listed species. Also,
NMFS Regional Administrator Will Stelle has organized several meetings
to facilitate communication between NMFS, EPA, United States Department
of Agriculture, states and stakeholders. Unfortunately, litigation on
pesticide consultation for ESA continues. The Center for Biological
Diversity filed suit against EPA for failure to consult on more than
300 pesticides and 214 species in January of this year. This lawsuit
will affect pesticide registrations in all states except Alaska. Court-
directed consultation between EPA, United States Fish and Wildlife
Service and NMFS on such a scale is unsustainable given existing
federal resources and processes. Moreover, specific court decisions to
date have delivered unmanageable workloads for agencies and untenable
timelines, but no workable solution to the problem of ESA consultation.
The current pesticide registration/consultation process limits the
ESA's effectiveness at protecting listed species by delaying
development and implementation of rational, effective measures for
pesticide use. Because of numerous procedural barriers and minimal
opportunity for states and stakeholders to engage decision-makers, the
process also fails to provide reasonable registration of pesticides.
Solutions to these challenges are available. For example, mediation of
the strained relationship between the Services and EPA can establish a
collaborative and transparent consultation process for pesticide
registration. In addition, past and future biological opinions will
benefit from incorporation of both current available data and
assessment of the economic feasibility of proposed RPAs and Reasonable
and Prudent Measures (RPMs). Similar benefits can be achieved through
clear integration of consultation into EPA's registration process.
Integration can prevent future litigation based on the ``failure to
consult'' premise and improve opportunity for public participation.
The facts are clear: the consultation process is poised to collapse
under the weight of proposed litigation limiting effective species
protection, and adversely impacting the nation's agricultural
community. Ultimately, resolution will be achieved only when states,
policy makers and interested parties join the call to improve the
pesticide consultation process.
______

The Chairman. Thank you very much, Mr. Secretary.
And our last witness on this panel is Mr. Grader. Mr.
Grader, you are recognized for five minutes.

STATEMENT OF W.F. GRADER, JR., EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR,
PACIFIC COAST FEDERATION OF FISHERMEN'S ASSOCIATIONS

Mr. Grader. Thank you very much Chairman Hastings and I
guess Chairman Lucas has gone.
My name, for the record, is Zeke Grader. I am the Executive
Director for the Pacific Coast Federation of Fishermen's
Associations. We represent working men and women in the West
Coast commercial fishing fleet. Our federation basically
consists of thousands of small, family fishing operations.
These are all small businesses. And I want to reiterate here
that it tends to get forgotten is that our members are food
producers.
One of the interest we look out for to ensure there are
ample fish for our members to harvest is that looking to
eliminate the various threats to fish. We work, for example, to
ensure fishing regulations promote sustainable fisheries and to
prevent over fishing. We also work to ensure that our fish
stocks are protected from non-fishing activities.
Since earliest days of our organization in the mid-1970s,
we have been concerned with water quality among those threats
to our fisheries, particularly in regard to salmon that spend--
they are spawn of course in fresh water streams, spend their
early days there in the case of coho salmon, a year there
before going to sea and then coming back to these same streams
to spawn again and die. And this is an area where they tend to
be particularly vulnerable.
We have been involved with efforts, looking the application
of pesticides and herbicides since the 1970s. I think some of
our earliest actions were involving in the north coast of
California the spraying of the phenoxy herbicides over forested
water sheds. These herbicides containing dioxygen we knew from
science that directly affected fish populations, either from
direct fish kills or more likely from more subtle effects,
affecting either behavior or immunity to disease.
As we mention in our written report that has been submitted
to you, in 1999, we actually prepared a report looking at
pesticides on the effects of salmon. That report called
Diminishing Returns: Salmon Declines and Pesticides the impacts
we found on fish are not simply direct and observable fish
kills as I mentioned, but effects on immune systems making them
more vulnerable to disease or predation or changes in behavior
that can also affect their survival. And of course, it also can
affect the feed, the small insects and other things that they
feed on.
On top of that is that these fish can pick up contaminates,
which then raise into question their healthiness as far as to
be a nutritious food choice. Now it is mentioned here the
nutritional aspects of pears and apples, and that is certainly
true. However, I think people also have to realize that salmon
is constantly regarded, wild salmon, in just about everything
you look at. I think most recently from the USDA is probably
among the top ten foods that people can eat. They are very rich
in Omega 3 fatty acids and everything from helping with
depression to heart disease to improving intelligence.
What we found in preparing our report is that at the time,
in the 1999s, is that there were some 54 known pesticides that
were being found in various salmon-bearing streams and rivers
at levels that were well above those considered safe. The U.S.
Geological Survey, for example, detected measurable
concentrations of pesticides within many sampled areas in West
Coast streams. Some pesticides were detected at levels of up to
1000 times the maximum concentrations allowed by EPA's own
aquatic protection standards.
To me, that clearly indicated we had a dysfunctional
system. We also found that EPA was not consulting under the
FIFRA process under the ESA as required. As a result, we did go
to court in 2001. That was mentioned here. We saw innumerable
delays, but we do now have, in fact, a process that appears to
start looking like it may, in fact, work, although it has gone
in fits and starts over the past decade. But we would certainly
urge that you give that an opportunity to work, work closely
with the agencies, make sure they are communicating and that
every effort is made to streamline the process without it any
way weakening protections for the animals. But we would
certainly urge you to, like I say, work closely, not hold
everything up until NAS study comes out. But basically would
look at the NAS for further guidance, but now to try to move
ahead with implementation. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Grader follows:]

Statement of W.F. ``Zeke'' Grader, Jr., Executive Director,
Pacific Coast Federation of Fishermen's Associations

Good morning, Chairmen and members of the Natural Resources and
Agriculture Committees. My name is Zeke Grader. I am the Executive
Director of the Pacific Coast Federation of Fishermen's Associations
(PCFFA), a major U.S. fishing industry trade association centered on
the U.S. west coast. PCFFA is in turn made up of 14 different member
fishing and local port associations, collectively representing working
men and women in the West Coast commercial fishing fleet. Our members
harvest and provide healthy and nutritious seafood for America's table,
and are the drivers of a billion-dollar west coast commercial fishing
industry employing thousands of U.S. workers.
We wish to thank the two Committees for the opportunity to provide
comments today on behalf of the West Coast fishing industry on the
importance of crafting stronger pesticide controls to keep these highly
toxic chemicals out of America's rivers, and in particular out of fish
such as salmon which are an important part of the human food chain.
The current EPA pesticide protection rules have obviously failed.
EPA-regulated pesticides are now found nearly everywhere in west coast
rivers and are killing salmon, destroying salmon jobs, and endangering
public health.
As you know, salmon are ``anadromous,'' which means they begin
their lives in inland fresh water streams, then move to the sea for
several years, and they then return (typically three to five years
later) from the ocean as adult spawners to lay their eggs in inland
freshwater streams all along the U.S. west coast and Canada. There the
young salmon must remain, some for months--in the case of coho salmon,
one year--until they grow large enough to migrate to the ocean where
they'll spend their adult lives. During all this time in fresh water,
young salmon are very vulnerable to the dozens of agricultural
chemicals (mostly pesticides) that can pollute West Coast rivers.
The great Pacific salmon runs have always been the work horse of
commercial fishing on the West Coast. Now, however, many of these
salmon stocks are overwhelmed by multiple stressors in our coastal
rivers that 17 once-major salmon runs are so imperiled they are
protected under the federal Endangered Species Act (ESA) as threatened
or in danger of extinction. Another 11 stocks of closely related
anadromous steelhead are also ESA-listed in these same river systems,
and for the same reasons. For a current list of the west coast salmon
and steelhead ESA listings and listing decisions see: www.nwr.noaa.gov/
ESA-Salmon-Listings/upload/snapshot-7-09.pdf.
Steelhead, which is closely related to salmon, while not a
commercially fished (ecepting tribal fishing) species supports a
vibrant inland recreational fishing industry that in turn supports
thousands of additional sportfishing jobs and hundreds sportfishing
businesses, large and small. This, too, is a billion dollar industry
bringing jobs and dollars to many rural communities. Salmon and
steelhead are collectively referred to as ``salmonids.''
When salmon or steelhead stocks are ESA-listed, they cannot be
harvested, and fishermen must make every effort to avoid them, which
has included closing whole fisheries. This has been done all over the
West Coast to protect these weakest stocks--yet still these ESA-listed
stocks remain at very low numbers, some still heading toward
extinction. Increased mortality from in-river pesticides, scientists
now tell us, is one of the reasons these stocks are not recovering.
PCFFA identified the growing threat that water-borne pesticides
present to west coast salmon runs in 1999, with the publication of
Diminishing Returns: Salmon Declines and Pesticides (Feb. 1999),
published by the Oregon Pesticide Education Network. That report is
available on a PCFFA web site at: www.pcffa.org/salpest.htm. That
report is, however, merely an overview of a representative sample of
literally hundreds of peer-reviewed scientific reports and studies at
the time (there are many more now) that clearly show how even extremely
low but persistent concentrations of pesticides in rivers can greatly
increase salmon mortality.
When that report came out, we were also shocked to find out that
the US Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), unlike any other federal
agency, had never consulted on the impacts of these EPA-registered
pesticides on ESA-listed salmonids under ESA Sec. 7 as federal agencies
are required by law to do for federal actions. The EPA had simply
refused to do so for more than 25 years, since the ESA was first
adopted into law in 1976.
As a result, in 2001 PCFFA joined as co-Plaintiff in the lawsuit,
Washington Toxics Coalition, et al. v. Dept. of Interior (457 F. Supp.
2d 1158) (W.D. Wash. 2006) that subsequently required EPA to consult
under Sec. 7 of the ESA, for the first time ever, on the impacts of 54
different commonly used but highly toxic pesticides on ESA-listed
salmon and steelhead. PCFFA brought this suit to protect West Coast
fishing industry jobs--and seafood consumers--from these chemicals in
the river harming the nation's valuable salmon runs. The end result of
that suit, after yet more litigation (see ATTACHMENT B), was the
current set of Pesticide Biological Opinions (Pesticide BiOps) that are
now coming out of NMFS on a Court-ordered schedule.
This initial list target list of 54 pesticides and herbicides was
not chosen at random. All of these 54 chemicals have been found at
levels higher than maximum health standards in rivers on the west
coast, they are among the most broad-spectrum and toxic of all
pesticides, and therefore the ones most likely to impact salmon and
steelhead generally, and so these were selected for first analysis.
Some have been eliminated from the list in the analysis, which now
consists of 37 chemicals. These are the worst of the worst for salmon.
These are the chemicals now going through ESA Sec. 7 Consultation.
So far these Pesticide BiOps have concluded that, on the basis of
the best available science, current EPA-endorsed pesticide practices
for those chemicals analyzed will likely drive these already ESA-
protected salmon runs towards extinction. This also means that these
chemicals negatively impact other, far more abundant, salmon runs in
these same rivers. And since these very same chemicals are also serious
human health hazards, the fact that all these chemicals are being found
in West Coast rivers that supply water to millions of people is also a
serious--but as yet unaddressed--human health hazard.
It should be noted as well that PCFFA obtained an Injunction in
that case against the further EPA-authorized uses of these 54 target
pesticides within buffer zones comparable to those later required in
the Biological Opinions, at least until that Sec. 7 Consultation could
be completed. That Injunction, and those required buffer zones, have
now been in effect since January 22, 2004.
GETTING BACK TO FUNDAMENTALS
In all the technical details of ESA Sec. 7 consultations and
discussions (driven by chemical industry concerns about regulation),
including some of the past discussions on this issue before these two
Committees, many have lost track of some basic facts, including the
following:
These Chemicals Are Poisons. It is often forgotten that
agricultural pesticides and herbicides are poisons for both fish and
humans. They are designed to be poisons and, while they may be useful
in agriculture when applied at the correct time, place and dosage, once
these chemicals escape into the nation's rivers, they are nothing more
than broad-spectrum, highly toxic poisons to both fish and humans.
These Chemicals Are Already In Our Rivers and Current EPA
Protections Have Failed to Prevent It: Again, the original list of 54
different pesticides and herbicides we chose to sue on in Washington
Toxics Coalition, et al. were not chosen at random. Not only are these
chemicals all highly toxic to fish, each has been found by US
Geological Service (USGS), many in multiple locations, in West Coast
rivers at levels that far exceed National Academy of Sciences (NAS)
recommended aquatic protection standards.
Among the many findings of these various USGS monitoring studies is
that the highly toxic pesticides carbaryl, carbofuran, diazinon,
chlorpyrifos and malathion were all found at levels well above NAS's
Aquatic Life Criteria (ALC) standards, often multiple times and in
multiple basins. For instance, diazinon was found at 400 times the
ALC's maximums in the San Joaquin-Tulare river systems. Malathion was
found at levels 45 times higher than ALC again in the San-Joaquin-
Tulare systems. Malathion was also found at 30 times higher than ALC in
the Willamette River in Oregon.
According to these USGS studies, these chemicals were also found
frequently (dependent on basin): carbaryl up to 67% of the time;
carbofuran up to 29% of the time; chlorpyrifos up to 52%; diazinon up
to 100%; and malathion up to 33% of the widely scattered samples taken
in several basins.
Among the many USGS government monitoring studies that have found
these pesticides to be pervasive in river systems throughout the west
coast are the following:
USGS Circular 1216 (Puget Sound, 1996-98) http://wa.water.usgs.gov/
pubs/misc/summary.rpt.html
USGS Circular 1161 (Willamette, 1991-95) http://pubs.usgs.gov/circ/
circ1161
USGS Circular 1160 (Upper Snake, 1992-95) http://pubs.usgs.gov/circ/
circ1160
USGS Circular 1159 (San Joaquin-Tulare, 1992-95)
http://pubs.usgs.gov/circ/circ1159
USGS Circular 1144 (Columbia 1992-95) http://pubs.usgs.gov/circ/
circ1144
In short, these nasty toxic pesticides are found in major salmon-
bearing river systems nearly everywhere on the west coast. What all
this means, bluntly, is that whatever protective rules the EPA now has
in place are simply not working to keep these chemicals out of the
nation's waterways. The committees were right to describe this as
federal regulatory dysfunction.
If these commonly used chemicals are already in salmon-bearing
rivers they are also in urban public water systems supplied from those
same rivers. This represents a serious and growing--but largely
unaddressed--public health hazard. All are highly toxic to humans, many
are bioaccumulative in human tissue, several are human endocrine
disrupters, and most are virulent carcinogens or mutagens or both. Few
of them can be effectively filtered out from these public water systems
by any currently available water filtering systems, most are very hard
to detect and few are currently even tested for.
If, under EPA labeling controls now in effect, these 54 and many
other agricultural pesticides and herbicides are getting into the
nation's rivers, it is clear and convincing proof that current EPA
restrictions against use of these chemicals in and around waterways is
insufficient to keep them out. This simple fact is ignored in this
debate by the chemical industry. If EPA rules under FIFRA are, as they
claim, ``already strong enough,'' then where did these chemicals in our
rivers come from?
These Chemicals Kill ESA-Listed and Non-listed Salmonids Alike: The
54 commonly used pesticides and herbicides originally chosen as our
target list for ESA Sec. 7 consultations in Washington Toxics
Coalition, et al. case are all well known in the scientific literature
as highly toxic, broad spectrum chemicals which can be fatal to fish.
The studies cited for salmon mortalities in Diminishing Returns: Salmon
Declines and Pesticides (Feb. 1999), represent only the tip of the
iceberg of the massive number of studies in the scientific literature
that indicate these chemicals are toxic to salmonids. Once these
pesticides and other agricultural chemicals are in our nation's rivers,
they not only kill ESA-listed salmon runs, but all other salmon runs as
well.
Most of these 54 target chemicals have been in use for many years,
some since shortly after World War II. Most are very broad spectrum
toxins which kill both target pests and many beneficial species. Some
(in particular carbofuran and azinphosmethyl) are now being phased out
by EPA because of increasing pest resistance and widespread ecological
toxic side effects. Most of these 54 chemicals are being replaced by
second and third generation pesticides that are far less toxic and far
more selective.
Once These Chemicals Are In Our Rivers, Society As a Whole Pays a
High Price: When these poisons are allowed to enter the nation's
waterways and kill salmon this depletes the salmon resource that
supports thousands of salmon related jobs along the Pacific Coast, and
deprives our nation's consumers of one of America's healthiest foods
sources. Moreover, it instigates further ESA listings as otherwise
healthy salmon stocks (and other fish and wildlife species) are in
their turn damaged to the point where they also need federal
protection.
In short, allowing these agricultural poisons to continue to enter
the nation's rivers COSTS JOBS, jeopardizes human health and DAMAGES
THE NATIONAL ECONOMY. These economic losses are now clearly
overwhelming any economic benefits these chemicals might provide from
their selective use in agriculture.
These chemical pollutants are an increasing public health hazard,
including some which are known as human ``endocrine disputers'' which
can affect human growth and development, especially in infants and
children, even at extremely low concentrations. According to EPA, the
insecticide cararyl likely causes cancer in humans. Three of the
pesticides under analysis (chlorpyrifos, malathion and diazinon) have
been linked with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder in children.
Many other studies show the dangers of other chemicals on this list to
human health.
There Are Simple and Cost Effective Ways To Keep Most of These
Chemicals Out of Our Rivers To Begin With. It is far more expense to
society as a whole to put poisons in rivers and then have to deal with
the consequences to human health and fisheries, plus the added costs of
filtering such poisons out of public water supplies (when that can be
done at all), than to keep them out of our rivers in the first place.
Fortunately, there are very simple ways to keep these chemicals away
from rivers--the use of river bank ``buffer zones'' and substitution
with less toxic alternatives, as discussed below.
CHEMICAL INDUSTRY COMPLAINTS ON THE CONSULTATION PROCESS ARE UNFOUNDED
The chemical industry and pesticide manufacturer's group CropLife
has been particularly vocal about what it characterizes as the
``serious flaws'' in the Sec. 7 consultation process between NMFS and
EPA. On January 26, 2011, eighteen members of the U.S. House of
Representatives even asked the Council on Environmental Quality (CEQ)
to halt or delay further federal evaluations of the effects of toxic
pesticides on threatened and endangered west coast salmon and steelhead
on the basis of these unverified--and largely false--CropLife
complaints. A copy of our 28 March 2011 responses to CEQ debunking
these claims is enclosed as ATTACHMENT A to this testimony.
Briefly, the major misstatements (and sometimes outright scare-
tactic fabrications) CropLife and other agricultural interests have
made to this Congress include the following:

Claim: Riparian buffer zones required under the RPA's
in the NMFS Biological Opinions will eliminate farming over
large portions of current agricultural lands.
Response: This is nonsense. The buffer zones required in the
Pesticide BiOps only restrict the use of a very few of some of the
oldest, most toxic and increasingly obsolete pesticides right near
rivers and streams. In nearly every instance when one of these highly
toxic pesticides would otherwise be used for pest control, there are
less toxic, and far more specific pest control alternatives. More are
being developed. Agriculture can continue as usual using other newer
and far more specific pesticides more wisely. And within these buffer
zone, hand applications (as opposed to aerial spays which drift
considerably and thus require much larger buffers) are nearly always an
option.
To give but one example of many of the alternatives available, in
California, Oregon and Washington codling moth causes significant
economic loses to apple growers. Four of the pesticides with Pesticide
BiOps (carbaryl, chlorpyrifos, diazinon and malathion) are registered
for use on this pest. However, most experts in the field now recommend
more targeted and less toxic products and practices. The University of
California-Davis Integrated Pest Management Guidelines include
biological, cultural and options such as spinosad, vegetable oil
sprays, kaolin clay products, and pheromones to disrupt codling moth
mating. Replacing these older pesticides with better cultivation
practices and less toxic alternatives is now common in the agricultural
industry.
It should also be noted that the ongoing Injunction in the
Washington Toxics Coalition case, which mandated no-spray buffer zones
for all the 54 chemicals subject to the Pesticide BiOp consultation
until consultation is completed, has been in effect since January 22,
2004--nearly seven years! Farmers have almost always been able both to
find less toxic and more targeted chemical substitutes and to adapt in
various ways. Very little productive acreage has been ``eliminated'' as
originally foretold.
Buffer zones are common practice. EPA already requires various
types of waterway ``buffer zone'' restrictions for many of these
registered pesticides, as part of its FIFRA label restrictions. The
common use of such ``buffer zones'' was noted by the Court in the
Washington Toxics Coalition case, as follows:
``The evidence submitted. . ... demonstrates that pesticide-
application buffer zones are a common, simple, and effective
strategy to avoid jeopardy to threatened and endangered
salmonids.. . .Neither EPA or CropLife dispute those basic
principles. . .. [C]urrent EPA effects determinations and
expert recommendations hinge on the employment of buffer zones,
such as those outlined by California county bulletins, to
prevent jeopardy to threatened and endangered salmonids. . ..
Likewise, CropLife acknowledges the efficacy of buffer zones
imposed by the most recent Reregistration Eligibility Decisions
for several pesticides. . ... Finally, the Court notes that the
20-yard and 100-yard buffer zones requested by plaintiffs are
generally consistent with those recommended by EPA.''
(Washington Toxics Coalition, Order 8 August 2003, pgs. 16-18,
emphasis added)
The restricted pesticides evaluated so far in the Pesticide BiOps
are generally outdated, broad-spectrum killers. Many are being phased
out because they kill both pest species as well as beneficial species,
thus often undercutting their effectiveness. Many of these EPA-approved
pesticides are also linked to cancer, endocrine disruption and other
serious health effects in humans, particularly children, the elderly,
farm families and farmworkers. Those that are endocrine disruptors
interfere with both fish and human hormones, causing developmental,
neurological, reproductive and immune system problems in wildlife and
humans alike.

Claim: The current ESA process is completely
duplicative of EPA's FIFRA analysis, under which EPA already
considers the effects of pesticides on fish and wildlife.
Response: The ESA consultation process as currently conducted in no
way duplicates EPA's current FIFRA pesticide evaluation processes
because the ESA analysis asks very different questions. To the
contrary, because EPA's ecological risk assessment process fails (in
all the ways discussed below) to adequately consider and protect the
nation's most threatened and endangered wildlife, the ESA Sec. 7
consultation process is an indispensible check on EPA's inadequate
species risk assessments. Moreover, EPA's own internal ESA effects
determinations also show that its FIFRA process to register pesticides
is flawed because the EPA's own ``effects determinations'' have nearly
all concluded that pesticides that EPA has already approved under FIFRA
are nonetheless likely to adversely affect listed species--see for
instance www.epa.gov/espp/litstatus/effects/redleg-frog/index.html.
Furthermore, both NMFS (and for non-salmonids, US Fish & Wildlife
Service) have considerably more experience with evaluating impacts on
fish and wildlife than does EPA. That is, in fact, part of the
Services' statutory job description.
In its Pesticide BiOps, NMFS scientists have concluded that much of
the methodology used by EPA is simply not sufficient to ascertain the
impacts of these chemicals on ESA-listed salmonids. In its own
toxicology studies, the EPA does not account for several effects on
fish that occur in the real world in our streams, including: (a)
impacts from chronic but low-concentration exposures that are not
immediately lethal but which add to stress on the fish in various ways
that can lead to increased mortality; (b) long-term behavioral impacts
that may adversely affect how the fish survives in the long run, or
make the fish more vulnerable to other sources of mortality such as
predators or disease; (c) synergistic effects from the exposure to
multiple pesticides simultaneously, even at low concentrations, as we
would see in any typical river. NMFS does take these important, but
much more subtle, real world impacts into account. The EPA does not.
Further,, EPA does not conduct most of its own research, but relies
almost completely on data and studies provided to it by the chemical
industry it regulates, few of which are ever peer-reviewed. Fewer still
of these industry studies on these pesticides actually studied impacts
on salmonids. Unlike EPA, however, NMFS has the facilities to conduct
its own research and has done so specifically with regard to impacts of
these chemicals on salmonids as part of the scientific background
information needed for these pesticide BiOps.
As the courts have found, EPA's ecological risk assessment process
under FIFRA simply fails to address the impacts of these chemicals on
species:
Washington Toxics Coalition v. Dep't of Interior, 457 F. Supp.
2d 1158, 1184 (W.D. Wash. 2006) (concluding that ``EPA's risk
assessment process is not only less protective than Service
determinations, there is overwhelming evidence on the record
that . . . EPA risk assessments . . . would actually result in
harm to listed species.''); id. at 1193 (holding EPA's risk
assessment process contains ``substantial flaws . . . [and is]
highly likely (if not certain) to result in an overall under-
protection of listed species.'')
More bluntly, the pesticide industry disputes the science only
because it is science they cannot control, and that they do not want to
hear. But these scientific decisions, many of which affect industries
such as ours, as well as the health and welfare of millions of
Americans, must be based on the ``best available science,'' not on the
``most convenient (or profitable) conclusions.'' Ignoring the
increasingly large body of science showing the serious collateral
impacts of certain highly toxic and broad-spectrum pesticides in the
ecosystem is not a sound policy basis for curtailing this impacts
analysis under Sec. 7 of the Endangered Species Act (ESA). Nor is it a
sound basis for any kind of deregulation in this important public
health arena.
While there are clearly scientific disputes between EPA and the
Services over methodology that need to be ironed out, these scientific
disputes have already been referred by EPA to the National Academy of
Sciences' National Research Council for a thorough analysis and
resolution. Congress should let this process naturally unfold.
Resolving scientific disputes is something that scientists should do,
not politicians. Scientific disputes of this nature are not uncommon,
and effective steps are being made now to resolve them. Nothing in the
process to date justifies more delay--especially since the burden of
delay could jeopardize industry jobs and the public's health.

Claim: The ESA Sec. 7 consultation process allows no
input from the chemical industry or affected users, and does
not consider the real-life circumstances in which these
chemicals are used.
Response: This is an easy one to dispose of. Far from being a
``closed process,'' since the draft of the first biological opinion
(``BiOp'') evaluating the effects of the organophosphates chlorpyrifos,
diazinon, and malathion was released in 2008, EPA has released each
draft BiOp specifically to solicit and consider input from pesticide
manufacturers, local, state, and tribal governments, and the general
public. It has published guidance outlining the procedures for input
and established a docket number (EPA-HQ-OPP-2008-0654) for this
specific purpose, available on the Internet.
To date, EPA has received over 300 written comments on the first
three BiOps alone, including from each of the manufacturers, many
pesticide users, various state agencies, and concerned members of the
public. In addition, for each BiOp prepared, EPA and NMFS have held
extensive meetings with pesticide manufacturers, and have received
large amounts of information and material from those registrants. NMFS
has documented this input and detailed how it considered the
information it received in each of the BiOps issued thus far. For more
details see the Letter to CEQ dated 28 March, 2011, enclosed as
ATTACHMENT A.
As to considering ``real world conditions,'' this is exactly what
NMFS does when it considers not only long-term behavioral impacts but
also synergistic impacts of multiple pesticides working together, as
they certainly do in real world streams. EPA only considers effects of
one pesticide at a time in isolation, and then only for the so-called
``active'' ingredient, excluding the impacts of so-called ``inert
ingredients'' in pesticide formations, some of which are actually more
toxic to fish than the registered ingredient. Thus it is EPA, not NMFS,
which is not considering the ``real world impacts'' of these chemicals
in the natural environment. This is one reason EPA's FIFRA toxic risk
analysis method has been criticized by both scientists and the courts.

Claim: If these chemicals cannot be used for mosquito
control, there will be outbreaks of west Nile virus and other
serious diseases which will jeopardize human life.
Response: First off, none of the most common chemicals used for
mosquito abatement are currently under ESA scrutiny.
Secondly, urgent public health or land management matters such as
mosquito control or control of invasive species are not likely to be
affected by these Pesticide BiOps. Special exemptions (such as ESA
incidental take permits) can and have been carved out for these rare,
and usually one-time, hazard abatement techniques. Use of integrated
pest management techniques is also increasingly replacing the heavy-
handed use of these kinds of highly toxic chemicals, and additionally
many modern alternatives to these chemicals that are far most specific
to mosquitos are being developed or already available.
Third, in our January 22, 2004, Injunction in the Washington Toxics
Coalition case, which enjoined the use of many of these same chemicals
within certain buffer zones, contained the following specific
exclusions:
``Based on EPA's effects determinations, the stipulation of
plaintiffs, or the evidence in the record. . .. the Court
determines that EPA's authorization of the following Pesticide
uses specified below is not vacated:
1.  Public Health Vector Control Programs: Use of Pesticides
for public health vector control as administered by public
health entities.
2.  Noxious Weed Programs: Use of the Pesticides for control of
state-designated noxious weeks as administered by public
entities, when such control program implements the following
safeguards that NMFS routinely requires for such programs. . ..
. .'' (Washington Toxics Coalition, Order of Jan. 22, 2005)
IT IS FAILURE TO PROTECT ESA-LISTED SPECIES FROM PESTICIDES THAT
PROMOTES GOVERNMENT WASTE AND INCREASES PRIVATE SECTOR ESA
RESTRICTIONS
In light of the theme of this Hearing, which is on job costs from
``Federal regulatory dysfunction'' it should be obvious that it is past
EPA failure to prevent harmful pesticides from getting into salmon-
bearing rivers, harming ESA-listed and non-listed salmonids, and
threatening public health that wastes government money and jeopardize
jobs, including:
(A)  Further restricting the west coast commercial and
recreational salmon fishing industries, jeopardizing the very
resources upon with they both depend, and destabilizing tens of
thousands of family wage jobs in coastal and inland salmon-
dependent communities;
(B)  Making it that much hard to recover, and thus to
eventually de-list, those species that are already ESA
protected, essentially helping to keep them on the ESA list
forever.
(C)  Driving currently abundant salmonid species into a
downward population spiral, creating more ESA listings in the
future.
(D)  Many hundreds of millions of dollars in combined federal,
state and local landowner funds have now gone toward protecting
endangered salmonids. Poisoning these species with federally-
allowed pesticide practices that pollute rivers works at
complete cross purposes with all existing salmon recovery
efforts.
(E)  As more ESA-listed fish decline from pesticides, this just
increases in severity the restrictions necessary on local
landowners. Many Central Valley farmers, for instance, have
pointed to ``water pollution'' as a main cause of depletion of
San Francisco Delta salmon stocks (not to mention Delta smelt).
But the more these fish stocks are depleted by pesticide
pollution, the more irrigation water will be necessary to take
from agriculture to help offset that other damage, e.g.,
diluting the pollution. It is thus just as much in the Central
Valley farmers best interests to make sure these pesticides do
not jeopardize ESA-listed fish in the San Francisco Bay-Delta
Estuary as it is for fishermen. This is also true elsewhere in
rivers throughout the West Coast, in most of which pesticides
are serious problems for ESA-listed fish.
(F)  Causing serious public health concerns as toxic pesticides
are increasingly found in drinking water and begin
significantly entering the human food chain.
IN SUMMARY
In short, it makes no economic sense to be poisoning the nation's
rivers and salmon runs which support tens of thousands of jobs, simply
to keep using certain highly toxic pesticides, most of which could be
easily replaced with much less toxic alternatives.
The current Sec. 7 ESA consultations and their resulting Pesticide
BiOps help us craft ways to keep these chemicals out of our nation's
rivers and away from urban water supplies in the first place. It is
always far more cost effective to prevent a problem in the first place
than to have to clean it up later--if it can be cleaned up at all.
And while conducting these decades-overdue ESA Sec. 7 consultations
may burden the resources of EPA and the Services temporarily, the long-
term solution is to provide the agencies the additional resources they
need to speed up the process. The solution is not to deny the science,
ignore polluted rivers, devastate the nation's valuable salmon runs,
turn a blind eye to serious human health problems, overturn the law--
and then just hope for the best!
Mr. Chairmen, we do indeed have a dysfunctional federal regulatory
system when it comes to regulating pesticide usage in order to protect
food fish, jobs and human health. That was why PCFFA sued. PCFFA looks
forward to working with you, the committees and members of Congress to
ensure that the regulation of pesticides will, in fact, effectively
consider and protect our nation's valuable food fish, fishing-industry
jobs--along with protection for farm workers, and human health. Thank
you and I'll be happy to answer any questions.

#####

PCFFA APPENDIX A--Joint Letter to CEQ
DEFENDERS OF WILDLIFE
EARTHJUSTICE
NORTHWEST
CENTER FOR ALTERNATIVES TO PESTICIDES
PACIFIC COAST
FEDERATION OF FISHERMEN'S ASSOCIATIONS
INSTITUTE FOR
FISHERIES RESOURCES

March 28, 2011

Nancy Sutley, Chair
Council on Environmental Quality
722 Jackson Place, N.W.
Washington, D.C. 20503

On January 26, 2011, eighteen members of the U.S. House of
Representatives asked the Council on Environmental Quality to halt or
further delay federal evaluation of the effects of toxic pesticides on
threatened and endangered West Coast salmon and steelhead. That
request, however, is based on a misunderstanding of the science
underlying the required protections and on an inaccurate picture of the
process that the National Marine Fisheries Service and the
Environmental Protection agency have followed. We write to urge CEQ to
instead use its resources and authorities to ensure that these agencies
can effectively complete and immediately implement the long-overdue
measures necessary to protect West Coast salmon and steelhead from the
harm caused by these pesticides.
Specifically, the letter asks CEQ to intervene in the on-going
Endangered Species Act (ESA) consultation process based on allegations
that biological opinions have been prepared without an adequate
opportunity for input from pesticide manufacturers and users and
without considering the best available science on the levels of these
chemicals found in salmon waters. Both of these contentions are
incorrect.
First, the letter is based on a misunderstanding of the
consultation process as it has unfolded for the eighteen pesticides
that have been evaluated so far. Since the draft of the first
biological opinion (``BiOp'') evaluating the effects of the
organophosphates chlorpyrifos, diazinon, and malathion was released in
2008, EPA has released draft BiOps specifically to solicit and consider
input from pesticide manufacturers, local, state, and tribal
governments, and the general public.\1\ It has published guidance
outlining the procedures for input and established a docket number
(EPA-HQ-OPP-2008-0654) for this specific purpose at
www.regulations.gov. http://www.regulations.gov/
#!docketDetail;dct=PS;rpp=10;so=ASC;sb=postedDate;po=60;D=EPA-HQ-OPP-
2008-0654.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ While this Organophosphate biological opinion (``OP BiOp'')
does not represent the first consultation evaluating the effects of a
pesticide on a listed species, it is the first of many such
consultations since the Court confirmed EPA's obligation to consult on
its pesticide registrations and reregistrations more than eight years
ago. Washington Toxics Coalition v . EPA, 413 F.3d 1024 (9th Cir.
2005). This and other recent biological opinions are the result of a
process that began before 2002, when EPA first requested consultation
for diazinon and bensulide. EPA's effects determinations for these and
other pesticides required by Washington Toxics Coalition were made by
December, 2004.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
To date, EPA has received over 300 comments on the first three
BiOps alone, including from each of the manufacturers, many pesticide
users, various state agencies, and concerned members of the public. In
addition, for each BiOp prepared, EPA and NMFS have held extensive
meetings with pesticide manufacturers, and have received large amounts
of information and material from those registrants. NMFS has described
this input and detailed how it considered the information it received
in each of the BiOps issued thus far.\2\ The categorical statement in
the House members' letter that EPA has not adequately consulted with
the pesticide industry and grower interest groups cannot be squared
with the agencies' actions, EPA's notice and request for comments on
each of these draft BiOps, and the extensive input received. We
continue to support EPA's effort to solicit input from all interested
groups and individuals as it completes other consultations and believe
that the agencies have used their existing authorities to conduct this
process in a transparent manner that allows for input from all affected
parties and that will quickly achieve compliance with the law.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ See, e.g., OP BiOp at 16-21 (detailing meetings with
registrants and nine file boxes of information provided to EPA by
registrants alone); Biological Opinion re: Environmental Protection
Agency Registration of Pesticides Containing Carbaryl, Carbofuran, and
Methomy (``Carbamate BiOp'') (Apr. 20, 2009) at 6-16; Biological
Opinion Environmental Protection Agency Registration of Pesticides
Containing Azinphos methyl, Bensulide, Dimethoate, Disulfoton,
Ethoprop, Fenamiphos, Naled, Methamidophos, Methidathion, Methyl
parathion, Phorate and Phosmet (Aug. 31, 2010) at 6-23 (discussing
extensive meetings, comments, and information exchanges between the
agencies and the manufacturers, and public comments).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Second, as the amount of input into the process demonstrates, NMFS
did not ``ignore'' the best available monitoring data and science
relevant to the presence of these chemicals in salmon waters. To the
contrary, each BiOp explicitly discusses the data relied upon,
discloses gaps in that information, and details how NMFS dealt with any
uncertainty. NMFS requested and analyzed the most current information
that manufacturers, state agencies, and users were willing to provide--
including voluntary measures and growers' best practices. For example,
NMFS relied on extensive monitoring conducted by the United States
Geological Survey, as well as data from state agencies like the
California Department of Pesticide Regulation.\3\ In some West Coast
watersheds, this monitoring revealed levels of these pesticides well
above standards set to protect aquatic life--sometimes at
concentrations 1000 times higher than accepted levels, presenting a
risk not only to the fish and those people who may consume them, but
also to human populations which also use these same rivers as a source
for urban water supplies. Moreover, because use patterns and practices
change and because high levels of these pesticides are routinely found
in actual water samples, NMFS also properly focused on the legal uses
allowed by the current pesticide labels.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ See, e.g., OP BiOp at 242-52 (discussing water quality and
water monitoring studies); id. at 173-75 (citing USGS National Water-
Quality Assessment Program data).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
NMFS comprehensively reviewed this data and all other information
regarding the impacts of pesticides on salmon and ultimately concluded
that current uses of these insecticides jeopardize the existence of
these imperiled fish. It then required proven and time-tested
protections that would help keep harmful levels of these chemicals out
of salmon waters in the first place. Measures such as no-spray buffers,
vegetative strips to catch run-off from fields, and limits on pesticide
application rates during adverse weather conditions have been employed
for years by state and federal regulators and effectively reduce the
amount of pesticides that enter our waters.
The highly toxic pesticides that NMFS has so far examined in
biological opinions, and which were the subject of the Washington
Toxics Coalition lawsuit leading to this analysis, were not chosen at
random. These organophosphate and carbamate pesticides are some of the
most widely used and broadest-spectrum--as well as most dangerous--
neurotoxic chemicals still used in both agricultural and/or urban
insect control. Numerous cost-effective and less toxic alternatives to
these pesticides already exist to meet the demand from farmers who
often avoid the use of such heavy-handed broad-spectrum chemicals
because they kill beneficial insects and can lead to greater pest
problems over time.
Rather than further delaying this already long-overdue evaluation
of the impacts of pesticides on threatened and endangered species, we
urge CEQ instead to help the agencies focus their efforts and resources
to implement the long-overdue measures required to protect salmon from
the impacts of these lethal chemicals. While there have been some
differences of opinion between EPA and the Services over
interpretations of some of the science, the agencies themselves can and
should resolve these differences. It should be scientists who make such
scientific judgments, not politicians.

Sincerely,

Patti Goldman
Vice President for Litigation
Earthjustice

Zeke Grader
Executive Director
Pacific Coast Federation of Fishermen's Associations and the
Institute for Fisheries Resources

Kim Leval
Executive Director
Northwest Center for Alternatives to Pesticides

Jamie Rappaport Clark
Executive Vice President
Defenders of Wildlife

#####

PCFFA APPENDIX B--Pesticide ESA Sec. 7 Litigation Chronology

Pesticides and West Coast Salmon Litigation Timeline

EPA's failure to fulfill its obligation under the Endangered
Species Act (ESA) to protect threatened and endangered West Coast
salmon and steelhead from toxic pesticides has unfortunately been the
subject of extensive litigation. Fishermen, public health advocates,
and conservation groups have been forced to repeatedly turn to the
Courts to enforce the law, and EPA has fought them--and lost--every
step of the way.
By 2000, a decade after the first runs of salmon were first
protected under the ESA, EPA had not initiated consultation with NMFS
over the effects on salmon of its registration or registration of
hundreds of pesticides under the Federal Insecticide, Fungicide, and
Rodenticide Act (FIFRA).
Fishermen and public health and environmental advocates formally
notified EPA in July of 2000 that they intended to sue if EPA did not
take steps to clear this backlog. After EPA took no action, these
groups in 2001 filed litigation in the U.S. District Court of the
Western District of Washington. Washington Toxics Coalition v. EPA, No.
C01-132 (W.D. Wash.).
In 2002, the Court held that EPA violated its duty to consult under
ESA section 7(a)(2) for at least 54 specifically identified pesticides.
Washington Toxics Coalition v. EPA, No. C01-132C, 2002 WL 34213031 at
*8-9 (W.D. Wash. July 2, 2002) The Court found that ``[d]espite
competent scientific evidence addressing the effects of pesticides on
salmonids and their habitat, EPA has failed to initiate section 7(a)(2)
consultation with respect to its pesticide registrations.. . ..Such
consultation is mandatory and not subject to unbridled agency
discretion.'' The Court then ordered EPA to make effects determinations
and initiate consultations with NMFS regarding the 54 pesticides not
later than December, 2004. Id. at *10.
To protect salmon during the consultation process, the Court in
2003 enjoined EPA from authorizing uses of the pesticides within
prescribed distances of salmon-bearing streams, and required point-of-
sale notifications regarding the dangers posed to salmon for domestic
uses. In requiring these interim no-spray buffers around salmon-bearing
waters, the Court found that:
The evidence submitted--including the declarations of all
parties' experts, reregistration eligibility decisions, EPA
risk assessments, prior EPA consultations with the Fish and
Wildlife Service, EPA's reliance on California's county
bulletin buffer zones, and an EPA expert's current section
7(a)(2) recommendations--demonstrates that pesticide-
application buffer zones are a common, simple, and effective
strategy to avoid jeopardy to threatened and endangered
salmonids. Plaintiffs' experts sufficiently articulate the
general efficacy of buffer zones in preventing the migration of
pesticides, via spray drift, surface runoff, or erosion, into
salmonid-bearing waters. Neither EPA nor Crop life dispute
these basic principles.
Washington Toxics Coalition v. EPA, No. C01-132C, Order (Aug. 8, 2003)
at 16.
After hearing from again from all parties, the Court set the
specific buffers for specific pesticides and specific applications in a
detailed order in January 2004. In addition to the interim buffers, the
Court--upon agreement of the parties--carved out exceptions allowing
these chemicals to be used where necessary for public health (such as
mosquito control programs) and in fighting noxious weeds or invasive
species. Washington Toxics Coalition v. EPA, No. C01-132C, Order (Jan.
22, 2004) at 9-10.
EPA, CropLife, and others appealed both the Court's legal ruling
that EPA must consult and the injunction to the Ninth Circuit Court of
Appeals. The Court affirmed all aspects of the district court's orders,
including the injunction. Washington Toxics Coalition v. EPA, 413 F.3d
1024, 1029 (9th Cir. 2005).
By 2004, EPA had made effects determinations for all of the 54
pesticides at issue in Washington Toxics and had initiated
consultations with NMFS on 37 of those pesticides that it deemed ``may
affect'' listed salmon species. As of 2006, NMFS had not completed any
of the required consultations for the 37 ``may affect'' pesticides, due
to critical flaws in EPA's risk assessment methodologies.
In another attempt to avoid its legal obligations under the ESA,
the government adopted a set of ``counterpart regulations'' that would
specifically govern the ESA consultation process for pesticides. These
regulations allowed EPA to make its own ESA determinations based on its
flawed risk assessment process without involving the expert biologists
at NMFS or FWS. To ensure that the consultations were based on the best
available science and not on EPA's flawed risk assessments, fishermen,
public health advocates and conservationists again returned to Court to
challenge the counterpart regulations. Washington Toxics Coalition v.
Dep't of Interior, 457 F. Supp. 2d 1158, 1193 (W.D. Wash. 2006)
The Court reviewed the extensive record documenting flaws in EPA's
risk assessment process--including its failure to account for sublethal
effects, synergistic impacts, and effects of ``inert'' ingredients in
pesticide mixtures. Id. at 1182-93. The Court agreed that ``EPA's risk
assessment process is not only less protective than Service
determinations, there is overwhelming evidence on the record that . . .
EPA risk assessments . . . would actually result in harm to listed
species.'' Id. at 1184. The Court emphasized that the Services
therefore provided an essential check on EPA's assessments and set
aside the challenged regulations because EPA's risk assessment process
alone contained ``substantial flaws . . . [and was] highly likely (if
not certain) to result in an overall under-protection of listed
species.'' Id. at 1193. EPA did not appeal this ruling.
In 2007, EPA and NMFS still had not completed consultation for a
single one of the 37 pesticides covered by Washington Toxics Coalition.
Fishermen and public health advocates therefore returned to court yet
again to compel NMFS to complete the 37 consultations. NW Coalition for
Alternatives to Pesticides v. NMFS, Civ. No. 07-01791 (W.D. Wash. Nov.
5, 2007). On July 30, 2008, NMFS and the plaintiffs in that action
entered into a settlement agreement establishing a schedule for NMFS's
completion of consultation on all 37 pesticides by late 2012. See id.,
Stipulated Settlement Order (Dkt.# 21) (Aug. 1, 2008). That schedule
has since been extended several times to accommodate longer comment
periods agency workloads.
After EPA published drafts and solicited comment and input from
pesticide users, state agencies, and the general public- and after NMFS
met extensively with the pesticide industry and others during the
consultation process--NMFS issued the first two biological opinions
covering six pesticides in November 2008 and April 2009. These two
biological opinions found that the broad-spectrum organophosphate
pesticides diazinon, chlorpyrifos, and malathion, and carbamate
pesticides, carbaryl, carbofuran, and methomyl, jeopardized nearly all
species of West Coast salmon and steelhead and destroyed or adversely
modified their critical habitat. In the biological opinions, NMFS
required mitigation measures that would avoid these impacts, including
no-spray aerial and ground buffers and application restrictions during
adverse weather. Both biological opinions required EPA to implement
these protections within one year. As of April 2011, EPA has yet to
implement a single one of these--or any other protective measure to
avoid the devastating impacts of these and other toxic pesticides to
West Coast salmon runs.
Fishermen, public health advocates, and conservationists have been
forced to turn to the Courts yet again in an effort to get EPA to
fulfill its legal obligations and protect these fish. In November 2010,
these groups challenged EPA's failure to implement salmon protections
in these two biological opinions in U.S. District Court for the Western
District of Washington. NCAP v. EPA, 2:10-CV-0199-TSZ (W.D. Wash.).
Briefing in this case should begin in the summer of 2011.
______

The Chairman. Thank you very much. And I want to thank the
panel for their testimony.
We are going to have some votes imminently and maybe if we
proceed, we may be able to get through the questioning before
the votes come. So at this time I would recognize the
distinguished Chairman of the Agriculture Committee, Mr. Lucas,
for five minutes.
Mr. Lucas. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Dr. Edwards, you wrote significant concerns when you served
at EPA regarding NOAA's biological opinions for pesticides. Are
you aware of any changes NOAA Fisheries made to the first
biological opinion in response to any feedback that it may have
received from the pesticide users or pesticide registrants?
Dr. Edwards. There may have been some very minor changes,
but there was nothing of consequence in terms of the outcome.
Mr. Lucas. So it is fair to say then I guess I naturally
would want to ask, and I think you confirmed that, did NOAA
ever provide responses to public comments that you are aware
of?
Dr. Edwards. Not to my knowledge. No.
Mr. Lucas. Dr. Edwards, are you aware of any and have you
reviewed any peer-reviewed articles from scientific journals
that have documented a causal link between currently registered
pesticides and the decline in listed species populations and/or
the rate of recovery?
Dr. Edwards. No, sir.
Mr. Lucas. Mr. Newhouse, are you comfortable that all data
and information from California, Idaho, Oregon, and Washington
agricultural agencies, growers groups, manufacturers of
pesticides were factored in by NOAA prior to their finalizing
any of these biological opinions?
Mr. Newhouse. Mr. Chairman, that was exactly one of our
concerns. In my letter last November to Secretary Locke I
explained some of the concerns we have of our data that we
have, real live data as far as our monitoring of streams in the
State of Washington that were not taken into account. So my
answer would have to be no I am not comfortable with that. I
can't speak specifically to those things in other states.
Mr. Lucas. To your knowledge, did NOAA ever consider
reopening the biological opinion or issuing a supplemental
opinion that factored in any new additional information or
data?
Mr. Newhouse. I do not have any knowledge of that. I do
know that they did respond to my letter, saying that they did
take our data into account, but found other data that had more
precedence.
Mr. Lucas. Dr. Edwards, ESA requires Federal agencies to
use the best scientific data available as the basis for
decisions. Knowing that the available information related to
listed species will rarely, if ever be definitive, isn't the
real problem between the EPA and the Services about how
available information is used and how each office addresses
uncertainty in its assessments? In other words, is the problem
that the Office of Pesticide Programs assesses risks using a
more traditional scientific method-based approach while the
Services prefer to rely on more precautionary principle
approach?
Dr. Edwards. I would say that that is true, at least in my
opinion. And part of the reason I say that is in certain cases
the Services have actually used what we call grey literature,
which are unpublished studies that have not been peer reviewed
in their biological opinions and EPA would not do that.
Mr. Lucas. Repeat that description again of what they
occasionally use, grey literature, if you would?
Dr. Edwards. Grey literature is literature that is not
published nor has it been peer reviewed. It might be a poster
presentation at a national meeting or something like that, but
it hasn't actually gotten into a scientific journal.
Mr. Lucas. That is fascinating, Mr. Chairman. I think my
questions have been answered. I yield back the balance of my
time.
The Chairman. The gentleman yields back his time. Mr.
Sablan is recognized for five minutes.
Mr. Sablan. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. Good
afternoon everyone.
Mr. Grader, I have heard of the predictions for many runs
of salmon to the Columbia River this year are less than half of
what they were in just nine years ago. Is it true that even
within the last two years many salmon runs have continued to
decline or shown no improvement?
Mr. Grader. It depends where you are looking. The Columbia
River, for example, saw some very good runs last year. Run
predictions are going to be less for this year. The Sacramento
system, which I am the most familiar with, we are looking at
some slight increases I think mostly I think because of a
biological opinion having to do with water flows there and that
we have those protections in place in 2008 and I think we are
starting to see some benefits from that, although we have a
long way to go.
Salmon populations do fluctuate and what we have to do,
looking is what factors are affecting the productivity. Now we
have often been criticized, and I think Chairman Hastings knows
this, when we have water hearings about only focusing on water
issues. But, in fact, we look both at the quantity of water
that is available for those fish. Fish gotta swim, as they say.
But also the quality of that water. And so in this case we look
at is there ample flow in stream to make sure that you protect
the fish life, but then also what about the quality of that
water.
And many farmers, particularly in the Central Valley
complain, rightfully so, that they are being asked to provide
much flows that might otherwise be necessary to dilute
pollution. We look carefully at what some of the sources of
pollution are and not all of it, but much of it is from
pesticides. We have looked at scientific data that indicate
that these pesticides are harmful to the fish.
Now they may not result in a direct fish kill where you go
out and look and see a bunch of fish floating on top of the
water. But if they are affecting your behavior, their ability
to survive at sea it certainly has an effect on how much fish
then are available for our harvest.
Mr. Sablan. I come from a Pacific Island, so we don't have
salmon. But people talk about West Coast salmon and steelheads.
Steelhead runs are stable, but isn't it also true that these
runs fluctuate from year to year due to various human
activities in fresh water and in other stressors?
Mr. Grader. All fish populations vary from year to year, as
you know, from being from the western Pacific. We know that
agriculture production varies from year to year, depending on
weather conditions. Now we can't always do something about
ocean conditions. We can't always do something about the
weather, as much as we would like to. But we certainly can have
some effect over the things that we do, so that all we can hope
for as far as weather and ocean conditions are have a good
relationship with the Almighty, I think as far as the human
factors we can do something about those and I think it is our
obligation to do something about those.
Mr. Sablan. So is it also true that up to 70 percent or
more of the returns of salmon runs are made up of fish produced
in hatcheries rather than wild fish?
Mr. Grader. That is absolutely correct. In some cases it is
even higher. The reason for that is these hatcheries were
brought in, as Chairman Hastings knows, they were brought in
primarily to mitigate for the impacts of dams and the lost
habitat behind those dams and those hatcheries are there to
mitigate.
I should say that whether they are hatchery fish or wild
spawning fish, it really doesn't matter. When it comes to water
quality, both of those fish are vulnerable. So if it is a
hatchery fish, it is affected every bit as much by, say,
pesticide applications or other water quality impairments as
wild fish are.
Mr. Sablan. Thank you, Mr. Grader. And Chairman, I yield
back.
The Chairman. I thank the gentleman for yielding back. I
just want to point out, and I recognize myself for five
minutes.
In my State of Washington, we have been keeping records of
salmon runs returning to the Columbia River. Admittedly, they
are different stocks, but in the last several years the salmon
runs coming back to the Columbia River have exceeded what they
have been since we started keeping records in 1938. And there
is an article here in the San Jose Mercury News headlined
``Pacific Salmon Fishermen Gear Up For Strong Season.'' The
point is, there is a lot that goes into this as the testimony
has suggested.
Dr. Edwards, you mentioned in your testimony when you were
at EPA you had correspondence with NMFS. You were less than
satisfied, my words, not your words with some of the responses.
And you alluded to the fact that part of the reason you were
less than enthused was because of what was excluded in the
information in drawing conclusions.
Could you elaborate on what was--maybe a few examples of
what was excluded that may or may not contradict other
information that caused you some concerns when you were with
EPA?
Dr. Edwards. The biological opinions did not utilize the
most recently approved product labeling that actually included
significant risk mitigation that had been achieved through
EPA's reevaluation program, didn't include as we have noted
here actual usage information from California and Washington
State. And it also didn't include information we had provided
on timing and location of use.
The Chairman. I want to ask Mr. Bushue and Mr. Mathison and
Mr. Newhouse I think you are the only three active farmers on
the panel and you obviously use these farm chemicals for
whatever reasons that you have. Is it fair to say because of
the cost of these farm chemicals that as a general rule most
farmers who obviously get their living from the land and
therefore have a very strong interest in making sure that land
is continuing to be productive that you use these farm
chemicals in the most prudent way that you possible can and for
no other reason because of the economic impact that it may or
may not have on your operation. Mr. Bushue, I would start with
you.
Mr. Bushue. I think the clear answer is yes. Most of us use
pesticides as part of an integrated pest management process. We
do a lot of scouting, a lot of monitoring. We use them if we
absolutely have to. As you pointed out, they are extremely
expensive. We generally try to use what we can when we
absolutely have to and it is all incorporated and rotational
mechanical, biological processes. But yes it is fair to say we
use them and we use them when we have to, but judiciously and
safely.
The Chairman. Mr. Mathison?
Mr. Mathison. Our company actively farms close to 900 acres
and we attempt to breakdown those into less that 10-acre
blocks. And at times we will spray certain sections of the
orchard, one or two acres, maybe the outside three rows. We do
everything possible to limit the amount of material that we put
in the orchard, both from a cost standpoint and also from the
standpoint that we want to do the responsible thing to our
orchards. My grandfather had a saying that farmers sometimes
were excellent and some of the first environmentalists.
The Chairman. Mr. Newhouse, I know that Mr. Mathison said
that he is a fifth generation. I think you are close to that I
think in the Yakima Valley too. Go ahead.
Mr. Newhouse. Thank you, Chairman.
You know actually we are working on number four, fourth
generation now. I guess I would echo the comments of my farmer
colleagues here on the panel. I can take shots at myself being
part Dutch certainly has had an influence on my use of
pesticides and chemicals. My goal is to use the minimum amount
possible. And just as West indicated, not just for the cost
factor, although that is a huge driving force, these materials
let me tell you are expensive. Talk about sticker shock. You
can have four, five, $600 per gallon of material or more and
they are not things that you just throw around without
certainly paying attention to the bottom line.
But also as far as being stewards of the lands and the
environment, we certainly want to use the least amount possible
to have the minimum amount of impact on those beneficial
insects as well as the people that we have working on our
farms.
The Chairman. I appreciate your response because sometimes
the impression is given for somebody that is not from farm
country that those chemicals are used willy nilly. And that has
been my experience that is not the case. In fact, one of the
first jobs I ever had was being a spotter on aerial spray and
before the technology got much better. Thank you very much.
I just want to remind Members that we have a vote going on
right now and we have two other Members that want to ask
questions. So I will recognize the gentleman from
Massachusetts, Mr. Markey and then Mr. Thompson.
Mr. Markey. I thank the Chair very much.
Mr. Grader, do pesticides kill and impact both endangered
and non-endangered species?
Mr. Grader. The pesticides, once they are in the waterway
are none discriminatory. They don't go out and select out an
endangered or non-endangered salmon. They affect them both.
Again, it depends on, and I think we heard here earlier how
much may be sprayed in a stream where it is that the nature of
the stream whether it is fast flowing or fairly still. Fairly
still is what we find with coho salmon when they, over during
the summer before they go to sea the following year.
Mr. Markey. So salmon, which provide jobs for fishermen up
and down the West Coast are impacted by pesticides, would you
expect there to be restrictions like the ones your industry has
experienced over the last three years?
Mr. Grader. When anything affects the productivity of the
salmon, whether it is ocean conditions such an El Nino or what
happened with the recent combination drought, excessive pumping
in the Bay-Delta in the better part of this decade as well as
perhaps something like pesticides getting in the stream that
are extremely toxic, it affects then what our seasons are and
whether or not we are allowed to fish. So, for example, when
there was a fish kill in the Klammath River in 2002, we had
almost a total closure of our fisheries in 2005 and 2006.
Mr. Markey. What are the direct and cascading economic
impacts of closing the commercial and recreational salmon
fisheries?
Mr. Grader. What happens is one thing is we have 100
percent unemployment as far as fishermen go.
Mr. Markey. Could you say that number again?
Mr. Grader. One hundred percent.
Mr. Markey. One hundred percent.
Mr. Grader. It is not 25 or 30 percent. It is 100 percent.
Mr. Markey. How many are you talking about?
Mr. Grader. You know the actual number of fishermen is no
longer that great. I mean our number is in a couple of thousand
for California and Oregon, the ones I am talking about. But
then you get into the processing plants and the recreational
fisheries and all that. From the last closures the studies
indicated that we lost 23,000 jobs.
Mr. Markey. So the USGS regularly monitors surface water
and groundwater throughout the nation. In its most recent
report the USGS detected measurable concentrations of
pesticides within most sampled areas. In West Coast streams
some pesticides were detected at levels up to 1000 times the
maximum concentrations allowed by EPA's own aquatic protection
standards. Are you concerned that the pesticide concentrations
in these streams are so far beyond the protection standards?
Mr. Grader. That is what I indicated initially in my oral
testimony here is that we do have a dysfunctional system. We
looked not at the process, but what was actually in the water.
I mean that really what is telling. And the fact is, is when
you have pesticides that are a 1000 times the level they should
be in those streams you have a problem.
Mr. Markey. So Mr. Grader, Malathion is a commonly used
insecticide that can be used to control mosquitos. The label
for this pesticide states that it is an ``will permanently
damage automobile paint. Cars should not be sprayed. If
accidental exposure does occur, the car should be washed
immediately.'' So if accidental exposure is dangerous for car
paint, do you think it would be problematic if fish and
wildlife were exposed to it?
Mr. Grader. It is a little bit difficult to wash them. Yes,
obviously it would be and I mean that is the reason we are
concerned. I tell you the truth my organization has got its
hand full of different issues it has to deal with and I just a
soon not have to be here wrestling with this issue if it were
not something that were of serious concern to us.
Mr. Markey. Thank you very much. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. I thank the gentleman. The gentleman from
Pennsylvania is recognized for five minutes.
Mr. Thompson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Actually, given the votes waiting, I just have two rather
quick questions for Dr. Edwards.
Dr. Edwards, has pesticide use increased, decreased, or
stayed the same over the past decade and how have pesticides
evolved over time in terms of their safety and effectiveness?
Dr. Edwards. EPA issued a report actually in February of
this year where they discussed that issue exactly. And
conventional pesticide use has declined in general over the
past decade. But in particular, the use of organophosphate
insecticides has declined more than 60 percent between the Year
2000 and 2007.
In terms of what I can tell you about newer pesticides,
they are more specific in their mode of action. And as a result
of that, they are generally less toxic to non-target organisms.
But I would like to add that because of that specificity in
mechanism of action insects and pathogens can more readily
develop resistance to these newer chemistries. And so it is
important that farmers have multiple options from which to
chose.
Mr. Thompson. And ma'am, my final question. As the former
Director of the Office of Pesticide Programs, would you
describe the relationship between EPA and the Services as
strained? And if that is so, why does that occur or why is that
occurring in your opinion?
Dr. Edwards. I haven't worked at the agency for a year and
a half, and so I really can't speak to the situation today. But
when I was at the agency, yes the relationship was strained and
I would attribute it to a couple of things. One is the
deadlines from the lawsuits and the settlement agreements put
everyone under a great deal of strain. And the second reason I
would say is that it was very difficult for EPA scientists to
understand the decisions or the recommendations that were being
made by the Services because the science was so kind of
mysterious I would say in terms of how the decisions were
reached.
Mr. Thompson. Given the votes, I yield back.
The Chairman. The gentleman yields back?
Mr. Thompson. Yes, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. I just want to ask. You asked, all of you in
one way or another said that we should look at legislation and
it was very broad. It wasn't specific. So I just want to ask a
question to all of you, and if I could just elicit a one-word
response I would very much appreciate it.
In all of the legislation we should be looking at there
seems to be a commonality that is driving a lot of this
discussion and that is the Endangered Species Act. Should this
Congress be looking at say for lack of a better word updating
the ESA? And we will start with you, Ms. Beehler.
Ms. Beehler. In a one-word answer, yes.
The Chairman. Doctor?
Dr. Edwards. I would say yes. And in particular, I would
look at an option to be able to implement counterpart
regulations that would survive the courts.
The Chairman. Yes. Very good. Mr. Mathison.
Mr. Mathison. Yes.
The Chairman. Secretary Newhouse?
Mr. Newhouse. Yes, Mr. Chairman. But not to the detriment
of endangered species.
The Chairman. No, that is not being suggested whatsoever at
all. Good. Mr. Grader.
Mr. Grader. I think what we need--yes, we do as far as
funding the agencies. We have to have funding so they can carry
out and go ahead with ensuring that these species are
protected.
The Chairman. Good. I thank you for your response. We have
a vote going on, so we are going to have to, as we say, eat and
run.
I want to thank all of you very much for your testimony.
The testimony may elicit other questions. And so within the
next ten days or so if there you receive written questions, I
would ask you to respond back as quickly as you possibly can.
And with that, no further business coming before the Joint
Committee we will stand adjourned. Thank you very much.
[Whereupon, at 1:27 p.m., the Joint Committees adjourned.]

[Additional material submitted for the record follows:]
[A letter to Secretary of the Interior Ken Salazar from
Hon. Bill Flores, a Representative in Congress from the State
of Texas, submitted for the record follows:]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6204.024

.eps                                ------

[The documents listed below have been retained in the
Committee's official files.]

Hobbs, Aaron, President, Responsible Industry for
a Sound Environment, Written testimony

Minor Crop Farmer Alliance, Letter addressed to
Chairman Hastings and Chairman Lucas
------

[A map entitled ``Number of Species in CBD v. EPA (2011)
and Percent Cultivated Crops per County'' follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6204.022

.eps[A map entitled ``Number of Species in CBD v. EPA
(2011) and Percent Forest Land per County'' follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6204.023

.eps[Charts on ``California Waters Impaired by Pesticides''
submitted for the record by Hon. Grace F. Napolitano, a
Representative in Congress from the State of California,
follow:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6204.001

.eps[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6204.002

.eps[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6204.003

.eps[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6204.004

.eps[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6204.005

.eps[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6204.006

.eps[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6204.007

.eps[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6204.008

.eps[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6204.009

.eps                                ------

[A statement submitted for the record by Hon. David Rivera,
a U.S. Representative in Congress from the State of Florida,
follows:]

Statement of The Honorable David Rivers, a Representative
in Congress from the State of Florida

Mosquito control, in South Florida especially, is not only nuisance
control, but a control for public health purposes.
Since 2009, South Florida has reported 95 cases of dengue fever.
These were the first cases of dengue fever reported in Florida since
the 1930's. Last year, there were 12 cases of human infection of West
Nile virus in Florida.
Mosquito control agencies are currently governed by the Federal
Insecticide, Fungicide, and Rodenticide Act (FIFRA). The law mandated
extensive testing for public health insecticides according to EPA
guidelines prior to their registration and use. This process ensures
that insecticides available for mosquito control do not represent
unreasonable risk to health or the environment when used as directed.
However, as a result of a court decision, the EPA recently
announced that mosquito control agencies will also require National
Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit, under the Clean
Water Act. It is estimated that the paperwork burden resulting from
this new permitting requirement will exceed $50 million nationally.
Given these tough budgetary times at all levels of government, I
believe it is irresponsible to burden our mosquito control agencies to
absorb these duplicative costs. Without additional funding streams
available, resources to meet these new requirements will have to come
at expense of core mosquito control health and welfare missions.
It is absolutely unacceptable to allow duplicative ``paperwork'' to
divert limited and essential resources from mosquito control's life-
saving work.
I would like to ask the EPA if any special consideration should be
given to mosquito control agencies that already meet FIFRA requirements
from also requiring NPEDS permits? Where does FIFRA fall short in
failing to address environmental concerns?
What, if anything, is the EPA proposing to help mosquito control
agencies across the country to reduce costs so that they can focus on
their core mission to protect public health and not waste valuable
resources complying with duplicative paperwork?
______

[A letter submitted for the record by The Honorable
Gregorio Kilili Camacho Sablan follows:]

May 2, 2011

The Honorable Doc Hastings
Chairman
House Committee on Natural Resources
U.S. House of Representatives
1301 Longworth House Office Building
Washington, DC 20515

The Honorable Edward J. Markey
Ranking Member
House Committee on Natural Resources
U.S. House of Representatives
1301 Longworth House Office Building
Washington, DC 20515

The Honorable Frank D. Lucas
Chairman
House Committee on Agriculture
U.S. House of Representatives
1301 Longworth House Office Building
Washington, DC 20515

The Honorable Collin C. Peterson
Ranking Member
House Committee on Agriculture
U.S. House of Representatives
1301 Longworth House Office Building
Washington, DC 20515

RE: Joint Public Hearing Entitled ``At Risk: American Jobs,
Agriculture, Health and Species--The Costs of Federal Regulatory
Dysfunction'' to American Jobs, Agriculture, Health and Species

Dear Chairmen Hastings and Lucas and Ranking Members Markey and
Peterson:

We appreciate your interest in issues related to agriculture, jobs,
public health and endangered species protection and look forward to the
joint hearing now scheduled for May 3. The issue of pesticide
regulation, in particular, is drawing needed scrutiny because of the
interplay between the Federal Insecticide, Fungicide, and Rodenticide
Act (``IFRA''), which regulates pesticide registration and labeling,
and the laws that protect the nation's wildlife, waters, and
environmental health.
Our organizations and the millions of Americans we represent
strongly support a rigorous, scientifically based solution to this
issue, one that fully protects America's waters, human health and
endangered species. Unfortunately, for nearly 20 years the
Environmental Protection Agency (``EPA'') has failed to meet its
obligations under the Endangered Species Act to consult with the U.S.
Fish and Wildlife Service (``FWS'') and the National Marine Fisheries
Service (``NMFS'') on the impacts of pesticide use and registration on
threatened and endangered species. To the extent EPA has consulted, it
has largely failed to implement the recommendations of expert wildlife
agencies that are necessary to protect salmon and other imperiled
species from dangers of pesticides.
Many EPA-approved pesticides are linked to cancer, endocrine
disruption, developmental problems, and other serious health effects in
humans, particularly children, the elderly, farm families and
farmworkers. Endocrine disruptors interfere with hormones, causing
developmental, neurological, reproductive, and immune system problems
in wildlife and humans alike. Emerging science further indicates that
these chemicals have transgenerational effects, so low level exposures
today may be transmitted via epigenetic modifications that harm
subsequent generations. Just last week, a new study presented evidence
that exposure to organophosphate pesticides in the womb lowers I.Q.

Center for Plant Conservation
Clean Water Action
Concerned Citizens for Clean Air
Cornell Laboratory of Ornithology
Deer Creek Valley Natural Resources Conservation Association
Defenders of Wildlife
Delaware Valley Ornithological Club
Delmarva Ornithological Society
Detroit Audubon Society
Earthjustice
Endangered Habitats League
Endangered Species Coalition
Environment America
Environment for the Americas
Farmworker Justice
Friends of Dyke Marsh
Friends of Pool 9--Upper Mississippi River Refuge, Inc.
Hawk Mountain Sanctuary
Jacobs Farm/Del Cabo, Inc.
League of Conservation Voters
Lane County Audubon Society
Maine Organic Farmers and Gardeners Association
Natural Resources Defense Council
New Jersey Audubon
Northwest Center for Alternatives to Pesticides
Northwest Environmental Defense Center
Oregon Toxics Alliance
Oregon Wild
Pesticide Action Network North America
Pesticide Free Zone
Pesticide Watch
Purple Martin Conservation Association
Rogue Riverkeeper
Safer Pest Control Project
Salem Audubon Society
Salmon Protection and Restoration Network (SPAWN)
San Francisco Baykeeper
Sierra Club
Swanton Berry Farm
Tennessee Ornithological Society
The Endocrine Disrupter Exchange
The Trumpeter Swan Society
The Xerces Society for Invertebrate Conservation
Turtle Island Restoration Network
WildEarth Guardians
Wildlife Center of Virginia
Wisconsin Society for Ornithology


