- EFFECT OF THE PRESIDENT'S FY 2013 BUDGET AND LEGISLATIVE PROPOSALS FOR THE OFFICE OF SURFACE MINING ON PRIVATE SECTOR JOB CREATION, DOMESTIC ENERGY PRODUCTION, STATE PROGRAMS AND DEFICIT REDUCTION

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

EFFECT OF THE PRESIDENT'S FY 2013 BUDGET AND LEGISLATIVE PROPOSALS FOR
THE OFFICE OF SURFACE MINING ON PRIVATE SECTOR JOB CREATION, DOMESTIC
ENERGY PRODUCTION, STATE PROGRAMS AND DEFICIT REDUCTION

=======================================================================

OVERSIGHT HEARING

before the

SUBCOMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND

MINERAL RESOURCES

of the

COMMITTEE ON NATURAL RESOURCES

U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

Tuesday, March 6, 2012

__________

Serial No. 112-99

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Natural Resources

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.fdsys.gov
or
Committee address: http://naturalresources.house.gov

U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
73-227                    WASHINGTON : 2009
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800; DC
area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104  Mail: Stop IDCC, Washington, DC
20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON NATURAL RESOURCES

DOC HASTINGS, WA, Chairman
EDWARD J. MARKEY, MA, Ranking Democratic Member

Don Young, AK                        Dale E. Kildee, MI
John J. Duncan, Jr., TN              Peter A. DeFazio, OR
Louie Gohmert, TX                    Eni F.H. Faleomavaega, AS
Rob Bishop, UT                       Frank Pallone, Jr., NJ
Doug Lamborn, CO                     Grace F. Napolitano, CA
Robert J. Wittman, VA                Rush D. Holt, NJ
Paul C. Broun, GA                    Raul M. Grijalva, AZ
John Fleming, LA                     Madeleine Z. Bordallo, GU
Mike Coffman, CO                     Jim Costa, CA
Tom McClintock, CA                   Dan Boren, OK
Glenn Thompson, PA                   Gregorio Kilili Camacho Sablan,
Jeff Denham, CA                          CNMI
Dan Benishek, MI                     Martin Heinrich, NM
David Rivera, FL                     Ben Ray Lujan, NM
Jeff Duncan, SC                      John P. Sarbanes, MD
Scott R. Tipton, CO                  Betty Sutton, OH
Paul A. Gosar, AZ                    Niki Tsongas, MA
Raul R. Labrador, ID                 Pedro R. Pierluisi, PR
Kristi L. Noem, SD                   John Garamendi, CA
Steve Southerland II, FL             Colleen W. Hanabusa, HI
Bill Flores, TX                      Paul Tonko, NY
Andy Harris, MD
Jeffrey M. Landry, LA
Jon Runyan, NJ
Bill Johnson, OH
Mark Amodei, NV

Todd Young, Chief of Staff
Lisa Pittman, Chief Legislative Counsel
Jeffrey Duncan, Democratic Staff Director
David Watkins, Democratic Chief Counsel
------

SUBCOMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND MINERAL RESOURCES

DOUG LAMBORN, CO, Chairman
RUSH D. HOLT, NJ, Ranking Democratic Member

Louie Gohmert, TX                    Peter A. DeFazio, OR
Paul C. Broun, GA                    Madeleine Z. Bordallo, GU
John Fleming, LA                     Jim Costa, CA
Mike Coffman, CO                     Dan Boren, OK
Glenn Thompson, PA                   Gregorio Kilili Camacho Sablan,
Dan Benishek, MI                         CNMI
David Rivera, FL                     Martin Heinrich, NM
Jeff Duncan, SC                      John P. Sarbanes, MD
Paul A. Gosar, AZ                    Betty Sutton, OH
Bill Flores, TX                      Niki Tsongas, MA
Jeffrey M. Landry, LA                Paul Tonko, NY
Bill Johnson, OH                     Edward J. Markey, MA, ex officio
Mark Amodei, NV
Doc Hastings, WA, ex officio
------
CONTENTS

----------
Page

Hearing held on Tuesday, March 6, 2012...........................     1

Statement of Members:
Coffman, Hon. Mike, a Representative in Congress from the
State of Colorado, Prepared statement of...................    69
Hastings, Hon. Doc, a Representative in Congress from the
State of Washington........................................    12
Prepared statement of....................................    13
Holt, Hon. Rush D., a Representative in Congress from the
State of New Jersey........................................     3
Prepared statement of....................................     4
Lamborn, Hon. Doug, a Representative in Congress from the
State of Colorado..........................................     1
Prepared statement of....................................     2

Statement of Witnesses:
Conrad, Gregory E., Executive Director, Interstate Mining
Compact Commission.........................................    44
Prepared statement of....................................    46
Resolution--Interstate Mining Compact Commission.........    49
Questions re OSM's Proposed FY 2013 Budget...............    50
Pizarchik, Hon. Joseph, Director, Office of Surface Mining
Reclamation and Enforcement, U.S. Department of the
Interior...................................................     5
Prepared statement of....................................     7
Response to questions submitted for the record...........     9
Roanhorse, Madeline, President, National Association of
Abandoned Mine Land Programs...............................    33
Prepared statement of....................................    35
Questions and Concerns re the AML Legislative Proposal in
OSM's FY 2013 Budget...................................    39
Resolution of the National Association of Abandoned Mine
Land Programs..........................................    43
Wasson, Matthew F., Director of Programs, Appalachian Voices.    55
Prepared statement of....................................    56

OVERSIGHT HEARING ON ``EFFECT OF THE PRESIDENT'S FY 2013 BUDGET AND
LEGISLATIVE PROPOSALS FOR THE OFFICE OF SURFACE MINING ON PRIVATE
SECTOR JOB CREATION, DOMESTIC ENERGY PRODUCTION, STATE PROGRAMS AND
DEFICIT REDUCTION.''

----------

Tuesday, March 6, 2012

U.S. House of Representatives

Subcommittee on Energy and Mineral Resources

Committee on Natural Resources

Washington, D.C.

----------

The Subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:07 a.m., in
Room 1324, Longworth House Office Building, Hon. Doug Lamborn
[Chairman of the Subcommittee] presiding.
Present: Representatives Lamborn, Thompson, Benishek,
Flores, Johnson, Amodei, Hastings; Holt, Tonko, and Markey.
Mr. Lamborn. The Committee will come to order. The Chairman
notes the presence of a quorum, which under Committee Rule 3(e)
is two Members. The Subcommittee on Energy and Mineral
Resources is meeting today to hear testimony in an oversight
hearing on the effect of the President's Fiscal Year 2013
budget and legislative proposals for the Office of Surface
Mining on private sector job creation, domestic energy
production, state programs, and deficit reduction.
Under Committee Rule 4(f), opening statements are limited
to the Chairman and Ranking Member of the Committee. However, I
ask unanimous consent to include any other Members' opening
statements in the hearing record, if submitted to the Clerk by
close of business today.
[No response.]
Mr. Lamborn. Hearing no objection, so ordered. I now
recognize myself for five minutes.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. DOUG LAMBORN, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF COLORADO

Mr. Lamborn. During today's hearing, we will hear from the
Administration justification for the President's proposed
Fiscal Year 2013 budget for the Office of Surface Mining,
including legislative proposals to change the 2006 amendments
to Title IV of SMCRA (Surface Mining Reclamation and Control
Act) amendments that took 10 years to negotiate and pass, and
to impose an abandoned mine lands fee on hard rock mines on
each ton of material moved, including non-mineralized rock and
soil, frequently referred to as the dirt tax.
Just prior to last year's budget hearing, documents related
to the Administration's rewrite of the Stream Buffer Zone Rule
had been released to the press. Subsequently, the Natural
Resources Committee initiated an investigation of OSM's rewrite
of the rule and their relationship to the contractor. As part
of the investigation, the Committee has requested information
from Secretary Salazar regarding communications between the
Interior Department, OSM, and the contractor, and held several
oversight hearings on the matter. I anticipate that some
Members will ask questions today relating to this ongoing
rulemaking.
The budget proposal before us proposes to decrease and/or
eliminate funding to the States and Tribes, specifically to the
certified States and Tribes, and at the same time advocates for
a significant increase in funding for OSM so that you can add
an additional 25 employees, full-time equivalents.
So I'm puzzled as to why you would include this statement:
``Of the almost 2,400 employees involved in carrying out these
two responsibilities on a daily basis, less than 25 percent are
employed by OSM. The rest are State and Tribal employees who
implement programs approved by the Secretary of the Interior
with assistance from OSM. States permit and regulate 97 percent
of the Nation's coal production. States and Tribes also
complete well over 90 percent of the abandoned mine land
reclamation projects.''
With the States and Tribes responsible for 97 and 90
percent of the workload created by SMCRA, why does the Federal
Government have 25 percent of the personnel? And why does it
have the audacity to come before Congress asking us to cut
state funding and increase Federal funding so that you can add
additional people to conduct the 3 and 10 percent Federal part
of those program? This makes absolutely no sense in cost,
productivity or function.
That being said, I look forward to hearing from our
witnesses today. And I now recognize the Ranking Member from
New Jersey, Representative Holt, for his opening statement.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Lamborn follows:]

Statement of The Honorable Doug Lamborn, Chairman,
Subcommittee on Energy and Mineral Resources

During today's hearing we will hear from the Administration
justification for the President's proposed FY-2013 budget for the
Office of Surface Mining including legislative proposals to change the
2006 amendments to Title IV of the Surface Mining Reclamation and
Control Act or SMCRA--amendments that took 10 years to negotiate and
pass, and to impose an AML fee on hard rock mines on each ton of
material moved including non-mineralized rock and soil--frequently
referred to as the dirt tax.
Just prior to last year's budget hearing, documents related to the
Administration's rewrite of the Stream Buffer Zone Rule had been
released to the press. Subsequently, the Natural Resources Committee
initiated an investigation of OSM's rewrite of the rule and their
relationship to the contractor.
As part of the investigation the Committee has requested
information from Secretary Salazar regarding communications between the
Interior Department, OSM and the contractor and held several oversight
hearings on the matter. I anticipate that some Members will ask
questions today relating to this ongoing rulemaking.
The budget proposal before us proposes to decrease and or eliminate
funding to the States and Tribes specifically to the certified States
and Tribes (overturn the 2006 Amendments to SMCRA), and at the same
time advocates for a significant increase in funding for OSM so you can
add an additional 25 FTEs (full time employees).
So I'm puzzled as to why you would include this statement; ``Of the
almost 2,400 employees involved in carrying out these two
responsibilities on a daily basis, less than 25 percent are employed by
OSM. The rest are State and Tribal employees who implement programs
approved by the Secretary of the Interior with assistance from OSM.
States permit and regulate 97 percent of the Nation's coal production.
States and Tribes also complete well over 90 percent of the abandoned
mine land reclamation projects.''
With the states and tribes responsible for 97 and 90 percent of the
workload created by SMCRA why does the federal government have 25
percent of the personnel and have the audacity to come before Congress
asking us to cut state funding and increase federal funding so you can
add additional people to conduct the 3 and 10 percent federal part of
the program. This makes absolutely no sense in cost, productivity or
function.
Thant being said, I look forward to hearing from our witnesses
today.
______

STATEMENT OF THE HON. RUSH HOLT, A REPRESENTATIVE IN CONGRESS
FROM THE STATE OF NEW JERSEY

Mr. Holt. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Ostensibly, this hearing
is to review the President's proposed budget for surface
mining. However, it is apparent that the Majority wants to
divert this hearing to another issue. And so I wanted to say a
few words about that, because I think their move strikes at the
heart of the surface mining law and regulations here in the
United States.
The Office of Surface Mining is charged with ensuring that
coal mining across the Nation is conducted in a way that
protects local communities and the environment. However, at the
tail end of the last Administration, the OSM weakened
regulations on some of the most destructive mining practices.
During the final days in office, the Bush Administration
issued what has come to be known as a Midnight Regulation that
revised a regulation known as the Stream Buffer Zone Rule, and
removed key protections for streams and rivers threatened by
the dumping of mining waste. The Administration's rule then was
challenged in court, and the current Administration is now
going through a process of issuing a new stream protection
rule.
Now, to be clear, mountaintop removal mining has
significant adverse impacts on communities and the environment
in the Appalachian region. Over the last 30 years, nearly 2,000
miles of Appalachian streams have been filled or spoiled as a
result of mountaintop removal activities. The practice has
deforested an area the size of Delaware.
An EPA study found that mountaintop removal mining
adversely affected aquatic life downstream in 9 out of every 10
streams in the region. And despite these impacts, the Majority
has sought to prevent the Obama Administration from issuing new
regulations to protect streams and communities in the
Appalachian region. The Majority has launched an investigation
into OSM's relationship with the contractor, Polu Kai Services,
PKS, that was hired in June of 2010 to prepare an environmental
impact statement for the rule.
OSM and the contractor mutually agreed to end their
relationship in March 2011, before the EIS was complete. Yet
the Committee Majority has alleged that the Obama
Administration and OSM acted improperly in seeking this
separation agreement and in managing the contract. This
investigation, it seems to me, is intended only to interfere
with the work of OSM.
The Natural Resources Committee Democratic staff has
reviewed more than 12,000 pages of documents provided to the
Committee by the Interior Department, and today is releasing
the findings of its review in a staff report. This report
concludes that the allegations from the Majority are baseless.
Committee Republicans initially asserted that OSM ended its
relationship with the contractor because of job loss estimates
in the draft EIS, well before any job estimates were done. What
is more, mining officials and technical experts from Virginia,
West Virginia, Wyoming, and other States were harshly critical
of the contractor's work, characterizing draft EIS chapters as
``inaccurate, incomplete, erroneous, incorrect,'' and
``insufficient.''
The Majority then alleged that OSM provided inappropriate
and contradictory instructions to the contractor. However, a
review of the materials showed that the facts just do not
support the allegations. In fact, the Statement of Work
document governing the contractor's work specifically
instructed the contractor not to disseminate deliberative
documents without prior approval of the OSM contracting
officer.
Democratic staff report that this instruction was
consistent not only with the Statement of Work, but with
longstanding rulemaking practice under the Administrative
Procedure Act.
It seems clear that the investigation is nothing more than
an attempt by the Majority to stop a regulation that is
intended to protect Appalachian communities and the
environment. In fact, in an attempt to block the stream
protection rule, the Majority passed legislation out of this
Committee last week that would completely paralyze the Office
of Surface Mining.
Any legislation drafted so broadly that it would prevent
OSM from issuing any regulation under the Surface Mining
Control and Reclamation Act through December of next year, if
the regulation would prohibit coal mining in any area, reduce
employment in mines, or reduce coal production, is clearly
excessive. This means that the law would have an impact well
beyond the stream protection rule, could compromise the safety
of mining operations, and threatens public health in Appalachia
by preventing OSM from issuing or revising numerous
regulations.
I look forward to hearing from the director and our
witnesses today. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Holt follows:]

Statement of The Honorable Rush Holt, Ranking Member,
Subcommittee on Energy and Mineral Resources

In 2011, American crude oil production reached the highest level in
nearly a decade. Natural gas production was once again at an all-time
high. Some have claimed that this is in spite of, not because of, the
Obama Administration.
Yet, the Obama Administration has continued to increase domestic
oil and gas production on federal land. Over the first three years of
the Obama Administration, oil production from all offshore and onshore
federal land has been 13 percent higher than during the last three
years of the Bush administration.
Some have claimed that oil production on federal lands is down this
year because of the Obama Administration. Well, oil production in 2011
was slightly lower than 2010 as a result of the aftermath of the BP
Deepwater Horizon disaster when oil and gas companies were not able to
demonstrate that they had the capability to actually respond to and
contain a deepwater blowout. And even with that slight dip in offshore
production, overall federal oil production in 2011 under President
Obama was still higher than each of the last three years of the Bush
Administration.
According to a recent Department of Energy report that examined
energy production between 2003 and 2011, onshore, oil production from
federal land in 2011 was higher than at any point under the Bush
Administration.. Over the first three years of the Obama
Administration, natural gas production onshore was 6 percent higher
than during the last three years of the Bush Administration.
The Department of the Interior has approved more permits to drill,
and industry has begun drilling more wells in the first three years of
the Obama Administration than in the first three years of the Bush
Administration. Yet these companies are sitting on more than 7,200
approved drilling permits on which they have not begun drilling. Oil
and gas companies hold more than 25 million acres of public land
onshore on which they are not producing oil and gas. The Obama
administration isn't holding up production on these leases, the oil and
gas companies who hold these permits are holding up production.
The Administration has once again proposed establishing a fee on
these nonproducing leases. Ranking Member Markey and I have introduced
legislation to establish an escalating fee on oil and gas leases,
providing a strong incentive for oil companies to either start drilling
in a timely fashion or relinquish this land so that another company can
develop it. If the majority is interested in increasing production on
federal lands they should support this legislation to get these
companies to stop just sitting on the thousands of approved permits to
drill and the tens of millions of acres of public lands they already
hold.
And last year there was a 50 percent increase in industry
nominations to lease federal land onshore for oil and gas drilling. The
oil and gas industry wouldn't be expanding the areas it wanted to drill
in if it thought the Obama Administration was not allowing oil and gas
development to go forward.
And as part of its real ``all of the above'' energy strategy, the
Obama Administration is also developing renewable energy on public
lands, with the goal of permitting 11,000 megawatts by the end of 2013.
This would be more than 5 times the amount of renewable energy
permitted by all previous administrations combined. Yet the Republican
Majority is threatening to raise taxes on the wind industry at the end
of this year, which would jeopardize those projects and could kill
37,000 permanent and existing clean energy jobs.
I look forward to the testimony of our witnesses today and I yield
back.
______

Mr. Lamborn. OK. I now invite forward The Honorable Joseph
Pizarchik, Director of the Office of Surface Mining Reclamation
and Enforcement.
Your written testimony will appear in full in the hearing
record, so I ask that you keep your oral statements to five
minutes, as outlined in our invitation to you, and under
Committee Rule 4(a).
I know you know how the microphones and the lights work;
you have been here before. So you may begin. Thank you for
being here.

STATEMENT OF JOSEPH PIZARCHIK, DIRECTOR, OFFICE OF SURFACE
MINING RECLAMATION AND ENFORCEMENT

Mr. Pizarchik. Thank you, Chairman Lamborn, Ranking Member
Holt. I appreciate the opportunity to be here to testify. Thank
you all to other Members of Congress who are here as well. I
appreciate the interest that this Committee has shown in the
Office of Surface Mining and Reclamation and Enforcement, in
our budget, and in our rulemaking. We certainly experience a
heightened awareness of the adverse impacts of coal mining that
is occurring around the country, and the opportunities to
improve the protection of the public and the environment.
The Fiscal Year 2013 budget request has a number of high
points. It is a focus budget, it is fiscally responsible, and
it is a budget that reflects tough choices and efforts to
reduce the Federal deficit.
Some of the discretionary budget highlights include a
reduction in funding to the Office of Surface Mining
Reclamation and Enforcement for its Federal programs, and on
the Indian lands by $3.4 million, for the review and
administration and enforcement of permits. We intend to offset
that reduction with collection for services provided to the
industry. The cost recovery will occur after OSM promulgates
regulations through the rulemaking process to update its fee
structure.
There is also a $10.9 million reduction in regulatory
grants to the States. The States are, again, encouraged to
recover their costs from the industry for services they
provided to the industry.
Mr. Chairman, you had asked a question earlier as to why we
would propose those types of reductions. Those reductions, both
to the States and to OSM, are designed to lower the Federal
spending, to reduce the deficit of this country, by recovering
from the industry more of the cost of the services that we
provide to the industry. To eliminate those, reduce those
subsidies to the industry.
These two reductions are also a part of the larger
governmentwide effort to lower the Federal spending elsewhere.
The budget proposal for OSM also includes administrative cost
savings and management efficiencies to support the President's
governmentwide campaign to cut waste, primarily in the areas of
travel, strategic sourcing of supplies and materials, and other
goods and services. It provides for fully funded fixed costs,
which includes a one-half of one percent pay increase for the
employees, as well as costs to pay for the higher insurance
costs for our employees and other related employer costs.
As regards your question about the additional staff to OSM,
as you may have heard over the past 10 years, not including
this current fiscal year, OSM staff has been reduced by 17
percent. If you include the cut from last year, this current
fiscal year is down about 18 percent. Over the last 20 years,
we have almost 48 percent fewer employees, and we are still
doing the same work. The additional staff is needed to be able
to carry out our statutory obligations, our obligations to
provide technical support and training and assistance to the
States, our obligation to conduct oversight to provide
assurances to the public, to Congress, to everybody, that we
have an incredible oversight program to make sure that the laws
are being implemented, as required across the country. Without
the additional staff, we do not have the resources to be able
to do all of the tasks assigned to this agency by Congress.
In regards to other reductions, for example in the
mandatory spending program, the Administration's 2013 budget
proposal for OSM includes a legislative proposal similar to
last year's to reduce unnecessary spending, and that includes
the three components: the termination of payments to the
certified States and Tribes who certified they have completed
their coal reclamation, as well as a change to the program to
provide for a more directed spending of those funds to address
the most dangerous sites in the country.
It also creates a proposal for a parallel program to
reclaim abandoned hardrock mines. There are States interested,
many of which have very dangerous problems in their areas. We
believe that the best approach is to provide for a
comprehensive solution to address those abandoned mine land
problems in the hardrock area with the fees being paid by the
hardrock industry.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Pizarchik follows:]

Statement of Joseph G. Pizarchik, Director, Office of Surface Mining
Reclamation and Enforcement, U.S. Department of the Interior

Mr. Chairman and Members of the Subcommittee, thank you for
inviting me to testify on the Fiscal Year 2013 budget request for the
Office of Surface Mining Reclamation and Enforcement (OSM).
The Surface Mining Control and Reclamation Act of 1977 (SMCRA)
established the Office of Surface Mining Reclamation and Enforcement
for two basic purposes: First, to assure that the Nation's coal mines
operate in a manner that protects citizens and the environment during
mining operations and restores the land to productive use following
mining; and second, to implement an Abandoned Mine Lands (AML) program
to address the hazards and environmental degradation remaining from two
centuries of unregulated mining. These tasks are vital to public health
and safety, and the environmental and economic well-being of the United
States.
Congress charged OSM through SMCRA to ensure that the Nation
strikes a balance between the protection of the environment and the
Nation's need for coal energy. Nearly 35 years after the passage of
SMCRA, coal remains an important fuel source for our country, providing
about half of our Nation's electricity. In the continued drive to
decrease our Nation's dependence on foreign oil, coal will continue to
be part of our domestic supply of energy for the foreseeable future.
While new energy frontiers are being explored, including the
development of clean coal, the coal supply (conventional coal
production) is essential to the Nation's energy requirements. In order
to ensure that coal is produced in an environmentally conscious and
responsible way, OSM is committed to carrying out the requirements of
SMCRA in cooperation with States and Tribes. Of the almost 2,400
employees involved in carrying out these two responsibilities on a
daily basis, less than 25 percent are employed by OSM. The rest are
State and Tribal employees who implement programs approved by the
Secretary of the Interior with assistance from OSM. States permit and
regulate 97 percent of the Nation's coal production. States and Tribes
also complete well over 90 percent of the abandoned mine land
reclamation projects.
The major tasks for OSM are to ensure that States and Tribes
successfully address coal mining activities by ensuring they have high-
quality regulatory and AML frameworks and to oversee implementation of
their programs. Importantly, OSM also provides technical assistance,
funding, training, and technical tools to the States to support their
regulatory and reclamation programs.
Currently, 24 States have approved regulatory programs in place
pursuant to Title V of SMCRA. There are 25 States and three Tribes that
administer approved AML programs pursuant to Title IV of SMCRA.
Since enactment of SMCRA in 1977, OSM has provided more than $3
billion in grants to States and Tribes to clean up mine sites abandoned
before passage of SMCRA. In the course of addressing health, safety and
environmental hazards, about 265,000 acres of Priority 1 and 2
abandoned coal mine sites have been reclaimed under OSM's AML Program,
though many sites still remain.
The authority to collect and distribute the AML reclamation fee was
revised by the Tax Relief and Health Care Act of 2006, which included
the 2006 Amendments to SMCRA (Public Law 109-432). Among other things,
these amendments extended the authority for fee collection on mined
coal through September 30, 2021, and changed the way that State and
Tribal reclamation grants are funded, beginning in FY 2008. State and
Tribal grants are funded by permanent appropriations that are derived
from current AML fee collections and the general fund of the U.S.
Treasury. With these amendments, funding to States and Tribes increased
from $145.3 million in FY 2007 to the most recent distribution made
available of $485.5 million for FY 2012.
The budget includes a legislative proposal to reform the AML
reclamation program to reduce unnecessary spending and ensure the
Nation's highest priority abandoned sites are reclaimed. First, the
budget proposes to eliminate the unrestricted payments to certified
States and Tribes that have completed their abandoned coal mine
reclamation. Terminating these payments will save taxpayers $1.1
billion over the next decade. Second, the budget proposes to reform the
allocation of grants for coal AML reclamation to a competitive process.
The current production-based formula allocates funding to States that
have the most coal production and not necessarily States with the most
critical reclamation needs. A competitive process would ensure that
funding addresses the highest priority and the most environmentally
damaging AML coal sites across the Nation, regardless of which State
they are located in and how much coal is currently produced.
Third, the budget proposes to create a parallel hardrock AML
program, with fees collected by OSM and distributed competitively by
the Bureau of Land Management.
The coal AML reclamation program would operate in parallel to the
proposed hardrock AML fee and reclamation program, as part of a larger
effort to ensure that the Nation's most dangerous coal and hardrock AML
sites are addressed by the industries that created the problems. The
mandatory distribution to the United Mine Workers of America (UMWA)
health benefit plans, estimated at $230.6 million in FY 2013, will not
be affected by this proposal.
Fiscal Year 2013 Budget Request Overview
The FY 2013 budget request for OSM totals $140.7 million in
discretionary spending and supports 528 equivalent full-time positions.
Compared with the 2012 enacted level of $150.2 million, this represents
a net decrease of $9.5 million. The budget request contains a
programmatic increase of $4.2 million for improved implementation of
existing laws and support to States and Tribes, and monitoring of AML
projects. Reductions include $10.9 million in discretionary spending
for State regulatory program grants to be offset with increased user
fees for services provided to the coal industry; $3.4 million in
Federal programs, including the Federal program for Indian lands, to be
offset with cost recovery of fees for services, and $0.3 million for
watershed cooperative agreements. The budget includes a net increase of
$0.9 million for fixed costs and continues to support administrative
savings and efficiencies.
OSM's budget also contains an estimated $537.2 million in permanent
appropriations. This spending includes $306.6 million for reclamation
grants to non-certified States and Tribes (those with remaining
abandoned coal mine problems); and $230.6 million for the UMWA for
specified health benefits plans. This spending is derived from both the
AML and U.S. Treasury funds. The estimates, as contained in the budget
submission, are projections based on information current as of the end
of the 2011 calendar year and subject to change since they are based on
fee collections and requests from the UMWA.
Regulation and Technology Appropriation
The OSM's overall FY 2013 request includes $113.1 million for the
Regulation and Technology appropriation, $9.7 million below the 2012
enacted level. This includes an increase in funding and staff to
support improved implementation of existing laws and support to States
and Tribes, and reductions for regulatory grants, and Federal programs
where OSM is the regulatory authority. The FY 2013 budget request will
enable OSM to provide financial and technical support, and training to
the 24 States with approved regulatory programs. It will also enable
OSM to continue to administer Federal regulatory programs in States
that do not operate their own programs and on Federal and Indian lands.
The requested programmatic increase of almost $4.0 million and 25
FTE will support improved implementation of existing laws and support
to the States and Tribes. Scientific developments have identified areas
in need of improvement to more completely implement SMCRA. Annual
performance agreements developed for each State, with stakeholder
input, outline the responsibilities and activities of both the State
and OSM. The increase in funding and FTE will strengthen OSM's skill
base to assist in resolving issues, while continuing to provide the
technical support and training that States and Tribes need to maintain
program effectiveness.
A large portion of the regulatory and technology funding
appropriated to OSM is distributed to the States and Tribes in the form
of regulatory grants. These grants account for 51 percent of this
proposed appropriation. For FY 2013, the request includes $57.7 million
for regulatory grants, $10.9 million below the 2012 enacted level.
States are encouraged to offset the decrease in Federal funding by
increasing cost recovery fees for services to the coal industry,
therefore there should be no reduction in regulatory performance. The
decrease supports the Administration's commitment to reduce subsidies
to fossil-fuel industries.
In addition, a decrease of $3.4 million for Federal regulatory
programs where OSM is the regulatory authority is proposed, which will
be covered by an equal amount of proposed offsetting collections for
the review, administration and enforcement of coal mining permits.
The remaining portion of the budget provides funding for OSM's
regulatory operations on Federal and Indian lands, evaluation and
oversight of State regulatory programs, technical training and other
technical assistance to the States and Tribes as well as administrative
and executive activities.
Abandoned Mine Reclamation Fund Appropriation
The request includes $27.5 million for the AML appropriation, which
is a net increase of $149,000 from the 2012 enacted level. The budget
supports OSM's program evaluations and reclamation operations,
watershed cooperative agreement projects, fee compliance and audits,
technical training and other technical assistance to the States and
Tribes as well as administrative and executive activities. Increases
are proposed for project monitoring of AML projects. Reductions are
proposed for watershed cooperative agreements due to the anticipated
number of projects in FY 2013 and available carryover funding to
support them.
Permanent Appropriations
The OSM will continue to distribute mandatory funding to States and
Tribes under the AML program and make payments to the UMWA health
benefit plans. The budget request includes a legislative proposal
discussed earlier to eliminate payments to certified States and Tribes
and restructure AML coal payments from a production-based formula to a
competitive process, allocating $306.6 million in 2013 for reclamation
of the highest priority coal AML sites in the Nation. This proposal
will save an estimated $1.1 billion over the next decade while ensuring
that the Nation's highest priority abandoned coal mines are addressed.
Offsetting Collections and Fees
OSM's budget continues an offsetting collection initiated in FY
2012, allowing OSM to retain coal mine permit application and other
fees for the work performed as a service to the coal industry. The fee
will help ensure the efficient processing, review, and enforcement of
the permits issued, while recovering some of the regulatory operations
costs from the industry that benefits from this service. Section 507 of
SMCRA authorizes this fee. It is estimated that $3.4 million will be
generated in offsetting collections.
Conclusion
The FY 2013 budget is a disciplined, fiscally responsible request
that lowers the cost to the American taxpayer while ensuring coal
production occurs in an environmentally responsible way.
Thank you for the opportunity to appear before the Committee today
and testify on the FY 2013 budget request for OSM. This concludes my
written statement. I am happy to answer questions that you may have on
the budget proposal.
______

Response to questions submitted for the record by The Honorable Joseph
Pizarchik, Director, Office of Surface Mining Reclamation and
Enforcement, U.S. Department of the Interior

Subcommittee Chairman Doug Lamborn
1.  Can you tell this Committee specifically how much money OSM has
spent on the rewrite of the 2008 Stream Buffer Zone Rule?
Answer: The Office of Surface Mining Reclamation and Enforcement
(OSM) has been developing improvements of its regulations to more
completely implement the Surface Mining Control and Reclamation Act by
better protecting streams from the adverse impacts of coal mining while
helping meet the nation's energy needs. Since 2009, OSM has spent about
$7.7 million to develop this rulemaking.
2.  Can you tell us how much more money will be needed to finish the
rule?
Answer: No. There are too many factors that will impact future
costs such as the number and complexity of public comments received,
the number of public hearings held, etc.
3.  How much more money will it cost the government to renegotiate a
second settlement and does that include paying attorney fees to
the plaintiffs?
Answer: The government has no current plans to negotiate a second
settlement.
Specific Questions re: Cost Recovery/User Fees
OSM has requested an amount for state Title V regulatory program
grants in FY 2013 that reflects an $11 million decrease from FY 2012.
While OSM does not dispute that the states are in need of an amount far
greater than this, the agency has suggested once again that the states
should be able to make up the difference between what OSM has budgeted
and what states actually need by increasing cost recovery fees for
services to the coal industry.
1.  What exactly will it take to accomplish this task?
Answer: Each state has the legal authority to collect a fee from
the applicant to cover up to the actual or anticipated cost of
reviewing, administering, and enforcing the permit. How that would be
accomplished would depend on the circumstance and processes of the
individual states.
2.  Assuming the states take on this task, will amendments to their
regulatory programs be required?
Answer: It depends on the individual state. Federal law did not
require states to develop programs that require a program amendment to
modify their fee structure. Those states that chose to include such a
constraint on their authority may need to amend their program and those
states that did not elect to include such a constraint on their
authority can adjust their fees without a program amendment.
3.  How long, in general, does it take OSM to approve a state program
amendment?
Answer: The amount of time that it takes to process a state program
amendment varies depending on the number of issues in each amendment.
In addition to internal review and clearance within OSM and the
Department, all state program amendments require publication of a
proposed rule in the Federal Register, an opportunity for public
comment, and then publication of a final rule in the Federal Register.
Between 2007 and 2010, OSM processed three state program amendments
dealing with fees; the average number of days for processing was 237.
The state of Alabama submitted a program amendment to OSM in May of
2010 to raise current permit fees and authorize new, additional fees.
It took OSM a full year to approve this amendment, resulting in lost
fees of over $50,000 to the state.
1.  If OSM is unable to approve requested state program amendments for
permit fee increases in less than a year, how does the agency
expect to handle mandated permit increases for all of the
primacy states within a single fiscal year?
Answer: The proposed FY 2013 budget for OSM does not mandate permit
fee increases for any state. Section 507(a) of the Surface Mining
Control and Reclamation Act (SMCRA) specifies that ``[e]ach application
for a surface coal mining and reclamation permit pursuant to an
approved State program. . .shall be accompanied by a fee as determined
by the regulatory authority.'' The amount charged is left to the state,
however. In addition, states are encouragedto recover the cost of other
services they provide. How individual states choose to recover the cost
of services they provide to the industry is a matter of the state's
discretion. Some state programs specify the permit fee amounts in the
state program. Any change to the fee amounts, therefore, requires a
state program amendment. Other states have set out permit fees
according to a schedule that is separate and apart from the state
program, in which case fee changes do not require a state program
amendment.
2.  If OSM is not expecting to pursue this initiative in fiscal year
2013, why include such a proposal in the budget until OSM has
worked out all of the details with the states in the first
instance?
Answer: As early as February 2010, states have been encouraged to
adjust their fees to recover more of the cost of the services they
provide to industry. The FY 2011, FY 2012, and FY 2013 budget proposals
for OSM have all included the proposed reduction in Federal spending.
The FY 2013 proposal includes a similar reduction of $3.4 million for
OSM's regulatory programs. OSM is pursuing a rulemaking to adjust its
fees to recover the costs of reviewing, administering and enforcing
permits for Federal programs. OSM anticipates that this rulemaking will
become effective in fiscal year 2013. Moreover, in response to requests
from the states and in order to reduce Federal spending, OSM is
exploring all available options to assist primacy states in the
collection of fees.
3.  What types of complexities is OSM anticipating with its proposal at
the state level? Many of the states have already indicated to
OSM that it will be next to impossible to advance a fee
increase proposal given the political and fiscal climate they
are facing.
Answer: States are encouraged to follow OSM's example and recover
more of the cost of the services provided to industry and reduce state
spending as OSM will reduce Federal spending.
OSM's solution seems to be that the agency will propose a rule to
require states to increase permit fees nationwide.
1.  Won't this still require state program amendments to effectuate the
federal rule, as with all of OSM's rules?
Answer: OSM has no plans to propose a rule requiring states to
increase permit fees.
2.  How does OSM envision accomplishing this if the states are unable
to do it on their own?
Answer: Beginning as early as February 2010, states were encouraged
to adjust their fees to recover more of the cost of the services they
provide to industry. The FY 2011, FY 2012, and FY 2013 budget proposals
for OSM all included the proposed reduction in Federal spending. OSM
stands ready to assist any States that elect to adjust their fees and
request assistance in their efforts to do so.
3.  Even if a federal rulemaking requiring permit fee increase
nationwide were to succeed, how does OSM envision assuring that
these fees are returned to the states?
Answer: OSM does not intend to propose a rulemaking to require
permit fees be increased nationwide. Rather, states have asked OSM to
collect fees on their behalf. OSM is exploring all legal and practical
options for providing such assistance to the states, including the
remittance of such fees to the states.
4.  Will OSM retain a portion of these fees for administrative
purposes?
Answer: Because OSM is still considering the resources and legal
authorities it has to address the request from the states to assist in
the collection of fees, we do not yet know how we will accomplish this
objective. Many options are under consideration.
Congressman Glenn `GT' Thompson
1.  What is OSM's current costs for administering the programs in the
two federal program States, Tennessee and Washington, and on
Indian lands for which you will be seeking reimbursement? And
what does this amount to on a per-ton of coal basis?
Answer: OSM spends about $4.7 million per year of Federal taxpayer
funds to review permit applications and administer and enforce coal
mining permits in two Federal program states (Tennessee and Washington)
and on Indian lands where OSM is the regulator. The $4.7 million is
based on the best available actual cost data. The actual cost will vary
based upon the number of permits, revisions, etc., that are processed,
administered, and inspected in any given year.
It is difficult to calculate and fairly assign the cost on a per-
ton basis. Each permit's cost per-ton changes through the lifecycle and
circumstances of the permit.
Congressman Mike Coffman
1.  You stated in your testimony that we must rely on domestic supply
of coal in order to reduce our dependence on foreign oil but
how will increasing fees on coal production increase our
supply? Won't the effect of these increased fees be a reduction
of production and supply? Therefore, increasing the cost of
energy for families?
Answer: OSM plans to revise its rules to recover from the coal
industry much of the cost that OSM incurs in reviewing, administering,
and enforcing mining permits on lands where OSM is the regulatory
authority. OSM intends to recover its costs for these activities in
Federal Program States and on Indian Lands. OSM's proposal neither
increases fees on coal production nor mandates permit fee increases for
any state that has assumed primary responsibility for regulating
surface coal mining operations within its borders. Those states are
encouraged to recover from the permitted mine operator the cost of the
services that the states provide. How individual states choose to
recover those costs, however, is a matter left to each state's
discretion.
OSM does not believe that a cost recovery rulemaking will lead to a
reduction in the Nation's supply of coal.
2.  Your budget states that the FY 2013 budget is a disciplined,
fiscally responsible request that lowers the cost to the
American taxpayer while ensuring coal production occurs in an
environmentally responsible way. However, isn't the reality
that the increased ``fees'' will be passed onto the consumer?
Answer: The proposed Fiscal Year 2013 budget for OSM does not
mandate permit fee increases for any state. States are encouraged to
recover the cost of services they provide from the permitted mine
operator, but it is a matter left to the state's discretion.
The Federal Government currently provides funding to States and
Tribes to regulate the coal industry. To eliminate a de facto subsidy
of the coal industry, the budget encourages States to increase their
cost recovery fees for coal mine permits. With additional funding from
fees, the States will need less Federal grant funding, so the budget
reduces grant funding accordingly.
3.  OSM proposes to reduce the budget by ``$10.9 million in
discretionary spending for State regulatory program grants''
and this is to be ``offset with increased user fees for
services provided to the coal industry''. Which states do you
anticipate will have to increase their fees to compensate for
the loss of this federal revenue? Also, how will these
increased fees (taxes) impact the economic viability of the
coal industry?
Answer: The proposed FY 2013 budget for OSM does not specify how a
state ought to offset its reduced regulatory grant amount. States are
encouraged to recover the cost of services they provide from the
permitted mine operator, but it is a matter left to the state's
discretion.
______

Mr. Lamborn. All right, thank you. We have also been joined
by the Chairman of the Full Committee, and both for him and the
Ranking Member of the Full Committee, we will give them the
courtesy of a five-minute opening statement when they appear.
So I would now like to recognize Representative Hastings of
Washington.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. DOC HASTINGS, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF WASHINGTON

Mr. Hastings. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, for the
courtesy.
Over this past year, Chairman Lamborn and I have patiently
and respectfully worked to conduct oversight into the sudden
decision to reopen a multi-year stream buffer rulemaking, and
push forward with new regulations in a rushed time frame. Since
this oversight investigation started last February, the scope
has expanded beyond just the decision to reopen rulemaking, but
to broader actions that include contractor dismissals and how
the rulemaking is being managed or mismanaged.
This is a serious matter that impacts the livelihood of
entire communities, the jobs of thousands of coal miners across
the Nation, and the cost of life for Americans that depend on
coal for electricity. Not only are real coal jobs and the cost
of electricity at stake, but the agency is spending unknown
sums of taxpayer dollars pursuing this rewrite. And the
spending is climbing higher, due to the highly questionable way
it is being managed.
For more than a year, through a series of letters sent to
you, Director Pizarchik, and Secretary Salazar, this Committee
has sought information, communications, and documents. Not once
over the last year has a single deadline been met, and the
Administration continues to withhold the vast majority of
requested materials. This occurs despite your pledge of
transparency at your confirmation hearings for this post, for
the Department of the Interior's promoting their commitment to
transparency and open government, and President Obama's
declaration that transparency would be a ``touchstone'' of his
Administration.
Congress and this Committee have an obligation to the
American people to conduct oversight of the executive branch
and get answers to questions that are asked. We take this
charge very seriously. Great patience and diligence has been
shown on our part for over a year, as we have asked for
information and documents. But there comes a time when we are
left with no other choice but to tell the Department to produce
these documents. That time is just about upon us.
It shouldn't take a subpoena to get straight answers and
documents. But if that is what it takes to get the Obama
Administration to comply, then I am prepared to take that step.
With that, Mr. Chairman, I yield back my time.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Hastings follows:]

Statement of The Honorable Doc Hastings, Chairman,
Committee on Natural Resources

Over the past year, Chairman Lamborn and I have patiently and
respectfully worked to conduct oversight into the sudden decision to
reopen a multi-year Stream Buffer rulemaking and push forward with new
regulations in a rushed timeframe. Since this oversight investigation
started last February, the scope has expanded beyond just the decision
to reopen the rulemaking, but to broader actions that include
contractor dismissals and how the rulemaking is being managed or
mismanaged.
This is a serious matter that impacts the livelihood of entire
communities, the jobs of thousands of coal miners across the nation,
and the cost of life for Americans that depend on coal for electricity.
Not only are coal jobs and cost of electricity at stake, but the agency
is spending unknown sums of taxpayer dollars pursuing this rewrite, and
the spending is climbing higher due to the highly questionable way it's
being managed.
Over more than a year, through a series letters sent to you (OSM
Director Joseph Pizarchik) and Secretary Salazar, this Committee has
sought information, communications and documents. Not once over the
last year, has a single deadline been met, and the Administration
continues to withhold the vast majority of requested materials. This
occurs despite your pledge of transparency at your confirmation
hearings for this post, the Department of Interior's promoting their
commitment to transparency and open government, and President Obama's
declaration that transparency would be a ``touchstone'' of his
Administration.
Congress and this Committee have an obligation to the American
people to conduct oversight of the Executive Branch and get answers to
the questions that are asked. We take this charge seriously. Great
patience and diligence has been shown on our part, for over a year, as
we've asked for information and documents, but there comes a time when
we're left with no other choice but to compel the Department to produce
these documents. That time is just about upon us. It shouldn't take a
subpoena to get straight answers and documents, but if that is what it
takes to get the Obama Administration to comply, then I'm prepared to
take that step.
______

Mr. Lamborn. All right, thank you. We will now have
questions from the members of the Committee, and I will begin.
Mr. Pizarchik, as you know, this Committee has been
investigating the rewrite of the 2008 stream buffer zone rule,
as was just mentioned by the Chairman, specifically why this
rewrite was initiated, how the rulemaking process itself is
being managed, whether the political implications of the rule
are unduly influencing the process, and the impacts the
proposed rule will have on jobs, the economy, and coal
production. Those are the concerns that we have.
OSM has admitted spending over $4.4 million on the
Environmental Impact Statement for this rule alone by contract,
and in 2005 several agents managed to produce a 5,000-page
programmatic EIS, including 30 Federally funded studies on all
aspects of surface mining for about the same amount.
Can you tell this Committee specifically how much money OSM
has spent on the rewrite of the 2008 stream buffer zone rule?
Mr. Pizarchik. Mr. Chairman, in regards to the spending on
the EIS, we hired a contractor, as you are aware. And of that
contractor--if you bear with me--we had provided some numbers
to you previously. And under the contract, the original amount
was for $4.98 million that was awarded to PKS. The final amount
that we paid to them was $3.7 million, leaving a balance of
$1.28 million.
After PKS and the Office of Surface Mining ended their
contractual relationship, we hired Industrial Economics and
awarded them a contract for $925,261. And there have been some
modifications to that, I believe totaling about $569,000 on
that. As far as the tracking on the amount of time that OSM has
spent on it, and our costs, I don't have those figures for you,
but I think we could provide, as best we can, information we
have and a response to the question for the record.
Mr. Lamborn. Yes, we would like more information on that,
thank you.
How much more money will be needed to finish the rule?
Mr. Pizarchik. I don't know specifically how much more. I
believe we have the provisions in place with the contract. It
should complete the work, as I understand it. But again, I have
to double-check on that to see if there is other work that is
anticipated. And it is hard to estimate exactly how much more
time would be involved for the staff, because once we were to
publish the proposed rule and draft EIS, we expect that there
will be significant input from the public, from industry, and
from the citizens who are affected by mining with their
comments. Dependent on the scope and the quantity of comments,
that could have a direct relation to how much additional work
would be necessary to complete the rule and finalize it.
Mr. Lamborn. OK. Do you anticipate finalizing this new rule
by June 29th of this year?
Mr. Pizarchik. No.
Mr. Lamborn. OK. What do you estimate the time frame to be?
Mr. Pizarchik. I don't have an estimate on the time frame
at this point. We are working on the rule. We do not yet have a
proposed rule ready for publication. And we have to complete
all of those matters, and we have the internal process we have
to go through, the standard process, to get a published rule
out. We have hopes of getting it out later this year, maybe
this spring.
Mr. Lamborn. OK. How much more money will it cost the
government to renegotiate a second settlement? And does that
include paying attorneys' fees to the plaintiffs?
Mr. Pizarchik. I don't believe that there is a need for a
second settlement, so I don't have any anticipation that any
additional money would be necessary. Under the terms of the
original settlement, we committed to making our best effort to
get the proposed rule out, I believe it was, last year.
Our best efforts have not been successful in meeting that.
The litigation has not been resumed. There has not been any
litigation. We are continuing to make our best efforts to
proceed and get a proposed rule published, and to get a rule
finalized.
Mr. Lamborn. OK, thank you. At this point I would like to
recognize the Ranking Member of the Full Committee for five
minutes.
Mr. Markey. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, very much. Mr.
Director, last week the Majority passed legislation that they
claimed was aimed at the stream protection rule. Yet that
legislation is drafted so broadly that it could likely prevent
OSM from issuing almost any regulation.
The legislation states, ``The Secretary of the Interior may
not, before December 31, 2013, issue or approve any proposed or
final regulations under the Surface Mining Control and
Reclamation Act of 1977 that would adversely impact employment
in coal mines in the United States, cause a reduction in
revenue received by the Federal Government or any State,
Tribal, or local government, by reducing, through regulation,
the amount of coal in the United States that is available for
mining, reduce the amount of coal available for domestic
consumption, for export, or designate any area as unsuitable
for surface coal mining and reclamation operations.''
Do you believe, Mr. Director, that this legislation would
have impacts for OSM that would extend well beyond the stream
protection rule, and that could impair OSM's ability to protect
safety and the environment?
Mr. Pizarchik. Yes, I do, sir.
Mr. Markey. And could you explain what you believe those
impacts would be?
Mr. Pizarchik. There is a number of them. We are beginning
the process to modify regulations for the placement of coal ash
at coal mine sites, both active and abandoned. That would
adversely impact those regulations. We have an attempt to
modify regulations on temporary cessations that have not been
updated since 1979. We believe that would adversely impact our
ability to address those as well.
And in regards to States, if there are state program
amendments, those need to come through for approval by OSM, and
that would also adversely impact our ability to process those
program amendments to carry out our statutory responsibilities.
Mr. Markey. OK. Well, Mr. Director, the purposes of the
Surface Mining Control and Reclamation Act, as outlined in
section 102(f) of that law, is to ``strike a balance between
protection of the environment and agricultural productivity and
the nation's need for coal as an essential source of energy.''
Would prohibiting any rulemaking, based upon the criteria in
H.R. 3409, be inconsistent with the purposes of the Surface
Mining Control and Reclamation Act?
Mr. Pizarchik. Yes. That would prohibit us from striking
that balance to take into consideration all the purposes of the
statute.
Mr. Markey. Mr. Director, could H.R. 3409 prevent the
Office of Surface Mining from approving state program
amendments to improve mine reclamation bonding programs, which
could adversely affect the ability of States to ensure that the
necessary funds are available to reclaim mine sites?
Mr. Pizarchik. Yes, that could have that impact. And, in
fact, there are some States right now where there are some
bonding issues that need to be addressed.
Mr. Markey. And this law potentially could interfere with
that.
Mr. Pizarchik. Yes, it could.
Mr. Markey. And what would the impact of that be?
Mr. Pizarchik. The impact of that would be that there would
be inadequate funds to reclaim the sites if the operator were
to go into bond forfeiture, which would prohibit the land from
being restored to productive use, adversely impacting the
economies of those people and the livelihood of the people
where those lands could not be restored.
Mr. Markey. Which States are we talking about?
Mr. Pizarchik. Primarily Kentucky right now, sir.
Mr. Markey. And so the State of Kentucky would be limited,
in terms of what it could do.
Mr. Pizarchik. Yes, because changes that they would need to
make would have to be approved by us, and that could not occur
if this bill were passed.
Mr. Markey. And could H.R. 3409 prohibit OSM from
developing guidelines and requirements for the use of coal
combustion residues for reclamation activities on active and
abandoned coal mine sites? A regulation would actually reduce
costs for the mining industry.
Mr. Pizarchik. Yes, sir. It could do that, as well. We want
to update our regulations to provide clear guidance to protect
the environment and to allow coal ash to be beneficially used
where it is appropriate.
Mr. Markey. OK, great. Thank you so much, sir. Thank you,
Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Lamborn. All right, thank you. We will now continue
with our questions by members of the Committee. I would note
that Ranking Member Holt is at another hearing. There are a lot
of hearings going on at this moment. If he gets back here
before the end of the hearing, he will be able, obviously, to
ask his questions.
But I would now like to recognize Representative Johnson of
Ohio.
Mr. Johnson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Pizarchik, OSM's
Federal Register notice in June of 2010 stated--and I quote--
``We had already decided that--to change the rule following the
change of the Administration on January 20, 2009.''
Additionally, there are internal OSM documents that state,
``OSM had already begun developing a revised rule, following
the change of Administration on January 20, 2009.''
So, according to internal OSM documents, not only was the
decision made to change the rule upon the change of the
Administration, work had begun on the rewrite when the
Administration changed. While this decision to change the rule
was made before you took your position as director, can you
tell me when, precisely, was the decision made to throw out the
2008 rule and significantly expand the scope of the 2008 rule?
Mr. Pizarchik. My understanding, Congressman Johnson, is
that the decision to revise the regulation was made after the
courts denied the Administration's request to vacate the 2008
rule. And instead, the court indicated if changes wanted to be
made, they had to go through the rulemaking process. I believe
that occurred in the summer of 2009.
Mr. Johnson. But that conflicts with what is in the Federal
Register.
Mr. Pizarchik. Actually, it does not. If you read the rest
of that sentence, that paragraph, and put it all in context,
you clearly understand that there were other factors that came
into place. I admit that that first sentence was probably
inartfully drafted, in light of the current----
Mr. Johnson. Because the truth hurts, doesn't it?
Mr. Pizarchik. No, actually----
Mr. Johnson. I will reclaim my time. Mr. Director, last
year you testified and claimed that the numbers the original
contractors used to arrive at the 7,000 job loss estimates were
not based on any evidence, and had no basis in fact. A few
short weeks later, one of the contractors testified that, in
fact, the numbers that were used were based on assumptions
given to them by OSM.
First, do you want to recant your earlier testimony that
the numbers the contractors used were based on no evidence?
Mr. Pizarchik. My understanding is that----
Mr. Johnson. That is a yes or no question. Did you say that
it was based on no evidence?
Mr. Pizarchik. What I said was that my understanding was
that there was no basis, they could not provide the assumptions
that they----
Mr. Johnson. But they got the numbers from OSM.
Mr. Pizarchik. And they used placeholder numbers in that,
so----
Mr. Johnson. They got the numbers from OSM, Mr. Pizarchik.
Mr. Pizarchik. Well, we did not provide them the
placeholder numbers, Mr.----
Mr. Johnson. And that is your testimony today, is that you
did not provide them the numbers?
Mr. Pizarchik. My testimony is we did not provide them the
placeholder numbers that they used in their calculations.
Mr. Johnson. OK. Then I can only assume that the numbers
that OSM gave the contractors, then, were not based in fact.
The problem resides with OSM, not with the contractor. That is
a valid assumption.
So your testimony is that OSM and the contractors came to a
mutual decision to end the contract, even though they were
following OSM orders and using assumptions given to them by the
OSM staff. Correct?
Mr. Pizarchik. [No response.]
Mr. Johnson. You guys set the guidelines for the rulemaking
process.
Mr. Pizarchik. It was a collaborative effort. We hired them
as the experts to provide us with a National Environmental
Policy Act compliant----
Mr. Johnson. But OSM gave them the assumptions on the
numbers, correct?
Mr. Pizarchik. I don't know the answer to that.
Mr. Johnson. You don't know.
Mr. Pizarchik. I don't----
Mr. Johnson. OK, I can accept that. Furthermore, the
contractors were paid out the rest of the contract, even though
they did not perform their responsibilities under the contract,
at the cost of millions of dollars to taxpayers. And OSM hired
another contractor to finish the job. Shouldn't OSM have ended
the contract and not paid them a penny if their work was
inadequate?
Mr. Pizarchik. We did not pay them the entire contract
amount. We paid----
Mr. Johnson. Why pay them anything if their work was
inadequate?
Mr. Pizarchik. Because we paid them for the services that
they provided. They did provide----
Mr. Johnson. How much did you pay them, again?
Mr. Pizarchik. Bear with me.
[Pause.]
Mr. Johnson. Well, we will come back to that. Finally on
this subject, is it true that Morgan Worldwide is currently
working on the rulemaking process, and that they were also
working on the original contracting team?
Mr. Pizarchik. They were a subcontractor for both prime
contractors, yes.
Mr. Johnson. That, to me, seems to undercut your logic that
the original contracting team was so incompetent, if OSM has
retained members of the original contracting team for the
current rulemaking.
When the representatives from ECSI, a subcontractor on the
original team, testified last year, they testified that OSM
staff members directed the contractors to change their baseline
coal production level from what the actual coal production was
for 2008, and to assume that the 2008 rule had been implemented
and was in effect across the United States.
I think I will come back to that question because my time
has expired. I will yield back.
Mr. Lamborn. Certainly we can ask that in the second round
of questions.
Representative Tonko of New York.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you, Mr. Chair. Director Pizarchik,
welcome.
Republicans are charging that OSM has recklessly rushed the
stream protection rulemaking, and that it has not provided
opportunity for input from outside the agency. Yet, OSM has
been evaluating this issue for two years, and still has not
even issued a proposed rule. Moreover, OSM received more than
32,000 comments on an advanced notice of proposed rulemaking,
which the agency was under no requirement to publish, and has
seen unprecedented outreach sessions with coal companies and
other stakeholders.
Do you think, Mr. Director, that this process has been
rushed?
Mr. Pizarchik. No, I do not. The previous rule they cite
took five years. We are approaching about three years. And we
have had more comments received on our attempt than was
received in the entire 5-year process on the 2008 rule.
Mr. Tonko. So you anticipate a lot more participation yet
and interest shown?
Mr. Pizarchik. Yes.
Mr. Tonko. And Director, isn't it true that OSM has already
received more public comments, as you indicated, than in the
entire 2008 stream buffer zone rulemaking?
Mr. Pizarchik. Yes. We have had, I believe, close to 50,000
comments input. And I believe the 2008 rule, I think, was maybe
in the 28,000 range.
Mr. Tonko. And isn't it also true that OSM will again seek
and consider public comments, once you issue a proposed rule?
Mr. Pizarchik. Yes.
Mr. Tonko. Can you tell the Committee about the outreach
sessions you have held on this rule?
Mr. Pizarchik. There have been several of them. It started
with the advance notice of proposed rulemaking that was
published in November of 2009. There were, I think, about
32,000 comments received on that based on that input. We
developed some concepts of changes to consider. We conducted
over a dozen stakeholder outreach meetings with industry,
citizens, the United Mine Workers, environmentalists, state
regulators. And then we had two rounds of scoping on the draft
EIS, where we received, I believe, about another 20,000
comments on the scoping sessions.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you. OSM instructed PKS not to share
drafts of the proposed rule or Environmental Impact Statement
with outside parties such as coal companies. The Majority has
claimed this instruction violated OSM's Statement of Work rules
for the contract because that document authorized contact with
coal companies.
However, according to documents reviewed by the Democratic
staff, the Statement of Work specifically instructed that
documents could not be disseminated without written approval of
the OSM contracting officer. OSM wanted the contractor to
obtain information from coal companies, but not to share
deliberative documents prior to the publishing of a proposed
rule.
Mr. Director, isn't it true that this is standard
rulemaking practice under the Administrative Procedure Act?
Mr. Pizarchik. That is my understanding, yes.
Mr. Tonko. And can you explain why it is done in that
manner?
Mr. Pizarchik. I believe the process provides for the
regulatory official, the agency, to be the one promulgating the
regulations, not the regulated industry, and that there is a
process to get public input from the regulated industry, from
the environmental groups, the public, from everybody, to
provide for a balanced, transparent rulemaking process, once
the appropriate deliberation and thought went into the process.
And plus, under the statute that I am charged with
effectuating and carrying out, I have to strike a balance
between protecting the environment and the citizens while,
helping meet the country's energy needs. And that is my job,
that is not the industry's jobs or any other interest group.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you. Committee Republicans have charged
that OSM ended its relationship with PKS before the EIS was
complete, because an unfinished draft EIS chapter projected job
losses from a new rule. However, Democratic staff review of
internal OSM documents provided to the Committee shows that OSM
had concerns about the contractor's overall performance, and
that these concerns were expressed well before the job
estimates were done.
What is more, state mining officials and technical experts
from other Federal agencies and within OSM were all harshly
critical of the contractor's work.
Did the contractor's draft job estimates have anything to
do with OSM's decision to seek a separation agreement? And
isn't it true that OSM civil servants expressed concerns about
the contractor's performance months before the job estimates
were provided?
Mr. Pizarchik. Yes, that is true. The numbers had nothing
to do with that. And the concerns of the quality of work had
been expressed by career civil servants months before the
working relationship ended.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you. And then, finally, at a recent
hearing the Committee Republicans said that a new stream
protection rule would cost more than 100,000 mining jobs,
according to Environ International Corporation. The ENVIRON
study is apparently just two pages long, with the numbers that
come with the National Mining Association.
Do you think this is a credible study?
Mr. Pizarchik. No.
Mr. Tonko. OK, could----
Mr. Pizarchik. In fact, if you look at the actual numbers
and compare it to the facts, according to the Energy
Information Agency, nationwide in 2010 there were a little
under 90,000 people working directly in the coal mine. And
under the environment study, they indicated nationwide the
direct employment in coal mining is 135,000, a very significant
difference between the facts provided by the other agency. The
Energy Information Agency gets their information directly from
the industry.
Mr. Tonko. So it is a huge discrepancy.
Mr. Pizarchik. Huge.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you.
Mr. Lamborn. All right. Now we will recognize
Representative and Dr. Benishek of Michigan.
Dr. Benishek. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you, Director
Pizarchik, for being here today. I am Dan Benishek, I represent
Michigan's first district. It is the northern part of the
State, along the Great Lakes. We don't have any coal mines, but
we have a lot of mining history in my district. And, more
importantly, coal provides two-thirds of the energy for the
State of Michigan. So we have a strong interest in the supply
of coal, and the cost.
In your testimony you wrote that Congress tasked your
office with striking a balance between protecting the
environment and ensuring the Nation's need for coal energy.
Providing energy means jobs in my district. Businesses rely on
affordable power to grow, and new industry to locate there
because of power constraints. There has been a lot of talk
about this job situation.
How many existing American jobs does the Department of the
Interior expect will be eliminated as a result of the revisions
to the stream buffer zone rule?
Mr. Pizarchik. We are still working on the development of
the revisions to our regulations, so we don't have any numbers
on that----
Dr. Benishek. You don't expect any job loss, then?
Mr. Pizarchik. At this point we are still developing the
regulations. We don't have our numbers completed in a
finalized----
Dr. Benishek. So you think there will be a job increase
from doing this?
Mr. Pizarchik. Some of it, yes. Because, for instance, if
you have to transport the excess spoil to the bottom of the
mountain, and to place it in a controlled fashion, as the
statute prescribes, it takes more people to do that, than it
does to shove it over the side of the mountain.
Dr. Benishek. So, how many jobs do you think are going to
be created by these rules?
Mr. Pizarchik. At this point I can't give you a number on
that, because we are still developing----
Dr. Benishek. So you think there is going to be a net
increase in jobs from this ruling. Is that what you are telling
me today?
Mr. Pizarchik. What I am saying is we are not fully
finished with our regulations. And we have to strike that
balance. There are going to be some jobs created with the
concepts we have under consideration. There will be engineering
jobs, there is likely to be more underground mining jobs, there
is likely to be more biologist jobs and land reclamation jobs.
At this point, though, it is premature to speculate what those
job numbers would be.
Dr. Benishek. I am just finding it hard to believe that if
we are going to eliminate an industry, that we are going to
create more jobs in the industry in and around the country. I
just find that to be a remarkable answer.
But with that, I will yield back my time.
Mr. Lamborn. All right, thank you. Representative Flores of
Texas.
Mr. Flores. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you, Director
Pizarchik, for joining us today.
With regard to the stream buffer zone rule, this issue is
being written to address a specific issue in the Appalachian
region. Is that correct?
Mr. Pizarchik. It is being addressed and written to protect
streams everywhere.
Mr. Flores. Well, in 2007, when you worked for the State of
Pennsylvania, you wrote a letter to the OSM, and you objected
to the scope of the stream buffer zone rule, stating that,
``OSM's proposed major overhaul of its regulations, which, if
adopted, will force States to make major changes to their
primacy program regulations and statutes to fix a problem that
doesn't exist in those states without mountaintop mining.''
So, has OSM provided any documentation or any evidence
suggesting that there is a nationwide problem arising from the
current regulation that requires national rulemaking?
Mr. Pizarchik. OSM has chosen, because of the litigation,
and at the request of the States, not to ask the States to
amend their programs to implement the 2008 rule.
Mr. Flores. So how many States are you talking about
affecting with this rule, outside of Appalachia?
Mr. Pizarchik. The 2008 rule would affect all the states,
all 24 primacy States. And the refinements to our existing
regulations under the stream protection rule would also apply
nationwide, as the statute requires us to create a level
playing field and have uniform minimum standards across the
country tailored to the region-specific geography and climate.
And that is what we intend to do.
Mr. Flores. My next question is, in 2010 there was a secret
settlement agreement that was signed with some environmental
group, where OSM agreed to pay fees and--to propose a new
stream buffer zone rule by February of 2011. Can you tell me,
remind me again, I think we have talked about it in past
hearings, how much were the fees that you agreed to pay?
Mr. Pizarchik. I don't have those numbers off the top of my
head. I believe----
Mr. Flores. Would you provide those for us? And also, when
was that secret agreement signed?
Mr. Pizarchik. I don't know of any secret agreements. There
was a settlement agreement where the litigation was placed on
hold. And I believe the settlement agreement was a matter of
court record on that. I don't know of any secret agreements.
Mr. Flores. When was it signed?
Mr. Pizarchik. I don't recall.
Mr. Flores. Can you provide that to----
Mr. Pizarchik. We can get to that. I believe we had
provided you the numbers on that, but yes, we can get you both
the amount of the fees, as well as the date when that document
was signed.
Mr. Flores. OK, thank you. I am going to yield back to Mr.
Johnson. He has probably got some great questions he would like
to ask.
Mr. Johnson. I thank the gentleman for yielding. Mr.
Chairman, I find it interesting. I want to point out our
Ranking Member, in his opening testimony, called the 2008
buffer zone rule, stream buffer zone rule that was issued by
the previous Administration, a ``midnight rulemaking process,''
yet both the Minority testimony or questions here today, as
well as Mr. Pizarchik's comments, fully validated that that was
a five-year process, with tens of thousands of pages of
documentation and analysis that went into it. So that is a
striking contrast to this current rulemaking process.
I also want to point out--and I thank my colleague, Mr.
Tonko, for acknowledging that in their evaluation of the
materials provided by OSM, that they determined that, indeed,
there were concerns about the contractor's performance. Months,
I think, was what you said just a few minutes ago, Mr.
Pizarchik, months before getting to the point of terminating
that contract. Yet, with all of that concern about performance,
you have got members of that contracting team in the current
rulemaking process, and you still maintain that the termination
of that contract was simply a mutual agreement.
This Kabuki dance that OSM is doing, tap-dancing around
this issue, is not going unnoticed by the American people. And
I don't know who you think your Department is fooling, but I am
not one of them.
So, with that, Mr. Chairman, I am going to yield back, and
I will come back for the second round of questions. I thank the
gentleman for yielding.
Mr. Lamborn. OK, thank you. Representative Thompson of
Pennsylvania.
Mr. Thompson. Thank you, Chairman. Thank you, Director, for
being here today. It is good to see you. I apologize for being
late. I was actually on the House Floor, talking about the cost
of energy. So it was work-related tardiness.
Director Pizarchik, the rule is being promulgated to
address an issue specific to streams in the Appalachian region,
which I know you are very familiar with. Yet the rule will
affect every mine throughout the country.
In 2007, when you worked for the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, you signed a letter to OSM objecting to the scope
of the stream buffer zone rule, saying--and a quote from your
letter--``OSM's proposed major overhaul of its regulation,
which, if adopted, will force States to make major changes to
their primacy program regulations and statutes to fix a problem
that does not occur in those states without mountaintop
mining.''
So, my first question for you, has OSM provided any
documentation or evidence suggesting a nationwide problem
arising from the current regulation that requires a national
rulemaking?
Mr. Pizarchik. The 2008 rule dealt with the burying of
streams with excess spoil, and that was occurring primarily in
Central Appalachia, and States like Pennsylvania did not allow
its streams to be buried with excess spoil, did not allow its
streams to be mined through. So there really wasn't a need for
that change in Pennsylvania and other states who were not
burying streams with excess spoil.
Regarding the revisions to the regulations that we are
working on to refine our existing regulations to more
completely implement the statute, there will be information in
the draft EIS, as well as in the preamble, that explains the
need and the purpose for that rulemaking, to better protect
streams to more completely implement the statute.
Mr. Thompson. Now, you recently notified industry of your
intentions to revise regulations related to fees that OSM
charges for the review, Administration, and enforcement of
mining permits in Federal program states and on Indian lands.
Now, what is OSM's current costs for administering the
programs in the two Federal program States, Tennessee and
Washington, and on Indian lands for which you will be seeking
reimbursement? And what does this amount to on a per-ton-of-
coal-mine basis?
Mr. Pizarchik. I can't give you that cost here today, I
don't know what those costs are. Our projections in the budget
is that we want to recover about $3.4 million on an annual
basis for the services that we provide. And that, I believe, is
a significant portion of the cost. The statute puts an upper
limit on the cost. We cannot charge more than our actual cost,
so we are working to recover more of those to reduce the
spending and the Federal deficit.
And on a per-ton basis, I haven't done that analysis, I
can't provide you an answer to that.
Mr. Thompson. OK. A recent ENVIRON study found that more
than 220,003 jobs in the Appalachian region alone are at risk
of going away. How many existing Pennsylvania jobs does the
Department of the Interior expect will be eliminated as a
result of revisions to the stream buffer zone rule? Has that
analysis been done?
Mr. Pizarchik. We don't have a rule proposed yet. And until
we have a rule that is published, that is when the analysis
will come out, as to what the potential impacts of that rule
could have on jobs.
Mr. Thompson. Well, in development of the rule, what
consideration will be given to the economic impacts for those
communities, and specifically jobs that may be put at risk, as
a result of the rulemaking that will be promulgated?
Mr. Pizarchik. We will be examining both the cost and the
benefits of the proposed rule, once we get to the point we have
a proposed rule. As I understand the requirement, the benefits
of the rule protecting the environment, the streams, the
public, the people living where the coal is mining has to
outweigh the cost of the rule.
Mr. Thompson. How is that measured? I mean that sounds
good, but I have seen so many rules come out of this
Administration, and not just your agency, but different
agencies where, in the end, I mean, it is sort of like, you
know, they say you can manipulate statistics any way you want,
just whatever kind of argument--that is what I found in my
life.
And so, I really look forward to seeing that analysis. And
hopefully it just--it provides just significant clarity of what
the risks and the benefits are, the costs and the benefits.
So----
Mr. Pizarchik. And that is what we are trying to
accomplish. And we believe--our goal is to have something much
more detailed, so that people and so Congress can look at the
analysis, understand the basis for the numbers and the
analysis, and how they were derived, so that everybody can
provide an informed assessment, and provide us their informed
comments.
Mr. Lamborn. OK, thank you. And for the second round I will
recognize myself.
Mr. Pizarchik, when proposing this budget, you are calling
for higher fees for the State programs to be offset with user
fees for services provided to the coal industry. Those are the
higher fees that you would propose.
Have you analyzed what higher fees would do to the supply
and the production of coal?
Mr. Pizarchik. I personally have not. No, sir.
Mr. Lamborn. Do you believe that higher fees will affect
the production of coal?
Mr. Pizarchik. It depends on the area and the cost
competitiveness of the area. I think some parts of the country,
where the coal is economical to mine, I doubt that it will have
much of an effect, if anything, or it will be inconsequential,
in the context of it.
In regards to the amount of fees, you know, considering
that there is over a billion tons of coal mined annually, I
would expect that it would not have a major impact on the coal
being produced, nationwide.
Mr. Lamborn. But if you think that in some areas it would
not have a measurable impact, you are implying that in other
areas it would.
Mr. Pizarchik. No, I don't want to make that implication at
all. I think there may be more of an impact, but I don't
believe it would be a major impact. Because again, if you look
at the amount of fees that we are talking about here, which
currently is coming from the average taxpayer through general
revenues appropriated to provide these services--pay for these
services that are provided to the industry, it seems to me that
it is only fair that the people who get the benefit of these
government services ought to pay a larger share of those.
Mr. Lamborn. That may or may not be, but the impact of
higher fees will affect production. Or, if not, it will be
passed on to the consumer, won't it?
Mr. Pizarchik. Again, it depends on the magnitude of the
fees. As I understand the basic economics of this, due to the
large scale of production and the minimal amount of these fees
in regards to the overall cost of production, I doubt that they
would have a significant impact or--on costs----
Mr. Lamborn. So, if I get this right, you are saying you
don't think higher fees will affect the supply and the
production of coal, and you don't think that it will be passed
on to and affect the cost of energy to the ultimate consumer?
Mr. Pizarchik. It----
Mr. Lamborn. I find that curious. Let me change subjects in
my last few minutes here. And you have stated more than once
today before this Committee that companies just push the
overburden off the side of the hill and off the side of the
mountain. But under current law and regulation since SMCRA has
been enacted, doesn't the placement of material have to be
considered in a mine plan?
And so, if people are reviewing and enforcing the mine
plans, this should not be happening, unless someone is not
doing their job. Wouldn't that be correct?
Mr. Pizarchik. That would be a logical assumption.
Mr. Lamborn. All right, thank you. I would now like to
recognize Representative Johnson.
Mr. Johnson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would like to pick
up where I left off before, Mr. Director. When the
representatives from ECSI, a subcontractor on the original
team, testified last year, they testified that OSM staff
members directed the contractors to change their baseline coal
production level from what the actual coal production was for
2008, and to assume that the 2008 rule had been implemented,
and was in effect across the United States. The contractors
testified they were asked to do this because, contrary to your
testimony from last year, the 2008 rule was not a rollback, but
would have actually caused coal production in the United States
to drop. This would have made the 7,000 job loss number look
even smaller.
Did you or anyone on staff at OSM direct the contractors
and the subcontractors to change their baseline assumption?
Mr. Pizarchik. I did not direct them, and I don't--I am not
aware of anybody on the staff directing to do that.
My understanding on the baseline assumptions they were
using, they used a 2008 rule, it appeared in chapter 1 and 2 in
the fall of 2009. But the numbers that they used to come up
with the 7,000 that you are referring to did not use the 2008
rule as the baseline. Instead, it wanted to take it back----
Mr. Johnson. So you were not aware of any direction from
you or your Department requiring the contractors to change
their assumption?
Mr. Pizarchik. I don't recall----
Mr. Johnson. OK, thank you. Would you like to recant your
testimony that the 2008 rule was a rollback of the original
stream buffer zone rule? Because that is what you told us last
fall.
Mr. Pizarchik. I am--have to get that in context. I don't
recall that statement.
Mr. Johnson. OK, all right. As a result of the settlement
OSM entered into, the 2008 rule was never implemented in States
with primacy. Without any implementation in the vast majority
of impacted territory, it seems that there is no way for OSM to
justify the need for this regulation, when there is no evidence
that the existing regulations are inadequate.
Since the decision to change the rule occurred prior to
January 20, 2009, and we have seen that in the Register, there
was never an opportunity for any actual analysis on the alleged
inadequacies of the 2008 rule. Correct? I mean if it wasn't
implemented, you had no basis upon which to do a valid
analysis.
Mr. Pizarchik. It is being implemented in Tennessee.
Mr. Johnson. That is one place. This is a big country. So
it hasn't been fully implemented, right?
Mr. Pizarchik. That is correct.
Mr. Johnson. OK. It has not been fully implemented. There
has been no science, scientific analysis, on the implementation
of the 2008 rule, because it was never implemented. Correct?
Has your Department done any scientific analysis on the 2008
rule?
Mr. Pizarchik. I am not familiar with all the scientific
analysis----
Mr. Johnson. You direct the Department, Mr. Pizarchik. Has
your Department conducted any scientific analysis? You are
talking about setting aside a five-year in-the-making rule. And
you don't know whether your Department has conducted analysis
of that rule before going and spending millions of taxpayer
dollars to rewrite it?
Mr. Pizarchik. We know that the practices that that rule
provides in place have a deleterious effect on the
environment----
Mr. Johnson. So have you conducted any scientific analysis
on that rule?
Mr. Pizarchik. There have been scientific----
Mr. Johnson. Well, you just said no just a minute ago. And
so now you are saying that there is. What is the answer? Has
there been scientific analysis on the 2008 rule?
Mr. Pizarchik. There has been scientific analysis on the
practices that are codified in the 2008 rule.
Mr. Johnson. How could it be so, because it hasn't been
implemented?
Mr. Pizarchik. Because a number of those practices that the
2008 codifies were being done under a guidance policy before.
Now there is a regulation. So it is, in essence, codifying a
practice that was inconsistent with a statute that has been
going on for years, as I believe Chairman Lamborn had mentioned
earlier, that many of these practices go back--and it seems to
be, if you look at it from a logical standpoint, is
inconsistent with the statutory requirements.
Mr. Johnson. OK. I am not sure I understood what you just
said. Maybe some of my colleagues can explain it to me later.
But I don't know how you can do scientific analysis on a rule
that hasn't yet been implemented.
Yes, and the guidance, the guidance policy, was shot down
by the court. So I am not sure I understand, but let's move on.
Two weeks ago I asked Secretary Salazar if threatening
extreme consequences for following an agreed-upon Statement of
Work was something that is a normal practice at the Department
of the Interior. As you well know, I was referring to the
threat of extreme consequences that you made through an OSM
employee to the contracting team.
First, will you confirm that you made that statement?
Mr. Pizarchik. I don't believe I made that----
Mr. Johnson. All right. Well, let's see a chart here. We
have got a slide. Maybe I can refresh your memory. Take a look
at the pink section of that slide there, Mr. Pizarchik.
Mr. Pizarchik. I am sorry, but I can't read it from here.
Mr. Johnson. OK. I will read it for you.
Mr. Lamborn. Representative Johnson, while he looks at that
maybe someone could yield time to you in a----
Mr. Johnson. Go ahead.
Mr. Lamborn. At the--before the----
Mr. Johnson. I yield back.
Mr. Lamborn [continuing]. Finish of this round. OK, thank
you.
Representative Tonko of New York.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you, Mr. Chair. One of the witnesses, Mr.
Director, on our second panel is expressing strong objections
to the Administration's proposal to terminate the Abandoned
Mine Land emergency fund in the Fiscal Year 2013 budget. Why is
the Administration eliminating this funding stream?
Mr. Pizarchik. Are you referring to the----
Mr. Tonko. The AML emergency fund.
Mr. Pizarchik. Well, actually, the AML emergency Federal--
OSM emergency program was eliminated in 2012 and it is not
included in the 2013. The 2013 proposes to change how the AML
funds are distributed from the certified States, to eliminate
funding to them.
Mr. Tonko. Well, the Administration, then, is proposing to
move AML reclamation--the reclamation program to a competitive
grant process?
Mr. Pizarchik. Yes, yes. That is not the emergency, that--
well, I guess it would be the emergency--yes. The
Administration has proposed to do that, in order to provide for
the most dangerous sites to be reclaimed.
Mr. Tonko. OK. Now, did the Administration consider other
possible allocation mechanisms for focusing these funds on
high-priority sites?
Mr. Pizarchik. As I understand it, they were basing it on
the experience and practice that they had with BLM, and we are
looking at the competitive process as being the best one suited
for that. I don't know if other processes were considered.
Mr. Tonko. And in your view, is there any risk that this
new process would slow the pace of reclamation?
Mr. Pizarchik. In my view, if it is implemented the way I
think it should be, it should not, because it would be based on
the work that the States have already begun, because it usually
takes several years from the time they want to do a project to
complete it. And the most efficient way to do that is to use,
as the basis, this work that the States have already completed,
the emergency projects that they are working on, and they are
already working on the most dangerous sites.
So now, by using that work, we could find out which is the
most dangerous of all the State ones and get those done first.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you. I yield back, Mr. Chair.
Mr. Lamborn. All right, thank you. Representative Benishek?
Dr. Benishek. Well, I was enjoying Mr. Johnson's testimony
there, and I would like to yield my time to him.
Mr. Johnson. I thank the gentleman for yielding.
Mr. Pizarchik, I gave you a copy of a document there. Would
you please read the part that is highlighted that page?
Mr. Pizarchik. Yes. It is John Craynon, Wednesday, December
15, 2010, at 3:17 p.m. And there is another part that is
highlighted. It says, ``As per my meeting with OSM Director Joe
Pizarchik, no part of the SPR rule text or the EIS are to be
sent to any parties for the purposes of the EIS preparation at
any time. He indicated that this direction is non-negotiable,
and that violations would have extreme consequences.''
Mr. Johnson. What exactly did you mean when you threatened
``extreme consequences''?
Mr. Pizarchik. I did not threaten extreme consequences. I--
--
Mr. Johnson. That is what this email says.
Mr. Pizarchik. Yes, and I----
Mr. Johnson. One of your employees testified to this.
Mr. Pizarchik [continuing]. Copied on that email, and I
just----
Mr. Johnson. Hold on. Either your employee has lied, or you
said this. So which is it?
Mr. Pizarchik. I don't believe it is either of those, sir.
I believe the employee----
Mr. Johnson. Wait a minute, Mr. Pizarchik. We are looking
at a piece of paper from your Department in an email from one
of your employees where you threatened extreme consequences.
And you are saying that is not true?
First you ask us to believe what we can't see. I mean what
we can't hear. Now you are asking us to believe what we see--or
disbelieve what we see.
Mr. Pizarchik. Well, as I said, I didn't write that email.
I don't believe I ever made that----
Mr. Johnson. OK.
Mr. Pizarchik. I am certainly experiencing the severe
consequences.
Mr. Johnson. Is it safe to say that the extreme
consequences that you were referring to would be to fire the
contractors and to pay them the full price at the cost of
millions of taxpayer dollars?
Mr. Pizarchik. No.
Mr. Johnson. OK, thank you. Mr. Chairman, I want to get to
one other question.
Earlier, when the Ranking Member of the Full Committee was
questioning you, he asked you questions about how the
legislation that was passed by the Committee last week would
affect your ability to release and issue regulations. And you
said that it would adversely affect your ability to issue
regulations as they related to--and I think one of the areas
was something to do with ash. Would you restate that?
Mr. Pizarchik. I am sorry, I----
Mr. Johnson. He was talking about H.R. 3409, and the fact
that you maintain that it would impede your ability to issue
any regulation. And you gave several examples, and one of those
had to do with ash, or placement of ash, or something like
that.
Mr. Pizarchik. Right.
Mr. Johnson. OK. Restate that, please.
Mr. Pizarchik. I am not understanding----
Mr. Johnson. OK. Then let's go back. How would H.R. 3409
impede your ability to implement any regulation?
Mr. Pizarchik. As I understand it, from how it has been
portrayed, is that that bill would prohibit us from doing any
regulations that could impact coal jobs, that could impact
lands' unsuitable designation, like a petition we have in
Tennessee right now, and that would have any adverse impact on,
as I understood it, coal being available. And if we are not
able to proceed with regulations in this particular area, it
could have an impact on how the ash is used on the site that
could adversely affect the economics of----
Mr. Johnson. OK. How ash is used on site. OK? How would
``how ash is used on site'' adversely impact employment in coal
mines? Because you said just a few minutes ago that it was
going to increase jobs, because it would take more people to do
that work. Right? If you had to----
Mr. Pizarchik. No, I didn't say that at all.
Mr. Johnson. OK. Explain to me, then.
Mr. Pizarchik. Well, as I understand it, in some instances,
instead of disposing of ash at a landfill, the ash can be
beneficially used on the mine site, and that they pay an
operator to take the ash to use it on the mine site. If the
operator is not able to be paid to use the ash on its mine
site, that could affect their economics of that particular
mine.
Similarly, if the operator cannot sell its coal to a power
plant because the power plant requires the ash to go back to
the coal company, and the coal company has no place to place
the ash, they would not have a market for their coal. They
don't have a market for their coal, they don't have jobs for
their employees.
Mr. Johnson. Mr. Chairman, I am going to summarize, I
think. You know, I want to commend you and the chairman of the
Full Committee, Mr. Hastings, for digging deep for the answers
to this important issue, and the questions we are asking.
We are clearly not getting direct or timely answers from
OSM. And Director Pizarchik's testimony today only confirms
that we need to keep digging deeper.
As I said before, where there is smoke there is fire. And
there is a ton of smoke coming from this rulemaking process. In
another bow by this President to extreme environmentalists, OSM
has undertaken this massive rewrite of the stream buffer zone
rule that could cost hundreds of thousands direct and indirect
jobs in the coal industry as we know it, and stop any economic
recovery in its tracks with skyrocketing electricity prices.
Until we get all of the answers from OSM on this rulemaking
process, it would seem to me to be irresponsible for the
Administration to go forward with the rule. However, it is
clear that the President is only interested in this year's
reelection this November, and is not worried about protecting
the jobs of hardworking men and women that go to work every day
in the coal industry and the many related industries. That is
why my legislation is so important, because it would simply
stop the President from going forward with a new stream buffer
zone rule until the end of 2013.
And as you know, my legislation received bipartisan support
in Committee, and I expect it will receive bipartisan support
once it comes to the full House for consideration later this
year.
Thank you again, Mr. Chairman. And with that, I yield back
the balance of my time.
Mr. Lamborn. OK, thank you. Mr. Amodei of Nevada.
Mr. Amodei. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Director, I am a
new guy here, so I am sure you aren't intimately familiar with
me. But I come from this place where we do a little bit of
minerals extraction and the hardrock process in Nevada.
And so, my questions are going to be just focused on the
proposed merger. Can you tell me what your knowledge is of the
reclamation programs of the Nevada Division of Environmental
Protection, as they presently exist?
Mr. Pizarchik. I am not familiar with that at all, sir.
Mr. Amodei. OK, I appreciate that. So when we talk about
merger with BLM and OSM, obviously BLM is a major Federal land
manager in the State of Nevada. They have been involved in
permitting and things like that in partnership with the State
Division of Environmental Protection out there. And some of us
happen to think that they are doing a pretty good job regarding
reclamation and surety requirements and all those things
associated with surface mining in the State of Nevada.
So, when I hear about the merger of your entity with BLM
for purposes of that in a State that I happen to think is doing
a pretty good job of evolving through the years, making
environmentally responsible decisions and policies about
reclamation and sureties and things to make sure that happens,
I am just wondering if there is anything on your radar screen
in the context of the proposed merger that indicates there is a
problem in Nevada with reclamation of surface operations there
that the merger would--puts you in a unique--your organization
in a unique opportunity to address.
Mr. Pizarchik. Congressman Amodei, I am not aware of that.
My understanding of the proposal to consolidate OSM and BLM was
for efficiencies, and to try to get a different way to lower
the cost of government, to be more efficient. But I am not
personally aware of any issues in Nevada on how the----
Mr. Amodei. OK.
Mr. Pizarchik [continuing]. Program is implemented by BLM.
Mr. Amodei. Thank you very much. Appreciate that. Yield
back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Lamborn. All right, thank you. And finally, unless
someone else shows up, Representative Thompson.
Mr. Thompson. Thank you, Chairman. Director Pizarchik, in
your testimony you suggested as the U.S. continues to reduce
our reliance on foreign oil, coal will continue to play an
important role in meeting our domestic demand. Now, there was a
stark contrast to that. As a result of the President's
policies, we had a terrible announcement last week about a
coal-fired power plant that has been producing affordable and
reliable energy for many years--and, frankly, some really good
jobs, direct and indirect jobs--plans for that plant to close
under the crushing pressure of the regulations and the
bureaucracy that have been layered on it by this
Administration.
But that said, I appreciate your testimony, where you
acknowledge that. I know you have been involved in the coal
industry throughout your life and that your observation will
continue to play a role in meeting our domestic demand. With
that in mind, does the Obama Administration support coal-to-
liquid technology and facilities, or clean coal technology,
or----
Mr. Pizarchik. I believe that the Obama Administration has
put more money into clean coal technology than any previous
Administration. In fact, I believe we--the Obama
Administration--has put more money in the clean coal technology
than any country in the world has. I think it was in the
neighborhood of $3.5 billion that has been put into clean coal
technology. And you don't make that kind of an investment into
coal if you have the belief that coal won't be around.
I don't know all the ins and outs of it. I am not a clean
coal engineer, or expert in that, but I do understand that
there has been more money put into clean coal technology by the
Obama Administration than anybody else.
Mr. Thompson. Yes. Well, unfortunately, that announcement
last week, and that was not the only one that was announced,
that was the one that obviously struck home for me, in my
congressional district. It is not having an impact of moving
us, I think, away from what is a very affordable and reliable
energy, in terms of coal.
In your discussion of the AML reclamation program reform
proposals, you talked about eliminating the unrestricted
payments to certify States and Tribes that have completed
reclamation. Have you performed any kind of analysis on how
this change might impact the overall reclamation efforts? I
mean obviously we have lots of abandoned mine lands yet to be
addressed.
Mr. Pizarchik. We have looked into that a bit. Most of that
certified money is coming out of the general treasury, so it
would not be a reduction in money that was being used for
abandoned mine lands. And for example, some of the certified
states who have been receiving funds in--let's take Wyoming.
They have received, I believe, over $322 million that they
haven't spent on anything yet, as I understand it, and another
$150 million from last year.
So, I don't know how they plan to use it. The law gives
them a great deal of flexibility to use it. But from that
standpoint, it is clear that some of this money is just
accumulating, it is not being utilized by the certified States.
Now, in regards to some of the other ones, I know in
Montana there has been an interest to be able to use the
certified money and some other monies for reclamation of
abandoned hardrock mines, and to have limited liability
protection. And the Secretary had just informed Senator Tester,
I believe last week, that we are going to go forward with a
rulemaking to modify our regulations so that the State of
Montana and others who have AML monies, that they could use
that for the reclamation of the abandoned hardrock mines.
But we still think that the best approach is not to take
money from the coal industry to use to reclaim hardrock mines,
but to create a comprehensive program for the reclamation of
abandoned hardrock mines, to provide an adequate and sustained
funding level from the hardrock mining industry to deal with
those thousands of abandoned underground mines, and the
polluted water, and the pollution from all of those abandoned
hardrock mines.
Mr. Thompson. The monies that we are talking about weren't
part of the 2006 amendments to SMCRA. Frankly, it is the
States' and the Tribes' money that we are talking about? I mean
the 2006 amendments to SMCRA, didn't it clearly designate that?
Mr. Pizarchik. As I understand what precipitated the 2006
amendments was the collection of the AML monies, and the money
not being appropriated under the old formula to the States and
Tribes. And as part of the compromise in 2006--again, it is
just my understanding of it--was that in lieu of getting that
money that had not been appropriated to those States, certified
States and Tribes, that that money was going to be used by
other States who still had abandoned coal problems to reclaim.
And to offset that, there would be appropriations, or money
coming out of the general treasury, to go to those certified
States and Tribes.
It is a matter of perspective. Some of those folks believe
it was their money. Some other folks, it wasn't. And I think
you could reach either answer, depending on where you stand and
look at the issue. It was a compromise, as I understand it, in
order to allow for the reauthorization, and to address the
money that hadn't been appropriated.
That was also what led to the mandatory distribution so
that the money that had accumulated would not be sitting in
Washington, but would be actually dispensed to the States to
use for what it was intended. And that has carried over, and
that mandatory provision provides for non-discretion on our
part. Every year we distribute what we collect out to the
States, pursuant to the new formula.
Mr. Thompson. Well, I appreciate your explanation. But, I
mean, I can see where there is confusion and controversy, just
given your explanation of what was supposed to be funded, what
wasn't funded, who--what money was taken from where.
Mr. Pizarchik. It is very complex.
Mr. Thompson. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Lamborn. OK, thank you. I want to thank the Director
for being here. These are serious issues. We appreciate your
time before the Subcommittee.
Members of the Subcommittee may have additional questions
for the record, and I would ask that you respond to those in
writing. Thank you for being here.
Mr. Pizarchik. You are welcome. And thank you for inviting
me. I appreciate your interest in OSM and our budget and
rulemaking. You have certainly heightened the public awareness
of our work. I appreciate that.
Mr. Lamborn. You are welcome. Thank you.
OK, I would now like to ask unanimous consent to submit for
the record a report by ENVIRON on the impacts of the proposed
stream buffer zone rulemaking into the record of today's
hearing.
[No response.]
Mr. Lamborn. Hearing no objection, so ordered.
[The ENVIRON report submitted for the record by Mr. Lamborn
has been retained in the Committee's official files.]
Mr. Lamborn. And now I would like to invite our second
panel to come forward. It consists of Ms. Madeline Roanhorse,
President of the National Association of Abandoned Mine Land
Programs; Mr. Gregory Conrad, Executive Director of the
Interstate Mining Compact Commission; and Mr. Matt Wasson,
Director of Programs for Appalachian Voices.
Your written testimony will appear in full in the hearing
record, so I ask that you keep your oral statements to five
minutes, as outlined in our invitation letter to you, and under
Committee Rule 4(a). Our microphones are not automatic, so you
need to turn them on when you are ready to begin.
And here is how our timing lights work. When you begin to
speak, a timer and a green light will come on. After four
minutes, a yellow light will appear. And at that time you
should conclude your statement, begin to conclude your
statement. And at five minutes the red light comes on.
And I will be giving the gavel momentarily to
Representative Johnson, but we will begin the testimony. Thank
you all for being here.
And, Ms. Roanhorse, you may begin.

STATEMENT OF MADELINE ROANHORSE, PRESIDENT, NATIONAL
ASSOCIATION OF ABANDONED MINE LAND PROGRAMS

Ms. Roanhorse. My name is Madeline Roanhorse. I am the
manager of the AML reclamation/UMTRA Department for the Navajo
Nation. I am appearing here today on behalf of the National
Association of Abandoned Mine Lands Program [sic], referred to
as AML Association.
AML Association represents 30 States and Tribes Federally
approved abandoned mine lands program authorized under the
Surface Mining Control and Reclamation Act. Based on the SMCRA
fee collections, the Fiscal Year 2013 mandatory appropriation
for State and Tribal AML grants should be $480 million.
Instead, OSM has only budgeted $307 million, a reduction of
$180 million. This reduction would primarily be accomplished by
eliminating funding for those States and Tribes that have
successfully certified completion of their highest-priority
coal reclamation sites.
From the beginning of SMCRA in 1977 to the latest--to 2006,
Congress promised that at least half of the money generated
from the fees collected within the boundaries of a State or
Tribe--referred to as State or Tribal share--would be returned
for use as described in the Act.
For certified States and Tribes, the Tribes' share funds
can be used for environmental stewardship. Cleaning up
abandoned coal and hardrock mines, sustainable development,
infrastructure improvements, alternative energy projects all
stimulate economic activity, protecting public health and
safety, creating green jobs, and improving the environment.
Each of these specific goals have been embraced by the
Administration. Breaking the promise of the State and Tribal
share funding will upset 10 years on negotiation that resulted
in the balanced compromise achieved in the 2006 amendments to
SMCRA. We, therefore, respectfully request the Committee to
continue funding for certified States and Tribes at the
statutory authorized level, and turn back any efforts to amend
SMCRA in this regard.
The proposed budget would also provide no funding for the
Federal AML emergency program. Section 410 of SMCRA was
unchanged by the 2006 amendments. It requires OSM to fund the
emergency AML program.
Additionally, the Act does not allow States and Tribes to
fund an emergency program from their own AML grants. On the
contrary, it requires strict compliance with non-emergency
funding priorities. If Congress allows the elimination of the
emergency program, States and Tribes will have to set aside
large portions of their non-emergency AML grant funds to be
prepared for future emergencies. This will result in the funds
being diverted from other high-priority projects. It will also
present special challenges for program States, since they have
to have to save multiple years of funding in order to address a
single emergency, thereby delaying work on other projects. For
these reasons and many others, we urge the Committee to restore
funding for the AML emergency program in 2013.
Finally, we oppose OSM's proposal to drastically remove the
distribution process for AML funds to non-certified States
through a competitive grant program. This proposal will
completely undermine the balance of interest, and objectives
achieved by the 2006 amendments. Among other things, the
proposal will cede authority for both emergency and non-
emergency funding decisions to an advisory council.
Aside from time delays associated with this approach, it
leaves many unanswered questions regarding the continued
ability of State and Tribal AML programs where they do not win
in the bidding process. It also upsets the predictability of
AML funding for long-term project planning. We urge the
Subcommittee to reject this unjustified proposal. Delete it
from the budget. Restore the full mandatory funding amount of
$480 million.
A resolution to this effect adopted by the Association is
attached to my testimony, as is a comprehensive list of
questions regarding the legislative proposal. I respectfully
request that they include in the record of this hearing.
Thank you for the opportunity to present our views this
morning. I would be happy to answer any questions that you may
have. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Roanhorse follows:]

Statement of Madeline Roanhorse, Manager, AML Reclamation/UMTRA
Department, Navajo Nation, on Behalf of the National Association of
Abandoned Mine Land Programs

My name is Madeline Roanhorse and I serve as the Manager of the AML
Reclamation/UMTRA Department with the Navajo Nation. I am appearing
today on behalf of the National Association of Abandoned Mine Land
Programs (NAAMLP) The NAAMLP represents 30 states and tribes with
federally approved abandoned mine land reclamation (AML) programs
authorized under Title IV of the Surface Mining Control and Reclamation
Act (SMCRA). My testimony today will focus primarily on the Title IV
AML program under SMCRA.
Title IV of SMCRA was amended in 2006 and significantly changed how
state and tribal AML grants are funded. These grants are still based on
receipts from a fee on coal production, but beginning in FY 2008, the
grants are funded primarily by mandatory appropriations. As a result,
the states and tribes should receive $488 million in FY 2013. In its FY
2013 budget, OSM is requesting $307 million for state and tribal AML
grants, a reduction of $180 million. OSM's budget also includes a
legislative proposal for the establishment of a competitive grant
process that would allegedly improve AML program efficiency. The
legislative proposal would also eliminate funding to states and tribes
that have ``certified'' completion of their highest priority coal
reclamation sites. I appreciate the opportunity to testify before the
Subcommittee and outline some of the reasons why NAAMLP adamantly
opposes OSM's proposed FY 2013 budget.
Over the past 30 years, the accomplishments of the states and
tribes under the AML program has resulted in tens of thousands of acres
of abandoned mine lands having been reclaimed, thousands of mine
openings having been closed, and safeguards for people, property and
the environment having been put in place. Be assured that states and
tribes continue to be committed to address the unabated hazards at both
coal and non-coal abandoned mines. We are all united to play an
important role in achieving the goals and objectives as set forth by
Congress when SMCRA was first enacted--including protecting public
health and safety, enhancing the environment, providing employment, and
adding to the economies of communities impacted by past coal and
noncoal mining.
SMCRA was passed in 1977 and set national regulatory and
reclamation standards for coal mining. The Act also established a
Reclamation Fund to work towards eliminating the innumerable health,
safety and environmental problems that exist throughout the Nation from
the mines that were abandoned prior to the Act. The Fund generates
revenue through a fee on current coal production. This fee is collected
by OSM and distributed to states and tribes that have federally
approved regulatory and AML programs. The promise Congress made in
1977, and with every subsequent amendment to the Act, was that, at a
minimum, half the money generated from fees collected by OSM on coal
mined within the boundaries of a state or tribe, referred to as ``State
Share'', would be returned for the uses described in Title IV of the
Act if the state or tribe assumed responsibility for regulating active
coal mining operations pursuant to Title V of SMCRA. The 2006
Amendments clarified the scope of what the State Share funds could be
used for and reaffirmed the promise made by Congress in 1977.
If a state or tribe was successful in completing reclamation of
abandoned coal mines and was able to ``certify'' under Section 411 of
SMCRA, then the State Share funds could be used to address a myriad of
other abandoned mine issues as defined under each state's or tribe's
approved Abandoned Mine Reclamation Plan. These Abandoned Mine
Reclamation Plans are approved by the Office of Surface Mining and they
ensure that the work is in accordance with the intent of SMCRA. Like
all abandoned mine reclamation, the work of certified states and tribes
eliminates health and safety problems, cleans up the environment, and
creates jobs in rural areas impacted by mining.
The elimination of funding for certified state and tribal AML
grants not only breaks the promise of State and Tribal Share funding,
but upsets the balance and compromise that was achieved in the
comprehensive restructuring of SMCRA accomplished by the 2006
Amendments following more than ten years of discussion and negotiation
by all affected parties. The funding reduction is inconsistent with the
Administration's stated goals regarding jobs and environmental
protection. We therefore respectively ask the Subcommittee to support
continued funding for certified states and tribes at the statutorily
authorized levels, and turn back any efforts to amend SMCRA in this
regard.
In addition to the $180 million reduction for certified states and
tribes, the proposed FY 2013 budget perpetuates the termination of
federal funding for the AML emergency program, leaving the states and
tribes to rely on funds received through their non-emergency AML grant
funds. This contradicts the 2006 amendments, which require the states
and tribes to maintain ``strict compliance'' with the non-emergency
funding priorities described in Section 403(a), while leaving Section
410, Emergency Powers, unchanged. Section 410 of SMCRA requires OSM to
fund the emergency AML program using OSM's ``discretionary share''
under Section (402)(g)(3)(B), which is entirely separate from state and
tribal non-emergency AML grant funding under Sections (402)(g)(1),
(g)(2), and (g)(5). SMCRA does not allow states and tribes to
administer or fund an AML emergency program from their non-emergency
AML grants, although, since 1989, fifteen states have agreed to
implement the emergency program on behalf of OSM contingent upon OSM
providing full funding for the work. As a result, OSM has been able to
fulfill their mandated obligation more cost effectively and
efficiently.
Regardless of whether a state/tribe or OSM operates the emergency
program, only OSM has the authority to ``declare'' the emergency and
clear the way for the expedited procedures to be implemented. In FY
2011, OSM issued guidance to the states that the agency ``will no
longer declare emergencies.'' OSM provided no legal or statutory
support for its position. Instead, OSM has ``transitioned''
responsibility for emergencies to the states and tribes with the
expectation that they will utilize non-emergency AML funding to address
them. OSM will simply ``assist the states and tribes with the projects,
as needed''. Of course, given that OSM has proposed to eliminate all
funding for certified states and tribes, it begs the question of how
and to what extent OSM will continue to assist these states and tribes.
If Congress continues to allow the elimination of emergency program
funding, states and tribes will have to adjust to their new role by
setting aside a large portion of their non-emergency AML funds so that
they can be prepared for any emergency that may arise. Emergency
projects come in all shapes and sizes, vary in number from year to year
and range in cost from thousands of dollars to millions of dollars.
Requiring states and tribes to fund emergencies will result in funds
being diverted from other high priority projects and delay
certification under Section 411, thereby increasing the backlog of
projects on the Abandoned Mine Land Inventory System (AMLIS). For
minimum program states and states with small AML programs, large
emergency projects will require the states to redirect all or most of
their AML resources to address the emergency, thereby delaying other
high-priority reclamation. With the loss of stable emergency program
funding, minimum program states will have a difficult, if not
impossible, time planning, budgeting, and prosecuting the abatement of
their high priority AML problems. In a worst-case scenario, a minimum
program state would not be able to address a costly emergency in a
timely fashion, and would have to ``save up'' multiple years of funding
before even initiating the work to abate the emergency, in the meantime
ignoring all other high priority work.
OSM's proposed budget suggests addressing emergencies, and all
other projects, as part of a competitive grant process whereby states
and tribes compete for funding based on the findings of the proposed
AML Advisory Council. OSM believes that a competitive grant process
would concentrate funds on the highest priority projects. While a
competitive grant process may seem to make sense at first blush,
further reflection reveals that the entire premise is faulty and can
only undermine and upend the deliberate funding mechanism established
by Congress in the 2006 Amendments. Since the inception of SMCRA, high
priority problems have always taken precedence over other projects. The
focus on high priorities was further clarified in the 2006 Amendments
by removing the lower priority problems from the Act and requiring
``strict compliance'' with high priority funding requirements. OSM
already approves projects as meeting the definition of high priority
under its current review process and therefore an AML Advisory Council
would only add redundancy and bureaucracy instead of improving
efficiency.
Based on our understanding of OSM's legislative proposal, there are
a myriad of potential problems and implications for the entire AML
program. They include the following:

Has anyone alleged or confirmed that the states/
tribes are NOT already addressing the highest priority sites?
Where have the 2006 Amendments faltered in terms of high
priority sites being addressed as envisioned by Congress? What
would remain unchanged in the 2006 Amendments under OSM's
proposal?

If the current AML funding formula is scrapped, what
amount will be paid out to the non-certified AML states and
tribes over the remainder of the program? What does OSM mean by
the term ``remaining funds'' in its proposal? Is it only the
AML fees yet to be collected? What happens to the historic
share balances in the Fund, including those that were supposed
to be re-directed to the Fund based on an equivalent amount of
funding being paid to certified states and tribes each year?
Would the ``remaining funds'' include the unappropriated/prior
balance amounts that have not yet been paid out over the seven-
year installment period?

Will this new competitive grant process introduce an
additional level of bureaucracy and result in more funds being
spent formulating proposals and less on actual AML reclamation?
The present funding formula allows states and tribes to
undertake long-term strategic planning and efficiently use
available funds.

How long will OSM fund a state's/tribe's
administrative costs if it does not successfully compete for a
construction grant, even though the state/tribe has eligible
high priority projects? How will OSM calculate administrative
grant funding levels, especially since salaries and benefits
for AML project managers and inspectors predominantly derive
from construction funds? Would funding cover current staffing
levels? If not, how will OSM determine the funding criteria for
administrative program grants?

How does OSM expect the states and tribes to handle
emergency projects under the legislative proposal? Must these
projects undergo review by the Advisory Council? Will there be
special, expedited procedures? If a state/tribe has to cut back
on staff, how does it manage emergencies when they arise? If
emergency programs do compete for AML funds, considerable time
and effort could be spent preparing these projects for review
by the Advisory Council rather than abating the immediate
hazard. Again, how can we be assured that emergencies will be
addressed expeditiously?

One of the greatest benefits of reauthorization under
the 2006 Amendments to SMCRA was the predictability of funding
levels through the end of the AML program. Because states and
tribes were provided with hypothetical funding levels from OSM,
long-term project planning, along with the establishment of
appropriate staffing levels and project assignments, could be
made accurately and efficiently. How can states/tribes plan for
future projects given the inherent uncertainty associated with
having to annually bid for AML funds?
Given these uncertainties and the negative implications for the
accomplishment of AML work under Title IV of SMCRA, Congress should
reject the proposed amendments to SMCRA as being counterproductive to
the purposes of SMCRA and an inefficient use of funds. We request that
Congress continue mandatory funding for certified states and tribes and
provide funding for AML emergencies. A resolution to this effect
adopted by NAAMLP last year is attached, as is a more comprehensive
list of questions concerning the legislative proposal. We ask that they
be included in the record of the hearing.
On a somewhat related matter, there appears to be increasing
concern by some in Washington that the states and tribes are not
spending the increased AML grant moneys that they have received under
the 2006 Amendments in a more expeditious manner, thus resulting in
what the Administration has characterized as unacceptable levels of
``undelivered orders''. What these figures and statements fail to
reflect is the degree to which AML grant moneys are obligated or
otherwise committed for AML reclamation work as part of the normal
grant process. Most AML grants are either three or five years in length
and over that course of time, the states and tribes are in a continual
process of planning, bidding and contracting for specific AML projects.
Some projects are multi-layered and require extended periods of time to
complete this process before a shovel is turned at the AML site. And
where federal funding is concerned, additional time is necessary to
complete the myriad statutory approvals for AML work to begin,
including compliance with the National Environmental Policy Act and the
National Historic Preservation Act.
In almost every case, however, based on the extensive planning that
the states and tribes undertake, AML grant funds are committed to
specific projects even while clearances and bidding are underway. While
funds may not technically be ``obligated'' because they are not yet
``drawn down'', these funds are committed for specific purposes. Once
committed, states and tribes consider this grant money to be obligated
to the respective project, even though the ``order'' had not been
``delivered'' and the funds actually ``drawn down''. The latter can
only occur once the project is completed, which will often be several
years later, depending on the size and complexity of the project. We
would be happy to provide the Subcommittee with more detailed
information about our grant expenditures and project planning in order
to answer any questions you may have about how we account for and spend
our AML grant moneys. Given the confusion that often attends the
various terms used to describe the grant expenditure process, we
believe it is critical that Congress hear directly from the states and
tribes on this matter and not rely solely on the Administration's
statements and analyses. We welcome the opportunity to brief your
Subcommittee in more detail regarding this issue should you so desire.
One of the more effective mechanisms for accomplishing AML
restoration work is through leveraging or matching other grant
programs, such as EPA's 319 program. Until FY 2009, language was always
included in OSM's appropriation that encouraged the use of these types
of matching funds, particularly for the purpose of environmental
restoration related to treatment or abatement of acid mind drainage
(AMD) from abandoned mines. This is an ongoing, and often expensive,
problem, especially in Appalachia. NAAMLP therefore requests the
Subcommittee to support the inclusion of language in the FY 2013
appropriations bill that would allow the use of AML funds for any non-
Federal cost-share required by the Federal government for AMD treatment
or abatement.
We also urge the Subcommittee to support funding for OSM's training
program and TIPS, including moneys for state/tribal travel. These
programs are central to the effective implementation of state and
tribal AML programs as they provide necessary training and continuing
education for state/tribal agency personnel, as well as critical
technical assistance. Finally, we support funding for the Watershed
Cooperative Agreements in the amount of $1.2 million because it
facilitates and enhances state and local partnerships by providing
direct financial assistance to watershed organizations for acid mine
drainage remediation.
To the extent that the Subcommittee desires to pursue changes to
SMCRA to improve or clarify the operation of the AML program, the
states and tribes would recommend looking at three areas: 1) the use of
unappropriated state and tribal share balances to address noncoal AML
and acid mine drainage (AMD) projects; 2) the limited liability
protections for noncoal AML work at section 405(l) of SMCRA; and 3) an
amendment to Section 413(d) regarding liability under the Clean Water
Act for acid mine drainage projects. In this regard, Mr. Chairman, we
were very encouraged that the full House Committee on Natural Resources
last week passed S. 897, which is identical to H.R. 785 introduced by
Rep. Pearce of New Mexico. As we noted in testimony presented to the
Subcommittee on February 17 at a legislative hearing on H.R. 785, the
bill will return states and tribes to their longstanding role under
SMCRA of directing abandoned mine grant funds to the highest priority
needs at either coal or non-coal abandoned mines and allow us to
designate additional moneys to address acid mine drainage concerns. It
will also correct a misinterpretation by the Interior Department in its
final rules implementing the 2006 Amendments to SMCRA that barred the
states and tribes from using AML monies for these valid and worthy
purposes.
States and Tribes are very familiar with the highest priority non-
coal problems within their borders and also have limited reclamation
dollars to protect public health and safety or protect the environment
from significant harm. States and tribes work closely with various
federal agencies, including the Environmental Protection Agency, the
Bureau of Land Management, the U.S. Forest Service, and the U.S. Army
Corps of Engineers, all of whom have provided some funding for non-coal
mine remediation projects. For states with coal mining, the most
consistent source of AML funding has been the Title IV grants received
under SMCRA. Section 409 of SMCRA allows states to use these grants at
high priority non-coal AML sites. The funding is generally limited to
safeguarding hazards to public safety (e.g., closing mine openings) at
non-coal sites.
The urgency of advancing the legislation passed by the full
Committee has been heightened by statements in OSM's proposed budget
for Fiscal Year 2013. Therein, OSM is proposing to further restrict the
ability of states to expend AML funds on noncoal reclamation projects.
This will apparently occur as part of a legislative proposal that the
Administration intends to aggressively pursue in the 112th Congress.
While the primary focus of that proposal will be the elimination of
future AML funding for states and tribes that are certified under Title
IV of SMCRA (which we adamantly oppose), OSM's proposal will also
substantially restructure the method by which AML funds are distributed
to the states in an effort to ``direct the available reclamation funds
to the highest priority coal AML sites across the Nation.''
S. 897 would also address a similar restriction on the use of the
unappropriated state and tribal share balances for the Acid Mine
Drainage (AMD) set-aside program under SMCRA. Congress expanded this
program in the 2006 Amendments to allow states and tribes to set-aside
up to 30% of their grants funds for treating AMD now and into the
future. AMD has ravaged many streams throughout the country, but
especially in Appalachia. The states need the ability to set aside as
much funding as possible to deal with these problems over the long
term. Again, OSM has acted arbitrarily in their interpretation of the
reauthorizing language by limiting the types of funds the state may use
for the set-aside program. S. 897 includes language that would correct
this misinterpretation and allow the states to apply the 30% set-aside
to their prior balance replacement funds and as such we strongly
support it. We are hopeful that the full House of Representatives will
act on S. 897 in the near future.
Another suggested amendment is needed to clarify a further
misinterpretation of SMCRA contained in OSM's final rules of November
14, 2008. Section 405(l) of SMCRA provides that, except for acts of
gross negligence or intentional misconduct, ``no state (or tribe) shall
be liable under any provisions of Federal law for any costs or damages
as a result of action taken or omitted in the course of carrying out a
state abandoned mine reclamation plan approved under this section.'' In
its rules, OSM concluded that because of the language of SMCRA,
including the generally unrestricted nature of the Title IV funds
provided to certified states and tribes in Sections 411(h)(1) and (2),
certified states and tribes can no longer conduct noncoal reclamation
or other projects under Title IV of SMCRA (73 Fed. Reg. 67613). Thus,
to the extent that certified states and tribes choose to conduct
noncoal reclamation, OSM asserts that they do so outside of SMCRA and
OSM's regulations, including the limited liability provisions of
Section 405(l) of the Act.
This strained reading of the 2006 Amendments is having severe
consequences for certified states and tribes conducting AML work
pursuant to their otherwise-approved state programs. Without this
limited liability protection, these states and tribes potentially
subject themselves to liability under the Clean Water Act and CERCLA
for their AML reclamation work. Nothing in the 2006 Amendments
suggested that there was a desire or intent to remove these liability
protections, and without them in place, certified states and tribes
will need to potentially reconsider at least some of their more
critical AML projects. We therefore recommend that the Subcommittee
consider an amendment to SMCRA that would clarify that the 2006
Amendments were not intended to affect the applicability of section
405(l) to AML projects undertaken by certified states and tribes. We
would welcome an opportunity to work with you to craft appropriate
legislative language at an appropriate time to accomplish this.
Finally, we recommend an adjustment to Section 413(d) of SMCRA to
clarify that acid mine drainage projects which are eligible for AML
funding under Section 404 of the Act, including systems for the control
or treatment of AMD, are not subject to the water quality provisions of
the Federal Water Pollution Control Act. This amendment is necessary to
address a November 8, 2010 decision by the U.S. Court of Appeals for
the Fourth Circuit, which decreed that the Clean Water Act's NPDES
permitting requirements apply to anyone who discharges pollutants into
the waters of the United States, regardless of whether that entity is
private or public in nature. More specifically, the court noted that
``the statute contains no exceptions for state agencies engaging in
reclamation efforts; to the contrary, it explicitly includes them
within its scope.''
The result of this far-reaching decision by the Fourth Circuit will
be to require some, if not all, state and tribal AML reclamation
projects to obtain NPDES permits before work can commence. This will be
particularly problematic for acid mine drainage control and treatment
projects where water quality is already significantly degraded and is
unlikely to ever meet effluent limitation guidelines under the Clean
Water Act. Essentially, efforts by state agencies and tribes, and the
watershed groups who work cooperatively with the states and tribes,
will be stymied. In some cases, existing water treatment systems could
be turned off and abandoned to the inability to obtain NPDES permits.
We do not believe that this result was intended by either Congress or
the courts, and thus believe that an immediate legislative
clarification should be pursued. Again, we would welcome the
opportunity to work with this Subcommittee to craft appropriate
legislative solutions to address this conflict of laws situation at
some time in the near future.
Thank you for the opportunity to testify today. I would be happy to
answer any questions you may have.
______

Questions and Concerns re the AML Legislative Proposal
in OSM's FY 2013 Budget

The Proposed Competitive Allocation Process

What is the potential for this new review and ranking
process to reduce expenditures and increase efficiency without being
counter-productive? Will it introduce an additional level of
bureaucracy and result in more time being spent formulating proposals
and less on actual AML reclamation? The present funding formula, while
not perfect, at least provides some direction on which to base long
term strategic planning and efficient use of available funds. The
closest analogy to what OSM is proposing by way of its competitive
allocation process is the way BLM and the Forest Service currently
allocate their AML funds through competitive proposals to various state
offices and regions. Because of the uncertainties of funding, neither
agency has been able to develop significant in-house expertise, but
instead often rely on SMCRA-funded states like MT, NM, UT and CO to do
a good portion of their AML work. Why would OSM want to duplicate a
system that has proven problematic for other agencies?

Who would be the ``other parties'' potentially bidding on
AML grant funds? Would this include federal agencies such as BLM, FS,
NPS, etc? If so, in many cases, those agencies already rely on the
states to conduct their reclamation work and also determine priorities
based on state input or guidance.

What do the state project managers and inspectors do if a
state does not win a competitive bid for AML funds? How does a state
gear up if it receives funding for more projects than it can handle
with present staffing? Each state and tribe has different grant cycles.
Unless all are brought into one uniform cycle, how will everyone
compete for the same dollars? In this regard, how can the competitive
allocation process and the use of the Advisory Council be more
efficient and simple than what we already have in place?

How long will OSM fund a state's/tribe's administrative
costs if it does not successfully compete for a construction grant,
even though the state/tribe has eligible high priority projects on
AMLIS? How will OSM calculate administrative grant funding levels,
especially since salaries and benefits for AML project managers and
inspectors predominantly derive from construction funds? Would funding
cover current staffing levels? If not, how will OSM determine the
funding criteria for administrative program grants?

How do the states and tribes handle emergency projects
under the legislative proposal? Must these projects undergo review by
the Advisory Council? Will there be special, expedited procedures? If a
state/tribe has to cut back on staff, how does it manage emergencies
when they arise? If emergency programs do compete for AML funds,
considerable time and effort could be spent preparing these projects
for review by the Advisory Council rather than abating the immediate
hazard. Again, how can we be assured that emergencies will be addressed
expeditiously?

What ranking criteria will be used to determine the
priority of submitted AML project grant requests? The number of people
potentially affected? The current priority ranking on AMLIS? How would
the Council determine whether a burning gob pile near a city presents a
greater hazard than a surface mine near a highway or an underground
mine beneath a residential area? Would the winning bid be the ``most
convincing'' proposal? The one with the most signatures on a petition?
The one with the most influential legislative delegation? Will AMLIS
continue to serve as the primary mechanism for identifying sites and
their priority status?

If the current AML funding formula is scrapped, what
amount will be paid out to the non-certified AML states and tribes over
the remainder of the program? What does OSM mean by the term
``remaining funds'' in its proposal? Is it only the AML fees yet to be
collected? What happens to the historic share balances in the Fund,
including those that were supposed to be re-directed to the Fund based
on an equivalent amount of funding being paid to certified states and
tribes each year? Would the ``remaining funds'' include the
unappropriated/prior balance amounts that have not yet been paid out
over the seven-year installment period? What about the amounts due and
owing to certified states and tribes that were phased in during FY
2009--2011?

Has anyone alleged or confirmed that the states/tribes
are NOT already addressing the highest priority sites for reclamation
within the context of the current AML program structure under the 2006
Amendments? Where have the 2006 Amendments faltered in terms of high
priority sites being addressed as envisioned by Congress? What would
remain unchanged in the 2006 Amendments under OSM's proposal?
The Nature and Purpose of the Advisory Council

Who would be on the AML Advisory Council and how could
they collectively have better decision-making knowledge about hazardous
AML sites than the state and tribal project managers and administrators
who work with these sites on a daily basis?

What will be the criteria to serve on the Advisory
Council? Will the Federal Advisory Committee Act (FACA) requirements
apply to the formation and deliberations of the Council? How long does
OSM envision it will take to establish the Council and when will it
become operational?

Will the Advisory Council be providing recommendations to
OSM or will OSM make all final decisions? Will these decisions by
appealable? If so, to who? Does OSM envision needing to develop
internal guidance for its own review process? If so, how long will it
potentially take from Advisory Council review and recommendation to
final OSM decision in order to complete the grant process so a state
can begin a project?

What degree of detail will be required in order to review
and approve competitive grant applications? Will the Council review
each project? What type of time constraints will be placed on their
review?

Will the Advisory Council consider partial grants for
projects that may exceed the allocation for a single year? Would
minimum program states be authorized to apply for a grant that would
exceed $3 million?

Will grant applications be based on an individual project
or will the grant be based on a project year? How will cost overruns be
handled?
Planning for AML Work

One of the greatest benefits of reauthorization under the
2006 Amendments to SMCRA was the predictability of funding through the
end of the AML program. Because state and tribes were provided with
hypothetical funding levels from OSM (which to date have proven to be
quite accurate), long-term project planning, along with the
establishment of appropriate staffing levels and project assignments,
could be made more accurately and efficiently. How can states/tribes
plan for future projects given the uncertainty associated with having
to annually bid for AML funds? NEPA compliance issues alone can take
years of planning. One state recently asked its State Historic
Preservation Office for initial consultation regarding project sites
that may be reclaimed over the next five years. This process will also
have significant impacts on those states that utilize multi-year
construction contracts that are paid for with annual AML grants.

State and tribal AML projects are often planned 18 months
to two years in advance of actually receiving construction funds, based
on anticipated funding under the 2006 Amendments. During that time,
states and tribes are performing environmental assessments, conducting
archeology reviews, completing real estate work and doing NEPA
analyses. There could be considerable effort and money wasted if a
project does not get approved during the competitive allocation
process.

At what point does a State or Tribe seek approval from
the advisory council? Considerable investigation must take place prior
to developing most projects, whether they be acid mine drainage
projects or health and safety projects. How much time should be spent
in design prior to proceeding to the Council? How accurate must a cost
estimate be prior to taking a project before the Council? The greater
the accuracy, the greater the design time expended, possibly for a
project that will be rejected.

State and tribes often seek and obtain valuable matching
funds from watershed groups, which take considerable lead time to
acquire. It will be difficult to commit to partners if we don't know
what level of funding, if any, will be made available from OSM.

Several states have committed significant amounts of
money to waterline projects across the coalfields. Local governmental
entities have started designs and applied for additional funds from
other agencies to match AML funds in order to make these projects a
reality. Ending all AML funding for these projects (assuming they are
not considered ``high priority'') could have significant consequences
for local communities. Our understanding is that these projects were
excluded under the 2006 Amendments from the priority scheme contained
in section 403(a) of SMCRA.

Does OSM's proposal allow acid mine drainage (AMD)
projects to be undertaken? Can these be designated as high priority?
(Our understanding is that those AMD projects undertaken pursuant to
the ``AMD set-aside program'' are not subject to the priority scheme
under Section 403(a) and that those AMD projects done ``in conjunction
with'' a priority 1 or 2 project are considered ``high priority''.) How
do states handle ongoing engineering, operating and maintenance costs
for existing AMD treatment systems? As the Administration works
diligently to develop a new rule to protect streams nationwide, why
would it advance a proposal to essentially halt the cleanup of streams
funded by the AML program?
Overarching Concerns

Given the original design of SMCRA by its framers that
AML funds will only be allocated to those states who agree to implement
Title V regulatory programs for active mining operations, to what
extent can we expect that states will continue to implement and fund
their Title V programs if Title IV funding is drastically cut or
eliminated under the proposal? Furthermore, since states and tribes
will not know what level of AML program staffing to maintain from year
to year under the proposal, who would desire to work for a program that
is in a constant state of flux?

The SMCRA 2006 Amendments were the result of roughly ten
years of negotiations, discussions, and debates in Congress. Since the
legislative process to enact these new proposed changes could take
years, why didn't OSM begin with the legislation and then follow up
with an appropriate budget proposal? Why weren't the states/tribes or
the NAAMLP included in discussions that led to this legislative
proposal?

As OSM develops the legislative proposal for a
competitive bidding process, the agency should consider the impacts on
minimum programs and consider maintaining the minimum allocation of $3
million for minimum program states.

What type of state AML plan amendments does OSM foresee
as a result of this new process?
Proposed Elimination of Funding for AML Emergencies

While amendments to Title IV of SMCRA in 2006 (P.L. 109-
432) adjusted several provisions of the Act, no changes were made to
OSM's emergency powers in Section 410. Quite to the contrary, Section
402(g)(1)(D)(2) states that the Secretary shall ensure ``strict
compliance'' with regard to the states' and tribes' use of non-
emergency grant funds for the priorities listed in Section 403(a), none
of which include emergencies. The funding for the emergency program
comes from the Secretary's discretionary share, pursuant to Section
402(g)(3) of the Act. This share currently stands at $416 million.
OSM's elimination of funding for the emergency program will result in
the shift of approximately $20 million annually that will have to be
absorbed by the states. This is money that cannot be spent on high
priority AML work (as required by SMCRA) and will require the
realignment of state AML program operations in terms of personnel,
project design and development, and construction capabilities. In most
cases, depending on the nature and extent of an emergency project, it
could preclude a state's ability to undertake any other AML work during
the grant year (and even following years), especially for minimum
program states. How does OSM envision states and tribes being able to
meet their statutory responsibility to address high priority AML sites
in light of the elimination of federal funding for AML emergencies? How
does OSM reconcile this proposal with the intentions of Congress
expressed in the 2006 amendments to move more money out of the AML Fund
sooner to address the backlog of AML problems that continue to linger?
Proposed Elimination of Funding to Certified States and Tribes

From what we can ascertain, OSM proposes to eliminate all
payments to certified states and tribes--in lieu of funds; prior
balance replacement funds; and monies that are due and owing in FY 2018
and 2019 from the phase-in during fiscal years 2008 and 2009. Is this
accurate? OSM says nothing of what the impact will be on non-certified
states as a result of eliminating these payments to certified states
and tribes--especially the equivalent payments that would otherwise be
made to the historic production share that directly relate to ``in lieu
of'' payments to certified states and tribes under section 411(h)(4).
Previously, OSM has stated that ``the amounts that would have been
allocated to certified states and tribes under section 402(g)(1) of
SMCRA will be transferred to the historical production allocation on an
annual basis to the extent that those states and tribes receive in lieu
payments from the Treasury (through the Secretary of the Interior)
under section 402(i) and 411(h)(2) of SMCRA.'' By OSM's own admission
in its FY 2013 proposed budget, this will amount to $1.2 billion over
ten years. If the in lieu payments are not made (as proposed), how can
the transfer to historic production occur? The result, of course, would
be a drastic impact on the historic production allocation otherwise
available to uncertified states. Will OSM address this matter in its
proposed legislation? If so, how?

Has OSM considered the fiscal and programmatic impacts
that could result if the certified states and tribes, who no longer
receive AML monies, choose to return their Title V regulatory programs
to OSM (especially given the severe reductions being proposed for FY
2013 in Title V grants)?

Finally, how do the cuts in the Title IV program line up
with the Administration's other economic, fiscal and environmental
objectives as articulated in the deficit reduction and jobs bills that
have been considered by Congress? These objectives include
environmental stewardship, cleaning up abandoned mines (coal and
noncoal) nationwide, creating green jobs, pumping dollars into local
communities, putting money to work on the ground in an expeditious
manner, sustainable development, infrastructure improvements,
alternative energy projects, protecting public health and safety, and
improving the environment. It seems to us that there is a serious
disconnect here and we remain mystified as to how these laudable
objectives and OSM's budget proposal can be reconciled.
______

RESOLUTION

OF

THE NATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF ABANDONED MINE LAND PROGRAMS

WHEREAS, Title IV of the Surface Mining Control and Reclamation Act
of 1977 (SMCRA) established the Abandoned Mine Land (AML) reclamation
program; and
WHEREAS, the National Association of Abandoned Mine Land Programs
(NAAMLP) was established as a nonprofit corporation to accomplish the
objectives of its thirty member tribes and states to eliminate health
and safety hazards and reclaim land and water resources adversely
affected by past mining and left in an abandoned or inadequately
restored condition; and
WHEREAS, NAAMLP members administer AML programs funded and overseen
by the Office of Surface Mining Reclamation and Enforcement (OSM), U.S.
Department of the Interior; and
WHEREAS, pursuant to the cooperative federalism approach contained
in SMCRA, all tribes and states who are members of NAAMLP have
federally approved abandoned mine reclamation plans; and
WHEREAS, SMCRA, Title IV, establishes a reclamation fee on each ton
of coal mined in the United States to pay for abandoned mine land
reclamation; and
WHEREAS, SMCRA, Title IV, mandates that fifty percent (50%) of the
reclamation fees collected annually are designated as state/tribal
share funds to be returned to the states and tribes from which coal was
mined to pay for reclamation programs administered by the states and
tribes; and
WHEREAS, SMCRA Title IV also mandates that a minimum level of
funding should be provided to ensure effective state program
implementation; and
WHEREAS, Congress enacted amendments to SMCRA in 2006 to address,
among other things, funding for state and tribal programs and fee
collection to address existing and future AML reclamation; and
WHEREAS, the 2006 Amendments established new, strict criteria that
ensures states and tribes expend funds on high priority AML sites; and
WHEREAS, the proposed 2012 budget for the Office of Surface Mining
Reclamation and Enforcement within the U.S. Department of the Interior
would abandon the 50/50 state-federal partnership established under
SMCRA and renege on the funding formula under the 2006 amendments by,
among other things, eliminating mandatory funding for those states and
tribes who have certified the completion of their coal reclamation work
and adjusting the mechanism by which non-certified states receive their
mandatory funding through a competitive bidding process; and
WHEREAS, if statutory changes are approved by Congress as suggested
by the proposed FY 2012 budget for OSMRE, reclamation of abandoned mine
lands within certified states and tribes would halt; reclamation of
abandoned mine lands in all states would be jeopardized; employment of
contractors, suppliers, technicians and others currently engaged in the
reclamation of abandoned mine lands would be endangered; the cleanup of
polluted lands and waters across the United States would be threatened
by failing to fund reclamation of abandoned mine lands in some states;
minimum program state funding would be usurped; the AML water supply
replacement program would be terminated, leaving coalfield citizens
without potable water; and the intent of Congress as contained in the
2006 amendments to SMCRA and its 2006 Amendments would be undermined
NOW, THEREFORE:
BE IT RESOLVED BY THE NATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF ABANDONED MINE LAND
PROGRAMS THAT ITS MEMBER TRIBES AND STATES:
Opposes the legislative proposal terminating funding for certified
states and tribes and altering the receipt of mandatory AML funding for
non-certified states contained in the FY 2012 budget proposal for the
Office of Surface Mining Reclamation and Enforcement and instead
supports the AML funding mechanism contained in current law.

ISSUED THIS 22nd DAY OF FEBRUARY, 2011
ATTEST:
Michael P. Garner
PRESIDENT, NAAMLP
ALABAMA ALASKA ARIZONA ARKANSAS CALIFORNIA COLORADO CROW HOPI ILLINOIS
INDIANA IOWA KANSAS KENTUCKY, LOUISIANA MARYLAND,, MISSISSIPPI,
MISSOURI MONTANA NAVAJO NEVADA, NEW MEXICO NORTH DAKOTA OHIO
OKLAHOMA PENNSYLVANIA TENNESSEE TEXAS UTAH VIRGINIA WEST
VIRGINIA WYOMING
______

Mr. Johnson [presiding]. Thank you, Ms. Roanhorse. Mr.
Conrad, you may now begin.

STATEMENT OF GREGORY E. CONRAD, EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR, INTERSTATE
MINING COMPACT COMMISSION

Mr. Conrad. Good morning. My name is Greg Conrad, and I
serve as Executive Director of the Interstate Mining Compact
Commission, on whose behalf I am appearing today to present the
views of the compact's 24 member States concerning the Fiscal
Year 2013 budget request for the Office of Surface Mining, and
its impacts on state programs.
In its proposed budget, OSM is requesting $57.3 million to
fund Title V grants to States for the implementation of the
regulatory programs, a reduction of $11 million, or 15 percent
below the 2012-enacted level. Mr. Chairman, these are
admittedly tough times for State and Federal budgets. We
realize that deficit reduction and spending cuts are the order
of the day for both the Nation and our respective States. As a
result, some hard choices need to be made about how we spend
limited dollars in an efficient and effective way.
Environmental protection associated with mining operations
is no exception. One of the tough choices that has to be made
with respect to programs under the Surface Mining Control and
Reclamation Act is who will take the lead in implementing the
Act's requirements.
Once we agree upon that, it is incumbent on both state and
Federal Governments to prioritize funding decisions to support
the lead agencies. Congress crafted a state primacy approach
under SMCRA, whereby state governments were vested with
exclusive regulatory authority to operate programs for active
mining operations and abandoned mine land reclamation. The Act
also provides for grants to States that meet 50 percent of
their program operating costs under Title V, and 100 percent
for AML projects under Title IV.
Once again, in Fiscal Year 2013, we are faced with a
decision about the extent to which the Federal Government will
support these funding commitments under SMCRA, and the State-
led concept for program implementation. OSM's budget proposes
to move us away from those commitments and concepts. The
Administration would have us believe that the Federal
Government is in a better position to decide how the state
programs should be run, and that the States should do so with
less money and more oversight.
At the very same time, additional mandates and program
requirements are being placed upon the States through new
rules, directives, guidelines, and agreements among Federal
agencies. Something has to give, Mr. Chairman. Either we
support the States, as envisioned by SMCRA, or we change the
rules of the game. States are struggling to match Federal
dollars, and signals from the Federal Government that it is
wavering in its support concerning both dollars and confidence
in the States' ability to run effectively regulatory and AML
programs will do little to build trust.
This is not the time to reverse the course that Congress
has set for its support of state programs over the past several
years. In this regard, it should be kept in mind that a 15
percent cut in Federal funding translates to an additional 15
percent cut for overall program funding for many states, since
these states can only match what they receive in Federal money.
We, therefore, urge the Subcommittee to reject OSM's
proposed cut of $11 million for state Title V grants, and
restore the grant level to $70 million, as supported by state
funding requests. It is important to note that OSM does not
disagree with the States' demonstrated need for the requested
amount of funding for Title V regulatory grants. Instead, OSM's
solution for the drastic cut comes in the way of an unrealistic
assumption that the States can simply increase user fees.
OSM's proposal is completely out of touch with the
realities associated with establishing or enhancing user fees.
IMCC's polling of its member States confirmed that it will be
difficult, if not impossible, for most States to accomplish
this feat at all, let alone in one fiscal year. As an example,
it took the State of Alabama one year of concerted effort to
secure a program amendment to increase its permit fees with
approval from OSM. We strongly urge the Subcommittee to reject
this approach.
If Congress is seeking to restrain OSM's budget, we suggest
that the Subcommittee look seriously at OSM's proposal to
increase its own budget by almost $4 million and 25 FTEs for
Federal oversight of State programs. In making the case for its
funding increase, OSM's budget justification document contains
vague references to the need to ``improve the implementation of
existing laws,'' and to ``strengthen OSM's skill base.''
In our view, this is code language for enhanced and
expanded Federal oversight of State programs. However, without
more to justify the need for enhanced oversight, Congress
should reject this proposed increase for Federal operations.
The overall performance of the States, as detailed in OSM's
annual State program evaluation reports, demonstrates that the
States are implementing their programs effectively, and in
accordance with the purposes and objectives of SMCRA.
The States also have serious concerns with several aspects
of OSM's enhanced oversight initiative, especially three
directives on annual oversight procedures, corrective actions,
and the issuance of 10-day notices. We are particularly
concerned about the potential for these Federal actions to
duplicate and/or second-guess State permitting decisions. Aside
from the impact on limited State and Federal resources, these
actions undermine the principles of primacy that underscore
SMCRA, and are likely to have debilitating impacts on the
State-Federal partnership envisioned by the Act.
Thank you for the opportunity to appear today; I would be
happy to answer any questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Conrad follows:]

Statement of Gregory E. Conrad, Executive Director, Interstate Mining
Compact Commission, on Behalf of the Interstate Mining Compact
Commission

My name is Gregory E. Conrad and I serve as Executive Director of
the Interstate Mining Compact Commission, on whose behalf I am
appearing today. I appreciate the opportunity to present this statement
to the Subcommittee regarding the views of the Compact's 24 member
states on the Fiscal Year (FY) 2013 Budget Request for the Office of
Surface Mining Reclamation and Enforcement (OSM) within the U.S.
Department of the Interior. In its proposed budget, OSM is requesting
$57.3 million to fund Title V grants to states and Indian tribes for
the implementation of their regulatory programs, a reduction of $11
million or 15% below the FY 2012 enacted level. OSM also proposes to
reduce mandatory spending for abandoned mine lands (AML) program by
$180 million pursuant to a legislative proposal to eliminate all AML
funding for certified states and tribes.
The Compact is comprised of 24 states that together produce some
95% of the Nation's coal, as well as important noncoal minerals. The
Compact's purposes are to advance the protection and restoration of
land, water and other resources affected by mining through the
encouragement of programs in each of the party states that will achieve
comparable results in protecting, conserving and improving the
usefulness of natural resources and to assist in achieving and
maintaining an efficient, productive and economically viable mining
industry.
OSM has projected an amount of $57.3 million for Title V grants to
states and tribes in FY 2012, an amount which is matched by the states
each year. These grants support the implementation of state and tribal
regulatory programs under the Surface Mining Control and Reclamation
Act (SMCRA) and as such are essential to the full and effective
operation of those programs. Pursuant to these primacy programs, the
states have the most direct and critical responsibilities for
conducting regulatory operations to minimize the impact of coal
extraction operations on people and the environment. The states
accomplish this through a combination of permitting, inspection and
enforcement duties, designating lands as unsuitable for mining
operations, and ensuring that timely reclamation occurs after mining.
In Fiscal Year 2012, Congress approved $68.6 million for state
Title V grants. This continued a much-needed trend whereby the amount
appropriated for these regulatory grants aligned with the demonstrated
needs of the states and tribes. The states are greatly encouraged by
the significant increases in Title V funding approved by Congress over
the past three fiscal years. Even with mandated rescissions and the
allocations for tribal primacy programs, the states saw a $12 million
increase for our regulatory programs over FY 2007 levels. State Title V
grants had been stagnant for over 12 years and the gap between the
states' requests and what they received was widening. This debilitating
trend was compounding the problems caused by inflation and
uncontrollable costs, thus undermining our efforts to realize needed
program improvements and enhancements and jeopardizing our efforts to
minimize the potential adverse impacts of coal extraction operations on
people and the environment.
In its FY 2013 budget, OSM has once again attempted to reverse
course and essentially unravel and undermine the progress made by
Congress in supporting state programs with adequate funding. As states
prepare their future budgets, we trust that the recent increases
approved by Congress will remain the new base on which we build our
programs. Otherwise, we find ourselves backpedaling and creating a
situation where those who were just hired face layoffs and purchases of
much needed equipment are canceled or delayed. Furthermore, a clear
message from Congress that reliable, consistent funding will continue
into the future will do much to stimulate support for these programs by
state legislatures and budget officers who each year, in the face of
difficult fiscal climates and constraints, are also dealing with the
challenge of matching federal grant dollars with state funds. In this
regard, it should be kept in mind that a 15% cut in federal funding
generally translates to an additional 15% cut for overall program
funding for many states, especially those without federal lands, since
these states can generally only match what they receive in federal
money.
OSM's solution to the drastic cuts for state regulatory programs
comes in the way of an unrealistic assumption that the states can
simply increase user fees in an effort to ``eliminate a de facto
subsidy of the coal industry.'' No specifics on how the states are to
accomplish this far-reaching proposal are set forth, other than an
expectation that they will do so in the course of a single fiscal year.
OSM's proposal is completely out of touch with the realities associated
with establishing or enhancing user fees, especially given the need for
approvals by state legislatures. IMCC's polling of its member states
confirmed that, given the current fiscal and political implications of
such an initiative, it will be difficult, if not impossible, for most
states to accomplish this feat at all, let alone in less than one year.
OSM is well aware of this, and yet has every intention of aggressively
moving forward with a proposal that was poorly conceived from its
inception. We strongly urge the Subcommittee to reject this approach
and mandate that OSM work through the complexities associated with any
future user fees proposal in close cooperation with the states and
tribes before proposing cuts to federal funding for state Title V
grants.
At the same time that OSM is proposing significant cuts for state
programs, the agency is proposing sizeable increases for its own
program operations ($4 million) for federal oversight of state
programs, including an increase of 25 FTEs. In making the case for its
funding increase, OSM's budget justification document contains vague
references to the need ``to improve the implementation of existing
laws'' and to ``strengthen OSM's skills base.'' More specifically, OSM
states in its budget justification document (on page 60) that ``with
greater technical skills, OSM anticipates improved evaluation of
permit-related actions and resolution of issues to prevent
unanticipated situations that otherwise may occur as operations
progress, thereby improving implementation of existing laws''. In our
view, this is code language for enhanced and expanded federal oversight
of state programs. However, without more to justify the need for more
oversight and the concomitant increase in funding for federal
operations related thereto, Congress should reject this request. The
overall performance of the states as detailed in OSM's annual state
program evaluation reports demonstrates that the states are
implementing their programs effectively and in accordance with the
purposes and objectives of SMCRA.\1\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ While not alluded to or fully addressed in OSM's budget
justification document, there are myriad statutory, policy and legal
issues associated with several aspects of the agency's enhanced
oversight initiative, especially three recently adopted directives on
annual oversight procedures (REG-8), corrective actions (REG-23) and
Ten-Day Notices (INE-35). IMCC submitted extensive comments regarding
the issues associated with these directives and related oversight
actions (including federal inspections) on January 19, 2010, July 8,
2010 and January 7, 2011.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
In our view, this suggests that OSM is adequately accomplishing its
statutory oversight obligations with current federal program funding
and that any increased workloads are likely to fall upon the states,
which have primary responsibility for implementing appropriate
adjustments to their programs identified during federal oversight. In
this regard, we note that the federal courts have made it abundantly
clear that SMCRA's allocation of exclusive jurisdiction was ``careful
and deliberate'' and that Congress provided for ``mutually exclusive
regulation by either the Secretary or state, but not both.'' Bragg v.
West Virginia Coal Ass'n, 248 F. 3d 275, 293-4 (4th Cir. 2001), cert.
Denied, 534 U.S. 1113 (2002). While the courts have ruled consistently
on this matter, the question remains for Congress and the
Administration to determine, in light of deficit reduction and spending
cuts, how the limited amount of federal funding for the regulation of
surface coal mining and reclamation operations under SMCRA will be
directed--to OSM or the states. For all the above reasons, we urge
Congress to approve not less than $70 million for state and tribal
Title V regulatory grants, as fully documented in the states' and
tribes' estimates for actual program operating costs.\2\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ We are particularly concerned about recent OSM initiatives,
primarily by policy directive, to duplicate and/or second-guess state
permitting decisions through the reflexive use of ``Ten-Day Notices''
as part of increased federal oversight or through federal responses to
citizen complaints. OSM specifically addresses this matter in its
budget justification document (on page 69) where it states that ``OSM
has an obligation under section 521 of SMCRA to take steps to ensure
that all types of violations, including violations of performance
standards or permit conditions and violations of permitting
requirements, are corrected if the state does not take action to do so.
Aside from the impact on limited state and federal resources, these
actions undermine the principles of primacy that underscore SMCRA and
are likely to have debilitating impacts on the state-federal
partnership envisioned by the Act.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
With regard to funding for state Title IV Abandoned Mine Land (AML)
program grants, Congressional action in 2006 to reauthorize Title IV of
SMCRA has significantly changed the method by which state reclamation
grants are funded. Beginning with FY 2008, state Title IV grants are
funded primarily by mandatory appropriations. As a result, the states
should have received a total of $488 million in FY 2013. Instead, OSM
has budgeted an amount of $307 million based on an ill-conceived
proposal to eliminate mandatory AML funding to states and tribes that
have been certified as completing their abandoned coal reclamation
programs. This $180 million reduction flies in the face of the
comprehensive restructuring of the AML program that was passed by
Congress in 2006, following over 10 years of Congressional debate and
hard fought compromise among the affected parties. In addition to the
elimination of funding for certified states and tribes, OSM is also
proposing to reform the distribution process for the remaining
reclamation funding to allocate available resources to the highest
priority coal AML sites through a competitive grant program, whereby an
Advisory Council will review and rank AML sites each year. The
proposal, which will require adjustments to SMCRA, will clearly
undermine the delicate balance of interests and objectives achieved by
the 2006 Amendments. It is also inconsistent with many of the goals and
objectives articulated by the Administration concerning both jobs and
environmental protection. We urge the Congress to reject this
unjustified proposal, delete it from the budget and restore the full
mandatory funding amount of $488 million. A resolution adopted by IMCC
last year concerning these matters is attached. We also endorse the
testimony of the National Association of Abandoned Mine Land Programs
(NAAMLP) which goes into greater detail regarding the implications of
OSM's legislative proposal for the states.
We also urge Congress to approve continued funding for the AML
emergency program. In a continuing effort to ignore congressional
direction, OSM's budget would completely eliminate funding for state-
run emergency programs and also for federal emergency projects (in
those states that do not administer their own emergency programs). When
combined with the great uncertainty about the availability of remaining
carryover funds, it appears that the program has been decimated.
Funding the OSM emergency program should be a top priority for OSM's
discretionary spending. This funding has allowed the states and OSM to
address the unanticipated AML emergencies that inevitably occur each
year. In states that have federally-operated emergency programs, the
state AML programs are not structured or staffed to move quickly to
address these dangers and safeguard the coalfield citizens whose lives
and property are threatened by these unforeseen and often debilitating
events. And for minimum program states, emergency funding is critical
to preserve the limited resources available to them under the current
funding formula. We therefore request that Congress restore funding for
the AML emergency program in OSM's FY 2013 budget.
On a somewhat related matter, there appears to be increasing
concern by some in Washington that the states and tribes are not
spending the increased AML grant moneys that they have received under
the 2006 Amendments in a more expeditious manner, thus resulting in
what the Administration has characterized as unacceptable levels of
``undelivered orders''. What these figures and statements fail to
reflect is the degree to which AML grant moneys are obligated or
otherwise committed for AML reclamation work as part of the normal
grant process. Most AML grants are either three or five years in length
and over that course of time, the states and tribes are in a continual
process of planning, bidding and contracting for specific AML projects.
Some projects are multi-layered and require extended periods of time to
complete this process before a shovel is turned at the AML site. And
where federal funding is concerned, additional time is necessary to
complete the myriad statutory approvals for AML work to begin,
including compliance with the National Environmental Policy Act and the
National Historic Preservation Act.
In almost every case, however, based on the extensive planning that
the states and tribes undertake, AML grant funds are committed to
specific projects even while clearances and bidding are underway. While
funds may not technically be ``obligated'' because they are not yet
``drawn down'', these funds are committed for specific purposes. Once
committed, states and tribes consider this grant money to be obligated
to the respective project, even though the ``order'' had not been
``delivered'' and the funds actually ``drawn down''. The latter can
only occur once the project is completed, which will often be several
years later, depending on the size and complexity of the project. We
would be happy to provide the Subcommittee with more detailed
information about our grant expenditures and project planning in order
to answer any questions you may have about how we account for and spend
our AML grant moneys. Given the confusion that often attends the
various terms used to describe the grant expenditure process, we
believe it is critical that Congress hear directly from the states and
tribes on this matter and not rely solely on the Administration's
statements and analyses. We welcome the opportunity to brief your
Subcommittee in more detail regarding this issue should you so desire.
One of the more effective mechanisms for accomplishing AML
restoration work is through leveraging or matching other grant
programs, such as EPA's 319 program. Until FY 2009, language was always
included in OSM's appropriation that encouraged the use of these types
of matching funds, particularly for the purpose of environmental
restoration related to treatment or abatement of AMD from abandoned
mines. This is a perennial, and often expensive, problem, especially in
Appalachia. IMCC therefore requests the Committee to once again include
language in the FY 2013 appropriations bill that would allow the use of
AML funds for any required non-Federal share of the cost of projects by
the Federal government for AMD treatment or abatement.
We also urge the Committee to support funding for OSM's training
program, including moneys for state travel. These programs are central
to the effective implementation of state regulatory programs as they
provide necessary training and continuing education for state agency
personnel. In this regard, it should be noted that the states provide
nearly half of the instructors for OSM's training course and, through
IMCC, sponsor and staff benchmarking workshops on key regulatory
program topics. IMCC also urges the Committee to support funding for
TIPS, a program that directly benefits the states by providing critical
technical assistance. Finally, we support funding for the Watershed
Cooperative Agreements in the amount of $1.2 million.
Attached to our testimony today is a list of questions concerning
OSM's budget that we request be included in the record for the hearing.
The questions go into further detail concerning several aspects of the
budget that we believe should be answered before Congress approves
funding for the agency or considers advancing the legislative proposals
contained in the budget.
Thank you for the opportunity to present this statement. I would be
happy to answer any questions you may have or provide additional
information to the Subcommittee.
______

Resolution

Interstate Mining Compact Commission

BE IT KNOWN THAT:
WHEREAS, Title IV of the Surface Mining Control and Reclamation Act
of 1977 (SMCRA) established the Abandoned Mine Land (AML) reclamation
program; and
WHEREAS, the Interstate Mining Compact Commission (IMCC) is a
multi-state organization representing the natural resource and
environmental protection interests of its 24 member states, including
the elimination of health and safety hazards and the reclamation of
land and water resources adversely affected by past mining and left in
an abandoned or inadequately restored condition; and
WHEREAS, pursuant to the cooperative federalism approach contained
in SMCRA, several IMCC member states administer AML programs approved,
funded and overseen by the Office of Surface Mining Reclamation and
Enforcement (OSM) within the U.S. Department of the Interior; and
WHEREAS, SMCRA, Title IV establishes a reclamation fee on each ton
of coal mined in the United States to pay for abandoned mine land
reclamation; and
WHEREAS, SMCRA, Title IV mandates that fifty percent (50%) of the
reclamation fees collected annually are designated as state share funds
to be returned to the states from which coal was mined to pay for
reclamation projects pursuant to programs administered by the states;
and
WHEREAS, SMCRA, Title IV also mandates that a minimum level of
funding should be provided to ensure effective state program
implementation; and
WHEREAS, Congress enacted amendments to SMCRA in 2006 to address,
among other things, continued collection of AML fees and funding for
state programs to address existing and future AML reclamation; and
WHEREAS, the 2006 Amendments established new, strict criteria that
ensure states expend funds on high priority AML sites; and
WHEREAS, the proposed 2012 budget for the Office of Surface Mining
Reclamation and Enforcement within the U.S. Department of the Interior
would disregard the state-federal partnership established under SMCRA
and renege on the funding formula under the 2006 Amendments by, among
other things, eliminating mandatory funding for states who have
certified the completion of their coal reclamation work and adjusting
the mechanism by which non-certified states receive their mandatory
funding through a competitive bidding process; and
WHEREAS, if statutory changes are approved by Congress as suggested
by the proposed FY 2012 budget for OSM, reclamation of abandoned mine
lands within certified states would halt; reclamation of abandoned mine
lands in all states would be jeopardized; employment of contractors,
suppliers, technicians and others currently engaged in the reclamation
of abandoned mine lands would be endangered; the cleanup of polluted
lands and waters across the United States would be threatened by
failing to fund reclamation of abandoned mine lands; minimum program
state funding would be usurped; the AML water supply replacement
program would be terminated, leaving coalfield citizens without potable
water; and the intent of Congress as contained in the 2006 Amendments
to SMCRA would be undermined
NOW THEREFORE BE IT RESOLVED:
That the Interstate Mining Compact Commission opposes the
legislative proposal terminating funding for certified states and
altering the receipt of mandatory AML funding for non-certified states
contained in the FY 2012 budget proposal for the Office of Surface
Mining Reclamation and Enforcement and instead supports the AML funding
mechanism contained in current law.

Issued this 10th day of March,
2011
ATTEST:
Gregory E. Conrad
Executive Director
______

Questions re OSM's Proposed FY 2013 Budget

What does OSM plan to do with the additional $4 million that has
been budgeted for ``enhanced federal oversight of state regulatory
programs''? How does OSM justify an increase in money for federal
oversight while decreasing money for state Title V grants?
What is the demonstrated need for an additional 25 FTEs to perform
federal oversight of state programs? Will this not simply lead to
duplication of effort, second-guessing of state decision-making,
undermining of state primacy and wasted resources?
If pressed by Congress, how expeditiously does OSM intend to push
the states to recover more of their regulatory costs from the coal
industry through user fees? Has OSM undertaken a full analysis of the
administrative and rulemaking complexities inherent in such an
undertaking?
OSM's newest AML legislative proposal (to eliminate payments to
certified states and tribes and to utilize a competitive bidding
process for the allocation of remaining AML reclamation funds for non-
certified states) is the fourth time that the agency has put forth
potential legislative adjustments to the 2006 amendments to SMCRA in
its proposed budgets. Based on the legislative proposal we have seen to
date, there are many more questions than answers about how this process
will work. (See attached list) Does OSM intend to seek input from the
states and tribes, especially given the role that the states and tribes
will play in the bidding/selection process and the significant impact
this will have on current program administration? What is the basis for
OSM's proposal to essentially upend the carefully crafted legislative
resolution related to future AML program funding and AML reclamation
work approved by Congress in 2006? Has OSM thought and worked through
the implications for AML program management and administration that
would result from its legislative proposal?
Why has OSM chosen to advocate for a hardrock AML reclamation fee
to be collected by OSM but not distributed by OSM? Why bring another
federal agency (BLM) into the mix when OSM has the greater expertise in
this area?
Specific Questions re Cost Recovery/User Fees
OSM has requested an amount for state Title V regulatory program
grants in FY 2013 that reflects an $11 million decrease from FY 2012.
And while OSM does not dispute that the states are in need of an amount
far greater than this, the agency has suggested once again that the
states should be able to make up the difference between what OSM has
budgeted and what states actually need by increasing cost recovery fees
for services to the coal industry. What exactly will it take to
accomplish this task?
Assuming the states take on this task, will amendments to their
regulatory programs be required?
How long, in general, does it take OSM to approve a state program
amendment?
The state of Alabama submitted a program amendment to OSM in May of
2010 to raise current permit fees and authorize new, additional fees.
It took OSM a full year to approve this amendment, resulting in lost
fees of over $50,000 to the state. If OSM is unable to approve
requested state program amendments for permit fee increases in less
than a year, how does the agency expect to handle mandated permit
increases for all of the primacy states within a single fiscal year?
If OSM is not expecting to pursue this initiative in fiscal year
2013, why include such a proposal in the budget until OSM has worked
out all of the details with the states in the first instance?
Speaking of which, what types of complexities is OSM anticipating
with its proposal at the state level? Many of the states have already
indicated to OSM that it will be next to impossible to advance a fee
increase proposal given the political and fiscal climate they are
facing.
OSM's solution seems to be that the agency will propose a rule to
require states to increase permit fees nationwide. Won't this still
require state program amendments to effectuate the federal rule, as
with all of OSM's rules? How does OSM envision accomplishing this if
the states are unable to do it on their own?
Even if a federal rulemaking requiring permit fee increase
nationwide were to succeed, how does OSM envision assuring that these
fees are returned to the states? Will OSM retain a portion of these
fees for administrative purposes?
Specific Questions re Federal Program Increases
In OSM's budget justification document, the agency also notes that
the states permit and regulate 97 percent of the Nation's coal
production and that OSM provides technical assistance, funding,
training and technical tools to the states to support their programs.
And yet OSM proposes in its budget to cut funding to the states by $11
million while increasing OSM's own federal operations budget by nearly
$4 million and 25 FTEs. How does OSM reconcile these seemingly
contradictory positions?
OSM's budget justification document points out in more detail why
it believes additional federal resources will be needed based on its
recent federal oversight actions during FY 2011, which included
increased federal inspections. Was OSM not in fact able to accomplish
this enhanced oversight with its current resources? If not, where were
resources found wanting? How much of the strain on the agency's
resources was actually due to the stream protection rulemaking and EIS
process?
In light of recent annual oversight reports over the past five
years which demonstrate high levels of state performance, what is the
justification for OSM's enhanced oversight initiatives and hence its
federal program increase?
Something has to give here--no doubt. There is only so much money
that we can make available for the surface mining program under SMCRA.
Both Congress and the courts have made it clear that the states are to
exercise exclusive jurisdiction for the regulation of surface coal
mining operations pursuant to the primacy regime under the law. It begs
the questions of whether OSM has made the case for moving away from
supporting the states and instead beefing up the federal program.
Unless the agency can come up with a better, more detailed
justification for this realignment of resources, how can Congress
support its budget proposal?
Specific Questions re OSM Oversight Initiative
OSM has recently finalized a Ten-Day Notice directive (INE-35) that
had previously been withdrawn in 2006 based on a decision by then
Assistant Secretary of the Interior Rebecca Watson. The basis for
terminating the previous directive was several court decisions that
clarified the respective roles of state and federal governments
pursuant to the primacy regime contained in SMCRA. The Secretary's
decision also focused on the inappropriate and unauthorized use of Ten-
Day Notices under SMCRA to second-guess state permitting decisions.
OSM's new TDN directive flies in the face of both this Secretarial
decision and federal court decisions. Does OSM have a new Secretarial
decision on this matter? If not, how can its recent action overrule
this prior decision? Has the Solicitor's office weighed in on this
matter? If so, does OSM have an opinion supporting the agency's new TDN
directive? Will OSM provide that to the Committee?
In light of limited funding for the implementation of SMCRA, how
does OSM justify the state and federal expenses that will necessarily
follow from reviewing and second-guessing state permitting decisions?
States have complained that responding to a single OSM TDN, especially
with respect to state permitting decisions, can require the investment
of 2--3 FTE's for upwards of a week. How do you justify this?
Questions and Concerns re the AML Legislative Proposal in OSM's FY 2013
Budget
The Proposed Competitive Allocation Process

What is the potential for this new review and ranking
process to reduce expenditures and increase efficiency without
being counter-productive? Will it introduce an additional level
of bureaucracy and result in more time being spent formulating
proposals and less on actual AML reclamation? The present
funding formula, while not perfect, at least provides some
direction on which to base long term strategic planning and
efficient use of available funds. The closest analogy to what
OSM is proposing by way of its competitive allocation process
is the way BLM and the Forest Service currently allocate their
AML funds through competitive proposals to various state
offices and regions. Because of the uncertainties of funding,
neither agency has been able to develop significant in-house
expertise, but instead often rely on SMCRA-funded states like
MT, NM, UT and CO to do a good portion of their AML work. Why
would OSM want to duplicate a system that has proven
problematic for other agencies?

Who would be the ``other parties'' potentially
bidding on AML grant funds? Would this include federal agencies
such as BLM, FS, NPS, etc? If so, in many cases, those agencies
already rely on the states to conduct their reclamation work
and also determine priorities based on state input or guidance.

What do the state project managers and inspectors do
if a state does not win a competitive bid for AML funds? How
does a state gear up if it receives funding for more projects
than it can handle with present staffing? Each state and tribe
has different grant cycles. Unless all are brought into one
uniform cycle, how will everyone compete for the same dollars?
In this regard, how can the competitive allocation process and
the use of the Advisory Council be more efficient and simple
than what we already have in place?

How long will OSM fund a state's/tribe's
administrative costs if it does not successfully compete for a
construction grant, even though the state/tribe has eligible
high priority projects on AMLIS? How will OSM calculate
administrative grant funding levels, especially since salaries
and benefits for AML project managers and inspectors
predominantly derive from construction funds? Would funding
cover current staffing levels? If not, how will OSM determine
the funding criteria for administrative program grants?

How do the states and tribes handle emergency
projects under the legislative proposal? Must these projects
undergo review by the Advisory Council? Will there be special,
expedited procedures? If a state/tribe has to cut back on
staff, how does it manage emergencies when they arise? If
emergency programs do compete for AML funds, considerable time
and effort could be spent preparing these projects for review
by the Advisory Council rather than abating the immediate
hazard. Again, how can we be assured that emergencies will be
addressed expeditiously?

What ranking criteria will be used to determine the
priority of submitted AML project grant requests? The number of
people potentially affected? The current priority ranking on
AMLIS? How would the Council determine whether a burning gob
pile near a city presents a greater hazard than a surface mine
near a highway or an underground mine beneath a residential
area? Would the winning bid be the ``most convincing''
proposal? The one with the most signatures on a petition? The
one with the most influential legislative delegation? Will
AMLIS continue to serve as the primary mechanism for
identifying sites and their priority status?

If the current AML funding formula is scrapped, what
amount will be paid out to the non-certified AML states and
tribes over the remainder of the program? What does OSM mean by
the term ``remaining funds'' in its proposal? Is it only the
AML fees yet to be collected? What happens to the historic
share balances in the Fund, including those that were supposed
to be re-directed to the Fund based on an equivalent amount of
funding being paid to certified states and tribes each year?
Would the ``remaining funds'' include the unappropriated/prior
balance amounts that have not yet been paid out over the seven-
year installment period? What about the amounts due and owing
to certified states and tribes that were phased in during FY
2009--2011?

Has anyone alleged or confirmed that the states/
tribes are NOT already addressing the highest priority sites
for reclamation within the context of the current AML program
structure under the 2006 Amendments? Where have the 2006
Amendments faltered in terms of high priority sites being
addressed as envisioned by Congress? What would remain
unchanged in the 2006 Amendments under OSM's proposal?
The Nature and Purpose of the Advisory Council

Who would be on the AML Advisory Council and how
could they collectively have better decision-making knowledge
about hazardous AML sites than the state and tribal project
managers and administrators who work with these sites on a
daily basis?

What will be the criteria to serve on the Advisory
Council? Will the Federal Advisory Committee Act (FACA)
requirements apply to the formation and deliberations of the
Council? How long does OSM envision it will take to establish
the Council and when will it become operational?

Will the Advisory Council be providing
recommendations to OSM or will OSM make all final decisions?
Will these decisions by appealable? If so, to who? Does OSM
envision needing to develop internal guidance for its own
review process? If so, how long will it potentially take from
Advisory Council review and recommendation to final OSM
decision in order to complete the grant process so a state can
begin a project?

What degree of detail will be required in order to
review and approve competitive grant applications? Will the
Council review each project? What type of time constraints will
be placed on their review?

Will the Advisory Council consider partial grants for
projects that may exceed the allocation for a single year?
Would minimum program states be authorized to apply for a grant
that would exceed $3 million?

Will grant applications be based on an individual
project or will the grant be based on a project year? How will
cost overruns be handled?
Planning for AML Work

One of the greatest benefits of reauthorization under
the 2006 Amendments to SMCRA was the predictability of funding
through the end of the AML program. Because state and tribes
were provided with hypothetical funding levels from OSM (which
to date have proven to be quite accurate), long-term project
planning, along with the establishment of appropriate staffing
levels and project assignments, could be made more accurately
and efficiently. How can states/tribes plan for future projects
given the uncertainty associated with having to annually bid
for AML funds? NEPA compliance issues alone can take years of
planning. One state recently asked its State Historic
Preservation Office for initial consultation regarding project
sites that may be reclaimed over the next five years. This
process will also have significant impacts on those states that
utilize multi-year construction contracts that are paid for
with annual AML grants.

State and tribal AML projects are often planned 18
months to two years in advance of actually receiving
construction funds, based on anticipated funding under the 2006
Amendments. During that time, states and tribes are performing
environmental assessments, conducting archeology reviews,
completing real estate work and doing NEPA analyses. There
could be considerable effort and money wasted if a project does
not get approved during the competitive allocation process.

At what point does a State or Tribe seek approval
from the advisory council? Considerable investigation must take
place prior to developing most projects, whether they be acid
mine drainage projects or health and safety projects. How much
time should be spent in design prior to proceeding to the
Council? How accurate must a cost estimate be prior to taking a
project before the Council? The greater the accuracy, the
greater the design time expended, possibly for a project that
will be rejected.

State and tribes often seek and obtain valuable
matching funds from watershed groups, which take considerable
lead time to acquire. It will be difficult to commit to
partners if we don't know what level of funding, if any, will
be made available from OSM.

Several states have committed significant amounts of
money to waterline projects across the coalfields. Local
governmental entities have started designs and applied for
additional funds from other agencies to match AML funds in
order to make these projects a reality. Ending all AML funding
for these projects (assuming they are not considered ``high
priority'') could have significant consequences for local
communities. Our understanding is that these projects were
excluded under the 2006 Amendments from the priority scheme
contained in section 403(a) of SMCRA.

Does OSM's proposal allow acid mine drainage (AMD)
projects to be undertaken? Can these be designated as high
priority? (Our understanding is that those AMD projects
undertaken pursuant to the ``AMD set-aside program'' are not
subject to the priority scheme under Section 403(a) and that
those AMD projects done ``in conjunction with'' a priority 1 or
2 project are considered ``high priority''.) How do states
handle ongoing engineering, operating and maintenance costs for
existing AMD treatment systems? As the Administration works
diligently to develop a new rule to protect streams nationwide,
why would it advance a proposal to essentially halt the cleanup
of streams funded by the AML program?
Overarching Concerns

Given the original design of SMCRA by its framers
that AML funds will only be allocated to those states who agree
to implement Title V regulatory programs for active mining
operations, to what extent can we expect that states will
continue to implement and fund their Title V programs if Title
IV funding is drastically cut or eliminated under the proposal?
Furthermore, since states and tribes will not know what level
of AML program staffing to maintain from year to year under the
proposal, who would desire to work for a program that is in a
constant state of flux?

The SMCRA 2006 Amendments were the result of roughly
ten years of negotiations, discussions, and debates in
Congress. Since the legislative process to enact these new
proposed changes could take years, why didn't OSM begin with
the legislation and then follow up with an appropriate budget
proposal? Why weren't the states/tribes or the NAAMLP included
in discussions that led to this legislative proposal?

As OSM develops the legislative proposal for a
competitive bidding process, the agency should consider the
impacts on minimum programs and consider maintaining the
minimum allocation of $3 million for minimum program states.

What type of state AML plan amendments does OSM
foresee as a result of this new process?
Proposed Elimination of Funding for AML Emergencies

While amendments to Title IV of SMCRA in 2006 (P.L.
109-432) adjusted several provisions of the Act, no changes
were made to OSM's emergency powers in Section 410. Quite to
the contrary, Section 402(g)(1)(D)(2) states that the Secretary
shall ensure ``strict compliance'' with regard to the states'
and tribes' use of non-emergency grant funds for the priorities
listed in Section 403(a), none of which include emergencies.
The funding for the emergency program comes from the
Secretary's discretionary share, pursuant to Section 402(g)(3)
of the Act. This share currently stands at $416 million. OSM's
elimination of funding for the emergency program will result in
the shift of approximately $20 million annually that will have
to be absorbed by the states. This is money that cannot be
spent on high priority AML work (as required by SMCRA) and will
require the realignment of state AML program operations in
terms of personnel, project design and development, and
construction capabilities. In most cases, depending on the
nature and extent of an emergency project, it could preclude a
state's ability to undertake any other AML work during the
grant year (and even following years), especially for minimum
program states. How does OSM envision states and tribes being
able to meet their statutory responsibility to address high
priority AML sites in light of the elimination of federal
funding for AML emergencies? How does OSM reconcile this
proposal with the intentions of Congress expressed in the 2006
amendments to move more money out of the AML Fund sooner to
address the backlog of AML problems that continue to linger?
Proposed Elimination of Funding to Certified States and Tribes

From what we can ascertain, OSM proposes to eliminate
all payments to certified states and tribes--in lieu of funds;
prior balance replacement funds; and monies that are due and
owing in FY 2018 and 2019 from the phase-in during fiscal years
2008 and 2009. Is this accurate? OSM says nothing of what the
impact will be on non-certified states as a result of
eliminating these payments to certified states and tribes--
especially the equivalent payments that would otherwise be made
to the historic production share that directly relate to ``in
lieu of'' payments to certified states and tribes under section
411(h)(4). Previously, OSM has stated that ``the amounts that
would have been allocated to certified states and tribes under
section 402(g)(1) of SMCRA will be transferred to the
historical production allocation on an annual basis to the
extent that those states and tribes receive in lieu payments
from the Treasury (through the Secretary of the Interior) under
section 402(i) and 411(h)(2) of SMCRA.'' By OSM's own admission
in its FY 2013 proposed budget, this will amount to $1.2
billion over ten years. If the in lieu payments are not made
(as proposed), how can the transfer to historic production
occur? The result, of course, would be a drastic impact on the
historic production allocation otherwise available to
uncertified states. Will OSM address this matter in its
proposed legislation? If so, how?

Has OSM considered the fiscal and programmatic
impacts that could result if the certified states and tribes,
who no longer receive AML monies, choose to return their Title
V regulatory programs to OSM (especially given the severe
reductions being proposed for FY 2013 in Title V grants)?

Finally, how do the cuts in the Title IV program line
up with the Administration's other economic, fiscal and
environmental objectives as articulated in the deficit
reduction and jobs bills that have been considered by Congress?
These objectives include environmental stewardship, cleaning up
abandoned mines (coal and noncoal) nationwide, creating green
jobs, pumping dollars into local communities, putting money to
work on the ground in an expeditious manner, sustainable
development, infrastructure improvements, alternative energy
projects, protecting public health and safety, and improving
the environment. It seems to us that there is a serious
disconnect here and we remain mystified as to how these
laudable objectives and OSM's budget proposal can be
reconciled.
______

Mr. Johnson. Thank you, Mr. Conrad.
Mr. Wasson, you may now begin.

STATEMENT OF MATT WASSON, DIRECTOR OF PROGRAMS, APPALACHIAN
VOICES

Mr. Wasson. Thank you, Congressman Johnson, to the
Committee, and to the staff, for the opportunity to speak about
OSM's work and responsibility to protect people and the
environment from mining practices that have demonstrably been
poorly regulated in the past. My name is Matt Wasson, and I am
the Director of Programs at Appalachian Voices. We are a non-
profit environmental organization dedicated to addressing the
greatest threats to the Southern and Central Appalachian
Region.
I first want to address the development of the stream
protection rule, and the air of misinformation and alarmism
about the rule's purported threats to jobs, domestic energy
production, and the economy.
Make no mistake that the controversy over OSM's actions on
the stream protection rule is all about mountaintop removal, a
mining practice in Appalachia that involves blasting the tops
off of mountains to access coal, and dumping the resulting
waste and debris down into valleys below.
Last year, the discussion draft of the Environmental Impact
Statement that was leaked to coal company employees and the
media provided mountaintop removal supporters like the National
Mining Association with the opportunity to spread fear and
misinformation, suggesting that the rule would all but abolish
mining, and especially in Western surface mining areas, as well
as in terms of underground longwall mining in the East.
To demonstrate just how disconnected this rhetoric has been
from reality, if you actually look at the document that was
leaked, for what it is worth, the three most restrictive
alternatives they put out were predicted to actually increase
underground coal mining in the East. And I am guessing that
this important fact has not been brought up by coal industry
witnesses in this Committee.
But the most important thing I want to impress on this
Committee is how much is at stake for people whose health,
homes, communities are at risk from poorly regulated mining
practices in Appalachia and beyond. Recently, 18 different
studies published in peer-reviewed scientific journals and
authored by nearly 40 different researchers have demonstrated
pervasive impacts on the health, well-being, and life
expectancy of people living near mountaintop removal and other
types of coal mines in Appalachia.
Last year, the overwhelming evidence that coal mining was
leading to a public health crisis in the coal-bearing regions
of their State led the Kentucky Medical Association to pass a
resolution pledging support for laws, rules, and regulations to
protect people's health from the impacts of coal. As reasons
for adopting the policy, the KMA made the following
statements--and I quote--``Loss of stream integrity from valley
fills associated with mountaintop removal coal mining is
related to increased cancer mortality.'' And they cite elevated
birth defect rates in mountaintop removal areas of Central
Appalachia compared with other mining areas and non-mining
areas.
The result of all of these health impacts is that life
expectancy for both men and women actually declined between
1997 and 2007 in Appalachian counties with the most strip
mining. In 2007, life expectancy in these counties was
comparable to that in developing countries like Iran, Syria, El
Salvador, and Vietnam.
I last want to address some of the false assumptions being
made about the impact of OSM's rulemaking on jobs, domestic
energy production, and the economy. Supporters of mountaintop
removal mining have been issuing sky-is-falling predictions
ever since the EPA announced its plans to give greater scrutiny
to mountaintop removal mine permits in March of 2009. This
gives us since then three years to evaluate the quality of
those predictions.
As it turns out, those predictions that the
Administration's actions would destroy jobs and put America's
energy supply at risk failed to occur. The number of mining
jobs in Appalachia has increased substantially since 2009.
Employment in this last quarter was up six percent since the
Administration first announced its new mountaintop removal
permitting policies. It is up 9 percent since the EPA issued a
new guidance on surface mine permitting in April of 2010. 2011
saw the highest level of employment in Appalachian coal mines
in 15 years.
And, in terms of domestic energy production, according to
the Federal Reserve, the productive capacity of actively
producing coal mines in the U.S. in 2011 is the highest it has
ever been in the 26 years they have been keeping those data.
And the utilization of that capacity is the lowest it has been
over that time frame, largely because of competition from
natural gas.
The problem facing the coal industry is low gas prices. It
is not permitting. And I encourage this Committee to use its
power to help end mountaintop removal, and create a just a
sustainable future for the people of Appalachia.
Thank you for the opportunity.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Wasson follows:]

Statement of Matthew F. Wasson, Ph.D., Director of Programs,
Appalachian Voices

Thank you Chairman Lamborn and members of the Subcommittee for the
opportunity to speak about the need for OSM to implement an effective
Stream Protection Rule. I also appreciate the opportunity to counter
the alarmist misinformation that has surrounded the debate about the
SPR in regard to the rule's purported threats to jobs and the economy.
My name is Matt Wasson and I am the Director of Programs at
Appalachian Voices, a non-profit organization dedicated to addressing
the greatest environmental threats to the Southern and Central
Appalachian Region. Appalachian Voices is a member of the Alliance for
Appalachia, which is an alliance of 13 grassroots organizations working
to end mountaintop removal coal mining and bring a just and sustainable
future to Central Appalachia.
Beginning with my doctoral research at Cornell University on the
impacts of acid rain on birds, I have spent the last 17 years involved
in research on the mining, processing and combustion of coal. Despite
my extensive research on stream ecology and coal, I can't offer the
subcommittee the type of testimony that would be most salient to the
topic of today's hearing--the tragic personal stories of what it is
like to bathe your children in polluted water or to wake up one day to
find your tap water looks like tomato soup and smells like rotten eggs.
But through my work with the Alliance for Appalachia I have had the
privilege of working with many people who have experienced precisely
those circumstances. On their behalf, I will try to provide my best
summary of the myriad and devastating impacts that poorly regulated
coal mining can have on nearby families and communities.
The most damaging form of poorly regulated coal mining is
mountaintop removal, a technique that involves blasting off the tops
off mountains to access thin seams of coal and then generally dumping
the waste and debris into nearby valleys. Not only has this practice
obliterated more than 500 of the oldest and most biologically diverse
mountains on the continent, but it has buried more than 2,000 miles of
streams and polluted the headwaters of the drinking water supply of
millions of Americans.
More importantly, 18 peer-reviewed scientific studies have linked
mountaintop removal and other forms of coal mining to a host of medical
conditions including increased rates of birth defects, cancer and
cardiovascular disease in nearby communities, resulting in life
expectancies comparable to those in developing countries like Syria,
Iran and Viet Nam.
Despite what you may have heard, the controversy over the Stream
Protection Rule is all about mountaintop removal. The atmosphere of
confusion, misinformation and near hysteria surrounding OSM's
development of that rule was initiated and fueled by those with a
vested interest in continuing and even expanding the practice.
As the chairman and members of this committee know well, an early
discussion draft of the environmental impact statement for the Stream
Protection Rule was leaked to coal company employees and the media just
over a year ago. While mountaintop removal supporters quickly took
advantage of the opportunity to spread fear and misinformation about
the rule (i.e., asserting that it would abolish western surface mining
and longwall mining in the East), the actual content of the leaked EIS
provides no indication that OSM has any such intentions. To provide
some perspective, the three most restrictive regulatory alternatives
evaluated in the draft EIS were predicted to lead to increased
underground coal mining in the East, while the fourth alternative would
have no impact. I would guess that this fact has not been brought up by
coal industry witnesses in this committee.
Like most advocates for a strong Stream Protection Rule, I
recognize that America needs coal to power our homes, factories and
economy. Moreover, we will continue to rely on the hard work and
sacrifice of American miners to supply coal for years, perhaps decades,
into the future. While demand for coal is in long-term decline due to
competition from other energy sources, there is no immediate
alternative that can replace the 42% of our electricity and 20% of our
overall energy supply that coal currently provides. The best way to
ensure a reliable supply of coal, as well as to honor the men and women
that mine it, is to give agencies the authority and resources they need
to ensure coal is mined in a manner that does not destroy the land,
water and health of nearby residents and that clearly complies with
laws passed by Congress to protect our natural resources.
On behalf of the thousands of people whose health, homes and
communities are at risk from poorly regulated mining practices in
Appalachia and beyond, I implore the members of this committee to allow
OSM to do its job to promulgate common sense rules that will protect
the people and mountains of Appalachia as well as the streams that are
the headwaters of the drinking water supply of millions of Americans.
Why a Strong Stream Protection Rule is Necessary
Environmental Considerations
The fact that surface coal mining, and mountaintop removal mining
in particular, is causing massive and irreversible impacts to
Appalachian streams is beyond question. According to a groundbreaking
study published by 13 leading aquatic ecologists in 2010 in Science,
the nation's premier scientific journal:
``Our analyses of current peer-reviewed studies and of new
water-quality data from WV streams revealed serious
environmental impacts that mitigation practices cannot
successfully address. Published studies also show a high
potential for human health impacts... Clearly, current attempts
to regulate [mountaintop removal mining] practices are
inadequate. Mining permits are being issued despite the
preponderance of scientific evidence that impacts are pervasive
and irreversible and that mitigation cannot compensate for
losses.''
In addition to the impact on streams, mountaintop removal has
obliterated 500 of the oldest mountains on the continent and caused
widespread destruction and fragmentation of Appalachian forests.
According to the 2010 Science article, ``The extensive tracts of
deciduous forests destroyed by [mountaintop removal] support some of
the highest biodiversity in North America, including several endangered
species.''
Impacts on the Health and Well-Being of People
There's a common saying in Appalachia: what we do to the land, we
do to the people. A host of recent peer-reviewed scientific studies
have demonstrated the truth of these words. Evidence of pervasive
impacts on the health, well-being and life-expectancy of people living
near mountaintop removal and other types of coal mines in Appalachia
has been published over the last five years in 18 different scientific
studies authored by nearly 40 different researchers. This overwhelming
evidence led the Kentucky Medical Association to pass a resolution in
2011 pledging to ``educate the public and make publicly visible its
support for national and state laws, rules and regulations that protect
individual health and public health from the impact of the extraction,
transportation, processing and combustion of coal.'' As reasons for
adopting the policy, the KMA made the following statements

``A recent study found that the loss of stream
integrity from valley fills associated with mountaintop removal
(MTR) coal mining is related to increased cancer mortality;''

``A recent study found elevated birth defect rates in
MTR areas of central Appalachia compared with other coal mining
areas and non-mining areas;''

``MTR areas are also associated with the greatest
reductions in health-related quality of life even when compared
with counties with other forms of coal mining;''

``Considering the value of life lost, a 2009 study
concluded that the human cost of the Appalachian coal mining
economy outweighs its economic benefits.''
In addition to the health impacts cited by the Kentucky Medical
Association, recently published studies have associated mountaintop
removal and other forms of coal mining in Appalachia with increased
rates of:

Chronic respiratory and kidney disease,

Low birth weight,

Deaths from cardiopulmonary disease,

Hypertension,

Lung cancer,

Hospitalizations

Unhealthy days (poor physical or mental health or
activity limitation)
The net result of these health impacts is illustrated in an
analysis of data published by the Institute for Health Metrics and
Evaluation in 2011. Life expectancy for both men and women actually
declined between 1997 and 2007 in Appalachian counties with the most
strip mining, even as life expectancy in the U.S. as a whole increased
by more than a year. In 2007, life expectancy in the five Appalachian
counties with the most strip mining was comparable to that in
developing countries like Iran, Syria, El Salvador and Viet Nam.

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 73227.001

.epsMountaintop removal coal mining is also associated with poor
emotional health. In surveys conducted by Gallup in 2010 across all 435
Congressional districts, those where mountaintop removal occurs ranked
dead last in both physical and emotional well-being.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 73227.002

.epsGiven that mountaintop removal frequently forces Appalachians
to leave homes and land that have been in their family for as many as
five, six, or seven generations, severe impacts on emotional well-being
are not surprising--it's not just mountains, streams, or even homes
that are at stake, it's people's culture, identity and sense of place.
These factors could also help explain the dramatic declines in
population that have occurred over the past 30 years in counties where
mountaintop removal occurs. The correlation between mountaintop removal
mining and population declines is unmistakable in the map of county
population trends between 1980 and 2010 shown below.
Beyond its association with poor physical and emotional health,
mountaintop removal is associated just as strongly with poor
socioeconomic conditions. Not only do the Central Appalachian counties
where mountaintop removal occurs have among the highest poverty rates
in the country, but a study of ``persistent economic distress''
published by the Appalachian Regional Commission in 2005 showed that
those counties are far more likely to remain economically distressed
compared to nearby counties where mining is less prevalent. According
to the ARC study:
``Of all the regions in this analysis, Central Appalachia has
been one of the poorest performers in relation to the ARC's
economic distress measure over time. Furthermore, and unlike
all other regions in the U.S., current and persistent economic
distress within the Central Appalachian Region has been
associated with employment in the mining industry, particularly
coal mining.''
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 73227.003

.epsIronically, the high poverty rates in Appalachian counties are
frequently cited as reasons for streamlining the permitting of
mountaintop removal mines, despite the fact that more than 50 years of
poorly regulated strip mining has failed to improve the economic
situation. A study published in 2011 in the Annals of the Association
of American Geographers took on the question of the relationship
between mountaintop removal and unemployment rates directly. Based on
their analysis, the authors of the study concluded:
``Although policymakers are aware of the negative environmental
effects of MTR, its continued use is primarily rationalized
using the argument that it contributes to local economies,
especially job retention and development... Contrary to pro-MTR
arguments, we found no supporting evidence suggesting MTR
contributed positively to nearby communities' employment.''
To make matters worse, a series of new studies that quantify coal-
related revenues and expenditures to state treasuries have shown that
the coal industries in West Virginia, Kentucky and Tennessee operate at
a net loss to tax-payers, even accounting for the indirect impacts of
coal mine employment while ignoring the ``externalized costs'' of the
industry on the health and environment of communities where coal is
mined. According to the West Virginia study:
``While every job and every dollar of revenue generated by the
coal industry provides an economic benefit for the state of
West Virginia and the counties where the coal is produced, the
net impact of the West Virginia coal industry, when taking all
revenues and expenditures into account, amounted to a net cost
to the state of $97.5 million in Fiscal Year 2009.''
One might wonder why, with all of the evidence that mountaintop
removal has detrimental impacts on the health and well-being or nearby
residents, the practice continues to occur and is supported by
virtually every elected representative of the region to state and
Congressional offices. The question becomes even more puzzling when one
looks at recent polls showing that likely voters in Central Appalachian
coal counties oppose the practice and, by an overwhelming margin,
oppose the destruction and pollution of streams that results from
mountaintop removal coal mining. According to a recent poll conducted
by Lake Research Partners and Bellweather Research, ``Voters across
Kentucky, West Virginia, Tennessee, and Virginia solidly oppose
mountaintop removal coal mining, by wide margins and across a host of
demographic and political divides.'' The poll also found that:

``Three-quarters support fully enforcing--and even
increasing protections in--the Clean Water Act to safeguard
streams, rivers, and lakes in their states from mountaintop
removal coal mining... Just 8% of voters oppose it.''

``...fully 57% oppose mountaintop removal and with
noticeable intensity (42% strongly oppose), compared to just
20% who support it (10% strongly).''

``solid majorities of voters in these Appalachian
states believe either that ``environmental protections are
often good for the economy'' (40%) or ``have little or no
impact on the economy'' (20%). Just one-quarter of voters (25%)
believes that ``environmental protections are often bad for the
economy''.''
How Will the Stream Protection Rule impact Jobs, Domestic Energy
Production and the Price of Electricity?
Supporters of mountaintop removal mining like the National Mining
Association have been issuing sky-is-falling predictions of devastating
impacts on jobs and national security ever since the EPA announced its
plans to give greater scrutiny to mountaintop removal mine permits in
March of 2009. The industry sounded similar warnings when the
memorandum of understanding was signed by EPA, OSM and the Army Corps
of Engineers in June, 2009, and when EPA released a new guidance for
reviewing Clean Water Act permits for Appalachian surface mines in
April, 2010.
With three years of coal production and employment data now
available since enhanced EPA oversight of mine permitting began, the
validity of those predictions can be put to the test. Testing these
claims should also shed some light on the validity and integrity of
predictions now being made by those same companies and trade
associations in regard to the Stream Protection Rule.
As it turns out, the prediction that EPA's actions would destroy
jobs, increase electricity rates and put America's energy supply at
risk not only failed to occur, but was precisely the opposite of what
actually occurred. The discrepancy between coal industry predictions
and reality is probably attributable to the fact that every statement
and analysis that has been made by mountaintop removal supporters about
the impact of more stringent mine permitting has been predicated on one
common false assumption: that permits are the limiting factor for coal
production and that simply permitting and developing new coal mines
will increase overall production and employment. In reality, declining
demand for coal is the bottleneck for production.
What coal industry representatives have consistently glossed over
is the fact that demand for coal is declining across most of the U.S.
for the simple reason that it is unable to compete with alternative
sources of electricity generation. A story published by the Energy
Information Administration in its Feb 29th edition of the ``Electricity
Monthly Update'' provides a concise illustration of the point. The
story is about how three natural gas plants in Ohio are supplying an
increasing proportion of the state's electricity at the expense of
seven older coal-fired plants that rely on Central Appalachian coal.
According to the EIA:
``The increased generation from these three [gas-fired] plants
is coming at the expense of less efficient coal plants. Seven
coal plants in Ohio (with a combined capacity of 7,113
megawatts and an average heat rate around 10,500 Btu/kWh) have
experienced a significant drop in generation in recent years.
In the chart below, the generation share of these seven sample
coal plants, expressed as its share of total generation from
both sample coal and natural gas plants, is compared to the
corresponding share of the three combined cycle plants. As
illustrated in the chart, natural gas generation went from 3
percent of total sample plant generation in January 2008 to 47
percent in December 2011.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 73227.004

.eps``As shown with the lines on the chart, relative Henry Hub
and Central Appalachian coal prices appear to have a
significant role in these gas-fired power plants being
dispatched more often. The fuel prices have been adjusted to
account for the average heat rate of natural gas or coal plants
consuming that fuel in Ohio.''
A similar story could be told in states all across the eastern U.S.
that have traditionally relied on Appalachian coal. Across the region,
natural gas prices have fallen below the level where Appalachian coal
can compete. Moreover, the declining role of coal in U.S. electricity
markets is not the result of any new regulations, but is the
continuation of a decades-long trend that began in the mid 80s, when
coal supplied nearly 60% of U.S electricity and is expected to continue
at least through 2015, when EIA projects in its 2012 Annual Energy
Outlook that coal will account for just 39% of U.S. generation.
No impact of previous EPA and OSM actions on jobs
In contrast to the dire predictions from mountaintop removal
supporters, the number of mining jobs in Appalachia has increased
substantially since 2009. In fact, 2011 saw the highest level of
employment at Appalachian coal mines since 1997. Employment in the 4th
quarter of 2011 was up 6% since the MOU was signed in June, 2009, and
it was up 9% since EPA issued a new guidance on surface mine permitting
in April, 2010 (see chart on next page).
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 73227.005

.epsOf course, if demand for Appalachian coal continues on its
expected downward trajectory then the number of jobs will ultimately
decline as well. In fact, it appears that may already be occurring, as
the enormous surge in international demand for metallurgical coal that
began in 2009, which partially compensated for the sharp drop in demand
for thermal coal from domestic power producers, has begun to fall off.
As a result, Appalachian coal production is down 8% compared to the
first quarter of 2011 and an increasing number of layoffs have occurred
recently due to companies' decisions to idle or curtail production at
certain mines. The fact that these layoffs are the result of falling
demand, as opposed to difficulty in obtaining mining permits, is
demonstrated by a press release issued by Alpha Natural Resources in
February announcing their intention to idle six Appalachian mines and
reduce production at four others. Alpha's CEO Kevin Crutchfield
explained in the press release that ``Several mines are encountering
weak demand for their products,'' and that ``... adverse market
conditions left us no choice.''
The press release goes on to explain that ``Alpha's Central
Appalachian businesses are seeing more electric utilities switch from
thermal coal to natural gas to take advantage of gas prices at 10-year
lows.'' The company also attributes some of the drop in demand to the
fact that utilities are ``shutting down a number of generating stations
that have traditionally run on coals sourced from Central Appalachia.''
Unsurprisingly, the
No impact of previous EPA and OSM actions on energy supply and
electricity prices
According to the Federal Reserve, the productive capacity of
actively producing coal mines in the U.S. in 2011 was the highest it
has ever been since they began supplying such estimates in 1986. The
Fed estimates that productive capacity increased by 1.6% since 2009,
when more stringent review of Appalachian mine permits began. The
Federal Reserve data also show that the utilization of the productive
capacity of active U.S. coal mines was an anemic 77% in 2011--the
lowest it's been since the Fed began supplying such estimates. The
capacity utilization of U.S. mines has averaged 85% since 1986.
To put those numbers in perspective, mines that have already been
permitted could have produced an additional 138 million tons in 2011 if
they were operating at the historic average level of capacity
utilization. Notably, that is somewhat more than the 119 million tons
produced by all strip mines in Appalachia combined. There could be no
clearer evidence that the reason U.S. mines are operating at such a low
capacity is because there is insufficient demand for the coal they
could produce, and has nothing to do with difficulties companies might
face in obtaining new permits for mountaintop removal mines.
Finally, an update on natural gas supplies in the Federal Energy
Regulatory Commission's recent ``Winter Market Assessment'' highlights
the absurdity of any contention that permitting requirements for
mountaintop removal coal mines threaten national security and domestic
energy supply. In their report, FERC makes clear that natural gas
supplies are likely to remain more than adequate for two reasons: the
rapid increase in unconventional gas drilling in the Marcellus Shale
and the enormous increase in domestic oil drilling resulting from high
oil prices. According to FERC:
``Natural gas production continued to grow in 2011, setting
records throughout the year ... Shale gas now accounts for more
than 25% of U.S. production, up from 5% in 2007. There has also
been an increase in production of associated gas from oil shale
wells, as high oil prices led to the acceleration in drilling
for shale oil... In some regions, the rush to extract oil from
oil rich shale formations has also resulted in high levels of
flaring, or burning of natural gas. In the Bakken shale
formation in North Dakota, for example, the natural gas
gathering system is struggling to keep pace with growing
production, and an estimated 25% of the natural gas produced,
as much as 100 MMcfd, has been flared this year.''
In regard to electricity rates, the average retail cost of
electricity across the U.S. has increased by 1.7% since 2009, when the
MOU on mountaintop removal went into effect. That translates into an
annual rate of increase of less than 1%--below the rate of inflation.
More importantly, the price of electricity in the South Atlantic--the
region where most Central Appalachian coal is consumed--has actually
fallen by 0.6% since 2009.
Predictions of the impact of the Stream Protection Rule are based on
faulty assumptions and non-existent data
The most important thing to understand about any prediction of
economic impacts of the Stream Protection rule is that, at this point,
there is simply nothing valid to base those predictions on. OSM hasn't
even proposed a draft rule. In the mean time, studies based on
unrealistic assumptions and worst-case scenarios only serve to
obfuscate the important issues the rule is designed to address.
Some studies claim to be based on an early version of the draft EIS
for the rule that was leaked to coal companies and the media last year.
The EIS analyzed 5 different alternatives that included ``no action''
(Alternative 1), three regulatory approaches presented in descending
order of their relative impact on current mining practices
(Alternatives 2,3 and 4), and a hybrid that was identified as OSM's
preferred approach (Alternative 5). Even assuming that these
alternatives are representative of OSM's current thinking, however, the
analyses released by industry groups have no relationship to the actual
content of the document that was leaked and appear to be based on data
that was simply made up.
Even the original analysis conducted by the contractors that
produced the draft EIS was problematic, as it was based on demonstrably
unrealistic assumptions of coal demand. For instance, the headline in
the media--that 7,000 jobs in Appalachia are projected to be lost if
OSM's ``preferred alternative'' were implemented--was based on the
assumption that demand for Appalachian coal would remain roughly
constant at 2008 levels. As a result, the production levels at
Appalachian mines that were forecast under all five regulatory
scenarios were higher than what the Energy Information Administration
is forecasting in its 2012 Annual Energy Outlook (see figure below).
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 73227.006

.epsIn other words, if the same analysis were applied to more
realistic levels of coal demand it would presumable predict there would
be no reduction in Appalachian coal production and employment under any
of the alternative rules considered in the EIS.
Conclusion
Starving the agency of the funds it needs to promulgate the Stream
Protection Rule would be irresponsible and it would be unethical given
the enormous amount of evidence in recent peer-reviewed scientific
literature showing that poorly regulated mining is causing irreparable
damage to streams that are the headwaters of the drinking water supply
of millions of Americans, and is the key factor implicated in what
amounts to a public health crisis in Appalachia.
In terms of EPA's and OSM's actions around mountaintop removal,
many environmental and Appalachian community advocates are also
concerned about the approach these agencies are taking, but for very
different reasons than those of the coal industry representatives that
have testified repeatedly to this committee. I believe that EPA and OSM
have erred in vainly pursuing a coherent approach to regulating
mountaintop removal coal mining because mountaintop removal simply
can't be done in a manner that complies with the Clean Water Act, much
less that protects the health and welfare of people living nearby.
Mountaintop removal doesn't need to be regulated, it needs to be ended.
Even if there were an economic justification for neglecting clean water
safeguards and the welfare of the Appalachian people, every rationale
that has been put forward to continue mountaintop removal is
contradicted by readily available facts which I have provided
throughout this testimony.
I thank the committee and Chairman Lamborn again for the
opportunity to speak on behalf of the thousands of people suffering
from the impacts of poorly regulated coal mining practices. I sincerely
hope that my testimony will help this committee better understand the
pressing need for OSM to develop an effective set of rules to ensure
that coal mining can continue to supply our country with much needed
energy without the devastating impacts to public health, the
environment and the economy of the regions where coal is mined.
______

Mr. Johnson. Thank you, Mr. Wasson. We will now begin
questioning. Members are limited to five minutes for their
questions, but we may have additional rounds, time permitting.
I now recognize myself for five minutes.
Mr. Wasson, you did not provide references for the studies
that you referred to. Do you have references that you can
provide to this Committee?
Mr. Wasson. I do, and I would be happy to furnish those.
Mr. Johnson. OK. If you would furnish those, I would
appreciate it.
You testified that you and your organization's goal is
working to end mountaintop removal coal mining. Is that a
correct statement?
Mr. Wasson. That is correct.
Mr. Johnson. OK. Well, clearly, as the invited witness of
the Minority, it is clear that the Minority members of the
Committee--by the way, who are all present here today we see,
they are so interested in this important topic--it is clear
that the Minority members of the Committee share this goal as
well: Working to end mountaintop coal mining in America.
Former Chairman, Nick Rahall, frequently stated that SMCRA
was written to establish guidelines for mining to permit the
development of the resource and the protection of worker
safety, at the same time understanding the environmental
impacts and promoting reclamation of these areas. Clearly,
Democrats on this Committee no longer believe in this premise.
If you want to talk about costing tens of thousands of
direct and indirect coal jobs, and causing electricity rates to
go higher, then we should go forward with that goal.
Unfortunately, since President Obama has taken office,
Americans are paying $300 more per year in electricity rates.
And I might point out you gave all of these stats, Mr.
Wasson, about coal production increases and coal production
utilization. I have a hard time drawing a connection, then,
with the dichotomy of the 150 or so people in my community at
the Muskingum coal-fired power plants as a result of many of
the utility companies closing down their coal-fired power
plants.
If we go forward with this radical rewrite of the stream
buffer zone rule, then that number, that $300 per year, will
only increase. It is a simple supply and demand issue. If you
cut down the amount of coal we produce, then the cost of coal
will increase, leading to higher utility rates.
Furthermore, in Mr. Wasson's testimony he stated that the
preferred rule of OSM would not impact Western States or
underground coal mining. That is simply not true. The preferred
rule of OSM would cut down on underground coal mining by as
much as 50 percent, and cost tens of thousands of direct and
indirect jobs, if it goes forward.
I would also like to enter into the record a recent study
by four Ph.D.'s at Yale University, and that was peer-reviewed
by the scientific community, that concluded, among other
things, coal mining is not, per se, an independent risk factor
for increased mortality in Appalachia.
Finally, I would like to remind everyone that this is a
budget hearing on OSM, and their use of taxpayer money to,
amongst other things, unnecessarily rewrite a rule to forward a
political agenda, regardless of the amount of jobs it would
cost.
With that, I yield back my time. And seeing no Minority
Members, I yield to my colleague, Mr. Thompson.
Mr. Thompson. Thank you, Mr. Johnson. I appreciate that. I
thank the panel for coming and being a part of this important
discussion.
Ms. Roanhorse, you raised your objections to OSM's proposal
to eliminate unrestricted funds for certified States. How might
this impact overall reclamation efforts and coal mining
regulations, as a whole?
Ms. Roanhorse. It will definitely impact our funding. We
don't have other funding sources available, for example, for
the Navajo Nation. We only get Federal funds from AML. We would
not have any funds to do the reclamation of abandoned coal and
abandoned uranium mine sites.
We do continue to find new sites in our areas. We do have a
large area, and we have to do all the work that is necessary to
do the planning, and also to--just to finish the work, to do
reclamation.
And the uranium sites, we still have to revisit about 520
sites because of major environmental problems in those areas.
In the meantime, we have to monitor those areas because of
major erosion problems.
And we also do fund, with the little funds that we get, we
do fund community projects. These projects are impacted by
mining activities. It is under section 411 of SMCRA. It allows
us to do project funding, more leverage funding for these
projects. We have great need for that. We lack about 50 percent
overall with the Navajo Nation. A lot of folks in the remote
areas do not even have running water, do not have utilities,
don't even have communication lines or paved roads.
And with whatever we receive, although it is limited, we do
provide leverage funding for those projects. And all the other
States, that would also impact their AML program, as well,
especially all the abandoned non-coal sites. That funding is
needed for the States.
Mr. Thompson. You had discussed in your testimony the
possibility of States and Tribes having obtained NPDES permits
for reclamation projects, as a result of the fourth circuit.
Can you elaborate on this?
Ms. Roanhorse. I will have Greg here respond to the
question.
Mr. Thompson. OK, thank you.
Mr. Conrad. Congressman, if you don't mind.
Mr. Thompson. Please.
Mr. Conrad. The fourth circuit decision was primarily
focused on bond forfeiture sites in the State of West Virginia.
But the decision was structured so broadly that there is
concern that the fourth circuit's decision, which does require
NPDES permits for States that are doing bond forfeiture work,
could extend to States that are doing abandoned mine land
reclamation work. And for that reason we have had a concern
about just how broadly that decision might reach into our work
for AML.
Mr. Thompson. Well, Mr. Conrad, you made the point that
OSM's ``solution to the drastic cuts for state regulatory
programs comes in the way of an unrealistic assumption of user
fee increases.'' Can you elaborate on that point?
Mr. Conrad. Yes, thank you. The idea behind this proposal
from OSM is that the States would increase permit fees that we
charge to the industry, and that those permit fees should be
structured to capture all of the costs associated not only with
permitting mining sites, but also for inspection and
enforcement.
These would be substantial fees, and substantial fee
increases that would be faced by the States. Our assessment,
based upon our discussions with the States, is that the concept
of fees is not particularly well received in most of the state
legislatures at this point in time, and that to move in that
direction would be exceedingly difficult. There is also a
question about how those fees should be structured, whether we
could do that with our own statutory authorities, or whether
this would require a Federal rule to support and allow us to
even move forward with these kinds of increases in the States.
So, it is an inherently complex and intricate process,
certainly not something that could happen in the course of a
single fiscal year.
Mr. Thompson. Mr. Conrad, how specifically can Congress or
OSM improve and make more efficient the grant process and
obligation of funding for reclamation purposes?
Mr. Conrad. Certainly not by using or utilizing an advisory
committee, as has been suggested in the legislative proposal.
Frankly, we believe that the process that we currently have
in place works well, and that it is an efficient and an
effective process. We don't see a need to completely retool and
reorder that process. To the extent that we need to make any
enhancements to that process, it would likely be in the area of
pursuing the way that the States are currently working in the
context of some of their partnerships, so that we can
effectuate greater degrees of money that might be available to
us in the AML world. But going in the direction of the
legislative proposal, in our view, would be disastrous.
Mr. Thompson. Well, thank you, Mr. Conrad. Mr. Chairman, if
I had any time remaining, I would yield it to the Members of
the Minority Party to weigh in on this important topic that we
have been addressing here, but I have neither time nor
Democratic colleagues present. So thank you.
Mr. Johnson. Thank you, Mr. Thompson. I appreciate you
yielding back.
I want to thank the panel for being here today, as well. I
have to excuse myself, because I have a Subcommittee that I
have to chair at noon. And so I am going to turn the gavel over
to Mr. Thompson. You have no further questions?
OK. Well, in that case, then, thank you all for being here
today, and providing your testimony. Members of the Committee
may have additional questions for the record, and I ask you to
respond to these in writing.
If there is no further business, without objection, the
Committee stands adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 11:53 a.m., the Subcommittee was adjourned.]

[Additional material submitted for the record follows:]

[The prepared statement of Mr. Coffman follows:]

Statement of The Honorable Mike Coffman, a Representative
in Congress from the State of Colorado

I want to thank Chairman Lamborn and the Sub-Committee for holding
this hearing today. It is important to discuss the how the President's
budget request will affect the Office of Surface Mining and its mission
to productively and responsibly utilize our coal resources.
I also would like to thank all the panelists here today. Your
testimony and insights on these matters is greatly appreciated.
As a Member from Colorado, I understand the importance of having a
sound and effective mining policy. The Colorado mining industry
generates over $3 billion in sales annually, employs more than 5,000
workers and creates over $8 billion in total economic activity for the
state.
Although coal is no longer the only means to produce energy in this
country, it is still an important factor in addressing our domestic
needs. The policy direction laid out by OSM and the President's Budget
take major steps to restrict the mining industry by not only re-writing
a previously negotiated stream buffer rule from 2006 but also forces
states to make up budget shortfalls with increased fee collection on
industry.
I am concerned the President's budget proposal is focused on
executing onerous federal regulations under the Surface Mining Control
and Reclamation Act and forcing states to increase fee collection
directly from mining companies to make up the lost funding--both of
which will have a detrimental impact on mining production in Colorado
and in the United States.
Coal is the most widely used, inexpensive source of electricity,
which provides approximately 72% of Colorado's electricity needs and
nearly half the needs of the entire country. The proposed budget and
legislative proposals, including the new stream-buffer rule, will
reduce access to affordable energy for many Americans by harming the
ability of the coal industry to be a major part of our energy
production.
Although the President hopes that renewables will run our country
tomorrow, if energy supply from coal is greatly reduced through federal
regulation the production cannot yet be replaced by renewables.
During a time when all energy production should be encouraged the
President's budget and policy direction seems to be clearly pointed at
greatly reducing our coal capacity. The President claims an all of the
above approach, but under this budget, coal production is clearly not
being supported by the Administration. It should not be the policy of
OSM to make production of this affordable and readily accessible energy
become even more restricted.
It is my hope as the Representative of the 6th District of Colorado
that the Office of Surface Mining will look closely at the effects
their policy decisions will have on job creation and energy costs for
families. However, after hearing your testimony Mr. Pizarchik, I am
convinced this Administration is dead-set on chasing impossible
environmental goals by imposing regulations that are costing American
jobs and blocking American energy production.


