- SECURE RURAL SCHOOLS REAUTHORIZATION AND FOREST MANAGEMENT OPTIONS FOR A VIABLE COUNTY PAYMENTS PROGRAM

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

SECURE RURAL SCHOOLS

REAUTHORIZATION AND

FOREST MANAGEMENT

OPTIONS FOR A VIABLE

COUNTY PAYMENTS PROGRAM

=======================================================================

OVERSIGHT HEARING

before the

SUBCOMMITTEE ON NATIONAL PARKS, FORESTS

AND PUBLIC LANDS

of the

COMMITTEE ON NATURAL RESOURCES

U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

Thursday, July 14 2011

__________

Serial No. 112-50

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Natural Resources

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.gpoaccess.gov/congress/
index.html
or
Committee address: http://naturalresources.house.gov

U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
67-404                    WASHINGTON : 2012
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800; DC
area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104  Mail: Stop IDCC, Washington, DC
20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON NATURAL RESOURCES

DOC HASTINGS, WA, Chairman
EDWARD J. MARKEY, MA, Ranking Democrat Member

Don Young, AK                        Dale E. Kildee, MI
John J. Duncan, Jr., TN              Peter A. DeFazio, OR
Louie Gohmert, TX                    Eni F.H. Faleomavaega, AS
Rob Bishop, UT                       Frank Pallone, Jr., NJ
Doug Lamborn, CO                     Grace F. Napolitano, CA
Robert J. Wittman, VA                Rush D. Holt, NJ
Paul C. Broun, GA                    Raul M. Grijalva, AZ
John Fleming, LA                     Madeleine Z. Bordallo, GU
Mike Coffman, CO                     Jim Costa, CA
Tom McClintock, CA                   Dan Boren, OK
Glenn Thompson, PA                   Gregorio Kilili Camacho Sablan,
Jeff Denham, CA                          CNMI
Dan Benishek, MI                     Martin Heinrich, NM
David Rivera, FL                     Ben Ray Lujan, NM
Jeff Duncan, SC                      John P. Sarbanes, MD
Scott R. Tipton, CO                  Betty Sutton, OH
Paul A. Gosar, AZ                    Niki Tsongas, MA
Raul R. Labrador, ID                 Pedro R. Pierluisi, PR
Kristi L. Noem, SD                   John Garamendi, CA
Steve Southerland II, FL             Colleen W. Hanabusa, HI
Bill Flores, TX                      Vacancy
Andy Harris, MD
Jeffrey M. Landry, LA
Charles J. ``Chuck'' Fleischmann,
TN
Jon Runyan, NJ
Bill Johnson, OH

Todd Young, Chief of Staff
Lisa Pittman, Chief Counsel
Jeffrey Duncan, Democrat Staff Director
David Watkins, Democrat Chief Counsel
------

SUBCOMMITTEE ON NATIONAL PARKS, FORESTS AND PUBLIC LANDS

ROB BISHOP, UT, Chairman
RAUL M. GRIJALVA, AZ, Ranking Democrat Member

Don Young, AK                        Dale E. Kildee, MI
John J. Duncan, Jr., TN              Peter A. DeFazio, OR
Doug Lamborn, CO                     Rush D. Holt, NJ
Paul C. Broun, GA                    Martin Heinrich, NM
Mike Coffman, CO                     John P. Sarbanes, MD
Tom McClintock, CA                   Betty Sutton, OH
David Rivera, FL                     Niki Tsongas, MA
Scott R. Tipton, CO                  John Garamendi, CA
Raul R. Labrador, ID                 Edward J. Markey, MA, ex officio
Kristi L. Noem, SD
Bill Johnson, OH
Doc Hastings, WA, ex officio

------
CONTENTS

----------
Page

Hearing held on Thursday, July 14, 2011..........................     1

Statement of Members:
Bishop, Hon. Rob, a Representative in Congress from the State
of Utah....................................................     2
Denham, Hon. Jeff, a Representative in Congress from the
State of California, Statement submitted for the record....    71
Grijalva, Hon. Raul M., a Representative in Congress from the
State of Arizona...........................................     3
Prepared statement of....................................     4
Hastings, Hon. Doc, a Representative in Congress from the
State of Washington........................................     5
Walden, Hon. Greg, a Representative in Congress from the
State of Oregon............................................     6
Prepared statement of....................................     8

Statement of Witnesses:
Crews, David, Superintendent, Norwood School District,
Norwood, Colorado..........................................    56
Prepared statement of....................................    58
Dauzat, Caroline McRae, Owner, Rex Lumber....................    25
Prepared statement of....................................    27
Morrison, Anna, Legislative Chair, Oregon Women in Timber....    53
Prepared statement of....................................    55
Pearce, Hon. Paul, Chair, Skamania County Board of
Commissioners, National Association of Counties Partnership
for Rural America..........................................    22
Prepared statement of....................................    23
Tenney, David Porter, Chairman, Board of Supervisors, Navajo
County, Arizona............................................    50
Prepared statement of....................................    51
Vaagen, Duane, President, Vaagen Brothers Lumber Company,
Colville, Washington.......................................    15
Prepared statement of....................................    16
Wagner, Mary, Associate Chief, U.S. Forest Service, U.S.
Department of Agriculture..................................     9
Prepared statement of....................................    11

Additional materials supplied:
``Community Forest Trust, A Pilot Project to Compliment
Secure Rural Schools and Community Self Determination Act
Reauthorization'' submitted for the record.................    69
Moyer, Steve, Vice President for Government Affairs, Trout
Unlimited, Letter submitted for the record.................    72
``Proposing a Community Forest Trust'': Statement submitted
for the record by Boundary County, Idaho; Clearwater
County, Idaho; Idaho County, Idaho; Shoshone County, Idaho;
and Valley County, Idaho...................................    73

OVERSIGHT HEARING ON ``SECURE RURAL SCHOOLS REAUTHORIZATION AND FOREST
MANAGEMENT OPTIONS FOR A VIABLE COUNTY PAYMENTS PROGRAM.''

----------

Thursday, July 14 2011

U.S. House of Representatives

Subcommittee on National Parks, Forests and Public Lands

Committee on Natural Resources

Washington, D.C.

----------

The Subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 10:07 a.m. in
Room 1334, Longworth House Office Building, The Honorable Rob
Bishop [Chairman of the Subcommittee] presiding.
Present: Representatives Bishop, Young, McClintock, Rivera,
Tipton, Labrador, Noem, Johnson, Hastings [ex-officio],
Grijalva, DeFazio, Holt, and Garamendi.
Also Present: Representatives Southerland, McMorris Rodgers
and Herger.
Mr. Bishop. The Subcommittee will come to order. The Chair
notes the presence of a quorum. The Subcommittee on National
Parks, Forests, and Public Lands is meeting today to hear
testimony on the challenges facing our timber and resource-
dependant communities with economic viabilities being shut down
by current Federal policies. With the authorization for Secure
Rural School Program expiring and the prospect of long-term
decline in funds available, for discretionary or non-
discretionary Federal spending we will have the opportunity to
be creative and are willing to consider options that have been
different from the recent past.
So this hearing is simply the first step in that process. I
am pleased that I am not going to have to read that next
paragraph, alright, yet. Under the rules, opening statements
are limited to the Chair and Ranking Member of the Subcommittee
and Full Committee. However, I am going to ask unanimous
consent to include any Members' opening statements in the
record if submitted to the clerk by the close of business
today. Hearing no objection, so ordered. I am going to further
ask unanimous consent for two of our colleagues to attend this
hearing.
No Member of Congress has been a more thoughtful or
creative advocate for rural schools than Mr. Walden and it is
our good fortune that he will be here to testify today.
Likewise, our colleague Cathy McMorris Rodgers and Steve
Southerland are not members of the Subcommittee but they have
agreed to take part in today's hearing, both to introduce one
of our witnesses as well as to participate in the hearing. I
ask unanimous consent for these Members of Congress to take
part in today's hearing, Hearing no objection, I also ask
unanimous consent for Wally Herger, who I think will be able to
join us later, to be able to sit on the dais and participate in
this hearing. And, obviously if Chairman Hastings or Ranking
Member Markey show up, at what stage they will show up, we will
allow them to give an opening statement at that point. Hearing
no objection, so ordered.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. ROB BISHOP, A REPRESENTATIVE IN CONGRESS
FROM THE STATE OF UTAH

Mr. Bishop. We thank everyone for being here. In the
history of education, public lands have always been used for
funding education. It goes back when Henry VIII took property
from the church, and he gave it to the nobles only on the
condition that they maintain and fund the schools that were
started by the church. In 1777, Georgia was the first state
that actually authorized state funding for education and half
the counties rejected it because it was an insult to their
ability to pay for themselves.
Connecticut sold two million--actually three million acres
of land to create a public trust fund for education. Of course,
the land they sold was in Ohio, but at least they were selling
something. Texas maintained their own debt, but they also set
aside 17,000 acres as a permanent trust fund for education.
Unfortunately, in the last few decades the ability of
education to be funded by use of our public lands and private
lands has seriously been eroded. Actually, it has been the last
100 years it has been seriously eroded, but especially in the
late 1980s and the 1990s it was a time where that became
difficult.
Those of us in the West, west of Denver, clearly understand
the situation where half of our land, one of every two acres,
is owned by the Federal Government and controlled by the
Federal Government, and if one looks at the situation, those of
us in the West pay a higher percentage of our income in state,
local, and Federal taxes, significantly higher than the East.
The West has always had a more difficult time in funding its
education program if you look at the 20 years before Mr.
Grijalva and I came here to Congress, whereas in the East their
education funding was increased by 68 percent. Those of us in
the West increased our education funding by only 33 percent,
less than half even though we pay more taxes and we have more
kids, and our enrollment is growing--and that in the East is
not growing.
Once again, the problem goes back to the lack of use of our
lands to generate the funds necessary from property tax and
severance tax, and even income tax from jobs that could be
generated from that particular land.
We are now talking about a program to secure rural schools
which I would have to classify as probably a good situation of
hush money. Instead of allowing the lands to be productive to
fund our education, we have an effort to try and bribe counties
so they will be satisfied by not being allowed to use their
lands. That is one of the situations I want to look at.
For the last 11 years, the Secure Rural School Program has
been providing a safety net of kinds for rural communities in
response to the Federal Government's inability to manage land
and resources and actually pay for education as it was
traditionally intended to be. I think every state has some
example of that.
As we reach a rapidly approaching debt ceiling and our
current deficits of this year, one to two trillion dollars, 14
trillion total in debt, the United States is running out of
funding options for all programs. This is one of those programs
which now requires us to look differently than we have in the
recent past at how we use our lands, and for what purpose we
will use our lands, and how our kids can be helped in the
future.
I returned from South Dakota over this last weekend, where
I saw the results of the mountain pine beetle epidemic in the
Black Hills. One of the witnesses at the hearing, a local mill
owner, pointed out that the Black Hills now have four times the
standing timber as it did 100 years ago, and the number
continues to rise while the timber harvest continues to
decline. As a result, this one single bug, which is a native to
the Rocky Mountain West, has killed millions of acres of trees,
an incredible waste of a resource, put communities at risk for
catastrophic wild fires, and doesn't help our kids.
Unfortunately, that is just one of the examples of forest
health problems that plague our national forests across this
country.
Now is the time for us, especially since Secure Rural
Schools needs to be reauthorized, to look at long-term
solutions to address the real underlying problem. It is time
for us to try and think outside the box instead of what we have
traditionally been doing. We have significant problems. We have
a significant challenge. This is our chance to meet that
challenge.
So, I look forward to hearing from our witnesses for
creative ideas for moving forward, to doing the right thing on
this issue. We can no longer afford to allow regulatory
gridlock, our timber wars to stand in our way of providing
education for our kids, and basic infrastructure for our rural
communities located in places where the Federal Government has
become an absentee landlord.
I thank you for being here. I look forward to the ideas. I
want you to know this is, as I said, the first step in a
process. We are going to be talking about this as a committee
and as groups for quite some time to come.
Mr. Bishop. With that, I recognize the gentleman from
Arizona, Mr. Grijalva, for his opening statement.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. RAUL GRIJALVA, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF ARIZONA

Mr. Grijalva. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and welcome to all
the witnesses on both panels.
Across this nation, rural communities and the Federal
Government are neighbors. The century goal when our population
was less than one-third of what it is today, it made perfect
sense to help support rural communities by sharing with them a
portion of the returns from timber harvests on public land.
This funding created an incentive for local governments to
increase timber production to fund rural schools and rural
roads. Thanks to this program, along with the others like the
Mining Law of 1872, the Homestead Act the western United States
prospered.
Unfortunately, poorly managed logging left our forests
overcut, our water polluted and wildlife habitat degraded. We
now recognize that tying Federal assistance to local
communities to the level of timber produced from the area can
make effective forest management more difficult and, even in
the best of times, lead to funding instability and uncertainty
for local governments.
The Secure Rural Schools and Self-Determination Act of 2000
recognized these challenges and provided temporary intervention
to help rural communities transition to other more sustainable
economic models. In 2006, the Republican Majority allowed this
program to lapse, but in 2007, the new Majority provided a one-
year extension. In 2008, Congress passed a four-year
reauthorization of the Secure Rural Schools Program.
The Administration has proposed a five-year reauthorization
of the program. I look forward to hearing the views of our
witnesses on this proposal. It is vital that we recognize the
needs of rural counties, but it is also important to remember
the lessons we have learned from past approaches and avoid
repeating those same mistakes again and again.
With that, let me yield back and thank you, Mr. Chairman.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Grijalva follows:]

Statement of The Honorable Raul Grijalva, Ranking Member,
Subcommittee on National Parks, Forests and Public Lands

Across this Nation, rural communities and the Federal Government
are neighbors. A century ago, when our population was less than one-
third what it is today, it made perfect sense to help support rural
communities by sharing with them a portion of the returns from timber
harvests on public land.
This funding created an incentive for local governments to increase
timber production to fund rural schools and rural roads. Thanks to this
program, along with others like the Mining Law of 1872 and the
Homestead Act, the Western United States prospered.
Unfortunately, poorly-managed logging left our forests over-cut,
our water polluted, and wildlife habitats degraded. We now recognize
that tying federal assistance to local communities to the level of
timber produced from the area can make effective forest management more
difficult and even in the best of times, lead to funding instability
and uncertainty for local governments.
The Secure Rural Schools and Community Self-Determination Act of
2000 recognized these challenges and provided a temporary intervention
to help rural communities transition to other more sustainable economic
models.
In 2006, the Republican Majority allowed the program to lapse but
in 2007, the new Majority provided a one-year extension and in 2008,
Congress passed a four-year reauthorization of the Secure Rural Schools
program.
The Administration has proposed a five year re-authorization of the
Secure Rural Schools program. I look forward to hearing the views of
our witnesses on this proposal. It is vital that we recognize the needs
of rural counties but it is also important to remember the lessons we
have learned from past approaches and avoid repeating the same
mistakes.
______

Mr. Bishop. Thank you, Mr. Grijalva.
We will now turn to our witnesses. We appreciate once again
you all being here with us. Mr. Walden, we are going to start
with you. Actually, let me introduce you all first. The
Honorable Greg Walden from the State of Oregon who has, as I
said, been involved in this issue before he was born; Mary
Wagner who is the Associate Chief of the U.S. Forest Service--I
appreciate having you here again; Duane Vaagen who is the
President of Vaagen Brothers Lumber, Incorporated, thank you
for being here; Paul Pearce, the Chairman of the, and I didn't
know how to pronounce this one, what is your county?
Mr. Pearce. Skamania.
Mr. Bishop. That is an easy thing to say. I am not even
going to go there. Anyway, thank you for being here and for
your nice--never mind. He is the County Board of Commissioners
and also from the National Association of Counties, and
Partnership for Rural America; and finally, Caroline Dauzat.
Ms. Dauzat. Dauzat.
Mr. Bishop. Dauzat. Can I just call you Smith and get it
over with? Anyway, Ms. Dauzat, I thank you for being here. You
are the owner, I understand, of Rex Lumber, and I appreciate
you being here.
Before I actually turn it over to you, the Chairman of the
Full Committee has arrived, and as I said, under our rules is
allowed to give an opening statement. I would ask if he is
desirous of doing that.
Mr. Hastings. I would like to
Mr. Bishop. Then we yield the time to the Chairman.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. DOC HASTINGS, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF WASHINGTON

Mr. Hastings. I certainly appreciate the consideration that
you give me and I apologize for coming in a little bit late,
but as you know it seems like there are always fires to put out
someplace, so I appreciate that.
For over a century the U.S. Forest Service has paid one-
quarter of its gross receipts from timber sales, mineral
extraction, leases, grazing and other fees for using national
forest lands for use on schools and roads in over 700 rural
counties where 193 million acres of national forests are
located across the country, mostly in the western states.
Additionally, the Bureau of Land Management has historically
paid about half the revenue receipts on some 2.5 million acres
of BLM-owned land in western Oregon known as ONC Trust Lands.
As we discuss the importance of revenues to these counties'
timber sales, timber sales which should be the primary source
of those revenues has deeply declined from a high in the late
1980s of over half a billion dollars to just $186 million last
year. That is an 88 percent drop. The result has been a
staggering loss of jobs and economic productivity in rural
forest communities. This serious decline of revenues is due in
large part to Federal environmental and regulatory policies in
environmental lawsuits over the past 20 years--exacerbated by
this Administration, which has blocked or shut down timber
sales in active forest management.
More Federal land acquisition, wilderness designation and
other restrictive management of existing lands has resulted in
a billion dollars in Federal maintenance backlogs and
increasing risk of catastrophic wild fires that emit tons of
carbon into the atmosphere and sediment into the streams and
rivers, and also results in more disease in dying trees.
Rather than maintain the status quo program that yields
less revenue for counties, current statutory authorities should
be reviewed to allow harvesting of more timber to make forests
healthier and more economically viable for state and local
governments to use for schools and other local needs.
So I look forward to this hearing. I am particularly
interested in--I am sure this Committee is interested in
hearing from the Forest Service on how the Administration can
reconcile the finalization of the revised forest planning rule
of the Northern Spotted Owl Recovery Plan which, of course, was
released recently.
So, I just want to say that I look forward to working with
my colleagues on this as we move forward. I know that our good
friend from Oregon, Mr. Walden, has been very active in this in
the past, and I certainly look forward to working with him, and
Paul Pearce, of course, is somebody that has darkened my door
many, many times on this issue, but I look forward to working
on this to try to find a right resolution.
With that, I yield back my time. Thanks for the courtesy.
Mr. Bishop. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
With that,] we will now turn to the panel. Congressman
Walden, you are up.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. GREGORY PAUL WALDEN, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF OREGON

Mr. Walden. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, Chairman
Hastings, Ranking Member Grijalva. It is an honor to be before
this wonderful committee on which I used to serve. I appreciate
the opportunity to share some comments with you today.
This is both an important and timely hearing, and I am
encouraged that your Committee has taken this up and is
interested in identifying long-term solutions for our Federal
forest counties and the people who live there. I want to
recognize my colleague from Oregon who proves that real men can
wear pink, Congressman Peter DeFazio. We have had productive
discussions and agree that the status quo serves no one well
and that it is time for real change.
In 2000, as you mentioned, Congress authorized county
payments in recognition that layers of environmental
regulations had throttled timber production on Federal lands
that deprived the local communities of timber receipts that
helped fund local schools, roads, and emergency services. I
would direct your eyes to this chart where the gold line shows
the drop in Federal timber harvest from a high of nearly five
billion board feet in the mid-1980s to less than one-half a
billion in 2009. And since 1990, Federal timber harvests have
dropped more than 90 percent while harvest on private lands has
remained at a stable sustainable level.
This year the third reauthorization of county payment
expires, and more than nine million school children in 729
counties nationwide will be impacted. I think we can all agree
the status quo doesn't work and will not work going forward.
Our communities don't even want the status quo. They don't want
the handout that has made them dependent on the Federal
Government. They want jobs. They want healthy forests. They are
tired of the catastrophic fires and bug infestations. They are
sick of the bludgeoning uncertainty that comes with not knowing
if Uncle Sam will pay his fair share. They want the ability to
pursue the American ideal of self-reliance once more.
When county payments were created in 2000, it was thought
of as a bridge payment so rural counties could transition away
from their resource-based economy. But let us get real. These
are Federal forested counties. The government controls more
than half of the land in most of them and nearly 80 percent in
some, and the notion that they have the ability to re-create
their economies in a decade's time is simply absurd.
The Federal Government owns most of the land but has all
but stopped productive forestry on it. It is shutting down
public access to it, fails largely to produce economic value or
renewable energy from it, and all too often stands idly by and
lets it go up in smoke every year. The loss of county payments
will be felt most in western states like Oregon where the
Federal Government owns 60 percent of the forests but only
produces just 12 percent of the timber harvest as seen in
orange on both of these pie charts. The mortality rates are
above 19 percent on Federal forest lands. That is not a healthy
picture.
Private forests in Oregon produce 73 percent of the
harvested timber with a mortality rate of just 3.8 percent,
maintaining a net growth rate of 22 percent. And according to
the Forest Service timber harvest on Federal lands nationwide,
nationwide has fallen 80 percent since 1990, while wild fires
have burned an average of 7.8 million acres every year for the
last five years, an area larger than the State of Maryland.
Meanwhile, there is an unemployment crisis in many rural
counties. In central, southern and eastern Oregon unemployment
is commonly well into the double digits.
Here on the monitors we are going to take a 30-second trip
through time, 30 years of it as mill closures and job losses
occurred in Oregon. From 1980 to 2010, we went from 405 open
mills to just 106 open mills, a 74 percent decrease in capacity
available to do work in the woods. We went from 45,778 mill
jobs to 15,706 in that time, a 66 percent loss of jobs.
My colleagues, this isn't an opportunity to act. This is an
obligation to act and deliver a real solution, one that puts
Americans back to work on public lands, makes our forests
healthy for habitat and taxpayers alike, and spares communities
of the uncertainty of wondering every four years if the Federal
Government will owe up to its end of the bargain.
Now here are some thoughts for the Committee to consider.
Paralysis by analysis, and litigation that push Federal
forested counties to the brink. There is bipartisan agreement
that using HFRA-style, pre-decisional objection and expedited
judicial review processes could help. There is also an
understanding that in order to get the job done there should be
exemptions for certain qualifying projects or appeals in
litigations. Trusts also work. Nationwide land trusts annually
return billions to beneficiaries from resources on state public
lands.
Chairman Hastings and Congresswoman McMorris Rodgers know
well, their state is a good example. 2.9 million acres are
managed by the Washington Department of Natural Resources in
trusts for schools. In 2005, they produced gross revenues of
nearly $300 million. Trusts work in Arizona, and in New Mexico,
too, and on a nationwide basis trusts could help keep the
school doors open, keep the roads in good repair, keep sheriffs
and deputies on patrol while families sleep well at night.
These are just a few ideas.
I appreciate the Committee coming together today to look at
this long-running problem and helping us tackle this difficult
issue and taking charge to find a solution.
With that, Mr. Chairman, I yield back the negative balance
of my time. I appreciate your indulgence and I look forward to
working with the Committee on a solution. And if I could, Mr.
Chairman, I actually have to chair the Subcommittee on
Cybersecurity that is going to meet here soon, so I will
probably have to depart.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Walden follows:]

Statement of The Honorable Greg Walden, a Representative in Congress
from the State of Oregon

Chairmen Bishop, Hastings, Ranking Member Grijalva, and fellow
witnesses:
Thank you for the opportunity to testify.
This is an important and timely hearing.
I'm encouraged by the Committee's interest in identifying a long-
term solution for our federal forest counties and the people who live
there.
I recognize my colleague from Oregon, Congressman Peter DeFazio.
We've had productive discussions and agree that the status quo serves
no one well. It's time for real change.
In 2000, Congress authorized county payments in recognition that
layers of environmental regulations had throttled timber production on
federal lands, depriving local communities of timber receipts that
helped fund local schools, roads, and emergency services.
This year, the third reauthorization of county payments expires and
more than 9 million school children and 729 counties nationwide will be
impacted.
I think we can all agree that the status quo doesn't work and won't
work going forward.
Our communities don't even want the status quo. They don't want the
handout that's made them dependant on the federal government. They want
jobs. They want healthy forests. They're tired of the catastrophic fire
and the bug infestation. They're sick of the budgeting uncertainty that
comes with not knowing if Uncle Sam will pay his fair share.
They want the ability to pursue the American ideal of self-reliance
once more.
When county payments was created in 2000, it was thought of as a
bridge payment so rural counties could transition away from a resource-
based economy.
But let's get real. These are federal forest counties, the
government controls more than half the land. . .nearly 80 percent in
some counties. . .and the notion that they have the ability to recreate
their economies in a decade's time is absurd.
The federal government owns most of the land, but has all but
stopped productive forestry on it, is shutting down public access to
it, fails largely to produce economic value or renewable energy from
it, and all-too-often stands idly by and lets it go up in smoke every
year.
The loss of county payments will be felt most in Western states
like Oregon, where the federal government owns 60 percent of the
forests, but only produces just 12 percent of the timber harvest--as
seen in the ORANGE on both of these PIE CHARTS. \1\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Oregon Forest Resources Institute. Federal Forestland in
Oregon: Coming to Terms with Active Forest Management of Federal
Forestland. 2010.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The mortality rates are above 19 percent on federal lands. That's
not a healthy picture.
Private forests in Oregon produce 73 percent of the harvest, with a
mortality rate of 3.8 percent, maintaining a net growth rate of 22
percent. \2\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ Ibid.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
According to the Forest Service, timber harvest from our federal
lands nationwide has fallen nearly 80 percent from 1990, while
wildfires have burned an average 7.8 million acres a year for the last
five years--an area larger than the state of Maryland.
Meanwhile, there is an unemployment crisis in many rural counties.
In central, southern, and eastern Oregon, unemployment is commonly well
into the double digits.
Here on the monitors we're going to take a trip in 30 seconds
through 30 years of mill closures and job losses in Oregon. From 1980
to 2010, we went from 405 open mills to just 106 open mills--a 74
percent decrease in capacity available to do work in the woods. We went
from 45,778 mill jobs to 15,706 in that time--a 66 percent drop.
My colleagues, this isn't an opportunity to act. This is an
obligation to act. . .and deliver a real solution. . .one that puts
Americans back to work on public lands, makes our forests healthy for
habitat and taxpayer alike, and spares communities the uncertainty of
wondering every four years if the federal government will owe up to its
end of the bargain.
Here are some thoughts for the committee to consider.
``Paralysis by analysis'' and litigation have pushed federal
forested counties to the brink. There's bipartisan agreement that using
the HFRA-style pre-decisional objection and expedited judicial review
processes would help.
There is also an understanding that in order to get the job done,
there should be exemptions for certain qualifying projects from appeals
and litigation.
Trusts also work. Nationwide, land trusts annually return billions
to beneficiaries from resources on states land. Chairman Hastings'
state is a good example.
2.9 million acres are managed by the Washington Department of
Natural Resources in trust for schools. In 2005, they produced gross
revenues of nearly $300 million. Trusts work in place in Arizona and
New Mexico, too. \3\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ Lincoln Institute of Land Policy. Managing State Trust Lands.
2010
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
On a nationwide basis, trusts could help keep the school doors
open, keep the roads in good repair, and keep the sheriff's deputies on
patrol while families sleep at night.
These are just a few ideas.
I appreciate the committee coming together today to look at this
long-running problem and helping us tackle this difficult issue and
taking charge on a solution.
______

Mr. Bishop. Mr. Walden, we appreciate you being here with
us today. You used to be a member of this Committee, this
Subcommittee.
Mr. Walden. Yes.
Mr. Bishop. We miss you on that. However, if you were still
a member, you would be the Chairman and I wouldn't, so maybe I
don't miss you all that much.
[Laughter.]
Mr. Walden. Given your superior looks and ability, I
probably would have yielded that gavel to you, sir
Mr. Bishop. And I won't say what Chairman Hastings just
said here either. But we do appreciate it, and thank you. We
realize you have a schedule that requires you to be elsewhere.
Thank you for being with us. We will dismiss you at this time.
For those of you on the Committee, the rest of the panel,
obviously Ms. Wagner has been here before and understands this,
we are asking you that you keep your oral testimony to five
minutes. When you speak, the green light will go on. When you
see the yellow light come on, you have one minute left. When
the red light comes on, I am supposed to gavel you into
silence, but if you would sum it up very quickly that won't
necessarily happen.
Ms. Wagner, it is good to see you again here as a witness.
For you, as with everyone else, your written testimony will
appear in the record, and you are recognized for five minutes
for an oral version of your testimony.

STATEMENT OF MARY WAGNER, ASSOCIATE CHIEF,
FOREST SERVICE, U.S. DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE

Ms. Wagner. Thank you, Mr. Chairman and Members of the
Subcommittee. It is good to be here. Thank you for the
opportunity to present the view of the United States Department
of Agriculture regarding Secure Rural Schools Reauthorization
and Forest Management Options for a Viable County Payment
Program.
The President's Fiscal Year 2012 budget proposal
reauthorizes the Secure Rural Schools Act. We recognize the
economic difficulties rural communities have experienced in
recent years. At the same time, we understand the need to
manage the Federal budget thoughtfully and deliberately for
deficit reduction. We would like to work with Congress to
develop a proposal that addresses both.
I am going to focus my comments on the benefits the Secure
Rural Schools Act as it relates to natural resources and the
agency's intention to continue to actively restore forests and
grass lands for the benefit of citizens.
The Secure Rural Schools Act provides an important
mechanism to maintain and improve the health of our forests and
watersheds and to create jobs. The Forest Service really values
the relationships fostered with tribal and county officials,
and all stakeholders in the 118 resource advisory councils
under the Secure Rural Schools Act.
The resource advisory committee (RAC) process of reviewing
and recommending projects has resulted in projects with broad-
based support that help provide jobs in rural communities,
support local businesses and help create a more self-sustaining
community. In a study done at the University of Oregon it was
found that every dollar of public investment in forest and
watershed restoration projects is multiplied in economic
activity 1.7 to 2.6 times as it cycles through Oregon's
economy.
In numerous cases RACs working together have forced
relationships in a spirit of collaboration which is
contributing to restoration efforts beyond the Secure Rural
Schools-funded projects but across the county and across the
landscape. Community capacity has grown to support
collaborative work which has resulted in more on-the-ground
accomplishments, better and more defendable decisions, and
efficient implementation of projects.
I would like to highlight a few key agency efforts to
increase restoration on national forests. The President's
budget is designed to support the Administration's priorities
for maintaining and restoring the resiliency of America's
forests. The President's budget includes a proposal to create
the integrated resource restoration budget line item which
allows us to effectively integrate interdisciplinary
restoration treatments.
Integrated resource restoration aligns the budget structure
with a focus on landscape scale restoration and we expect it
will increase accomplishments, focus on priority landscapes,
and increase efficiency and effectiveness on the ground. Within
integrated resource restoration, there is increased funding for
the collaborative forest landscape restoration fund which
provides an increased emphasis on protecting and enhancing
forest and watershed health. This is a real opportunity to
showcase the value of collaborative landscape scale
restoration.
In 2010, we received 31 proposals, only 10 were funded but
an additional 26 proposals have been provided in 2011. it just
tells us there is a lot of capacity and communities and
citizens are working together to put these proposals together.
There are additional opportunities to strengthen our landscape
scale restoration, including working on projects that weren't
selected under the Collaborative Forest Landscape Restoration
Fund (CFLR) funding through collaborative work with groups such
as the Nature Conservancy, local watershed councils and other
community-based organizations that work on landscape scale.
Forest and regions are finding means to invest in work in
these landscapes because of the up front collaboration and
agreement to action.
Another tool we use to restore forests and provide jobs and
economic activities is stewardship contracting. It involves
close collaboration with local communities and a focus on new
and emerging markets for forest products removed, and
restoration activities. Stewardship contracts can achieve
multiple outcomes on large landscapes over time, and we look
forward to working with Congress on authorizing this valuable
tool.
The Forest Service has recently completed a national bark
beetle strategy which prioritizes treatments to focus on health
and safety, recovery and resiliency of the landscapes impacted
by bark beetle. We expect to treat our 230,000 acres this
fiscal year, investing a little over $99 million in western
regions. We have also launched a NEPA project to increase our
efficiency through select demonstration projects and to also
seek categorical exclusions to support restoration across the
landscape.
The Secure Rural Schools Act has provided more than a
decade of payments to eligible states and counties to help fund
schools and roads. It has also created a forum for community
interest to participate, and so the selection of projects and
assist in community fire protection planning. We would like to
build on the successes over the last decade and would like to
work with the Subcommittee to provide much needed support to
rural communities, and to responsibly address the Federal
deficit and actively restore our landscapes. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Wagner follows:]

Statement of Mary Wagner, Associate Chief, U.S. Forest Service,
United States Department of Agriculture

Mr. Chairman and Members of the Subcommittee, thank you for the
opportunity to present the views of the U.S. Department of Agriculture
regarding the reauthorization of the Secure Rural Schools and Community
Self-Determination Act of 2000, (Secure Rural Schools Act), as amended
and reauthorized in 2008 (P.L. 110-343), and forest management options
for a viable Program providing payments to States, which distribute the
funds to eligible counties.
The Forest Service and Secretary Vilsack have an ambitious vision
for managing our forests. We are focused on restoration and
conservation efforts that make forests healthier and reduce the
likelihood and impacts of catastrophic fires like those we have seen
this year. These restoration efforts also protect watersheds and create
jobs. The Secure Rural Schools Act is one of the tools we use to
maintain and improve the health of our forests and watersheds, and to
create jobs.
Secure Rural Schools Reauthorization
The President's fiscal year 2012 budget proposes to reauthorize the
Secure Rural Schools Act, extending for five more years the enhanced
payments to States to ease the transition to the reduced amount of the
25-percent payments for public schools and roads. We recognize the
economic difficulties rural communities have experienced in recent
years. At the same time, we understand the need to manage the federal
budget thoughtfully and deliberately for deficit reduction. We would
like to work with the Congress to develop a proposal that addresses
both concerns.
Purpose and history of the Secure Rural Schools Act
Since 1908, the Forest Service has shared 25-percent of gross
receipts from national forests with states to benefit public schools
and public roads in the counties in which the national forests are
situated. The receipts on which the 25-percent payments are based are
derived from timber sales, grazing, minerals, recreation, and other
land use fees, deposits and credits.
In the late 1980s, the 25-percent payments began to decline
significantly and fluctuate widely, due largely to a significant
decline in timber sale receipts. Congress responded to these declines
by providing ``safety net payments'' to counties in northern
California, western Oregon and western Washington for fiscal years 1994
to 2003. The safety net payments were enhanced payments intended to
ease the transition to the reduced amount of the 25-percent payments.
Before the safety net payments expired, Congress enacted the Secure
Rural Schools Act, which provided the option of decoupling the payments
from receipts and authorizing enhanced, stabilized payments to more
states for fiscal years 2000 through 2006. The Secure Rural Schools Act
provided eligible counties with two options. A county could elect to
receive its share of the State's 25 percent payment, which fluctuated
based on receipts, or the county could elect to receive its share of
the State's ``full payment amount,'' which was a stabilized amount.
Congress later appropriated payments to States for fiscal year 2007
and in October 2008, amended and reauthorized the Secure Rural Schools
Act for fiscal years 2008 through 2011. The purpose of this
reauthorization was to stabilize payments that help fund public schools
and roads, and to ease the transition to the reduced amount of the 25-
percent payments.
The primary change in the Secure Rural Schools Act as reauthorized
was a new formula for the stabilized ``State payment''. The new formula
includes a ramp down of funding each year and incorporates a factor for
per capita personal income to address differences in economic
circumstances among counties. In addition, the 2008 reauthorization
amended the Twenty-Five Percent Fund Act (16 USC 500) to reduce
fluctuations in the 25-percent payments by basing the payments on a
rolling average of the most recent seven fiscal years' percent
payments. The reauthorization further increased the number of States
and counties that participate.
The final Forest Service State payment under the Secure Rural
Schools Act will be approximately $324 million for fiscal year 2011. In
addition, the Department of the Interior will provide approximately $40
million in SRS payments to Oregon. If Secure Rural Schools is not
reauthorized, in fiscal year 2012, all eligible States will receive the
25-percent payment to States using the new formula based on a seven-
year rolling average of 25-percent payments. The total of 25 percent
payments for all States is projected to be approximately $64 million
for fiscal 2012 from the Forest Service. In addition, the Department of
the Interior would make approximately $5 million in payments to Oregon.
The Secure Rural Schools Act has three principal titles with
complementary objectives.
Title I--Secure Payments for States and Counties Containing Federal
Land
The Act directs that the majority of the State payment be used to
help fund public schools and roads in counties in which national
forests are situated. This portion of the payment, commonly called
title I funds, has averaged about 85 percent of the total State
payments to date. For fiscal years 2008 through 2011, title I funds are
projected to total nearly $1.5 billion.
Title II--Special Projects on Federal Land
An eligible county may allocate a portion of its share of the State
payment to title II for projects that enhance forest ecosystems,
restore and improve the health of the land and water quality and
protect, restore and enhance fish and wildlife habitat. These projects
provide employment in rural communities and opportunities for local
citizens on resource advisory committees (RACs) to advise the Forest
Service on projects of mutual interest that benefit the environment and
the economy. For fiscal years 2008 through 2011, title II funds are
projected to total $172 million for projects recommended in more than
300 counties.
Title III--County Funds
Funds allocated by a county to title III may be used for activities
under the Firewise Communities program, for reimbursement for emergency
services on national forests, and for preparation of a community
wildfire protection plan. For fiscal years 2008 through 2011, title III
funds are projected to total $87 million.
Secure Rural Schools Act Successes
The Forest Service values the relationships fostered with tribal
and county officials and stakeholders under title II. Members on the
118 RACs represent diverse interests such as tribal, county and school
officials, conservation groups, recreation interests, commodity
producers, and members of the public.
The RAC process of reviewing and recommending projects leads to
projects with broad-based support that help provide jobs in rural
communities, support local businesses and help create more self-
sustaining communities. In a study done at the University of Oregon, it
was found ``that every dollar of public investment in forest and
watershed restoration projects is multiplied in economic activity
between 1.7 and 2.6 times as it cycles through Oregon's economy.''

i
The collaboration improves the quality of the projects and
resolves differences early in project development. The projects
actively restore and improve forest watersheds and ecosystems,
increasing their resiliency in the face of climate change and
catastrophic events.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\i\ Max Nielsen-Pincus and Cassandra Moseley, The Employment and
Economic Impacts of Forest and Watershed Restoration in Oregon, EWP
Briefing Paper number 23, http://ewp.uoregon.edu/publications.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The resource advisory committees' role in reviewing title II
projects is an important part of the suite of tools the Forest Service
needs for actively managing the national forests to restore ecosystem
health and provide local employment.
Management Opportunities, Options, and Other Tools
The President's budget is designed to support the administration's
priorities for maintaining and restoring the resiliency of America's
forests, specifically healthy forests and grasslands, clean air and
water, wildlife habit, and recreation opportunities. To support this,
the President's budget includes a proposal to create the Integrated
Resource Restoration (IRR) budget line item which will allow us to
effectively integrate interdisciplinary restoration treatments that
will protect and improve our water resources, habitat, and vegetation
treatments, including fuels reduction. We support sustaining our
forests by increasing the collaborative efforts for restoration
activities that create jobs. Within IRR, there is increased funding for
the Collaborative Forest Landscape Restoration Fund (CFLR) which
provides an increased emphasis on protecting and enhancing forest and
watershed health. There will be additional opportunities to strengthen
landscape-scale restoration, including projects not selected for CFLR
funding, through collaborative work with groups such as The Nature
Conservancy, watershed councils, and other community based
organizations that work on a landscape scale to improve watershed
condition, wildlife habitat, native plants, and fuels condition.
Statewide Assessments, developed collaboratively, can be used to
provide an analysis of each State's forest conditions and trends while
working to enhance public benefits from trees and forests. At the same
time, the Statewide Assessments prioritize the conservation of working
forest lands.
We will continue to track not only the traditional targets, but
also the overall outcomes of forest restoration and watershed
improvement so that we can show our progress at the landscape scale. It
is clear that well-managed forests enhance communities and their
economies.
Another tool we use to restore forests and provide jobs and
economic activity is stewardship contracting. Stewardship contracting
is not intended to replace timber sales, which we will continue to use
as an important tool, as well. But where appropriate, stewardship
contracts can achieve multiple outcomes on large landscapes over time.
By rebuilding infrastructure, stewardship contracts create local jobs
and stimulate the local economy.
We have found that with stewardship contracting, multi-year
contracts work best, because they stabilize the flow of work and
materials over time, stimulating investments. Our stewardship
contracting authority will soon expire. We look forward to working with
Congress on reauthorizing this valuable tool.
Secure Rural Schools Reauthorization
We recognize that funding a reauthorization for the Secure Rural
Schools Act will be challenging. To make the Forest Service related-
payments to States for the last three years the Treasury has made-up
the shortfall of nearly $1.1 billion between available receipts and the
payments required by statute. Our proposal balances the need to support
these communities while managing the federal budget. It continues the
transition to the reduced amount of the 25-percent payments while
building on the successes of the current program by doubling funding
for Title II. This and other budget proposals like IRR will increase
active management to reduce fuels and improve ecosystem health. These
activities could increase revenues but they would likely still fall
short of the current level of payments.
Conclusion
The Secure Rural Schools Act has provided more than a decade of
payments to eligible States and counties to help fund public schools
and roads and has provided predictably declining payments as states
transition back to the 25-percent payment. It has also created a forum
for community interests to participate collaboratively in the selection
of natural resource projects on the National Forests, and assisted in
community wildfire protection planning. The Forest Service would like
to build on the successes of the last decade and would like to work
with the Subcommitttee to provide needed support to rural communities
and responsibly addresses the federal deficit.
______

Mr. Bishop. Thank you for your testimony. We welcome Mr.
Vaagen who his here and to introduce him to the Committee I
would like to turn to Representative McMorris Rodgers.
Mrs. McMorris Rodgers. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I
appreciate the chance to be here today and to introduce my good
friend Duane Vaagen from Colville, Washington.
Since 1980, Duane has served as President of Vaagen
Brothers, a second generation family owned timber company with
over 175 employees. Duane is well regarded in the community and
among his peers. He has spent his entire career in the forest
products industry and is a pioneer, leading innovator and his
expertise is beyond compare. Because of these attributes Duane
has been recognized as timber processing man of the year, one
of the highest honors in his field.
Duane and his family have the distinction of having many
firsts. They were the first to move their business into small
log processing, and the first to utilize single grip harvesters
for mechanical harvesting, all to support better forest
management. As an innovator, Vaagen's is one of the very few
businesses in the forest products industry to remain viable in
both good times and bad. Duane has the foresight and the
expertise to know what action is required to make our forests a
healthy and viable industry again.
Let me point out one example with the Colville National
Forest. After decades of litigation and conflict between
environmentalists, businesses, grazers, recreationalists and
other parties Duane successfully brought these diverse interest
groups to the table and developed a comprehensive strategy for
elevating the forests beyond the conflict. Through our
collaborative efforts, Duane and I are proud to report that the
Colville National Forest has been litigation-free for over a
decade, and was named one of the top three national forests by
the Forest Service.
Recently, a leading and well-respected forester told me
that because of Duane Vaagen, we have had more successes in the
Colville National Forest than any other western state. Today,
we find our forest management system broken and the flaws in
the system fostering policies that deviate from effective
management. Because of these policies our forests are overgrown
and they have become vulnerable to disease and bug
infestations. Like so many government programs, our forest
management policies have created a system of dependency that is
unsustainable in both the short and the long run, and there is
no better example than Secure Rural Schools. This program is a
direct result of government intervention on behalf of the
spotted owl, and made our counties more dependent on the
Federal Government than ever.
I believe, and Duane will tell you that there are ways we
can give our local counties more control, improve forest
management, create middle class jobs, and return money back to
the Federal Government. I trust that this Committee and
Congress will use Duane as a resource and strongly consider his
recommendations, so please join me in welcoming Duane and all
of our witnesses, and especially those from Washington State. I
look forward to hearing from them all.
Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.

STATEMENT OF DUANE VAAGEN, PRESIDENT,
VAAGEN BROTHERS LUMBER, INC.

Mr. Vaagen. Thanks for the kind introduction. My
presentation can be shorter now. That was very kind.
Mr. Chairman, Committee Members, it is a pleasure to be
here. We have lived this crisis beyond the 20 years that we
say. I have been President of Vaagen Brothers for 31 years. It
is good when I own the company. They can't fire me. But we have
been through so many crises. You know, when you have a losing
team you get rid of the head coach. Well, it takes persistence
to survive in this industry, and I appreciate the witnesses
here today.
Again, the history is the debate in the woods started long
before the counties' schools proposition. It started in the
seventies, and people had to react, so we re-tooled to go to
small diameter because the environmental community was pushing
that, and that is a good thing. So we believe in safe, healthy,
and clean forest. But the forest has been neglected the last 20
years, so what we have done is built up more and more fuel, and
consequently as we harvest less we burn more. We have less jobs
and poor economics in rural communities.
Right now, there are 60 million acres in dire straits of
treatment, but there is some good news. The collaboration has
shown us many ways to get there. We have been appeal and
litigation free, but our forest, we have only harvested 4,000
acres a year in the last 10 years. That is not enough. Through
the collaboration efforts, which we helped form, we are
agreeing in 80 million feet, around 15,000 acres a year. I
think that is great, but now we have a mountain pine beetle
epidemic that just came on us last year. This year it has
doubled in size and next year it will double again. People in
Colorado, Wyoming, and Montana all know that story very well.
But through collaboration we can move forward and what we
want to demonstrate is we can return money to the treasury.
Even though we deal in very small diameter stands, we pay $750
an acre to thin those forests. If you go to other states, it
may cost you $500, $750 to $1,000 an acre to thin the forest,
and we have to move quickly on this.
We have supported this Secure Schools proposition from the
get-go. The RACs and the FLACs were a great idea. In our forest
it didn't work. You can't go down from 100 million feet to 20
million feet, and now we are stabilized around 30 million feet,
and say that has worked. It hasn't worked. Its intention is
good, but we have to get work done on the forests if we are
going to save the forests prior to beetles and fire.
Again, the mountain pine beetle is an epidemic spreading
through our forest. I toured an Arizona forest six weeks ago
before the fire. It is a green forest. I said they are
fortunate, their forest is green. It may not burn. The day
after I left it was on fire and burned 560,000 acres. New
Mexico had their biggest fire in history. It is going to return
to other western states.
I will leave you Committee members with a copy of the book
``The Big Burn,'' 1910 Fire, Montana, Idaho, Washington, three
million acres, two days, 87 people perished. I think we are
going to see things like that in our area. So please accept
that, read that.
What is going to fix this is we have to streamline NEPA.
You can't have a beetle epidemic that you need to harvest
within a year and spend a year-and-a-half trying to figure out
how to do the planning process, so NEPA has to be streamlined
on emergency efforts, and we have to have legislative mandates
for the Forest Service so they can guide their way to the net
results that we need.
And as far as money to the treasury, it used to be before
1992-1993, when this all started, you sold eight million feet a
year, or 11 billion feet. Nowadays that dropped to two billion,
but the price of logs and lumber doubled, so actually we could
return to six billion feet and double the money that we used to
have, so our recommendation is for significant treatment and
quick resolution of these forest debates.
Again, appreciate the Committee, my congresswoman, and look
forward to any help that we may be able to offer. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Vaagen follows:]

Statement of Duane Vaagen, President, Vaagen Brothers Lumber Company,
Colville, Washington

Good morning Mr. Chairman and members of the Subcommittee. I am
Duane Vaagen, President of Vaagen Brothers Lumber, a family-owned
forest products company located in Colville, Washington. I am here
today to discuss the urgent need to restore responsible, sustainable
management to our federal forests for the sake of our forests and rural
communities.
Vaagen Brothers Lumber was founded by my father and uncle in the
early 1950s and has survived over the years by focusing on
technological advancements, ecologically-minded forest management and a
commitment to healthy forests and rural communities. We currently own
and operate two sawmills in northeast Washington, employ over 175
people and contribute $75 million to the local economy. We once
employed 500 people and operated another two sawmills here in northeast
Washington.
Today our mills predominantly rely on small diameter timber, the
primary bi-product of forest thinning operations. We also fully utilize
the biomass component of forest management activities through a biomass
co-generation plant. Unfortunately, for the past 15 years we have
continually struggled to secure an adequate timber supply to ensure our
continued operation. The primary reason for this shortage of raw
materials is a lack of management and timber coming from the 1.1
million acre Colville National Forest (Colville NF).
Declining Forest and Community Health
The health of our nation's forests continues to decline and federal
forests are most at risk due to overstocking, disease, drought, insect
infestations and catastrophic wildfires resulting from a lack of sound
management. In fact, the Forest Service classifies 60-80 million acres
of National Forest land as being overstocked and at particular risk.
Just last week a Forest Service report indicated that 50 million acres
of forests in the continental U.S. were killed or seriously damaged by
insects between 2003 and 2007, which was a three-fold increase over the
previous five year period. This represents 8-percent of the total
forested acres in the lower 48. As you know, federal forests throughout
the West have been ravaged by the pine beetle.
Meanwhile, over the past 30 years we have gone from over 700 lumber
manufacturing mills in the West to a current level of approximately
120. Many areas of the country, including Arizona, Utah, New Mexico and
Colorado, are largely devoid of the forest products industry
infrastructure (mills, loggers, etc) needed to restore and maintain the
health of our forests and provide employment opportunities in rural
communities. Here in northeast Washington we still have the integrated
sawmill, logging, biomass and paper mill industries that are needed to
effectively maintain the health of the forest and generate economic
benefits for rural communities. Unfortunately, if something isn't done
to increase the level of management on the Colville NF we will continue
losing mills, jobs and our ability to treat the threats facing this
forest. The recent fires in Arizona and New Mexico provide perfect
examples of the consequences of inaction as well as benefits of
treating the forest.
As you know, the health of our rural communities also continues to
decline. Unemployment in our local tri-county area currently sits at
14-percent. It is not a coincidence that many of the counties with the
highest unemployment rates in the country also happen to be those
surrounded by federal forests. Many of these rural communities have
lost their historical heritage as well as generations of forest
stewards. I believe it will require decisive action now if we want to
restore the health of our rural communities and our federal forests.
Collaboration
Over the past decade my company has invested significant time,
energy and money into collaboration. In fact, we helped form the
Northeast Washington Forestry Coalition (NEWFC), which is comprised of
the forest products industry, conservationists, local businesses and
other stakeholders. The NEWFC has been a success--we haven't had a
timber sale or stewardship project litigated on the Colville NF in
nearly 10 years. We've had only one appeal. The Coalition has helped
bring once warring sides together to find forest management solutions
on the Colville NF built around a blueprint that identifies areas most
appropriate for active forest management, restoration treatments and
meeting conservation objectives.
Despite agreement from all interested parties we have not seen
meaningful progress from the Forest Service to restore the health of
the forest or meet the needs of local industries and communities by
offering an adequate supply of timber. We continue to support
collaboration as an important component of federal forest management,
but it alone does not address many of the current barriers to
implementing a sustainable and predictable timber management program.
Secure Rural Schools/County Payments Program
The Federal Government has actually been making payments to
counties to make up for lost 25-percent timber receipts since the early
1990's following the listing of the Northern Spotted Owl in Washington,
Oregon and California. The current Secure Rural Schools program was
first enacted in 2000 and has been extended twice since then. As you
know, the program has provided billions of dollars to counties and
schools over its lifetime. Our company has supported the National
Forests Counties & Schools Coalition, the primary advocate of the
Secure Rural Schools program. We've supported their efforts because we
believed that one of the primary goals of the program was to transition
back to the sustainable management of our federal forests. After nearly
twenty years of experience in the Pacific Northwest and over a decade
nationwide, it is clear that the program as currently designed will not
address the fundamental threats to our federal forests and rural
economies. The program has primarily succeeded at treating just one
symptom of the illness, a lack of funding for local government services
and schools due to the paralysis affecting federal land management.
While we all support efforts to meet these critically important needs,
I believe our political leaders can no longer avoid confronting the
fundamental problem by treating just one symptom.
As a resident of a rural community I certainly understand the
dependency of many local governments on this funding to provide public
sector jobs and services. Unfortunately, the overall health of many
rural, forested communities has further declined over the past two
decades due to our inability to rebuild private sector employment. In
many forested communities the forest products industry is one of the
few industries capable of providing meaningful employment opportunities
and the tax base needed to provide long term economic and social
stability.
As Congress considers legislation to address the pending expiration
of the Secure Rural Schools program I encourage you to seek a
comprehensive solution to the illness and not just one symptom of it.
We are running out of time to restore the health of our forests and
maintain the industries important to the economies of rural
communities.
Snapshot of the Colville National Forest
The Colville NF provides a perfect example of how we can balance
sustainable forest management, revenue generation and rural economic
development with other objectives, including conservation. I have
provided the Subcommittee pictures that show the type of responsible
forest management we are advocating.
As I mentioned the Colville National Forest is comprised of 1.1
million acres. There is a strong consensus within our coalition for
managing 500,000-600,000 acres for a mix of active management (timber,
etc) and restoration objectives. Meanwhile, there is an urgent need to
accelerate commercial thinning treatments on at least 250,000 acres of
overstocked and beetle infested forest at risk to catastrophic
wildfire. In recent years less than 4,000 acres have been mechanically
thinned despite the support of the Coalition to treat between 15,000-
20,000 acres annually. I actually believe we should be restoring the
health of the forest even more aggressively in the short term.
My testimony includes charts that compare estimated outcomes of the
Forest Service's current management with the approach supported by the
Coalition in terms of the pace of forest restoration, timber value
generated, jobs created and potential county receipts. These are
estimates and can vary year to year based on market conditions, the use
of stewardship contracting and other factors, but they provide a good
snapshot of the opportunity that exists.
The key to success is the existence of an integrated forest
products industry, which allows treatments to actually generate revenue
(approx $750 per acre) to be used for county receipts, on-the-ground
restoration activities or the Treasury by removing enough merchantable
material in the form of sawlogs. This is not the current reality in
areas where the industry no longer exists and the taxpayer is picking
up the tab to thin the forests at a cost of as much as $1,000 per acre.
Legislative Recommendations
As your committee considers legislative options for restoring
sustainable management to our federal forests as a key component of
reauthorizing Secure Rural Schools, I would like to provide the
following suggestions. These suggestions are based on the following
assumptions: 1) securing significant increases in Forest Service
appropriations to fund their current approach to managing these forests
is unlikely under current and future budget realities; 2) the Forest
Service and the federal government have a responsibility to the rural
communities surrounded by our federal forests; and 3) we must
significantly increase the pace of treatments if we are serious about
getting ahead of the forest health crisis.

Reduce the time and cost of Forest Service project
planning requirements, particularly in areas where consensus
exists. A NEPA Environmental Assessment or Environmental Impact
Statement on a single forest management project can take years
to complete and cost $500,000-$1 million to prepare. Real
progress is unlikely until the agency's project planning costs
are significantly reduced.

Legislation could be passed to give projects that
meet a certain criteria for responsible management and/or enjoy
collaborative support some relief from appeals and/or
litigation if those are liming the sustainable management of
some forests.

Enact legislation to hold the Forest Service
accountable for managing forests to maintain forest health,
generate economic activity and provide a minimum level of
receipts for local governments. The Forest Service needs clear
direction from Congress.

Amend the Stewardship Contracting Authority to give
counties the option of receiving 25% of the retained receipts
and specifically give the agency the authority to use retained
receipts for future project planning costs.

Consider reforming the Forest Service to separate
fire fighting and forest management functions. The Forest
Service has largely become a fire fighting agency, not a land
manager.

Divert a portion of ever-increasing wildfire
suppression costs to actually get ahead of the problem though
increased forest management. This will create additional
funding and certainty to help bring new industry infrastructure
(and jobs) to the forests and rural communities where it has
been lost.

If the Forest Service is unwilling or unable to
deliver these relatively modest economic returns to local
communities and improvements to forest health then states or
counties should be given the authority to plan and implement
forest management projects.
I appreciate the opportunity to appear before the Subcommittee
today. I would be happy to answer any questions you may have.
Attachments:
(1)  Bark Beetle Infestation in the West, USDA FY12 Budget
Justification
(2)  National Forest Growth, Removals and Timber Volume Sold
Graphs
(3)  Colville National Forest Management Outcomes Graphs
(4)  Pictures of Forest Treatments on the Colville National
Forest
______

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 67404.002

Mr. Bishop. Thank you, Mr. Vaagen. Now we will turn to Mr. Pearce.

STATEMENT OF PAUL PEARCE, CHAIR, SKAMANIA COUNTY BOARD OF
COMMISSIONERS, NATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF COUNTIES, PARTNERSHIP
FOR RURAL AMERICA

Mr. Pearce. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, Chairman
Hastings, Ranking Member Grijalva, Congresswoman McMorris
Rodgers who has always had her door open for these
conversations and has worked hard on this issue all the way
back to when she was in the Legislature in Washington. Thank
you very much.
I want to thank the members of the Committee and the
Subcommittee, and I thank you for the invitation to appear
before you today to discuss this issue, Secure Rural Schools
and Forest Management Options for Viable County Payments, and
if I may add, finding a long-term answer to economically
healthy, productive forests, counties and schools because we
need all three.
I am here today as Chair of the Federal Payment
Subcommittee of the NACO's Public Lands Committee, and as an
executive board member of the Partnership for Rural America
Campaign for Reauthorization. But finally, I am the Chair of
the Skamania County Board of Commissioners, a county which at
one time produced up to a quarter of the Federal timber
harvested in Washington State.
Twenty-four percent of the nation's 3,000 plus counties
contain national forests, some, like my own, covering up to 90
percent of their land. These 154 national forests cover 139
acres. These counties are responsible for maintaining the
infrastructure, the roads, the schools, search and rescue, and
other emergency services that allow these forests to be
enjoyed. The 1908 Act fulfilled the promise of Gifford Pinchot
when he said that no community would suffer for hosting these
lands, and the partnership at that time that we created between
the Federal Government and the counties with revenue sharing,
the first in the nation, of 25 percent revenues worked well
until the late eighties when court decisions and endangered
species listings both in the Northwest and the South
dramatically reduced Federal timber production.
In 2000, Congress passed Secure Rural Schools to address
the loss of revenue, but at that time the conversation was
around increased forest production. We had another
reauthorization in 2007. We were still having that government.
The current authorization in 2008, again conversations around
production. We appreciate that the Act was reauthorized in
2008, and it runs out this year, and I want to take a moment to
sincerely thank you and the other members of the Committee who
voted for its passage and helped to make that happen.
According to Dr. Eylers' economic study, which I have
attached to my written, these payments have an impact of 1.3
billion in sales, 188 million realized tax revenues, and most
importantly, represent 11,000 jobs in those mostly rural
communities. Forest management is imperative.
NACO's platform, and I quote here, ``supports the
reauthorization and enhancement of Secure Rural Schools
Program. Reauthorization should maintain coupling between
payments to counties and active natural resource management and
the connection between sustainable natural resource management
and the stability and well being of forest communities and
counties.''
Attached to my written testimony you will find a White
Paper from the Partnership for Rural America titled
``Maintaining the Partnership Today and in the Future'' which
details many suggestions for changes in forest management,
including fixing the biomass definition, expedited harvest of
beetle killed timber, allowing counties and schools to retain
75 percent of receipts, just to name a few.
Contrary to what many believe, the vast majority of county
commissioners would much rather have a vibrant economy with
hundreds of jobs based on healthy sustainable productive forest
management on these lands. I would gladly trade these dollars
for the over 1,200 jobs I once had on the Gifford Pinchot
Forest in my own county, not to mention the four mills we had,
and the 300 Forest Service jobs. Did I mention 300 Forest
Service jobs? We had the Northwest Nursery, out at the Wind
River Nursery, and there were over 300 people employed there,
both part time and full time.
Returning directly to 25 percent receipts has two critical
problems. The first is the Forest Service actual receipts
dropped so low last year that there would have been less than
$65 million available for all 729 forest counties and 4,400
school districts, in 42 states. We need to remember that the
2008 Act changed 25 percent to a seven-year rolling average,
meaning we would have to have five years of significant
production if we are going to return to the 25 percent money.
Finally, stewardship contracting is not the answer for a
variety of reasons that I can address, not the least of which
is the lack of revenue sharing with counties or the national
treasury.
In closing, NACO and the Partnership stands ready to assist
in crafting a solution to both the county payments issue long
term, as well as sustainable productive forest management.
Thank you, sir.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Pearce follows:]

Statement of The Honorable Paul Pearce, Commissioner, Skamania County,
Washington, on behalf of The National Association of Counties (NACo)
and the Partnership for Rural America Campaign

Good afternoon Chairman Bishop, Ranking Member Grijalva, members of
the committee and subcommittee. I appreciate the opportunity to appear
before you today to discuss Secure Rural Schools reauthorization and
Forest Management options for a viable County Payments program and if I
may add. . .a long term answer to economically healthy forest counties
and schools.
I am here today testifying as Chair of the Federal Payments
Subcommittee of NACO's Public Lands Committee, as an Executive Board
member of the Partnership for Rural America Campaign for
reauthorization, and finally as the Chair of the Skamania County Board
of Commissioners, a county which once produced, fully a \1/4\ of all
the timber harvested in Washington State.
Twenty-four percent of the nation's three thousand plus counties
contain national forests, some like my own totaling up to 90% of their
land mass. These 154 National Forests cover 193 million acres across
the country. These forest counties are responsible for maintaining
infrastructure like roads, schools, emergency services
The 1908 Act fulfilled the promise of Gifford Pinchot who said that
no community would suffer for hosting these lands. The partnership
established between the federal government and rural forested counties
called for revenue sharing...the first in the nation...where 25% of all
revenues generated on these lands is returned to the communities.
The contract worked well for nearly a century. . .until the late
1980's when court decisions, Endangered Species Listings, such as the
spotted owl in my area of the country and re-cockaded woodpecker in the
south dramatically reduced timber production and other extraction. In
2000 Congress passed the Secure Rural School and Communities Self
Determination Act to address the drastic loss of revenue from the
decline in timber production. This was followed by a one year
reauthorization in 2007 and the current authorization in 2008 which
ends this year. I want to take a moment to sincerely thank you and the
other Members of the Committee who voted for its passage and helped
make that happen.
The 2008 reauthorization came at the same time as the economy was
beginning to fall apart. According to Dr Eylers economic analysis
(attached) these payments have an impact of $1.3 billion in sales, $188
million in realized tax revenue and most importantly represent 11,000
jobs in these most rural communities. These will be lost the first
year.
Failure to reauthorize in 2012 will be devastating to those
counties and schools dependant on this act and the prior forest
receipts it is based on.
Consider for a moment had this loss had occurred at the same time
as the full force of the recession hit. This is especially
disconcerting, in these mostly rural communities where the loss of one
family wage job often results in the entire family having to leave the
community to find work
Forest Management
NACo's platform. . .and I quote here. . .``supports the
reauthorization and enhancement of the Secure Rural Schools program (PL
110-343). Reauthorization should maintain coupling between payments to
counties and active natural resource management; and the connection
between sustainable natural resource management and the stability and
well being of forest counties and communities.''
Attached to my written testimony you will find a white paper from
the Partnership titled ``Maintaining the Partnership Today and in the
Future'' which details numerous suggestions for changes in Forest
Management including Fixing the Biomass Definition, Expedited Harvest
of Beetle Kill Timber, Allowing Counties and Schools to Retain 75% of
Receipts: just to name a few.
Contrary to what many believe. . .we County Commissioners. . .would
much rather have a vibrant economy with hundreds of jobs based on
healthy sustainable productive forest management on these lands. I
would gladly trade these dollars for the over 1200 jobs I once had on
the Gifford Pinchot forest in my County.
The Forest Service has failed over the past two decades in healthy
forest management and in producing revenue through timber sales.
Interestingly the nation's consumption of wood products continues
unabated. The Forest Service is not clear on their mandate or their
mission. In the mid-90's because of the spotted owl the Clinton
administration created the Northwest Forest Plan setting timber harvest
targets on all forests. None of which has to date been met. This was a
clear mandate and failed miserably. Congress must find a way to require
production at the line level through incentives or disincentives that
affect these career officers. There is no other way to implement any
initiatives Congress may create or impose.
Returning directly to 25% receipts has two critical problems. The
first is that Forest Service actual receipts are so low that last year
there would have been less than $65 million dollars available for all
729 counties and 4400 school districts, in 42 states...We also need to
remember that the 2008 Act changed 25% receipts from a year-to-year
amount into a seven year rolling average. It would take at least 5
years of much higher production before the payments could be replaced.
Stewardship
Finally, stewardship contracting is not the answer for a variety of
reasons. The forest service has adopted stewardship contracting as the
panacea for dismal timber production. Stewardship contracting requires
a collaborative process. These collaborative are intended to have
participation by people on all sides of the timber issues. On the north
half of the Gifford Pinchot National Forest in the Randle District the
collaborative took 10 years to produce a single 11 million board foot
sale. A forest executive told me that based on this collaboration the
new timber rotation is 300 years. This is a forest that produced an
average of 350 million board feet per year from the 70's until 1991.
Even the NW Forest plan calls for 50 million board feet per year. No
revenue is produced for the counties, schools or treasury from these
sales. Instead the forest line officers negotiate for restoration or
other work in exchange for the actual dollars. I am aware of at least
two contracts where the forest ended up owing the successful bidder
money at the end of the day. This so called collaborative process of
decision by committee of those that can commit untold volunteer hours
against paid environmental staffers is a poor way of doing business and
certainly not in the end scientifically based.
O&C
There has been discussion around the O&C Counties in Oregon and a
bill which would allow for these lands to be divided, with half being
sold for production and the other half in conservation. While I have no
disagreement with the O&C proposal it cannot be described as a
``model'' for possible action with National Forest lands unless a
radical change is made to the enabling legislation. O&C lands were
created in 1937 specifically for revenue production for the counties.
The counties receive 50% of receipts, 25% remain on the land and only
25% are sent to the treasury. On the contrary National Forests were
created in 1908 as multiple use and not dedicated to revenue
production. In fact the counties receive only 25% of the receipts and
the remaining 75% are sent to the treasury.
In closing NACo and the Partnership stand ready to assist in
crafting a solution to both the County Payments issue long term as well
as sustainable productive forest management and we must begin right
now.
[NOTE: Attachments have been retained in the Committee's official
files.]
______

Mr. Bishop. Thank you very much. Now Ms. Dauzat. Am I
getting close?
Ms. Dauzat. You are getting closer
Mr. Bishop. I am still butchering your name. I apologize
deeply for that. So since I can't do it well I am going to ask
Congressman Southerland if he would do the honor of simply
introducing you as our next witness.
Mr. Southerland. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I don't have a
nice prepared statement that Kathy had, so thank you for
throwing me under the bus here. But I will tell you that
Caroline Dauzat, and that is my attempt, that her family has
businesses in our district, and so I am going to speak from the
heart for just a moment and introducing her family, so this is
not a prepared remark.
I want you to know that her family provides jobs, and they
never provided jobs because of a jobs bill. They provided jobs
because they believed in what they did. They believed that they
met a need, that our country needed it, especially our
district, and so her family she is now the fourth generation of
sawmill owners in her family.
Four hundred hardworking men and women go to work every day
because they are allowed to work. They get up at 3:30 in the
morning, they live in an environment that is--workers comp.
would rate it as the most dangerous in the country. They risk
their lives. I know about the risk because my brother used to
work for her family. Three weeks ago my brother was in the
hospital because of an injury in the woods. We rushed him, and
it was a head injury, and these people just want to work, and
her family has been a part of that in our district, and I thank
her for being here. She has never been to the Hill to testify,
and so, without any further ado, I thank you for your courage
of coming, and I hope you find a committee here that is ready
to embrace what you say. Thank you, Caroline.

STATEMENT OF CAROLINE DAUZAT,
OWNER, REX LUMBER

Ms. Dauzat. Thank you. Good morning, everyone, Mr. Chairman
and Members of the Committee, and Representative Southerland.
Thank you for inviting me to appear before you today.
My name is Caroline McRae Dauzat. I am a fourth generation
sawmill owner with three sawmills in the following locations:
Brookhaven, Mississippi; Graceville and Bristol, Florida. In
addition to the sawmills, we also own a pilot plant in Bristol
as well as a timber procurement company. I have submitted my
full statement to the Committee which I ask be made part of the
hearing record.
My qualifications include working with my father and
brother over the last 10 years in all capacities of our forest
products businesses. After receiving my Master's in Business
Administration degree from Loyola University, I began my
sawmill career the summer of 1998 in and around the woods of
Bristol, Florida. My current role with our organization
includes all aspects of financial risk and human resource
management.
My father established Rex Lumber Bristol or North Florida
Lumber, as it was known then, in 1980. He chose Bristol as the
mill location primarily because of the close proximity to the
vast resources of Apalachicola National Forest. According to my
father, at the time of locating the mill the Forest Service
verbally promised us a sustained yield of timber from the
forest in order to support our mill and the local community.
The promise made at that time has long been disregarded.
The purpose of my testimony is to offer a view of management of
the forest in our area and offer our plan as an existing end
user.
Rex Lumber is one of many diverse forest products
industries within the timber shed of the Apalachicola. Products
manufactured include lumber, plywood, extract board, pulp and
paper, wood pellets, and a biomass-fired electrical power
plant. Such a diverse infrastructure offers an unusually solid
base for management of our local national forest.
Unfortunately, management of the national forest has been
hampered by a number of factors and often neglects a healthy
timber market in pursuit of other purposes, frequently related
to environmental concerns. Ironically in an effort to meet
those concerns the health of the forest is put in serious
jeopardy.
As my first handout of Deep Creek clearly shows, proper
timber management is essential to environmental integrity.
Currently the Apalachicola is only cutting 6.8 percent of its
annual growth. In the 1980s, when the forest was productively
managed, our mill could count on up to 80 percent of its raw
material coming from the Apalachicola. Today our Bristol mill
receives less than one percent of total logs from the forest
though it sits at our absolute door step.
Our southern forests are young, healthy, and productive,
but if poor management continues our forest will face the same
problems as the Western forests have been dealing with, beetles
and fires. In our region it is the southern pine beetle that
would be destroying our timber, and 2011's fire season should
be enough evidence that management practices need to improve.
An extreme example of where poor forest management leads is
the Dixie National Forest in Utah. As shown in the second
handout, on approximately 600,000 acres of timberland,
mortality has exceeded growth. One hundred and five percent of
the total annual growth was lost to fire, insects and disease.
Our forests are too valuable a resource to continue on this
path. Although with 30 percent mortality on growth, the
Apalachicola is on its way. Solutions exist for these problems.
In order for the Forest Service to do what it is required
by the Multiple Use Sustain Yield Act of 1960, it will have to
re-order its priorities and shift funds to more productive
activities. Streamlining environmental documentation and
outsourcing some field work would get foresters out of the
office and into the field. Including resource advisory
committees in every annual planning and project selection
process will contribute to a more balanced community-oriented
forest work program. Of key importance, NEPA, ESA needs to be
amended to increase appellant and litigant accountability.
Last, Congress should consider requiring selected national
forests to test the feasibility of timber program self-
financing as is now done on DOD land. Please see my written
testimony for further detail.
In summary, I believe the best solution for funding the
rural schools is the utilization of the assets already
available; that is, timber with a market ready to go. As we
work together so that such a program can be adopted and
implemented, we appreciate your work to reauthorized the safety
net of the Secure Rural Schools and Community Self-
Determination Act.
Finally, Mr. Chairman and Committee Members, I want to
thank you again for allowing me to appear here today. I am here
as a prospective partner with the Forest Service in forest
management, hopefully a part of the solution to the problem
facing our national forests. I would be most happy to work with
any of you and your staff to find a solution to the long-term
health of our national forests and adequate funding for our
rural schools. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Dauzat follows:]

Statement of Caroline McRae Dauzat, Family Business Owner, Rex Lumber

Good morning, Mr. Chairman, and Members of the Committee thank you
for inviting me to appear before you today.
My name is Caroline McRae Dauzat. I am a fourth generation sawmill
owner with three sawmills in the following locations: Brookhaven,
Mississippi, Bristol and Graceville, Florida. In addition to the
sawmills we also own a pole and piling plant in Bristol, as well as a
timber procurement company that supplies timber to our operations. I
have submitted my full statement to the committee, which I ask be made
part of the hearing record.
My qualifications include working with my father and brother over
the last ten years in all capacities of our family forest products
businesses. After receiving my Master's degree in Business
Administration from Loyola University, I began my sawmill career the
summer of 1998 in and around the woods of Bristol. My current role with
our organization includes all aspects of financial, risk and human
resources management.
My father established Rex Lumber, Bristol, or North Florida Lumber,
as it was known then, in 1980. He chose Bristol as the mill location
primarily because of the close proximity to the vast timber resources
of the Apalachicola National Forest. According to my father, at the
time of locating the mill, the Forest Service verbally promised a
sustained yield of timber from the forest in order to support our mill
and the local community. The promise made at that time has long been
disregarded.
The purpose of my testimony is to offer a view of the management of
the National Forest in our area and offer our plant as an existing end
user. Rex Lumber is one of many diverse forest products industries
within the timbershed of the Apalachicola. Products manufactured
include lumber, plywood, oriented strand board, pulp and paper, wood
pellets and a biomass-fired electrical power plant located 1 mile from
the forest boundary. Such a diverse infrastructure offers an unusually
solid base for management of our local National Forest
Unfortunately, management of the National Forest has been hampered
by a number of factors and often neglects a healthy timber market in
pursuit of other purposes, frequently related to environmental
concerns. Ironically, in an effort to meet those environmental
concerns, the health of the forest is put in serious jeopardy. As my
first handout of Deep Creek clearly shows, proper timber management is
essential to environmental integrity.
Currently, the Apalachicola National Forest is only cutting 6.8% of
its annual growth. In the 1980's, when the forest was productively
managed, our mill could count on up to 80% of its raw material coming
from the Apalachicola. Today our Bristol mill receives less than 1% of
total logs from the forest, though it sits at our absolute doorstep.
Our southern forests are young, healthy and productive, but if poor
management continues, our forests will face the same problems the
western forests have been dealing with in the last decade: beetles and
fires. In our region it is the southern pine beetle that will be
destroying our timber and twenty eleven's fire season should be enough
evidence that management practices need to improve.
An extreme example of where poor forest management leads is the
Dixie National Forest in Utah. As shown in the second handout on
approximately 600,000 acres of timberland, mortality has exceeded
growth--105% of the total annual growth was lost to fire, insects and
disease. Our forests are too valuable a resource to continue on this
path, although with 30% mortality on growth, the Apalachicola is on its
way.
Solutions exist for these problems. In order for the Forest Service
to do what it is required by the Multiple Use, Sustained Yield Act of
1960, it will have to reorder its priorities and shift funds to more
productive activities. Streamlining environmental documentation and
outsourcing fieldwork would get foresters out of the office and into
the field. Including Resource Advisory Committees as full participants
in every annual planning and project selection process, would
contribute to a more balanced community-oriented forest work program.
Of key importance, NEPA/ESA needs to be amended to increase appellant
and litigant accountability. Lastly, Congress should consider requiring
selected National Forests to test the feasibility of timber program
self-financing, as is now done on DOD land. Please see my written
testimony for further detail.
In summary, I believe the best solution for funding the rural
schools is the utilization of the assets already available--timber,
with a market ready to go--rather than letting those assets deteriorate
and die. As we work together so that such a program can be adopted and
implemented, we appreciate your work to reauthorize the safety net of
the Secure Rural Schools and Community Self-Determination Act.
Finally, Mr. Chairman and committee members, I want to thank you
again for allowing me to appear here today. I am here as a prospective
partner with the Forest Service in forest management: hopefully a part
of the solution to the problem facing our National Forests. I would be
most happy to work with any of you and your staff to find a solution to
the long-term health of our National Forests and adequate funding for
our rural schools. I stand ready for any questions you may have.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 67404.001

.eps__

Mr. Bishop. Thank you very much for all of your
testimonies. We will now turn to questions for the panel. I
will actually go to Mr. Grijalva first for a time for
questions.
Mr. Grijalva. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I am going to yield
to my colleague Mr. DeFazio for first round of questions. Thank
you.
Mr. Bishop. Mr. DeFazio, you have been long working in this
area.
Mr. DeFazio. Thank you. Yes, in fact had I prevailed in the
early nineties we wouldn't be here today. I opposed the Clinton
forest plan because I said it wouldn't give us what either side
desired. Environmental groups wanted more protection for the
residual old growth, and the timber industry wanted more
predictability of a sustainable harvest, and I predicted
neither would get what they wanted and they haven't.
And then second, when we did the first county school
support payments my version of the bill would have made them
permanent, then at time of surplus we could have passed that,
but it was opposed by certain folks to create a cliff and now
we are at the cliff again.
So Associate Chief Wagner, I have to say your testimony was
a little short on the details. There was one point where you
kind of reference the Safe and Secure County Rural Schools Act,
and that is it. You know, the President put it in his budget.
As a candidate, he said repeatedly he would give us a long-term
solution. And so I guess I would like to know what does the
Forest Service propose to deliver either on the promise of a
long-term solution or how do you intend to propose to implement
the President's budgetary proposal of $328 million for Forest
Service and BLM? This is not in your testation. I mean, I am
trying with all the nice things that you said in there, but
what are the specifics?
Ms. Wagner. Thank you, Mr. DeFazio.
In the written statement, there is a bit more about the
history and the structure of the existing titles and
administrations.
Mr. DeFazio. Right, I read your entire, but I didn't find--
you didn't either reaffirm or propose how the Forest Service
was going to find $328 million in its budget this year to
deliver on the President's budgetary proposal.
Ms. Wagner. Right. It was proposed in the Forest Service
budget as part of our discretionary budget, the $328 million,
to be followed with a specific proposal. I think, given the
interest, the ideas that are being talked about in terms of
Secure Rural Schools authorization, there is an opportunity to
work together and craft something that works for both the
Congress, the public, and the Administration.
Mr. DeFazio. I guess working with, and I will be taking out
some frustrations on you that I have with the Administration
generally, but I see big sky plans, like $500 billion for
transportation infrastructure. It is in his budget, he mentions
it very occasionally, that is it. Are you telling me now that
you don't have a specific plan and you are looking forward to
working together, you haven't one yet, the President promised
this when he was a candidate three years ago, it was in his
budget in February, and I guess I am wondering--I mean, you
have no specifics to give us today?
Ms. Wagner. Well, there was a specific formulation in the
President's budget.
Mr. DeFazio. Yes, the declining payment, the 328 this year
out of your budget, but what are your plans to find or make
room for $328 million in your budget?
Ms. Wagner. We have already gotten some feedback about
provisions that in that structure that was proposed that are
non-starters, and so we would like to work with you to put
something together that is acceptable to Congress. The
President's budget proposal included the $328 million in the
Forest Service's discretionary budget.
Mr. DeFazio. Right. OK. Let me ask with Mr. Vaagen's
testimony. We have a forest that is ostensibly a model for
collaboration. They haven't had litigation and they haven't had
appeals. Yet they are only producing a tiny fraction of what
was proposed by the collaborative group. What is the reason for
that? Why can't you get near the number of the collaborative
group when you don't have barriers of litigation and appeals?
Either of the two can answer that. You can both give me a
perspective quickly.
Mr. Vaagen. I will go first. The reason we get is we don't
have the staffing at the Forest Service or the budgets, but I
propose that if you had seed money to get past the first hurtle
it would perpetuate itself and make the government lots of
money.
Mr. DeFazio. OK.
Mr. Vaagen. Because it does not make sense not to, so that
is the bottom line. That is the simple answer.
Mr. DeFazio. Associate Chief, what is the hold up? What is
the barrier?
Ms. Wagner. And I know from my experience in the Pacific
Northwest that the Colville National Forest is a place where we
had found the ability to provide carryover funding, if we had
carryover funding. So prior year carryover into forests in the
Colville we got an outcome. We got a project, a timber sale
completed, so they can do.
We are a little bit challenged by the investment we are
making and the outcomes that we would like to realize and the
two not quite matching up. So, part of our strategy is we have
to stretch the appropriate dollar in every possible way to make
the most of what it can do out there on the public lands.
Collaborations, finding people to work with us who are forging
great agreement about what we need to go after and how is
making it easier. Being litigation free makes it easier, but we
are not stretching the dollar as far as it needs to go to do
the work necessary on the land.
Mr. DeFazio. Or you don't have enough dollars.
Mr. Vaagen. I would like to add it is the starter dollars,
but this will work. The collaboration works. All the people
want to do the 80 million feet. It has a return to the
government. I think we do need new ideas. We need a lighter
touch NEPA. We have to get after it quicker. The mountain pine
beetle does not wait a season or two seasons for us. It eats
every day. So we are ready, and it is a good question. I think
we ought to get there and we ought to get there quickly.
Mr. DeFazio. Thank you, Mr. Chairman
Mr. Bishop. Thank you. Now, Mr. DeFazio, I don't know how
much time you have to be here with us or if you have another
engagement. We have a whole lot of people over here. Let me go
through a couple. If you want to come back for another round
before we do that.
Mr. DeFazio. That will be all right, because I have
something going on.
Mr. Bishop. Works for me. Let me go to some questions on
our side. First of all, the first person here was actually Mr.
McClintock, if you have some questions.
Mr. McClintock. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
We saw in the graph displayed earlier radical reduction in
timber harvest on Federal lands over the past several decades.
We know that it has devastated local economies. It has
contributed to the nation's chronic unemployment. It has
reduced revenues to the Federal Government it otherwise would
have received through timber harvests, at the same time it has
reduced revenues to local communities, particularly for local
schools, which then requires the Federal Government to replace
those lost funds. This was done in the name of health forests,
and yet the forests are much less healthy as a result of these
policies. Forest fires are now much more frequent and intense.
A ranger explained it this way. He said that excess timber is
going to come out of the forest one way or another. It is
either going to be carried out or it is going to be burned out.
When we carried it out, it contributed to both healthy forests
and a healthy and prosperous economy. Now we are content to let
it burn out.
This is lunacy and I would like to get a perspective. Who
is responsible for this?
Ms. Wagner. Well, the Forest Service has the responsibility
to administer the 193 million acres of national forest.
Mr. McClintock. An area about the size of the entire State
of Texas, by the way.
Ms. Wagner. Right, so it is a lot of country, and we have a
budget and there is----
Mr. McClintock. How do you answer to this lunacy? Is this
your fault?
Ms. Wagner. We as a group of agency employees are working
to do what is needed on the lands, make the resources that are
appropriated by Congress.
Mr. McClintock. That is not what I asked. Who is
responsible for this lunatic policy?
Ms. Wagner. I would say we are responsible for implementing
the laws of Congress and the regulations that are promulgated
by the Administration.
Mr. McClintock. Perhaps some of the actual dickens of these
policies might want to weigh in.
Mr. Vaagen. Well, I will agree we are all responsible but I
want to do something about it, and I want to do it quick.
Mr. McClintock. The point is we are not all responsible.
There are specific policies enacted by this Congress that are
responsible, and there are bureaucracies that are responsible
for carrying it out, and it is about time we held them
accountable for the damage they have done to our forest and to
our economy. Don't you think so?
Mr. Vaagen. I agree with that statement.
Mr. McClintock. I mean, Ms. Wagner, we are talking about
the enormous holdings of the National Forest Service. I think
it's probably one of the most valuable assets held by the
people of the United States. What is the commercial value of
the timber on your 193 million acres?
Ms. Wagner. I don't have an estimate of the value of the
commercial timber, but we can get that information for you
maybe by way of----
Mr. McClintock. I would love to get such an estimate. In
fact, I find it appalling every time I have asked Forest
Service representatives, they have no idea of the value of the
timber that they are responsible to the people of the United
States for managing. Why don't you know these things?
Ms. Wagner. Well, I could make an estimate based on market
conditions. They change their volatile. We do have an estimate
of standing volume, so we do an inventory of the entirety of
the nation's forests so we could tell you the type of wood
fiber that is out there, the general size, the health and
condition of it, so we have that kind of information, that kind
of inventory. To put a market value on that, I would say it
would be projection based on market conditions as they exist.
It goes up and down depending on the value.
Mr. McClintock. I would like to get those figures because I
would like to know how much these policies are costing our
country as well as our economy.
Mr. Vaagen, you talked about the fact you harvest small
diameter trees only. That seems rather counterproductive. Young
trees, I assume, don't have nearly the commercial value of old
trees. Sounds like the opposite of our fish and game policies.
I really wonder what would be the future of our fish and game
populations if we required taking only the young undersized
individuals out of the population. Why are we doing that?
Mr. Vaagen. Well, they are not all young little trees. We
take two and a half inch up to 12 inch, and these are return
stands of 1930, 1920 fires. Our county, 60 percent of it burned
in that period. So we are thinning this out before it burns
again so it survives the fire. It does have value of $750 to
$1,000 an acre in stumpage alone. The government can keep the
property. In our case if we were losing as much money the
government would have to sell our assets, but in this case I
say utilize them because they are sustainable and perpetual.
Small logs do have higher value. Also, 15 percent of our
product goes to Australia because it is stronger than the other
product which didn't used to be the case 20 years ago, so we
pioneered a lot of markets
Mr. Bishop. Thank you. We are going to go through our
committee members first in giving these questions. I am going
to go to Mr. Grijalva next, and then in the order you all
arrived, Mr. Johnson, Mr. Rivera, Ms. Noem, Mr. Labrador, and
then our three who we have added to it at that point. Mr.
Grijalva.
Mr. Grijalva. Yes. Ms. Wagner, the testimony that would be
presented today or has been presented already seems to indicate
that the Forest Service is basically not logging any trees
anywhere. So my very simplistic question is, is it accurate to
say that--is that accurate or is logging still taking place?
Ms. Wagner. Commercial logging is still taking place on
national forests. We are estimating, in Fiscal Year 2010 we
harvested about 2.5 billion board feet. In the President's
budget proposal for 2012 we were projecting 2.6 billion board
feet.
Mr. Grijalva. I have, and correct me if I am wrong, but I
have seen estimates that we have logged as much as 90 percent
of large old growth timber on this Federal land. Given that
that those large old growth trees are the most profitable to
log, how has the loss of these trees impacted the Federal
timber program?
Ms. Wagner. Well, there was a time in our country when
harvesting large old trees was what fueled the economy, built
houses, and with Endangered Species Act societal values that
changed, concern about endangered species, recovery of those
species, we have put in place strategies that look at
preserving the large old growth character that exists in
forests say typically in the Pacific Northwest. So that affords
us an opportunity to look at other forest stand conditions, so
in the Pacific Northwest much of the activity, as Mr. Vaagen
said, is taking place in second growth stands, so stands that
have been harvested or clear cut at one time in their past, and
have now re-generated, they are second growth and they can be
managed. In some cases they are being managed to actually build
in old tree characteristics over time so small diameter trees
and select harvesting is taking place to get stand conditions
that are favorable for species that we want to recover.
Mr. Grijalva. And some of the testimony today claims that
the demand for wood products remains very, very high. First of
all, the first question, is that accurate? And has the economic
downturn, particularly in home construction, caused a drop in
the demand for wood? And have economic factors played a
significant role in the loss of timber industry in this
country? Getting that, is the issue more complicated than just
deciding that we have to cut more trees?
Ms. Wagner. Well, I think it is true economic conditions in
the country have influenced the forest products sector. In the
case of private landholders, they are hold onto their stumpage,
their trees in the woods because of the low value of stumpage
at this point in time. So the forest products industry is
looking to public lands to help out.
We certainly have the need to treat forests and we are
trying to be responsive to that. Typically we have seen what we
have offered has been sold.
Mr. Grijalva. And last question. Today's hearing might lead
some to believe that timber production is the only valuable use
of our Federal land, our forest land. Is that true, and could
you elaborate on that?
Ms. Wagner. The restoration work we do on national forests
is multi-fold in its benefits. We work on watershed
restoration, so the value of clean water, clean air, healthy
plant and animal communities, wildlife habitat, those are all
values that people expect from national forests. The multiple-
use mandate of the Forest Service is an interesting challenge
because we see forests as places to conserve and we see forests
as places that we should use.
Mr. Grijalva. Thank you. Yes, is it a very complex balance
question that is part of this issue as well.
With that, let me yield back, Mr. Chairman
Mr. Bishop. Thank you. Mr. Johnson.
Mr. Johnson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for holding this
important hearing. I represent southeastern Ohio which is the
home to Wayne National Forest, and while the counties in my
district may not receive the same level of payments that the
counties in some of my colleagues out West do, these payments
are still an important revenue stream. If the Secure Rural
Schools Program is not reauthorized, these counties in my
district would have to cut services back even further than the
current cuts that they have experienced.
However, our country is at a crossroad when it comes to our
debt crisis, and we understand that, and it is clear that the
new formula authorized for the program through the 2008 TARP
bill is not sustainable as we in Congress look for ways to rein
in the Federal debt.
One way though to ensure that these payments to counties
are not drastically cut as a new formula is most likely
authorized would be to increase timber receipts. That is why I
am pleased that at least the second part of this hearing today
is going to--is in regard to options for the U.S. Forest
Service to create a viable program. Unfortunately what I am
hearing is that the U.S. Forest Service is not actively working
on a viable program that will increase timber production, and
therefore increasing timber receipts, not to mention that as we
will hear testimony today, and I have already heard some, an
increase in timber production equals jobs and more tax revenue
for those counties as well.
Ms. Wagner, the Forest Service constantly says that it
needs to increase management, increasing management, I believe
part of that would be to increase timber production, thereby
increasing timber receipts. In your testimony you called this
an ambitious vision. Yet most of the actions of the agency
achieve the opposite result. The case in point on the Colville
National Forest as described by Mr. Vaagen you had one appeal
and no litigation for 10 years and a proposal to increase
management by four-fold, yet the agency still cannot implement
it. What is the reason?
Ms. Wagner. Before I became Associate Chief, I was Regional
Forester in the Pacific Northwest Region, and I can tell you
out of the forest units there in the Pacific Northwest there
was no unit that didn't want to do--to treat more acres, and if
we got additional national forest timber management money in a
budget line item, there were high demands for that everything.
So, my dilemma as a Regional Forester was if I needed to
invest more in the Colville I had to pick another national
forest where I had to diminish my investment, so that is part
of the challenge is where do you invest, where the priority
landscapes. We saw the Colville as a great investment area
because we got results every time we invested there.
Mr. Johnson. Well, you know, I am not a--I don't own a
sawmill, so I am not in that type of business, but I am a
little confused as to why it requires so much money to simply
increase timber receipts. Help me understand that.
Ms. Wagner. Before we do any action on a national forest we
have to disclose the environmental effects of that activity to
inform a decision around how we do that activity, how we might
mitigate that activity. That is guided by the National
Environmental Policy Act. We invest about $365 million across
the Nation----
Mr. Johnson. Basically what you are saying is that here is
another example of regulatory activity, environmental
regulatory activity that is hampering America's economy. We
study these things but we don't produce anything. We do a lot
of talking, we do a lot of analysis. When are we going to open
up these lands and let private companies go in and get that
timber out. We have already heard testimony that it is either
going to burn out or we are going to haul it out. Why don't we
want to haul it out and put America back to work? Why are we
continuing to study these things ad nauseam?
Ms. Wagner. I would not characterize the National
Environmental Policy Act as simply studying the thing. It takes
a look at the site-specific impacts of an activity, guides the
decisionmaker to make a decision about that activity, and then
we move forward after that decision has been informed. We have
requirements under provisions of law to take a look at the
cultural resources, to know what the wildlife impact and
inventory and species are. We have the Endangered Species Act.
It is complex, yes, but----
Mr. Johnson. Well, I apologize for cutting you off because
my time has expired, but I want to follow up just real quickly.
We have private sources that are interested in paying some of
this funding to get this analysis done. If the forest products
industry in northeast Washington is willing to pay the Forest
Service $600 to $750 per acre to treat the forest and remove
the fuels, it seems to point back to the agency's planning
cost, doesn't this reiterate the need to reduce the cost and
complexity of completing never-ending costly NEPA analysis on
projects that have already got broad private sector support?
Mr. Bishop. You have 15 seconds to do that answer.
Ms. Wagner. Absolutely, we want to make sure that we are
using appropriate dollars very efficiently and that we are
leveraging the strong agreement that exists in these
collaborate landscapes. We need to speed up the NEPA process.
Mr. Johnson. America wants to break down the bureaucratic
roadblock and put it back to work. Thank you for the extra
time, Mr. Chairman
Mr. Bishop. And you did it in 14 seconds. I am impressed.
Mr. Rivera.
Mr. Rivera. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. With your permission,
if I could yield my time to my colleague from Florida, Mr.
Southerland?
Mr. Bishop. Certainly. Mr. Southerland.
Mr. Southerland. Thank you, Mr. Rivera, and thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
I wanted to ask because I do have a constituent here. Mrs.
Dauzat, I would like to ask you some questions because you are
out there having to live with this insanity, OK, and most
people who have walking-around sense really struggle with what
we hear here in this book and environment that we live in. But
since you are sweating payroll, since you are paying high
workers comp. premiums, since you are dealing with the lunacy
coming out of the EPA, OK, they want to study something, they
want to diagnose something. Well, after it is dead, then it
becomes a postmortem examination. So what I want to do is ask
you a couple of things.
You are obviously an owner of multiple businesses, and over
400 jobs that we talked about earlier amongst your communities.
As a Floridian, it is worth noting that Florida's forest
product industry contributes over $16.6 billion to the State's
economy. As an industry expert, do you believe lumber
production in the country would benefit from increased access
to timber in our national forests as far as jobs? I know that
is simple.
Ms. Dauzat. Definitely. Go ahead.
Mr. Southerland. Go ahead. No, you drove a long way.
Ms. Dauzat. I mean, our mill in Bristol, having access to
the Apalachicola and national forests would be a tremendous
increase in resources. We are able to make it as we are, but
having that access would be wonderful for the community,
wonderful for our company.
Mr. Southerland. And as far as the Apalachicola National
Forest, it is my understanding having been there, having grown
up there, that what the Service has done, conveniently, is take
a national forest and have created wilderness land. So, they
have basically taken a national forest and made a national
park, which obviously has had terrible effects on the ability
to harvest. Also, in the national forest, it needs to be noted
it has a 5.7 mortality rate, and we have a 3.5 percent harvest
rate.
So why in the world, and I guess we could shift over to Ms.
Wagner, why in the world with those numbers--5.7 mortality
rate, 3.5 cut rate--how do we get our arms around that and say
this is smart?
Ms. Wagner. We are not harvesting all of the in-growth that
occurs on national forests across the nation. We are not even
touching it, approximating it, coming close to it in part
because people value forests for a suite of values that they
get from them. In other cases we are actively working and
harvesting commercially, and in addition, providing small
diameter material that is fostered by our restoration work.
Mr. Southerland. But we are harvesting now 20 to 30 percent
of what we were harvesting 10 years ago, and yet we have an
Administration, if they utilize, you know, the numbers that you
shared, the $320 million Mr. DeFazio asked you about, and you
want to work with us, so you throw out a number, and now you
want to work with us. If that is the rationale that this
Administration has for the entire budget, that is pretty scary.
OK, in small business we figure out how we are going to do
something and then we determine the possibility of numbers. So
explain to me how going from where we were 10 years ago, and
the things that Mr. Walden talked about, we had 405 mills 30
years ago and now we are down to 106, and much of that is
because of the management of the services. How do you justify
that this particular direction that you are headed is good from
American jobs? This is a jobs issue.
Ms. Wagner. We favor working and restoring America's
forests.
Mr. Southerland. I don't think you do favor working though,
and see, I have to counter what you--you do favor restoring
forests just like some favor turning the Gulf of Mexico into an
aquarium, OK? And I think that you do, I think you do mean what
you just said as far as restoration and as far as preservation,
but these numbers say that you don't value work and jobs in
these rural counties.
Ms. Wagner. Well, I would like to provide the Committee
with the real number of acres treated, volume created and give
you a sense of the--for the investment what we are getting off
of national forests, so I would like to provide that to the
Committee.
Mr. Southerland. That would be good.
Ms. Wagner. And just reiterate that the creation of
resilient and healthy forests is something that has been
priority for the Forest Service for a number of years. We work
in a complicated regulatory environment and a patchwork of laws
that makes it a little difficult to navigate that landscape,
but we are committed to do so for the health of the land and to
provide benefits to citizens in this country.
Mr. Bishop. OK, thank you. Mr. Labrador.
Mr. Labrador. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
We need to be innovative in the way that we are dealing
with this issue. We have some county commissioners in Idaho who
are working toward a new solution that is kind of outside the
box, kind of what you are working on, Mr. Vaagen, so to speak,
and I am still hearing from them. I am going to be working with
them in the next few months trying to see if it is an idea we
can bring to Congress, but we need more ideas. The one idea by
itself is not enough. I welcome the proposals that some of
these counties are saying they are going to be submitting, Mr.
Chairman, a letter to the record within the next 10 days, and
this is just one option that we have that we need to take a
hard look at and we need to just find a good solution to the
problem.
I am concerned about jobs, and maybe some of the questions
that I heard, is it Mr. Vaagen or Vaagen?
Mr. Vaagen. Vaagen.
Mr. Labrador. Vaagen, all right. Mr. Vaagen, have you seen
a drop in the demand for wood at this time?
Mr. Vaagen. In some products but again 15 percent of our
product finds its way to Australia, some to Japan. The foreign
markets are very good right now.
Mr. Labrador. Foreign markets are good and we also use wood
for paper. Have you seen--I know you don't deal with this, but
we have a paper mill in our----
Mr. Vaagen. Yes, there are several around us. We have five
customers. Pulp and paper is extremely good, probably the best
it has been in the last 20 years for an extended period of
time--almost a year-and-a-half, which is like a record. Because
there is a constriction on the log supply, it is going to
remain high. Wood pulp is extremely valuable, and a lot of the
wood products in the U.S. are finding their way to China in the
form of logs or lumber. So, no, there is still demand. We ran
out of logs. We ran one mill 33 percent of the time, which is
unfortunate. The other one was two-thirds. We would like to run
them both at 100. We could add 100 jobs immediately. That would
be another 100 jobs in the words and your district as well.
Mr. Labrador. And that is what I am asking. So there are
jobs that could be created. We can use some of this wood that
is diseased, you know, with beetle. We could use that for paper
products, right?
Mr. Vaagen. Absolutely. That pulp logs, and that is another
business. Half of our fiber makes it in byproducts, chips, sod,
bark and shavings, so that is another thing about small logs,
but that is a third of our revenues, too, so we don't take that
lightly.
Mr. Labrador. OK. Now no one on this panel is arguing that
timber harvesting is the only valuable use of the lands, right?
Is there anybody on this panel who is arguing that?
Mr. Vaagen. Well, I would argue if you don't do it you are
going to get fire, and that is going to destroy the habitat and
these other uses that people like to use. You don't destroy
500,000 acres without destroying habitat, animals and
recreation, grazing, you name it.
Mr. Labrador. Well, you got to my next question. The reason
we want timber harvesting is we want to prevent some of these
large forest fires, so in north Idaho we had 100 years ago a
huge fire that almost destroyed the entire area, and they are
concerned in Idaho that we may have that again, you know,
called the 100-year fire, that we are getting to a point where
the timber has grown and the forestation has grown at such a
rate that we could have another fire like that. What is the
best way to prevent something like that from happening?
Mr. Vaagen. You have to take the material out. You have to
thin the forest, and trees are valuable. I like trees, and we
don't cut them all, and they grow. It is amazing. We act like
they don't grow back. They do. Those fires you are talking
about in 1910, three million acres, it all grew back.
Mr. Labrador. Yes.
Mr. Vaagen. So we need to take the fuel loadings out and we
need to do that quickly, and if you want to make money on it go
to the places where they can make money on it first, break even
second, and if it cost you money you go there third.
Mr. Labrador. Now you have been working on these
communities for over two decades. In your experience in the
Colville National Forest what kind of changes have you seen in
the structure and overall health of the forest?
Mr. Vaagen. Well, what we have harvested, and actually I
have to tell you it is over four and a half decades actually.
Mr. Labrador. OK. My apologies.
Mr. Vaagen. No, no, I am trying to stay in good health. It
has gotten better where we treat it, and it is fire resilient.
Where we haven't treated the fuel loadings are high. We have
mountain pine beetle now. I am afraid for Idaho, Montana, and
Washington State inland, we are going to have some big fires in
the next 10 years, amazing fires.
Mr. Labrador. And one last question. What are your thoughts
about the socioeconomic impacts? What have you seen about the
socioeconomic impacts in those decades as well based on our
forest policy?
Mr. Vaagen. Well, we used to cut the bigger trees up to
four-foot diameter. In Republic and Ione, we lost those two
operations. That was probably 300 jobs in the mills, 300 in
those small communities. Those school districts have gotten
smaller. I was in Ione last week, a small town in northeast
Washington. Half the stores look like they are boarded up. They
always wait for a mine or some other project that lasts for 20
years as a boost but long term the forest is where we live.
That is where we get the value, and we can increase it, and we
haven't done those areas any good the last 20 years.
Mr. Labrador. Thank you very much
Mr. Bishop. OK, thank you.
Mr. Vaagen, it is obvious that Mr. Labrador doesn't need
your book, so can I get his copy?
Mr. Vaagen. Is it in the bag, sir
Mr. Bishop. OK, good. Mr. Young is a member of our
Subcommittee with impeccable timing. Do you have some questions
for these witnesses?
Mr. Young. Mostly a comment. This hearing is about Secure
Rural Schools and Communities. I notice Ms. Wagner said she
supports the reauthorization, but gives us no suggestions on
funding. Funding would be to harvest some trees. That is the
answer. I know in Alaska, you know, 35 years ago we were--
actually 40 years ago--we were cutting 450 million board feet a
year, and now if I am not mistaken, Ms. Wagner, we are supposed
to have 267 million board feet this year, and we have 15
million board feet.
When I drove by that Forest Service compound--you are good
at building compounds, by the way--if you want to fund these
schools, eradicate the compounds, sell them, use the money and
fund these schools. When I was in Ketchikan the other day and,
gentlemen, I want you to listen to this, I drove by their
compound--by the way it is gated. There are 27 new Chevrolet
trucks in the yard. There are 3 big boats with 2 motors each--
150 horsepower--brand new in the yard, and what kills me, 27
kayaks--kayaks. And I asked what they were for. They use them
so they don't disturb the forest, and this is the Forest
Service that is supposed to be harvesting trees so we have
secure schools.
With all due respect, Ms. Wagner, you are not the only--
this Administration is not the only one. This has been going on
for a long time, answering to interest groups that say we have
to save our trees, and what they are doing is saving the dead
ones and not allowing the young ones to grow.
Now, can you visualize, everybody in this room, while you
allowed to grow and live forever, being rotten to the core, and
that young girl in the back of the room back there wouldn't
have room to grow. The forests of this nation is a vital part
of what we call our fiber base, and we have neglected it and
let it burn. Now, I agree with my good friend that said there
are going to be big forest fires, and it is going to happen,
but you will say, and EPA will say, and the interest groups,
``Oh, that is natural,'' and I am very upset about that for
another reason.
We have the EPA and forests and air quality in Fairbanks,
Alaska, but they will let the forests burn because it is
natural, but when it is 60 below zero you can't light a fire
because you might pollute the air to keep warm. Now that is the
stupidity of our Federal Government. Now show me the rationale
behind that.
So I am suggesting, Mr. Chairman, and I know I am on my
soapbox but I am suggesting that we need to solve this problem,
have to re-address this idea of what is the forest for. For
those who live in the--I call the big cities that go around and
visit, oh, they are really pretty, and leave these people in
the rural areas to starve, have to move, destroy the fiber of
this country. Your counties are going through it right now. But
the solution is with the Forest Service to say we are the
managing agency and we are going to harvest these trees as we
should.
With all due respect, I don't see this in the Forest
Service anymore. I see park rangers, that is what I see. I
don't see people that believe that the trees can grow again. So
I think it is very, very important, my good Chairman and the
Members of this Committee, either they do it or we pass laws
that says they will. Take it away from the Forest Service, give
it to the counties. You manage it. You live there. You live it.
Provide for your people because our government right now is
forcing people from these small communities and move to the big
cities, and we don't have a timber industry.
Ms. Wagner, why aren't we cutting trees? And don't give me
this restoration stuff, by the way. We are restoring it for
what? If you are not going to cut it, you are not restoring it.
Ms. Wagner. I think the way I could best address your
statement is in citing the 10 projects that are real projects,
tangible, on-the-ground, generating outcomes, including forest
products harvested. These are the 10 Collaborative Forest
Landscape Restoration Act projects. Congress say the need to
invest in large landscape scale restoration which is not simply
conservation and protection. It is actually utilization and
treatment of these projects. All of these projects are over
50,000 acres in scale. Many of them over a million acres in
scale where citizens have come together and they are
identifying what needs to be done--the treatment of invasive
species, the restoration of streams or creeks, the wildlife
habitat that needs to be improved, the hazardous fuels that
need reduced, and the wood products that need harvested and
moved to put that forest in a condition where it can be
resilient to the impacts and changes that we are predicting
over time including fire.
So, I would like to provide you with a list of these
projects and the outcomes that have happened just in one year's
worth of funding as examples of how active we are and how
committed we are to the condition and health of these forests.
Mr. Bishop. Thank you very much. I hope, Mr. Young, now I
am 60, I am not one of those old trees that is rotten to the
core you are talking about.
Mr. Young. It takes 100 years.
[Laughter.]
Mr. Young. By that time you better be harvested, I can tell
you that right now.
[Laughter.]
Mr. Bishop. Ms. McMorris Rodgers.
Mrs. McMorris Rodgers. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Young
was asking what are the forests for, and he made the comment
that for some they are really pretty. You know, I might submit
that they are not even really pretty. If Americans saw what was
really going on in these forests, I think they would be
outraged because the Forest Service, yes, they own, they manage
millions of acres, that is what they say, but the reality is if
you look at these trees, so many are dying. They are dead, they
are kindling actually for that major fire. This year's New
Mexico, you know, next year who is it going to be? Or even
later on this year who is it going to be? That is the reality.
I wish more people could actually see, I wish Americans could
see what is going on in these forests. They would be outraged.
And I come from the Colville National Forest, and it is the
model supposedly of how we on the local level should be working
together, coming together in this collaborative approach. We
have done it now for years and years, and then we still, we
still don't qualify for the Collaborative Forest Landscape
Restoration Fund. Ten projects in all of America. It is very
disappointing.
I wanted to ask, Mary, and I appreciate the conversations
we have had through the years, do you believe that the Forest
Service--that the time, the cost required to plan, analyze is
too high?
Ms. Wagner. We are working on that as we speak because we
believe that to do our best by the people that put us out there
to do work on forests we have to stretch the appropriated
dollar in every way that it can. So this NEPA project that I
mentioned to look at categorical exclusions, to support
restoration work, and to look at demonstration projects where
we can practice better approaches to NEPA, streamline, move
faster, work cheaper is absolutely critical for us.
Mrs. McMorris Rodgers. I feel like we have tried
everything. We have jumped through all the hoops and there is
always just one more. I would like to ask Mr. Vaagen, why don't
you think that we qualified or what is your experience? Let me
ask you. What is your experience related to the Collaborative
Forest Landscape Restoration Fund?
Mr. Vaagen. I was a big proponent of it. I was excited
about it. I thought that we would qualify. I thought that we
were number one or two in the Nation out of 10. We didn't make
the top 15, which tells me the collaboration wasn't a good
payoff for us. We haven't got special funding there and our
forest has the bug. A third of the national forests is at risk
of fire. You know, 60 million acres out of 193 million, that is
a high percentage. My experience is we are not getting it done.
Something drastically has to change. There has to be a new way
of doing business.
We stand ready to help and pay the government and extra $12
million a year, and probably provide additional 350 jobs. It is
all a win/win/win situation. I don't think people can answer
the question why today because they don't want to answer the
question. I will answer the question.
Mrs. McMorris Rodgers. So now we are in the situation where
we are actually willing to pay the Forest Service for an
opportunity to maybe get some of these sales. What has been the
response so far from the Forest Service?
Mr. Vaagen. What do you mean by pay to get----
Mrs. McMorris Rodgers. Well, that we would--that the forest
products industry will now potentially pay to treat certain
parts of the forest.
Mr. Vaagen. Well, from our vantage point we are going to
pay for anything we treat, but you have to lower the cost to
make it affordable for the government. Their costs are too high
and don't try to make the sale uneconomical. Our experience is
they put in special walkway bridges, things like that,
bathrooms, whatever, but also they make the sales itself very
difficult. You need to target jobs and profitability if you are
going to make it a success and you have to work with customers
and markets to do that.
Mrs. McMorris Rodgers. Thank you. Mr. Pearce, what do you
believe is the impact of stewardship contracts on counties and
schools through Secure Rural Schools?
Mr. Pearce. Thank you very much.
The Forest Service has adopted stewardship contracting as a
panacea for dismal timber production. Stewardship contracting
requires a collaborative process. These collaborators are
intended to have participation by people on all sides of the
issues. On the north half of our forest, the Gifford Pinchot
National Forest, in the district the collaborators took 10
years to produce a single 11 million board foot sale. Ten
years, 11 million board feet.
A forest executive told me that based on this collaboration
the new timber rotation in the Gifford Pinchot is 300 years.
This is a forest that produced an average of 350 million board
feet from the seventies until 1991. Even the Northwest Forest
Plan calls for 50 million board feet per year. No revenue is
produced for the county schools or treasuries from these sales.
Instead the forest line officers negotiate for restoration or
other work in exchange for actual dollars.
I am aware of at least two contracts where the Forest ended
up owing the successful bidder some money at the end. The so-
called collaborative process of decision by committee of those
that can commit untold volunteer hours against paid
environmental staff is a poor way of doing business, and it is
not very scientific.
Mr. Bishop. Thank you. I appreciate that. Mr. Herger.
Mr. Herger. Thank you, Chairman Bishop, for holding this
hearing and allowing me to participate. The Northern California
district that I represent contains all or parts of nine
national forests. Sadly, many Northern California communities
have been devastated by the forced decline of the timber
industry. I was a strong supporter of the legislation in 2000
that authorized the Secure Rural Schools Program. Congressman
George Radanovich and I sat on the Budget Committee then and
worked to help secure the program's funding. I said on the
Floor at the time that ``It provides the short-term stability
and education funding which these communities desperately need
while enabling them to participate with their Federal agencies
in a program that will help to begin to restore health to our
overgrown national forest system.''
This funding has been crucial for schools and roads in the
communities I represent, but it was intended to be a bridge and
the program's goal should continue to be to foster forest
management which is the best and really only way to restore
long-term stability to our county economies and our schools.
Today's hearing is an unfortunate reminder that timber
harvests are still nowhere near where they need to be. Our
forests and communities are becoming more and more vulnerable
to catastrophic wild fires, and our forest counties face very
high unemployment.
Mr. Pearce, what efforts will your organization make to
help ensure that the Secure Rural Schools Programs get back to
its original goal of self-sufficiency for communities through
increased timber harvesting?
Mr. Pearce. As I said earlier, the National Forest counties
Coalition and the Partnership for Rural America has put forward
a White Paper which is included in my testimony, my written
testimony, that speaks to forest management. We believe in
forest management. We want to trade these safety net dollars
for jobs for our communities because the jobs and the dollars
in our communities are important, and the NACO position,
National Association of Counties' position is also the same. We
are ready to work with whoever we need to work with to get
production back into the forest. It is not just about
restoration. It is about actual timber production.
Mr. Herger. Mr. Pearce, I want to thank you and your
organization for that. I can't emphasize enough how important
it is that this Congress be lobbied by the constituency, your
constituency, to make sure this fact is out there. I hate to
say that over the years, particularly over the last four or
five years, I have seen a decrease in our counties and our
different coalitions out lobbying our Congress for this point
because ultimately we know what the funding is here. We know we
are only spending 42 cents out of every dollar more than we are
bringing in. Ultimately it is going to take us, and we have
heard even during these economic down times of the housing
being down, there is still a demand for our product out there,
and the real answer, both to preventing these fires by going
out and managing them, thinning out our forests and getting
money into our school since it is not going to be there in our
counties otherwise is by a very active lobbying by your group.
Ms. Wagner, I recently received--on a different issue--a
copy of these letters that were sent from the Forest Service
Washington Office to Fish and Wildlife Service and National
Marine Fishery Service revoking the alternative consultation
agreement between our agencies. I have been very concerned with
the delays in consultation for projects in my district, and
this will only make that worse. My question to you is why did
the Forest Service get rid of this valuable tool and how will
the Forest Service increase forest management and 25 percent
payments while implementing these kinds of decisions?
Ms. Wagner. Sir, I don't know the answer to the alternative
arrangements with Fish and Wildlife Service, so if you would
allow me to check into that and get a response back to you, I
would be happy to do that. Consultation is an important piece
of our work, and I would like to explore that, so I will get
back with you on that.
Mr. Herger. Thank you. I appreciate that. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
Mr. Bishop. Thank you. Mr. Tipton.
Mr. Tipton. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would like to thank
our panel for being here.
I came from the west slope of Colorado and we have up to 70
percent of the property on the western slope of Colorado is
either Federal, state or tribal lands, and Ms. Wagner, I guess
I would like to ask you a question from the Forest Service
perspective. I have an area called Chimney Rock, which you all
may be familiar with, on Forest Service lands. I was visiting
with some of the rangers and they indicated that the timber was
literally overgrown. You are only supposed to have so many
Ponderosa Pine, Blue Spruce over a given area, and that it was
overgrown.
So can you maybe illustrate for me, and I apologize, had to
run out, you may have already covered this, what is the Forest
Service plan truly for dealing with some of the overgrowth?
Because when we are talking about Colorado, we live in fear,
one lightening strike, one spark away from a major forest fire
with the dead standing timber from the pine beetle kill, which
we have had. We have to really manage our forests in a way that
not only lends itself obviously to their good health but
obviously the collateral benefits that we can see with our
timber industry representatives here for providing jobs and for
supporting our school. So, can you tell me a little bit of what
those plans are?
Ms. Wagner. So, there would be two approaches to treat a
forest stand that is overgrown, that has unhealthful forest
conditions in it. Usually we do a combination. We take our
NFTM, our timber management budget line item and our hazardous
fuels reduction budget line item, and we combine those to do
the project planning, put a silvicultural prescription in
place, do the environmental documentation, issue a decision,
put a timber sale contractor or stewardship contract on the
streets, and actively manage that.
Mr. Tipton. Are you seeing some regulatory concerns that
are inhibiting you from being able to do that job?
Ms. Wagner. Well, I think I mentioned a few things. We have
to get better at our own environmental documentation through
the National Environmental Policy Act, so I have talked about
that being something that is on us to get better at doing. We
need to continue to work on how we take the appropriated dollar
and really stretch it to do everything that is necessary. We
would be the first to say that we are not treating all the
acres that are needed treatment on national forests.
Mr. Tipton. Great. How about access into the forests
because we have a lot of plans right now shutting down a lot of
roads going into our forests, how is that going to impact the
timber industry's ability to be able to get in and make those
treatments?
Ms. Wagner. One thing I wanted to mention earlier about the
forest products industry. They have, in the West, the AFRC,
they do a lot of work with us locally on the ground looking at
the specific timber sale projects that we are proposing to put
up, and they help us make sure that we are packaging them in
the most economical way. They advise us. We sometimes take road
packages out of them to make them more viable, particularly in
this downturned economy, so I do want to credit industry works
directly with us to put the most favorable packages together. I
think that is why in part our offerings have had a high rate of
sell.
I forgot the second part of your question. I am sorry.
Mr. Tipton. Well, let me move on to another point here. We
have one mill left in Colorado, and it is in receivership right
now, you know. And I think when Congressman Walden was talking
about the number of mills that we used to have available in
this country, is there a real commitment now for the Forest
Service, because a lot of it has to be cost-associated ability
to get that timber out? Right now we have to create that
accessibility, and I would encourage you to do everything you
possibly can to assist us.
Ms. Wagner. Thank you. In these economic times the Forest
Service has had a pretty aggressive approach to addressing all
of the avenues that we have in regulation and through the Farm
Bill to make projects more viable. We have been able to extend
contracts, in some cases cancel contracts or reduce prices on
contracts to make them more viable in these conditions.
Mr. Tipton. Ms. Dauzat, fourth generation, I assume you
want to go into the fifth generation to be able to do this.
What can the Forest Service do to help you?
Ms. Dauzat. Well, we own timberland as well, and from what
she has described if we had to sell our timber in the manner
they have to sell our timber it would never work. I mean, you
have to make it logical. We go out as sawmill owners, we have a
forestry department, they go out, approach landowners, the deal
is made, the timber is cut. It doesn't cost us money. Everybody
makes money in the equation, so I am confused.
Mr. Tipton. My time has expired, Mr. Chairman. Thank you.
Mr. Bishop. Thank you. Let me ask a couple of questions to
a few of you.
Mr. Pearce, first of all, you quote the NACO platform that
says it supports active natural resource management. Does that
mean that NACO supports streamlining NEPA or other laws as well
to provide protection from activists who use those laws to
delay and obstruct the active forest management?
Mr. Pearce. Yes, sir. We support both reform of NEPA as
well as the ESA.
Mr. Bishop. What about your county and also the Partnership
for Rural America? You represent both of them.
Mr. Pearce. National Forest Counties and the Partnership
both do, and especially the use of categorical exclusion.
Mr. Bishop. I appreciate that so let me follow up with Ms.
Wagner then on that issue.
The NEPA analysis can cost up to $1 million per project to
go through that. Does the Forest Service agree that the time
and cost required to plan and analyze forest management is too
high?
Ms. Wagner. We want to work to lower those costs so that we
can do more work on the ground
Mr. Bishop. Do you think it is actually possible for the
Forest Service to begin producing revenues for schools and
local government if it does not streamline that process?
Ms. Wagner. I think it would be very difficult for us to
achieve the receipts necessary to fully pay the freight
Mr. Bishop. Ms. Wagner, the proposed planning rule has some
concern. Probably every multiple-use organization in the
country and several Members of Congress who represent probably
most, if not 80 percent of the national forest, have expressed
concern with that. A letter was sent to Secretary Vilsack back
on May 31 of this year. To date, we have yet to receive any
kind of response from either the Service or the Department.
Do you have a clue like when we are going to be hearing
from him?
Ms. Wagner. Mr. Bishop, let me follow up on that. I know we
have received the letter and let me make sure that we have
actually got a response, and if your office doesn't have it
make sure you do.
Mr. Bishop. Thank you. Mr. Vaagen, you know, assuming we
can produce meaningful progress with the Forest Service in your
area, how quickly do you think your coalitions, the management
approach for the Colville National Forest can produce the 25
percent payments you referred to in your testimony?
Mr. Vaagen. Fairly quickly. We just have to have more
projects put up to get the revenue stream up
Mr. Bishop. Is there a time lapse in that or is it simply a
matter of authorizing the work to go forward?
Mr. Vaagen. Authorizing the work to go forward. CEs would
work like on this mountain pine beetle, they can go up to a
thousand acres. I see various projects being implemented
immediately. I mean, the material is turning orange and yellow,
and then gray, and then the last color will be orange again.
Mr. Bishop. I thought blue was in there somewhere.
Mr. Vaagen. Yes, it is if it is real hot. Yes, you are
right.
Mr. Bishop. All right. Could I also ask you the other
question? What do you believe would be the effect if Congress
was to reauthorize Secure Rural Schools Program without making
reforms to how the Forest Service manages those lands to bring
a sustainable management back to the forest?
Mr. Vaagen. I don't see how that would happen. It hasn't
happened in the past.
Mr. Bishop. Let me ask one last question for Ms. Wagner if
I could. The Interior Department recently released a new
spotted owl recovery plan that in some of our opinions remains
largely unchanged from the plan that was released last fall.
How can the Forest Service increase management, especially in
the Northwest, if this new recovery plan and the ensuing
critical habitat designation places more restrictions on more
acres?
Ms. Wagner. I mean, I do this from memory, sir, so if I
don't have it right I would like to make sure that I can follow
up with the correct information. But I think the estimates from
the Pacific North region about the impact of the northern
spotted owl recovery plan is that it would impact the number of
acres treated by somewhere between 15 and 20 percent in the
Pacific Northwest, so it would lessen our ability in some ways
to treat acres.
It is a fine line trying to recover species and balance the
habitat requirements for that species in light of other
competition, the Bart owl, in particular, so that is a complex
problem. I know it does have some impacts. I know the Forest
Service was feeling like the impacts and the Fish and Wildlife
Service had been responsive to the comments that had been
offered and the workshops that were in place early this winter
to resolve those concerns
Mr. Bishop. OK, thank you. It is a good answer, complete
answer to my question. Appreciate that.
Are there others on the Committee who would like a second
round of questions? Mr. Southerland, do you have--
Mr. Southerland. It shouldn't take much time
Mr. Bishop. You are recognized.
Mr. Southerland. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I wanted to ask Ms. Dauzat if I could, as a business owner,
because right now small business in this country is being
crushed by what I believe are manmade policies. With small
business representing 85 percent of our economy, and the State
of Florida is having historical unemployment numbers,
nationwide we are seeing the unemployment rate continue to go
up. Florida has been hit, as you know, by incredible amounts of
foreclosures. But as a business owner and you knowing what I
just stated, you and your family have contributed much to our
communities in north and northwest Florida, do you have any
suggestions for this committee on how to better manage national
forests while preserving our wildlife habitat for future
generations?
And I notice you, by the way, have your daughter here, so
witnessing mom testifying, so when I say future generations it
sits 10 feet from you.
Ms. Dauzat. She is present, yes.
My written comments that I submitted contained a number of
specific recommendations. I would ask the Committee to consider
them. Beyond them I ask each of you to remember that you are
not just dealing with land, timber and other natural resources.
You have in your hand many communities and families' legacies
that deserves to be properly cared by everyone here. You are
not dealing with dollars for counties, you are dealing with
families, especially children, and with their homes, their
dreams, their future. Please treat them gently.
Mr. Southerland. Wonderful. Thank you very much. Mr.
Chairman, I want to say this is not a committee assignment. I
would like to thank you publicly for allowing me to come before
you today. Thank you
Mr. Bishop. We are happy to have you here. Come anytime,
and starting the next session we will renegotiate, maybe we can
get you hear full time.
Mr. McClintock, do you have another couple of questions in
conclusion?
Mr. McClintock. Yes, sir. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Ms. Dauzat, you actually are in the harvesting business as
well as sawmill business, right?
Ms. Dauzat. Well, we do not own logging operations but we
have a procurement company that goes out and procures timber
for our sawmill.
Mr. McClintock. Do any of you actually have timber stands
that you manage?
Ms. Dauzat. Yes, we own lumber as well.
Mr. McClintock. Can you tell me on the timber stands that
you own what is the commercial value of those stands?
Ms. Dauzat. Not off the top of my head.
Mr. McClintock. What percentage of your stands do you
harvest every year?
Ms. Dauzat. We own about 9,000 acres as a family and we try
to keep it at about 150 acres a year rotation. That is what we
shoot for.
Mr. McClintock. Out of how much?
Ms. Dauzat. Nine thousand acres.
Mr. McClintock. OK.
Ms. Dauzat. Small stand.
Mr. McClintock. So percentage-wise that is what, about one
or two percent?
Ms. Dauzat. Yes.
Mr. McClintock. OK. Mr. Vaagen, you seem to have----
Mr. Vaagen. Same story. We have about 50,000 acres. It is
less than five percent of our supply, but we try to continually
rotate it, stay ahead of the bugs, the forest health issues.
The value of it is usually $1,000 to $2,000 an acre.
Mr. McClintock. One thousand to two thousand an acre. That
is helpful.
Ms. Wagner, what percentage of our timber does the Federal
Government harvest? Ms. Wagner?
Ms. Wagner. I am sorry, sir. I was just looking to see if I
had a quick acre figure. I have a volume figure and I have some
acre figures, but I would like to get back with you on--oh,
wait, timber sales, 177,000 acres treated using timber sales in
2010.
Mr. McClintock. Now, is that the percentage of our timber
resources that we are harvesting each year?
Ms. Wagner. No, sir. We would be happy to do that because I
think it would be worth looking at the different legislation
that exists on national forests and take things like wilderness
areas out of calculation, but about 200,000 acres treated using
timber sales out of the acres that we--a very modest
percentage.
Mr. McClintock. What I am getting at is this is a renewable
resource of immense value. Using the low end figure that Mr.
Vaagen just offered us, I would assume that means that the
total value of our national forest timber is some $200 billion,
meaning if we harvested one percent a year that would be
yielding at least $2 billion of revenues to the United States
Treasury.
And the point that Mr. Young made is one that needs to be
emphasized. If we were actually properly managing these
resources, not only would we have healthier forests, we would
have a much healthier economy because the economic multiplier
on forest activity that I have seen from economists is about
threefold. So, not only would it be $2 billion of direct
revenues to the Federal treasury, it would be $6 billion of
additional economic activity because of the ripple effect of
that economic productivity.
Mr. Young says we could fund our Secure Rural Schools
budget from that. In fact, we wouldn't need Secure Rural
Schools because the local communities would be generating
enormous property taxes again because of an enormous prosperity
that I see this policy practiced by your bureaucracy standing
in the way of. I mean, I look at the economic devastation of my
district, which is one of the most resource rich areas of the
country, northeastern California, huge, huge timber resources
mainly managed by the Federal Government sitting there. They
can't even harvest fire killed timber once the overgrowth has
caused these fires. We can't even go back in and salvage dead
timber because of the restrictions placed in the way by the
Forest Service and by this panoply of environmental laws that
need wholesale redress.
So, Mr. Chairman, I would just like to offer the suggestion
that maybe in the future we ought to be looking at ways that we
can link the Forest Service budget to Forest Service revenues
actually yielded off of Forest Service land.
Mr. Bishop. Thank you. Mr. Tipton.
Mr. Tipton. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I just wanted to
have one follow-up question.
Mr. Pearce, I would like to go back to some of the opening
comments Congressman Walden brought up just to have your
feedback.
Would you and other leaders in counties that are similar to
yours, would you like to see additional discretion from your
counties on how to manage your lands for production and provide
revenue for rural schools?
Mr. Pearce. Absolutely. You wouldn't get a negative, I
think, from any of the counties that have, as I have said, up
to 90 percent of their county in Federal ownership. And to
really follow up to that, we also have state trust land, 20,000
some odd acres, and have about 30,000 acres of private timber
land. The fact is the state trust land brings more revenue
comparatively on that 20,000 acres than the 880,000 acres of
national forest I have.
Mr. Tipton. Impressive and speaks to a lot. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman. Thank you, Mr. Pearce
Mr. Bishop. Thank you. I appreciate all four of you for
your patience in answering these questions and how I
slaughtered your names. I apologize for that, too. You are
dismissed. We appreciate your time and effort in being here.
We have one other panel, if we could have the following
three people come to the table and join us: Mr. David Tenney,
President of the County Supervisors Association of Arizona from
the Navajo County Board of Supervisors; Ms. Anna Morrison,
Women in Timber; Mr. David Crews, Superintendent of the Norwood
Colorado School District.
As you are coming up here, I would also ask unanimous
consent that the SRS language from the Interior Appropriation
Report in the House appear in our record. Hearing no objection,
that is so ordered.
[NOTE: The Interior Appropriation Report language has been
retained in the Committee's official files.]
Mr. Bishop. We appreciate the three of you joining us as
well. The same situation applies as before. Your written
testimonies will appear in the record. We are asking for your
oral testimonies. As I think you were watching the clocks
there, green means your time has started; yellow, you have a
minute left; red, your time has actually expired, and we will
see how long over that red mark we can all go.
At any rate, we thank you for being here and we would ask
Mr. Tenney if you would start us off with your oral testimony.

STATEMENT OF DAVID TENNEY, PRESIDENT, COUNTY SUPERVISORS
ASSOCIATION OF ARIZONA, NAVAJO COUNTY BOARD OF SUPERVISORS

Mr. Tenney. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Members of the
Committee. I appreciate the invitation to be here today.
My name is David Tenney. I am Supervisor for Navajo County
in the State of Arizona. I am located up in the northeastern
part of Arizona. Also, just coincidentally I have nine years
experience on a local school board there, so Secure Rural
Schools I can come at it from a couple of different angles.
I will begin by stating that I believe the responsible use
of industry is the key ingredient for managing our forests. I
also believe that the reintroduction of industry into our
forests is the key ingredient for the continuation and
reauthorization of county payment programs like PILT and Secure
Rural Schools. I cannot overstate how important the management
of natural resources have become to rural communities like
ours, and rural counties like ours. The 468,000-acre Rodeo-
Chediski fire of 2002 burned in my county and nearly destroyed
my home, and the 540,000-acre Wallow fire of this year burned
in two of my neighboring counties.
The footprints left by those two fires alone could
comfortably hold the Cities of Phoenix, Chicago, Dallas and Los
Angeles.
Mr. Chairman and Members, the rural communities of Arizona
were founded and exist due to the use of the abundant natural
resources that surround them. However, our combined mistakes in
forest management have changed rural counties like mine and we
require the help and leadership of this body to correct the
systemic mismanagement of our forests.
During my adult life there has been a significant reduction
in the harvesting of timber from the forests. In the late
1980s, Arizona and New Mexico produced approximately 200 to 250
million board feet of timber each year. Between 1989 and 1996,
those numbers steadily dropped until there was no industry left
in those forests, in 1997 and 1998.
Dramatic reduction of wood harvesting was a result of
intense disagreements over how the forests should be managed.
During that period there was no effort by industry, government
or the environmental community to find common ground, and as a
result nothing productive took place. We lost our industries,
we lost the revenues and jobs that came from those industries,
and now we have lost millions of acres in our forests.
You have heard testimony today that talks about what then
happened and how Secure Rural Schools was put in place to
replace some of those revenues. I won't go into that much
because you know that history. But unfortunately we can't go
back and prevent the mistakes that have degraded our forests
and the funding sources that counties and schools need. There
is plenty of anger and frustration to go around.
My family was intimately involved in the timber wars of the
eighties and nineties, and I will admit that I would not have
probably sat in the same room as some of these environmental
activists who opposed our family at that time. However, when I
became first-hand witness to the massive fires that now burn in
our country I saw their potential to destroy entire
communities, and I embraced the challenge to change the
situation.
I am here to testify that each of these events, number one,
the loss of the timber industry and the jobs that came with it,
two, the decline of the timber receipts, the subsequent passage
of Secure Rural Schools, and three, the destruction of homes
and prize recreational areas in my county, a result of the
degrading condition of the forests throughout America.
Fortunately, there is a solution. The solution requires
getting industry back into the forest to thin the trees in
ecologically and socially sustainable way. The solution
involves stakeholders from the scientific, environmental,
elected, Forest Service, and industrial communities who are all
at the table and who all agree that we must reach common
ground.
One of the solutions in our areas is what we call the
Forest Service Restoration Initiative, or 4FRI. It is a model
for the kind of management that will end the catastrophic wild
fires and produce revenues for programs like PILT and Secure
Rural Schools. The model we have developed calls for the
Federal Government to partner with private industry to thin
upwards of 50,000 acres of forested land in Arizona per year
for little or no cost to the government. This model has been--
we have been working actively for the last three or four years
to get this off the ground.
We should do everything we can to revitalize our forests
and to do so we need to support projects like 4FRI, other
projects like it that come together collaboratively on a
landscape scale to get industry back into the picture here, and
in doing such thin our forests.
I will give you one example of the kind of issues that we
have. Coconino County where Congressmen Gosar, my congressman,
lives, without Secure Rural Schools funding they would lose all
of their search and rescue funding. In the small town of
Fredonia there used to be a thriving forest community. They now
have to bus their kindergartners and first graders over 30
miles to go to school.
We can remedy that though by putting industry back into the
forest. It is going to take some time however. We are not going
to do this overnight. I have heard questions asked today, could
you immediately go back to funding and pay for itself. It can't
happen overnight.
I am out of time. I want to quickly give a couple of things
that I think can make a difference, some asks that we have. I
think we need to support the implementation of active forest
management policy modeled after the Forest Restoration
Initiative and others of its kind. We also need to support
reforming things like NEPA and ESA. In the meantime, until we
get that industry back into the forests we have to support the
full funding of PILT and Secure Rural Schools and other
programs such as those.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I will stand for any questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Tenney follows:]

Statement of David Porter Tenney, Board of Supervisors Chairman,
Navajo County, Arizona

Mr. Chairman, and Committee members, thank you for the invitation
to address you today. For the record, my name is David Porter Tenney,
and I am a Supervisor in Navajo County, which is located in
northeastern Arizona. I have nine years of experience as a former
Chairman of the Show Low School Board, I am a member of the Four Forest
Restoration Initiative Steering Committee, and I am currently the
President of the County Supervisors Association of Arizona, which
represents the 55 elected county supervisors in Arizona. It is in my
capacity as a County Supervisor, and a member of the Four Forest
Restoration Initiative, that I address you today on the importance of
industry in forest management, and the need for the continued funding
of PILT and the reauthorization of Secure Rural Schools and Community
Self-Determination Act.
I will begin by stating that I believe the responsible use of
forest products industry is the key ingredient for managing our
forests. I also believe that the reintroduction of forest products
industry to our forests is a key ingredient for the continuation and
reauthorization of county payment programs like PILT and the Secure
Rural Schools Act.
I cannot overstate how important the management of our forests has
become to rural counties. The 468 thousand-acre Rodeo-Chediski Fire of
2002 burned in my county, and nearly destroyed my home. The 538
thousand-acre Wallow Fire of this year burned in two of my neighboring
counties. The footprints left by these two fires could comfortably hold
the cities of Phoenix, Chicago, Dallas and Los Angeles and the
ecological and economic impacts are tremendous.
Mr. Chairman, and Committee members, the rural communities of
Arizona were founded on, and exist due to, the use of the abundant
natural resources that surrounded them. However, our combined mistakes
in forest management have changed rural counties like mine, and we
require the help and leadership of this body to correct the systemic
mismanagement of our forests.
During my adult life, there has been a significant reduction in the
harvesting of timber from the forests. In the late 1980's Arizona and
New Mexico produced approximately 200 to 250 million board feet of
timber each year. Between 1989 and 1996 those numbers steadily dropped
until there was no forest products industry left in those forests by
1998. The dramatic reduction in wood harvesting was a result of intense
disagreements over how the forests should be managed. During that
period, there was no effort by industry, government or the
environmental community to find common ground, and as a result, nothing
productive took place. We lost our industries, we lost the revenues and
jobs that came from those industries, and we have now lost millions of
acres in our forests.
As you are aware, counties and schools have received a 25 percent
share of timber receipts from the federal government since the
administration Teddy Roosevelt. Until the 1990's, counties and schools
were able to continue their work because they were compensated by the
federal government for the abundance of tax-exempt federal land in
their jurisdictions. However, as timber receipts declined, the solvency
of rural counties and schools across the nation was also degraded. To
address this challenge, Congress passed the Secure Rural Schools and
Community Self Determination Act in 2000, which provided payments to
counties and schools to make up for the decline in timber sale revenue.
Unfortunately, we cannot go back and prevent the mistakes which
have degraded our forests and the funding sources that counties and
schools need. There is plenty of anger and frustration to go around on
the subject. I was intimately involved in the Timber Wars of the 1980's
and 1990's, and I will admit that I would not have sat in the same room
with an environmentalist if you paid me. However, when I became a
firsthand-witness to the massive fires that now burn in our country,
and I saw their potential to destroy entire communities, I embraced the
challenge to change the situation.
Mr. Chairman, and Committee members, I am here today to testify
that each of these events: 1) the loss of the forest products industry
(along with the hundreds of jobs and millions of dollars in revenue it
created), 2) the decline of timber receipts and subsequent passage of
the Secure Rural Schools Act, and 3) the destruction of homes and
prized recreational areas in my county and neighboring counties are the
result of the degraded condition of the forest products industry in
America's forests.
Fortunately, there is a solution. The solution requires getting
forest products industry back into the forest to thin the trees in an
ecologically and socially responsible way. The solution involves
stakeholders from the scientific, environmental, elected, forest
service and industrial communities who are all at the table, and who
all agree that we must reach common ground. The solution is called the
Four Forest Restoration Initiative (4FRI) and it is a model for the
kind of management that will end catastrophic wildfires and produce
revenues for programs like PILT and the Secure Rural Schools Act.
The model that has been developed in 4FRI calls on the Federal
Government to partner with private industry to thin upwards of 50,000
acres of forested land in Arizona per year at little or no cost to the
Federal Government. This model, developed over the last three years by
the stakeholders I have mentioned, represents America's best chance for
revitalizing the forest products industry and restoring the forest, and
it can be replicated throughout the country.
Mr. Chairman, and Committee members, we can and should do
everything possible to revitalize the forest products industry through
active forest management policies like 4FRI, but Arizona's counties
cannot wait for that to happen. In addition to pursuing an active
forest management policy, Congress can and must enact a full and long-
term reauthorization of PILT and the Secure Rural Schools Act.
Failure to reauthorize the Secure Rural Schools Act would mean that
federal payments to Arizona counties would drop from $73 million in the
last four years, to barely $1 million in 2012, jeopardizing critical
education and public safety programs in Arizona's counties.
For example, Coconino County--the county that Congressman Gosar
resides in--would lose nearly 80% of its search and rescue funding--a
critical service for a county known as a recreation and hunting
destination. Likewise, in that county's remote town of Freedonia,
Kindergarten and 1st-grade classes would be eliminated, forcing those
students to be bused to a school over 30 miles away.
The re-growth of our forest product industries can make a
difference in the revenues necessary to fund these programs, but it is
going to take time, and as tempting as it may be not to reauthorize the
Secure Rural Schools Act I must impress upon you that the forest
products industry cannot immediately provide the federal government,
rural counties and schools with the sales revenue necessary. The fact
is, those efforts will take years.
In the meantime, counties like mine that have already been
devastated by state budget cuts and cost shifts would be further
devastated by the loss of a revenue source that compensates for the
abundance of tax-exempt federal land in rural jurisdictions.
Mr. Chairman, and Committee members, as a county supervisor who has
seen and experienced the consequences of a forest that is not permitted
to be properly managed, I implore you to do two things:
1.  Support the solution of an active forest management policy,
modeled after the Four Forests Restoration Initiative, and in
the meantime,
2.  Support the long-term funding of PILT and the
reauthorization of the Secure Rural Schools Act.
Thank you for this opportunity. I would be happy to stand for any
questions.
______

Mr. Bishop. Thank you, Mr. Tenney. Ms. Morrison.

STATEMENT OF ANNA MORRISON,
WOMEN IN TIMBER

Ms. Morrison. Chairman Bishop and Subcommittee Members,
thank you for allowing me to speak before you today. My name is
Anna Morrison. I am representing Oregon Women in Timber as well
as American Agri-Women. I bring a unique perspective to this
hearing in that I have a history surrounding the Secure Rural
Schools legislation.
Initially, I lobbied for this legislation as a county
commissioner from Oregon. It was always meant to be a six-year
funding stopgap until the forests were reopened to harvest
levels sustaining rural schools and roads. It was never
intended to be the entitlement program it has become. I chaired
and served on two Forest Service RACs and one BLM RAC. The sole
purpose was to find ways to spend the Title II and III monies
that were included in the legislation. That was supposed to be
used for on-the-ground projects in the forest.
For years monies have been wasted, in my opinion, mostly on
projects that had little merit or need. Many were pie in the
sky projects that benefitted only those who submitted the
project. I have actual U.S. Forest Service email documents from
employees hoping they could find ways to spend the money.
We request, respectfully, that you not reauthorize this
bill that is in the Administration's FY 2012 budget. From 1908
until 1991, the revenue sharing plans specifying 25 percent
return to forested counties. By the late 1980s, national
policies and court injunctions diminished revenues generating
activity in our national forests drastically. By 1998, revenues
for national forest counties declined by 70 percent. This
decline had a devastating impact on communities nationwide due
to an almost total shutdown of timber harvesting in the Federal
forest.
Beginning in 1991, led by Senators Hatfield and Packwood,
Congress began to subsidize county payments in western Oregon.
Near the end of the decade Congress recognized its obligation
to Rural America. Congress passed the Secure Rural Schools and
Community Self-Determination Act of 2000, and President Clinton
signed the bill. It provided six years of entitlements. In 2000
again, Congress extended the Secure Rural Schools for one year.
In 2008, Congress once again extended and gave us four more
years on this entitlement program.
During that period of time, the Forest Service was to ramp
up the timber harvest program so that the entitlement was no
longer needed. However, that has not happened.
Under the original legislation there was also a Forest
County Payments Committee that was formed to report back to
Congress on possible solutions. Reports were submitted to
Congress in 2003, 2005, 2006. These are copies of those reports
to this body. However, nothing has ever been done with the
recommendations.
As we move forward, we strongly request that you support
legislative efforts that seek to provide incentives for
increased timber sales and other activities on the national
forest. These, in turn, provide jobs and socio-economic
benefits in addition to the timber receipts that are shared
with local communities. In the late 1980s, increased timber
harvest from the Federal lands generated eight times the
economic benefit that is currently being provided by Secure
Rural Schools.
New legislation should include the following basic
principles:
One, long-term public forest health and timber production
is vitally important to the people and communities adjacent to
these lands. We urgently need to revive the Healthy Forest
Restoration Act II.
Two, as Congress mandated in enacting the legislation
public resources on national forests and Bureau of Land
Management should be managed to provide the people of our
nation with consumer products, jobs, and sustainable sources of
revenue.
Three, the Federal Government has an obligation to return
to the 25 percent of all gross receipts. Oh, hard targets,
implement the maximum harvest of the volume allowed annually
for timber sales on each forest under the respective forest
plan.
It is the age of no more entitlements. We need jobs, jobs,
jobs in our rural-dependent communities. You must ensure a
long-term forest managed program and to return to actual gross
timber receipts. We need to get these communities off the dole.
No more Secure Rural Schools.
At a time when about half of the Forest Service budget is
spent fighting fires due to bug-infested dead and dying,
overcrowded forest it makes more sense from a fiscal and
environmental standpoint to better manage the forest by using
the resources instead of taking money from the Federal coffers
to subsidize. We can sell the timber, put back money. We can
harvest, provide for the people, pay for schools and roads, and
still protect the environment. It makes perfect sense.
Thank you very much for allowing me to testify. I would be
available for any questions.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Morrison follows:]

Statement of Anna Morrison, Legislative Chair, Oregon Women In Timber,
San Antonio, Texas

Chairman Bishop and Subcommittee Members,
I am Anna Morrison. I am representing Oregon Women In Timber, as
well as American Agri-Women. I bring a unique perspective to this
hearing in that I have a history surrounding the Secure Rural Schools
legislation. Initially I lobbied for this legislation as a county
commissioner from Oregon. It was always meant to be a 6 year funding
stop gap until the forests were reopened to harvest levels sustaining
rural schools and roads. It was never intended to be the entitlement
program it has become. I chaired and served on 2 Forest Service RACS
and 1 BLM RAC. The sole purpose was to find ways to spend the Title II
and III entitlement monies from Secure Rural Schools Legislation that
was to be used for on the ground forest projects. For years monies have
been wasted, in my opinion, mostly on projects that had little merit or
need. Many were ``pie in the sky'' projects that benefitted only those
who submitted the project. I have actual USFS email documents from
employees hoping they could find ways to spend the money.
We respectfully request that you not reauthorize the Secure Rural
Schools and Communities Self-Determination Act that is in the
administration's Fiscal (FY) 2012 budget. From 1908 until 1991 the
revenue sharing plan specifying 25 percent of all revenues from
National Forests were to be returned to forested counties. By the late
1980's national policies and court injunctions diminished revenue
generating activity in our national forests drastically. By 1998,
revenues for national forest counties had declined by 70 percent. This
decline had a devastating impact on communities nationwide due to an
almost total shutdown of timber harvesting in the federal forest.
Beginning in 1991, lead by Senators Hatfield and Packwood, Congress
began to subsidize county payments in Western Oregon. Near the end of
the decade Congress recognized its obligation to rural America.
Congress passed the Secure Rural Schools and Communities Self-
Determination Act of 2000, and President Clinton signed the bill. It
provided six years of entitlements. In 2007, Congress extended the
SRSCA for one year. In 2008, Congress once again provided a four year
extension of the SRSCA for 2008-2011.
During this period of time the Forest Service was to ramp up the
timber harvest program so that the entitlement was no longer needed.
However, that has not happened. Under the original legislation there
was also a Forest Counties Payments Committee that was formed to report
back to Congress on possible solutions. Reports were submitted to
Congress in 2003 and 2006. However, nothing has ever been done with the
recommendations.
As we move forward, we strongly request that you support
legislative efforts that seek to provide incentives for increased
timber sales and other activities on the national forest. These in turn
provide jobs and socio-economic benefits, in addition to the timber
receipts that are shared with local communities. In the late 1980's
increased timber harvests from the federal lands generated eight times
the economic benefit that is currently being provided by the Secure
Rural School Payments.
New legislation should include the following basic principles:

Long term public forest health and timber production
is vitally important to the people and communities adjacent to
these lands and to the public at large. We urgently need to
revive the Healthy Forest Restoration Act II.

As Congress mandated in enacting the legislation,
Public forest resources on National Forests and Bureau of Land
Management lands should be managed to provide the people of our
nation with consumer products, jobs and a sustainable source of
revenue to support local schools and counties. This is
attainable while sustaining a healthy multiple use forest.

The federal government has an obligation to return
25% of all gross receipts generated on all forest lands to the
counties in which these lands lie; and/or 50% of gross receipts
from O&C land (Oregon/California Railroad Lands); and/or 4% of
gross receipts from Public Domain lands.

Hard targets -Implement the maximum harvest of the
volume allowed annually for timber sales in each forest under
the respective forest plan.
It's the age of No more Entitlements! We need Jobs, Jobs, Jobs in
our rural, timber dependent communities. You must ensure a long-term
forest management program and a return to actual gross timber receipts.
We need to get these communities ``off the Dole''. No more Secure Rural
Schools and Communities Self-Determination Act. At a time when about
half of the Forest Service budget is spent fighting fires, due to bug
infested, dead and dying
Over-crowded forests, it makes far more sense, from a fiscal and
environmental standpoint, to better manage the forests by using the
resource. We can harvest, provide for the people and still protect the
environment. It makes perfect sense.
Thank you.
______

Mr. Bishop. Thank you. Mr. Crews.

STATEMENT OF DAVID CREWS, SUPERINTENDENT,
NORWOOD COLORADO SCHOOL DISTRICT

Mr. Crews. Good afternoon, Mr. Chairman and Members of the
Committee.
My name is Dave Crews. I am the Superintendent of Schools
in Norwood, Colorado, which is a small ranching community on
the Western Slope. Today I am representing superintendents and
school districts from Colorado who want to share the grave
concern we have about the potential loss of the Secure Rural
Schools and Communities Self-Determination Act. We are grateful
for the Act. The concerns I express are very real as nearly 68
percent of Colorado's forests are in Federal ownership.
As a resident of Colorado, I appreciate the year-around
outdoor activities this provides, but as a member of a rural
community, an educator and a parent I must live with the
consequences of that Federal ownership as well. I am a resident
of San Miguel County. This county, like others across the
state, is limited in the amount of taxes collected based upon
the amount of national and state owned lands, and then unlike
the urban and suburban areas along the front range of Colorado
it is almost impossible for us to tap into additional resources
for our students.
The reality for my home county as well as other rural
counties in the state is that revenues from our forested land
are not available to support the educational programs in either
the form of bond elections or mil levy overrides. It is
untaxable land.
To offset those tax losses the rural school districts in
the State of Colorado use the SRSCA dollars to maintain and
support educational opportunities for students. This year my
school district used the funding to implement a new K-12
writing program in order to improve our children's writing
skills. Over the years the dollars have been used to develop
and implement instructional strategies, improve our children's
writing and math scores, and to prepare every student for post-
secondary endeavors.
For other districts in my regional area the funding is used
to pay for additional teachers, to keep class sizes smaller,
and to deliver a higher quality of instruction and to devote
more time to each student to improve their learning. Studies
indicate that students achieve more with well trained teachers
employing effective instructional techniques in small class-
size settings. The result is seen in higher test scores, better
preparedness for life after high school, and increased post-
secondary success.
School districts across the State of Colorado are using the
additional money from Secure Rural Schools to fund technology
programs. One of the challenges faced by many of the rural
school districts is limited Internet access. Most rely on a
broadband delivered through phone or cable services. Many
schools are using these funds to establish WiFi networks,
allowing students to access the Internet not only at school,
but the community, and also in their homes.
For some school districts the money is not just to create
new programs, but actually augments the operating revenue
resources that keep school districts running and capable of
providing services and education in that regional setting.
Statewide there are nearly 480,000 school age children
living in Colorado counties that receive SRSCA funding. With
the potential loss of these funds a critical link between rural
families and access to education could be permanently severed
forcing the affected families to drive dozens of miles, often
over hazardous snowbound roads in order for their child to
attend school. This challenge is the fundamental premise of
fairness and equal access to education between rural and urban
school children, placing some of our poorest and most at risk
students at a distinct disadvantage.
K-12 public schools in Colorado are primarily funded
through a combination of local property taxes and state
revenues. Historically property taxes have made up the majority
of funding. However, property taxes have declined
significantly, and because of the Gallagher Amendment in the
state constitution which limits the valuation of residential
property the state is required to fill in for losses that
residential property once covered.
School districts can raise additional revenues through
local bond and mil levy elections up to a specified level, but
the economic vitality of many rural communities cannot support
money raised through local bonds and mils.
Schools are not only the beneficiary of this funding.
Counties and county services benefit as well. School district
representatives such as myself meet annually with the county
commissioners to determine how to allocate the Secure Rural
Schools fund for that year. School administrators have built
communication, relationships with county commissioners, and
have developed increased communication and understanding about
the needs of the county and our students. We appreciate that
Congress has supported the century-long commitment to schools
and counties.
In closing, I would like to emphasize the need to
reauthorize the Secure Rural Schools and Communities Self-
Determination Act. With the elimination of this resource, rural
districts will suffer additional hardships and the education of
our children will be affected. What I am hearing today is that
we need to make production changes in the national forests but
that will take some time. I feel the need to have this SRSCA
reauthorized while these changes occur. Thank you for your
time.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Crews follows:]

Statement of David Crews, Superintendent,
Norwood School District, Norwood, Colorado

To: Chairman Bishop and Ranking Member Grijalva,
My name is David Crews; I live and work in the town of Norwood on
the Western Slope of Colorado. Today, I am here representing
superintendents and school districts from Colorado who want to share
the very grave concern we have about the potential loss of the Secure
Rural School and Community Self-Determination Act. We are grateful for
the Secure Rural Schools and Community Self-Determination Act which was
originally established in 2000. The Act preserves the commitment made
by President Roosevelt in 1910 when these forests were set aside for
the benefit of the entire nation. As you are aware, SRSCA Funds are
used to support educational and county services within forested
communities.
The concerns I express are very real as nearly 68 percent of
Colorado's forests are in federal ownership. As a resident of Colorado,
I appreciate the year-round outdoor activities this provides; but as a
member of a rural community, an educator and a parent, I must live with
the consequences of that federal ownership as well. I am a resident of
San Miguel County. This County, like others across the State is limited
in the amount of taxes collected based upon the amount of national and
state owned lands. And, unlike the urban and suburban areas along the
Front Range it is almost impossible for us to tap into additional
resources for our students. The reality for my home county, as well as
other rural counties in the State, is that revenues from our forested
land are not available to support our educational programs in either
the form of bond elections or mill levy overrides. It is untaxable
land!
To offset those tax losses, the rural school districts in the State
of Colorado use SRSCA dollars to maintain and support educational
opportunities for students. This year, my school district used the
funding to implement a new K-12 writing program in order to improve our
children's writing skills. Over the years the dollars have been used to
develop and implement instructional strategies, improve our children's
writing and math scores, and to prepare every student for post-
secondary endeavors.
For other school districts in my regional area the funding is used
to pay for additional teachers to keep the class sizes small to deliver
a higher quality of instruction and to devote more time to each student
to improve their learning. Studies indicate that students achieve more
with well-trained teachers, employing effective instructional
techniques in small class size settings. This results in higher test
scores, better preparedness for life after high school and increased
post-secondary success.
School districts across the State of Colorado are also using the
additional money from the Secure Rural Schools and Community Self-
Determination Act to fund technology programs. One of the challenges
faced by many rural school districts is limited internet access. Most
rely on broadband delivered through phone or cable services. The speed
and ease for delivery of information places these children at a
distinct advantage. Many schools are using these funds to establish
WIFI networks allowing students to access the internet not only at
school but in the community and in their homes. For some school
districts this money doesn't just go for additional instructional
programs but augments the operating revenue resources to keep a school
district running and capable of providing services and education in a
regional setting.
Statewide there are nearly 480,000 school-age children living in
Colorado counties that receive SRSCA funding. With the potential loss
of these funds, a critical link between rural families and access to
education could be permanently severed, forcing the affected families
to drive dozens of miles, often over hazardous snowbound roads, in
order for their child to attend school. This challenges the fundamental
premise of fairness and equal access to education between rural and
urban school children, placing some of our poorest and most at risk
students at a distinct disadvantage.
K-12 public schools in Colorado are primarily funded through a
combination local property taxes and state revenues. Historically,
property taxes have made up the majority of funding. However, property
taxes have declined precipitously, and because of the Gallagher
Amendment to the State Constitution, which limits the valuation of
residential property, the State is required to fill in for losses that
residential property once covered. School districts can raise
additional revenues through local bond and mill levy elections up to a
specified level, but the economic vitality of many rural communities
cannot support money raised through local bonds and mills. Another
challenge we face: the State funds local school districts at a lower
levels than the majority of the other States resulting in an increased
reliance by rural school districts in Colorado on SRSCA. We appreciate
that Congress has supported the century long commitment to schools and
counties.
Schools are not the only beneficiaries of SRSCA funding: counties
and county services benefit as well. School Districts Representatives
meet annually with their County Commissioners to determine how to
allocate the secure rural schools funds for that year. School
administrators have built relationships with county commissioners and
have developed increased communication and understanding about the
needs of the county and our students.
In closing, I would like to emphasize the need to reauthorize the
Secure Rural Schools and Community Self-Determination Act. With the
elimination of this resource, rural districts will suffer additional
hardships--and the education of our children will suffer. I appreciate
the time you have given to hear my concerns and hope you have a better
understanding of the importance of SRSCA to the rural school children
of Colorado.
______

Mr. Bishop. Thank you. I appreciate the testimony from our
witnesses. We will have some questions first from Mr. Grijalva.
Mr. Grijalva. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Supervisor Tenney, let me ask you a question, and welcome.
Hypothetically let us say we are able to return to those
historic levels of timber production and that counties receive
25 percent of the revenue, and you mentioned about a transition
period but let me ask you. Would that funding stream, would
that be stable? Would there be economic, political, weather,
climate changes that would affect that revenue stream, that 25
percent?
Mr. Tenney. Mr. Chairman, Congressman Grijalva, certainly
there are things that affect funding streams from every angle.
But is it sustainable? I believe it is. It is a natural
resource that we are dealing with. The communities that are
taking money now from Secure Rural Schools are communities that
were founded because of the abundance of natural resources that
are there.
I don't necessarily believe that we have to return to the
250 million board feet of timber that was being harvested in
Arizona and New Mexico in the eighties and nineties, but we
certainly need to do more than the zero that was harvested in
1998, 1999 and 2000. It has got to be somewhere in between. We
have to return industry to the equation.
Mr. Grijalva. Thank you for that, Supervisor. One of the
proposition is that we go from this entitlement, get to those
historic levels, from some of the testimony overnight, and
therefore that guaranteed stream level would be there. What do
you think of that scenario?
Mr. Tenney. Well, Mr. Grijalva, first of all, I don't see
anything happening overnight. It is going to take--in our area
at least the mills are all gone. There is a good graphic
showing the decline from 400 mills to 100 in the State of
Oregon. Arizona has certainly lost a greater percentage than
that. Those mills are not there. That is going to take time.
But I also didn't hear anyone asking that we return to
historic levels. What I hear people ask is a return to some
level and it would not take the historic level to give the
amount of funding that is coming to schools and counties right
now through Secure Rural Schools funding. Those numbers weren't
based on what the maximum levels once were reached.
Mr. Grijalva. So SRS funding, in your opinion, Supervisor,
needs to be reauthorized and then the balance issue, the in
between issue, the point that you made is something that
happens down the road?
Mr. Tenney. I think all of it needs to happen. It needs to
be reauthorized in the sense that until industry is
reintroduced that is the solution, but industry is the answer.
The long-term solution is industry back in our forests.
Ms. Morrison spoke of the entitlement. None of us want
entitlement. What we feel we are entitled to is using the
forest for the benefit that it has. The renewable resource and
the blessing it can be to our families and our communities in
the way of jobs, employment and revenues coming into those
communities will far outweigh anything that we are getting from
Congress and Secure Rural Schools. So ultimately we would just
as soon see it go away, but only when industry is back in
place. Until then it needs to stay put.
Mr. Grijalva. Thank you. Mr. Crews, outside of the SRS
funds, and you mentioned your school system, what do you think
led to the strength of your particular school system--and
congratulations on that--besides the SRS funding?
Mr. Crews. As far as our communities are concerned, I think
it is the support of the communities, support of the parents
and the importance of education. Again, we are doing a lot of
things with limited amount of money. We are being asked to do
that not only at our community level but also at the state
level, but educating kids is what we need to do and that is
important, so whatever we can receive will help.
Mr. Grijalva. Thank you. That is it. Yield back
Mr. Bishop. Thank you. Mr. McClintock.
Mr. McClintock. Just a couple of points. I would first Mr.
Tenney offered the observation that economic revival once these
policies are changed might happen a lot faster than you think
as one economist put it to me. It doesn't take businesses long
to follow you back into an area if you are dropping $100 bills
along the way. In other words, if they are able to make a
profit it is amazing how dynamic they are and how quickly they
will return. So, I think you are selling short the impact of
policy changes on the economy of these local communities.
I know in my area we have had three mills close last year.
They are still there. They are just closed. We had 300 families
put out of work in each one of those communities and those are
small communities. The impact is huge. But the sole reason or
the principal reason anyway was lack of timber supply for the
mills to use. Bring back that timber supply, those mills will
reopen. The families will get their jobs back and the economy
will prosper and it will happen a lot faster than you think.
Any thoughts?
Mr. Tenney. Yes. I want you to know I agree with you. I
didn't mean to sound like I don't think it will come back. It
will absolutely come back. The reason I say it is going to take
time is until you change some of the Federal policies, like
NEPA, ESA and others that slow that process down, you cannot
shut off SRS tomorrow and offer timber sales the next day----
Mr. McClintock. Agreed, agreed.
Mr. Tenney.--and expect that they are going to coincide
because NEPA is going to take two years to get done.
Mr. McClintock. And unfortunately we can't change policy
overnight here.
Mr. Tenney. Right.
Mr. McClintock. We can from the House side but we still
have a recalcitrant Senate and White House to deal with, and
that is something the American people are going to have to
address in the next year.
Mr. Tenney. Can I add one thing?
Mr. McClintock. Sure.
Mr. Tenney. I agree with you. The people of our communities
are aching to get back to work in the forest.
Mr. McClintock. I know.
Mr. Tenney. Now they are watching to see what happens to
the salvage of the Wallow fire. We burned 2.5 billion board
feet in that Wallow fire. Over 73--an ultimate irony here--over
73, or 73 is the number of spotted owl nest areas that burned.
If my recollection is right, it is over half of the, or between
half and a third of the total area is protected in our state
just burned. That is not what the environmental community
wanted. That is not what any of us want.
Mr. McClintock. No, I disagree with you on that point. If
you talk to them, you will find out it is precisely what they
want. For some reason they don't understand that the most
environmentally devastating thing to a forest is a forest fire
and that their policies have directly led to the high
frequency, high intensity forest fires that we are seeing today
because of the excess overgrowth that they have forbidden us
from removing from the forests. And if you talk to a lot of
them, they just say, well, that is nature's way. Well, I
suppose you can say that, but the impact is devastating on the
environment.
Mr. Tenney. Nature's way is a smaller, lower intensity
fire.
Mr. McClintock. Exactly.
Mr. Tenney. Not these catastrophic half a million acre
fires.
Mr. McClintock. No, I don't worship at the Church of Global
Warming, I do believe the planet is warming. I believe it has
been warming since the last Ice Age and whatever we do here I
can guarantee you it will continue to warm and cool as it has
for billions of years. But in that church they practice the
faith of carbon sequestration, the idea that timber,
particularly young growth timber, absorbs enormous amounts of
carbon dioxide. That part is quite true. New growth timber
absorbs carbon dioxide at a much, much higher rate, and higher
volume than old growth timber.
Why is it then that the only timber we are allowed to
harvest at all is the young growth timber? I don't understand
that. Perhaps somebody can offer some guidance to me on that
point.
Mr. Tenney. Is that question is aimed at me, I can't answer
that either. I appreciated the question earlier about the
Animal Kingdom. We certainly don't manage the Animal Kingdom
that way, and I love to hunt and certainly would not be as near
interested if all I could shoot was a spike elk instead of
going for a large six point. I don't understand it.
Mr. McClintock. You would not have a very healthy spike elk
population.
Mr. Tenney. Pretty soon you would not have anything because
you have killed all the spikes.
Mr. McClintock. And that is exactly how we are managing our
forests today. It is insane.
Mr. Tenney. You are asking a question of someone who is not
qualified to answer but I agree exactly with you on this point.
I don't understand the management practice. We need to return
to harvesting all classes, and it needs to be based on science
and it needs to have industry as a part of it. Until we get
back to that point we are going to have these problems in our
forests
Mr. Bishop. Thank you. Mr. DeFazio.
Mr. DeFazio. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
To Ms. Morrison. You are advocating that counties should
get off the dole. As a former Oregon county commissioner, you
know how critical particularly the ONC payments are to us were
unique in that we have both ONC and Forest Service payments.
Even if, and as you just heard the gentleman from California
say we do have it, and I liked the description, recalcitrant
Senate, I am usually not that polite about it, but anyway, a
dysfunctional Senate and the White House. But let us just say
the Senate went away and the White House, the President, as he
does often, just decides to change his mind and support
whatever comes out of the House, and we went back to something
that the Forest Service could gear up for next year because
obviously it is too late for this harvest season, some very
robust level of harvest and the ONC lands, and somehow we got
them in an appropriation so they could hire back all their
timber sale officers who they have all laid off, and they could
lay out the sales and there were no appeals or anything
allowed. I mean, it would just go forward next year with a very
robust harvest at some huge level.
That would mean there would be substantial revenues.
Unfortunately, the existing law says that it is an average of
seven years. So even if we went back to 12 billion board feet
next year, actually it would be, you know, averaged over the
last seven years, the counties and schools would still get very
little money. In fact, it would be about a 90 percent reduction
for my counties.
I don't have any currently elected county commissioners in
Oregon nor am I aware in the Partnership for Rural America of
currently elected county commissioners, 729 counties, who are
advocating an immediate end to this program.
How would you solve that problem?
Ms. Morrison. I guess, Congressman, I am not naive. I
understand what you are saying, and it is not going to happen
overnight. However, these 729 counties have known since 2000
what the future held. I question why have we allowed the
agencies, BLM and the Forest Service, to continue in the same
vein and not see any actual production on the lands.
Again, back in 2003, 2005, 2006, the National Forest
Counties Payments Committee did submit to this body, and I
believe, Peter, you have a copy of this, recommendations for
making payments to state and counties. However, nothing has
ever been acted on in regards to those. At some point we are
going to have to stop the program. As long as the schools and
the counties think that they can come back and they are going
to get a dribble here and a dribble there, you are bleeding
them to death.
Mr. DeFazio. I understand.
Ms. Morrison. That is what you are doing.
Mr. DeFazio. Thank you. Just reclaiming my time. My vision
is that we get a temporary continuing authorization which is
either a phase-out or it has a date certain on which it ends
which gives us time to transition. I would also like to have an
ongoing base payment at a lower level because we are never
going to get back to the levels of harvest we had in the
seventies and eighties.
Ms. Morrison. Right.
Mr. DeFazio. I mean the value of the timber is just not
there. So, my vision is we both do active management, and I
have for the first time the BLM actually working on pilot
projects on the land, working with scientists to show there is
a way we can go into these areas and do forestry and get a
predictable level of harvest, although there is going to be a
fight over that. But we would need a transition and I believe
we need an ongoing base. That is my position. I mean, we are
going to have to disagree over that, but I mean an immediate
cutoff of all funds, no continuing authorization next year
would mean virtually all the jails in southwest Oregon would
close. We already are down to 20 hours a day for sheriff's
patrols. In Lane County we would go down to probably zero hours
per day----
Ms. Morrison. Right.
Mr. DeFazio. For Josephine, I know it would go to zero.
Curry would go to zero. I mean, I just can't support that. It
would just be catastrophic for the region.
Ms. Morrison. And I agree about the catastrophic effect of
this but at some point people have to come to the table and
understand that we need to start doing this. I mean, back in
1987 was the first time I testified here in D.C. at one of
these panels. We needed to have management on the Federal lands
then. We are now several years past. We are still dealing with
the same questions. We are still not getting management on the
lands. What do we do to get people to move?
Mr. DeFazio. Well, we put in place a plan. It is just like
balancing the budget here. We can't balance a budget in one
year, but if we had a plan to balance it in 10 years so it was
credible then people would say, OK, we get it, 10 years, that
is reasonable, good.
The same thing here, we need a transitional plan to move
back to more active management. So thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Bishop. Thank you. Mr. Tipton.
Mr. Tipton. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Crews, I would
like to welcome you. I am just down the road in Cortez.
Certainly a pleasure to be able to see you here and appreciate
your testimony.
Could you give us a little example during your tenure while
you have been in the Norwood School District how your funding
levels have changed just over your time period there?
Mr. Crews. Our funding levels for the whole general budget?
Mr. Tipton. Just specifically what is coming off the Forest
Service.
Mr. Crews. Oh, off the Forest Service. It has reduced--the
way it was set up in 2000, our county actually was taking
probably 95 percent of the money, and then around 2008, I came
in around 2007. Around 2008 one of the commissioners saw this
and said that we need to give more money to our two school
districts in our county, and so we received--at that year we
were reversed and we received about 95 percent of the money
between the two school districts.
Mr. Tipton. Right.
Mr. Crews. About that same time state law changed and
created this 25 percent for the county, 25 percent for the
schools, and then the 50 percent would be negotiated, the rest
of it, and that was worked well. I have been involved in that
for the last two years, and it has been a nice relationship
that we have built with the county understanding kind of their
needs and them understanding the needs that we have in our
districts and for our kids, so it is working well.
Mr. Tipton. But you are strained as a school district to be
able to provide for your students?
Mr. Crews. Well, overall, you know.
Mr. Tipton. Could you maybe explain? You and I may be the
only two people in the room that will be able to distinguish
the difference. Is there a per capita difference in terms of
Telluride versus Norwood?
Mr. Crews. There is actually, as far as student PPOR, the
money the people, the revenue money, we can--we actually
receive a little bit more than Telluride just because of our
need, so we have some state equalization levels there. As far
as generating money, Telluride probably could generate more
money with their assessed valuations than we can in Norwood.
Mr. Tipton. That is my understanding, obviously
Mr. Crews. There is that separation there between the two.
Mr. Tipton. Right. I would like to go back over to Ms.
Morrison. You were talking about trying to seek, and I gather
Mr. Pearce just left, that you are looking for a long-term
solution.
Ms. Morrison. I didn't hear the first part that you said
before Mr. Pearce.
Mr. Tipton. I said Mr. Pearce just left from our previous
panel, that it seemed to me that as county commissioner you are
really looking for some kind of a long-term solution. You were
talking about the report prior to my being here certainly. It
was making some recommendations and there has been no response
from Congress. Is this sort of like a tree falling in the
forest if there is nobody there to hear it?
Ms. Morrison. It could be like that but looking at this
panel the makeup, there are only five on here that were here in
2000 and 1999 when we first started working on this, and so
again, you know, that education level, you are not being aware
that these were submitted to Congress is understandable. Why
they were never acted on I really don't know.
And the other one is back in 1998 this was presented to
Congress at the same time. This was options for the Forest
Service Second Century, and this was a compilation of possible
solutions on how Federal lands could be managed, and the trust
concept is in here as to transferring the ownership, taking it
away from the Forest Service or the Bureau of Land Management
and putting it into a trust of some sort, and again, the group
that put this together was very diverse. I mean, you had the
National Wildlife Federation, you had Andy Stall on here. I am
not sure you are familiar with Andy or not. You had Mark Ray,
Doug Crandall. I mean, a real diverse group of people that
actually agreed on these concepts on managing our Federal lands
in the second century. Again, to my knowledge, there has not
been a lot of discussion--I think it is starting--as to how we
can utilize some of these recommendations
Mr. Tipton. Well, believe me, I have real empathy as a
Westerner, and obviously natural resources, many of our members
come from the West, and I think our eastern counterparts
sometimes have difficulty getting their arms around some of the
challenges that we face when up to 98 percent of one county
that I represent is either Federal or state lands. There are
real challenges, and when we have school districts liked
Norwood that are supposed to be able to educate our children,
so we have people that are able to provide services when people
come out to their public lands as well, national public lands
as well. We want to be able to provide those services. We want
to have an educated public, and we need to be able to find out
a revenue stream that is going to be addressing those local
concerns, and to be able to empower our local communities to be
able to make some of those decisions, and the stumbling block,
my sense is, is right here in Washington that we need to be
working on.
So thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Ms. Morrison. More aggressively
Mr. Bishop. Thank you. Mr. Garamendi. Oops, I mispronounced
that too, didn't I? I have been mispronouncing every name
today. Please don't take it personally.
Mr. Garamendi. Like most of us in this business, we are
called many, many different names.
These issues have gone on forever. For me it is 36, almost
37 years now dealing with these kinds of issues. There is a
transition that is occurring in the timber industry in the
West, at least in the Sierra Nevada mountains in the California
region and I think also in Oregon, the transition from what was
originally a selective harvest program to a clear cutting
program and tending now back to either a selective harvest or a
significantly reduced clear cutting program. I think that is
kind of the transition we are in.
That transition in its current stage moves toward a
sustainability model so that there will be a sustained yield
over a period of time, and also sustained employment that would
be affected by the economy, the housing industry principally.
So, I think that is where we are headed or maybe we are already
there in some places. Just correct--yes or no?
Ms. Morrison. I would agree.
Mr. Garamendi. Now that being the case we are then in a
transition period here in which these communities will
stabilize at some level due to the--those that are dependent
upon timber harvesting will stabilize at some level. In the
region that I come from and represented for a long, long time,
it is at a very minimal level, and the area has moved onto
other kinds of activities principally, although there still is
a timber industry.
I think the question we are faced with--with the end of the
SRS program or the need to renew it--is a transition period in
which the communities are allowed to transition to a more
stable level. Those communities that are in these areas also
have new economies or potential growth economies, recreation
principally, and maybe some other industries that have moved
into the area.
So back to that transition period. How would you want to
structure say an SRS or a similar program for the next five
years, and just run down the--I will let you start and go from
there. I have two minutes and 30 seconds.
Ms. Morrison. Again, when it was first passed in 2000, the
thought was that during that period of time to 2006 that there
would be this ramp down and ramp up, which did not happen. So
what period of time do you want me to suggest when that didn't
work? I am not sure----
Mr. Garamendi. That begs the question. In your view why
didn't it work?
Ms. Morrison. Because I think that there was an
unwillingness by the agencies. I mean, the agencies are
strapped, to be perfectly honest. They are damned if they do
and they are damned if they don't, and they drag their feet in
regards to trying to get something out there. It is like they
are trying to appease everybody. The analysis with paralysis,
that is the agency side.
Mr. Garamendi. OK.
Ms. Morrison. Looking at it from the county side, I didn't
see the counties, because I was very involved, I was on the
board at that time, aggressively trying to find solutions to do
this, and all of a sudden 2006 is here, oh, my god, we are at
the cliff again. This willingness to work together and make
direction, I think, needs to be----
Mr. Garamendi. Given the problem you have described, and
thank you, let me posit a couple of solutions. The Federal
agencies, Bureau of Land Management and Forest Service, you are
quite correct about the management. They are underfunded,
understaffed, and you are correct about the box that they are
in.
Mr. Garamendi. Maybe we can do something about the box that
they are in but clearly we are going to have to do something
about the staffing level if we are going to be successful at
getting timber harvest plans done.
Ms. Morrison. They need road engineers, they need somebody
that knows how to even plan a timber sale. They have fish
biologists, wildlife biologists, hydrologists, geologists, but
do they have engineers anymore that really know how to put up a
timber sale? Not in my region they don't.
Mr. Garamendi. Well, that is an important point for us to
know, and we could potentially deal with that. So the timber
harvest plans need to go forward. That is a piece of it. That
provides some level of funding. It won't be at the maximum
level that it used to be in the past, but it is presumably a
sustained level over time.
Then the payment side of it, that is, the Federal payments
coming in. I don't have to time you and I don't have time to
tell you anyway, but budgets are a little tight around here.
Mr. Garamendi. And likely to be for awhile so we have to
figure out how to deal with that piece of it, too--and then the
final piece, and thank you for the additional time, Mr.
Chairman--is the other kinds of economic activity that might be
available in any given area, and it varies wherever it happens
to be. So, we need a comprehensive look at this, and I think
those would be the three areas. So as we go forward with a re-
write of the SRS, adequate Federal money, hopefully, the
agencies, BLM, Forest Service, instructed to put together
management plans, forest harvest plans, and then some sort of
economic development program going on within the communities.
Is that a reasonable model?
Ms. Morrison. I am not sure about the economic development
component. Being from a very small coastal rural community in
Oregon, we are surrounded on three sides by Federal forests and
the ocean on the west. We are very limited in any kind of
economic development because of transportation issues, labor
issues and those that bring people in. So we are a natural
resource-based community. There are just no ands, ifs, buts or
maybes about it.
Mr. Garamendi. Understood. I will give an example that will
occur perhaps I think in Mr. McClintock's new district. The
communities there have joined together to develop a tourism
plan. It used to be logging and agriculture, but now it is
morphing into something different, so there may be tourism
opportunities. Kind of like to go to your place and forget
about this place for a couple of days, so you have that kind of
potential.
Anyway, maybe the legislation could be drafted in such a
way as to deal with those three elements.
Mr. Chairman, I have taken more than my time and I
appreciate it. Thank you so very much
Mr. Bishop. Thank you. I appreciate it. Let me ask a couple
of questions here, Mr. Tenney, if I could.
Has the planning process for the Forest Restoration
Initiatives indicated how much timber revenue it could produced
that could be shared with the counties?
Mr. Tenney. Mr. Chairman, yes, the plan process is well
underway and we are trying to do this in big chunks. The first
planning process we are undergoing right now is a 700,000-acre
area. They have never done NEPA at this scale before. We are
out. The first RFP from the Forest Service for the first
contract is 4FRI is out right now. Those bids are due back in
roughly a month, and that is going to tell us a great deal
about what are the industries that are out there that are
saying they are willing to return to the area. There have
been--people have stepped up and said they are willing to put
in OSP plants and things of that nature. That RFP process is
going to tell us what those companies will pay.
Bear in mind that the 4FRI is largely the small diameter
timber. It is not really getting into the big commercial
timber. That needs to come as part of another project, but it
is a little too early, Mr. Chairman, to tell what they are
saying those revenues will be. I don't anticipate a lot of
revenues off of at least the first initial contract in 4FRI,
but to me it is a lot like the Field of Dreams, build it and
they will come.
We start offering up these timber sales and start offering
up these acreage for treatment and the industry will return and
the receipts will return
Mr. Bishop. Thank you. You know, many, in fact almost
everyone has argued today that in order to increase the forest
management on a broad scale we have to address NEPA reform or
other environmental laws that seems to help delay or obstruct
active forest management. Is that something Navajo County would
support as part of a legislation that might extend Secure Rural
Schools?
Mr. Tenney. Absolutely. Everyone that I deal with
understands that NEPA is a problem in these processes, and that
some type of reform is needed. You know, one thing that comes
to my mind, my kids are, and I have been involved extensively
in athletics and especially in wrestling, and the legendary
wrestler Dan Gable is famous for saying, ``If nothing changes,
nothing changes.'' And you know, we can do all we want to say
we are going to try to end Secure Rural Schools and have a
plan, but if we don't change NEPA and some of the policies that
the Forest Service and others are bound by it will never
change, and you will never get to the transition period that
Ms. Morrison is talking about to get away from being on the
dole and getting back to using industry. We have to change it.
Unfortunately, counties can't force that change as much as you
folks can
Mr. Bishop. I wish that were true.
All right, Mr. Crews, let me ask just a couple of
questions. Does the Colorado system have an equalization
statewide for revenue for schools?
Mr. Crews. Yes. Did you want me to explain the formula?
Mr. Bishop. No, not necessary, but you do have a state
equalization program for both----
Mr. Crews. We do state equalization, right
Mr. Bishop. For both MNO as well as construction?
Mr. Crews. I am not sure for construction
Mr. Bishop. OK. Would you support increasing management,
forest management, timber revenues as a funding source?
Mr. Crews. I would support it. From what I am learning as I
am going through this, Colorado has some issues as far as like
we were hearing today. There is only one mill that is on its
way to being closed or is closed, and so there is going to be a
lot of--there needs to be a lot of changes in Colorado in order
for us to create that production in the forest.
Mr. Bishop. I have no idea when you started the
equalization formula in Colorado but with a 25 percent payment
that Colorado has been receiving, provided education money
before Secure Rural Schools went into effect, was that part of
the equalization process or should it be? And if you don't know
if it was just by timing, should it be part of the equalization
process? Should the money and the revenue that comes into
Secure Rural Schools or from increased sales be part of the
equalization?
Mr. Crews. I don't now if it was. If it generates any
revenue, then yes.
Mr. Bishop. Then it should be part of it.
Mr. Crews. Yes.
Mr. Bishop. OK. I have no further questions except I
appreciate all three of our witnesses.
Mr. McClintock, do you have anything further?
Let me thank all three for spending time with us, for
coming out here, for waiting through all of this time period. I
appreciate it very much. We thank you for your testimony, both
oral testimony and written ones which will appear in the
record. If there is no further business, then we are adjourned.
Thank you, sir.
[Whereupon, at 12:55 p.m., the Subcommittee was adjourned.]

[Additional material submitted for the record follows:]

[``Community Forest Trust, A Pilot Project to Compliment
Secure Rural Schools and Community Self Determination Act
Reauthorization'' submitted for the record follows:]

Community Forest Trust
A Pilot Project to Compliment
Secure Rural Schools and Community Self Determination Act
Reauthorization

July 26, 2011

Proposed by:
Boundary County, Idaho
Clearwater County, Idaho
Idaho County, Idaho
Shoshone County, Idaho
Valley County, Idaho

Summary
Idaho counties with significant federal lands inside their borders
are proposing a Community Forest Trust pilot project in Idaho. The
pilot project will provide a pathway for counties to successfully
transition away from federal transfer payments under the Secure Rural
Schools (SRS) Act. The proposal is for Community Forests to be
designated from federal forest lands within Idaho and managed in trust
by the state for the benefit of county governments and local
communities. Professional forest management would be provided by the
Idaho Department of Lands under the environmental laws that apply to
all Idaho state forest trust lands. Proceeds from management of the
Community Forest Trust lands would be distributed to counties receiving
Secure Rural Schools funding in lieu of transfer payments from the
federal treasury, after having first reimbursed the Idaho Department of
Lands for land management costs. Management of the Community Forest
Trust lands would be overseen by an Idaho Community Forest Trust Board
consisting of five elected county commissioners from the counties with
the most significant proportion of federal forest land within the
state.
Background
The U.S. Congress has perpetually recognized special obligations to
local governments and communities where the federal government has
extensive land ownership. When federal forests were first established,
the premise and promise was that local communities would welcome
federal ownership as they would benefit both from the economic activity
on federal forest lands and would receive a portion of the revenues
generated from the sale of timber and other resources on those federal
lands. Federal law required that 25% of the receipts from national
forest resource sales be returned to the counties where those lands
were located.
Beginning in 2000, the U.S. Congress recognized that revenues from
national forest activities had declined significantly and moved to meet
the obligation to local governments and communities by enacting the
Secure Rural School and County Self Determination Act (SRS). This law
established transfer payment schedules for federal monies to be paid
from the U.S. Treasury directly to the counties, proportionate to funds
lost from timber harvest revenues, in order to meet the obligations of
federal ownership. Since 2000, this law has been reauthorized twice and
is now up for reauthorization again.
The SRS funding was always intended to be an interim measure that
would be in place only until new programs on federal forest lands were
established that would provide reliable and sustainable revenue to
local counties. That transition has not come to pass. Instead, federal
forest management has declined, and with it, so too has the revenue to
the U.S. treasury and local counties. New Forest Service programs
targeted at landscape level forest restoration and fuels reduction have
faltered or not come to fruition.
This paper outlines a new way to restore much needed forest
management on federal land as well as a way to generate a more reliable
source of revenue for counties in Idaho that have historically depended
on receipts from federal forest management activities. Authorizing a
Community Forest Trust in Idaho will advance a reliable, sustainable
and environmentally responsible forest management process that will
also provide revenue to county governments to help pay for schools,
road maintenance and other essential services.
Community Forest Trust
The Community Forest Trust concept is offered as a long term
solution to meeting the federal government's obligations to counties
and communities with federal lands inside their borders. The goal
ultimately is for the U.S. Congress to designate specific federal
forest lands within Idaho as a Community Forest Trust that would be
managed in trust for local counties and communities. Professional
management of the Community Forest would be provided by the state's
professional land management agency, the Idaho Department of Lands, for
the legislatively defined purposes of supporting county governments and
providing sustainable forest stewardship. The Community Forest Trust
lands would remain the property of the United States government but
would be managed in trust for county governments under environmental
laws as they apply to state lands. Elected representatives from the
federal land counties would be appointed by the Governor to a Community
Forest Board that would ultimately be responsible for land management
decisions. Management costs would be deducted from the revenue earned
from land management activities and paid back to the Idaho Department
of Lands.
Net revenue generated from management of the Community Forests
would be pooled and distributed under a mutually agreeable distribution
formula to all counties within the state that are currently receiving
SRS funding. These payments would offset any SRS payments from the
federal government. Further, any net revenue generated from the
Community Forests would not impact other county payments under the
Payment in Lieu of Taxes (PILT) program.
Requirements
Sustainability: Community Forests will be required to have a
resource sustainability plan and must be managed to protect the long
term productivity of soil and water.
Public access: Public access will be provided to all Community
Forest lands in a manner that best facilitates access and use and that
protects environmental values.
Environmental Laws: Environmental laws will apply to the management
of the Community Forest lands as they are applied to the management of
forest lands managed by the State of Idaho.
Wildfire: The federal government will retain firefighting
responsibility for the Community Forest Trust lands.
Environmental Standards
Each of the counties proposing the Community Forest Trust concept
is currently engaged in ongoing multi-stakeholder collaborative efforts
on federal land projects that include Native American tribes and
environmental organizations.
The Community Forest Trust Board and individual participating
counties will seek advice from established collaboratives and/or
functioning Resource Advisory Committees (RACs) on how Community Forest
Trust land management programs can best accomplish support for
counties, communities and multi-stakeholder interests that are
consistent with the purposes of the Community Forest Trust concept.
Community Forest Trust--Pilot Project
The immediate proposal is for the U.S. Congress to approve a
200,000-acre Community Forest Trust pilot project in Idaho to
demonstrate how the project would function and to evaluate and fine-
tune the concept. The pilot would continue for at least five years or
for the duration of the next SRS reauthorization, whichever is longer.
Monitoring: Effective environmental and performance monitoring is
key to the success of the Community Forest Trust pilot. Idaho State
Best Management Practices (BMPs) and water quality monitoring programs
will be required on all Community Forest Trust pilot lands in the same
manner that they occur on existing state forest lands. Further, the
Community Forest Trust Board will consider and implement additional
monitoring programs that they determine necessary to properly evaluate
the pilot program. Implementation of these monitoring activities will
also be funded by revenue generated through Community Forest Trust
management activities.
Other monitoring programs from federal government and/or other
third party interests are encouraged and permitted provided that the
program designs are approved by the Idaho Department of Lands and the
Community Forest Trust Board and that independent funding is provided.
Designation of Community Forest Trust Lands
The designation of lands included in the Idaho Community Forest
Trust pilot project will occur by federal law as part of the SRS Act
reauthorization. The Idaho
Department of Lands will use Forest Service data and
recommendations to identify lands that best meet the purpose of the
Community Forest Trust pilot.
The following criteria will apply:
1.  Roadless lands identified in the Idaho Roadless Rule cannot
be included in the pilot project unless they are classified as
General Forest by the Rule.
2.  Selected lands will be in contiguous ``blocks,''
efficiently sized for management purposes and among the Idaho
counties with established Idaho Department of Lands management
offices. To the extent practicable, lands will be selected that
include different forest types and landscape conditions to
evaluate differing opportunities within the state.
3.  To the extent consistent with the purposes of the Community
Forest Trust concept, preference will be given to lands that
meet the following criteria:
a.  Are within the Wildland-Urban Interface (WUI) or
otherwise identified by the counties as critical for
community protection.
b.  Are classified as forest health condition Class 2
or 3 by the Forest Service.
c.  Are consistent with management goals for endangered
species.
______

[A statement submitted for the record by The Honorable Jeff
Denham, a Representative in Congress from the State of
California, follows:]

Statement submitted for the record by The Honorable Jeff Denham,
a Representative in Congress from the State of California

The Secure Rural Schools Program was implemented as a bridge
program to provide time for rural counties to transition away from
timber harvesting economies. The program was implemented because of the
layers of environmental regulation that halted timber production on
federal lands, which deprived local communities of timber receipts
which helped fund local schools, roads, and emergency services. The 3rd
reauthorization of this program will expire this year, and we cannot
continue to proceed with the status quo; because doing so would further
devastate our local and rural communities.
Our local communities do not want to continue the Secure Rural
Schools Program. They want jobs and healthy forests, and they are tired
of the budget uncertainty, bug infestations, and the constant threat of
wildfires. With the federal government controlling too much of the land
in these counties, it is extremely difficult for the communities to
redevelop, build and grow their economies. The status quo is continuing
to hurt our local schools and communities as the payments are being
pinched during these tough economic times.
The federal government must begin to manage its forests in a safe,
economical manner, including the harvesting of timber. With the
appropriate management of our forests, our rural counties will be able
to fund their schools, maintain their roads, and provide the necessary
emergency services to keep the communities safe. This economically
sound solution will also relieve the need for the Secure Rural Schools
Program and provide jobs to these communities that are struggling. In
my district the unemployment rate is well above the national average,
and hovers around 17 percent. Relieving the high unemployment and
providing the necessary funding for rural communities is imperative in
today's economic climate.
Another priority that is lost in the federal government's current
forest management practices is that of preventing wild fires. As the
Chair of the Economic Development, Public Buildings and Emergency
Management Subcommittee, I am constantly trying to make sure that our
forests are safe and the risk of wild fires is as minimal as possible.
The mismanagement of our forests on federal land is directly increasing
the risk of wild fires. According to the Forest Service, wild fires
have burned an average of 7.8 million acres every year over the past
five years. As a Representative from California, I am far too familiar
with the devastation of wild fires. In California, where environmental
regulations are far more over-burdensome than in other states, we are
annually threatened by severe wild fires that cause millions of dollars
in damages and claim many lives. We need to prevent these fires by
managing our forests for the public interests of safety and job
creation, which are far too often overlooked by the Administration and
extreme environmental regulation.
Not only has there been a failure to manage the forests on federal
land, but there is a practice of prohibiting public access to federal
lands. This prohibition coincides with the desire to stop timber
harvesting and fails to produce economic value or renewable energy of
the land. These federal lands are publicly owned and should be managed
in the best interest of the public, not to their detriment. The use of
the forests on federal land will create a viable economy and many job
creation opportunities in the West. The economy and jobs surrounding
the timber industry are not just those that are harvesting in the
forest. The chain of jobs extends to biomass generation for a renewable
energy source, to the building and housing market, and furniture
production for use within those buildings and homes.
The Secure Rural Schools Program is not the best option for our
local counties. The best option is to develop and implement a forest
management plan that will utilize our natural resources to put
Americans back to work, create much needed energy supplies, and fund
the rural schools and emergency services of our local communities. We
can no longer continue along with the status quo, and we must begin to
restart our timber industry to help our struggling communities relieve
high unemployment and constant budget uncertainty.
______

[A letter submitted for the record by Steve Moyer, Vice
President for Government Affairs, Trout Unlimited, follows:]

The Honorable Rob Bishop
Chairman
Subcommittee on National Parks. Forests and Public Lands
123 Cannon
Washington, DC 20515

The Honorable Raul Grijalva
Ranking Member
Subcommittee on National Parks. Forests and Public Lands
1511 Longworth
Washington, DC 20515

RE:  Oversight Hearing on Secure Rural Schools Reauthorization and
Forest Management Options for a Viable County Payments Program

Dear Chairman Bishop and Ranking Member Grijalva,

I am writing on behalf of Trout Unlimited and its 140,000 members
nationwide in support of reauthorizing the Secure and Rural Schools and
Community Self-Determination Act (SRSCA). Since its enactment in 2001,
SRSCA has made an important contribution to community infrastructure
and public land stewardship in rural counties. The SRSCA has been a key
funding source for rural counties' essential services, including roads
and schools, and also has provided critical funding for public land
restoration projects. Healthy public lands not only provide high
quality habitat for fish and wildlife and thus exceptional fishing and
hunting opportunities, but also important services on which downstream
communities rely, such as clean water.
Under SRSCA, allocated funds are organized under three titles
(Title I, Title II and Title III), and are used by rural counties for a
variety of purposes. Title II supports cooperative resource
conservation projects with strong stakeholder and community buy-in.
Under Title II, the Secretaries of Agriculture and Interior are
authorized to establish Resource Advisory Committees (RACs), which are
charged with proposing Title II projects. Each RAC must consist of
fifteen stakeholders, broadly representing conservation, community and
commodity interests. The applicable Secretary has the discretion to
approve of RAC projects. Such projects must further the purposes of the
SRSCA, including fostering investment in roads and other
infrastructure, soil productivity, ecosystem health, watershed
restoration and maintenance, control of noxious weeds, and
reestablishment of native species.
The RACs created under SRSCA are a natural fit with TU's work
because of our partnership approach, and our focus on restoring
watersheds. The funding that comes through the RACs has contributed to
these cooperative restoration efforts.
Lincoln County, Montana is representative of economically stressed
rural counties with large public land holdings that have benefited from
SRSCA funding. Throughout the most recent re-authorization of the Act
(FY 2008-2011), payments to Lincoln County have totaled $7,182,763;
$804,158 of which were Title II funds. Through these Title II funds
alone, over 256 projects have been approved and 62 projects have been
completed. Title II projects create jobs because the work is done by
local contractors. For example, $25,000 in SRSCA funds were used in
Lincoln County to replace an under-sized road culvert with a larger,
bottomless arch culvert, restoring fish passage in Zulu Creek for
native Westslope cutthroat trout and preventing future road failures,
thereby creating significant cost savings for Lincoln County. Simply
put, many projects like the Zulu Creek culvert replacement would not
happen without SRSCA funding.
Because of its demonstrable success, we strongly support
reauthorization of the SRSCA. This legislation has promoted healthier
public lands in tandem with healthy rural communities. To date, the
SRSCA has provided funding for hundreds of stewardship projects in
rural counties and created new economic opportunities across a number
of sectors. The reauthorization of the SRSCA is an important step
toward securing the future health of our rural communities and public
lands and waters.

Sincerely,

Steve Moyer
Vice President for Government Affairs
Trout Unlimited
______

[``Proposing a Community Forest Trust'' submitted for the
record by Boundary County, Idaho; Clearwater County, Idaho;
Idaho County, Idaho; Shoshone County, Idaho; and Valley County,
Idaho, follows:]

PROPOSING A COMMUNITY FOREST TRUST

STATEMENT OF
SKIP BRANDT, COMMISSIONER, IDAHO COUNTY, IDAHO
JON CANTAMESSA, COMMISSIONER, SHOSHONE COUNTY, IDAHO
GORDON CRUICKSHANK, COMMISSIONER, VALLEY COUNTY, IDAHO
DAN DINNING, COMMISSIONER, BOUNDARY COUNTY, IDAHO
STAN LEACH, COMMISSIONER, CLEARWATER COUNTY, IDAHO
Introduction
This statement is submitted by five duly elected County
Commissioners from five different counties throughout the forested
region of Idaho. This statement presents a Community Forest Trust
proposal that will allow a transition path from the federal transfer
payments of the Secure Rural Schools and Community Self Determination
Act (SRS) program, to a sustainable and reliable program for revenues
which do not depend on distributions from the U.S. Treasury. Our
proposal is for specific lands within the Idaho national forests to be
designated as a Community Forest Trust and that the resources on those
lands be managed in an sustainable and environmentally sound manner for
the purpose of generating resources for Idaho counties in lieu of
transfer payments under the Secure Rural Schools program.
We support reauthorization of the SRS program in 2011 as it is
immediately essential to the funding of county government school and
road programs throughout the country. However, as part of that
reauthorization we are specifically proposing the Congress include
legislation to establish a Community Forest Trust pilot project in
Idaho. The pilot project will demonstrate the opportunity for the
Community Forest Trust to provide a far superior alternative to the SRS
federal transfer payments. Additionally, revenues generated from the
Community Forest Trust pilot project would quickly begin to offset some
of the federal government transfer payments under the SRS program, and
thereby help immediately to partially reduce the impact to the federal
treasury for SRS payments.
We have developed the Community Forest Trust concept from our
combined experience with local government and natural resource
management, and with considered and ongoing input from natural resource
management professionals. Each of our counties has voted formally in
public meetings to embrace the Community Forest Trust concept for Idaho
and to seek authorizing legislation from the U.S. Congress.
We do appreciate the federal government's long standing obligation
of support for counties with significant quantities of federal land.
Congress has recognized, and we completely concur, that there must be a
federal mechanism for contributing funds to local government where
federal lands are not available for the local government tax base. The
federal transfer payments of the SRS program have been essential for
the last several years to maintaining threshold county government
services for schools, roads, and public safety. However, the continuous
uncertainty over whether the SRS program will continue and if so at
what level, does not provide for stability, and makes it impossible for
our counties to develop long term plans. We also believe the federal
deficit is a significant problem for our entire country and a primary
threat to our national security. The Community Forest Trust will help
address these paramount issues. Additionally, the Community Forest
Trust has the opportunity to stimulate increased economic development
and employment in our rural communities, and facilitate efficient
prioritized treatments of unhealthy forests with high risk of fire and
disease. These are priorities we also share with the U.S. Congress.
Community Forest Trust
Our proposal for a Community Forest Trust is described in detail in
the attached concept paper. Basically the idea is for a Community
Forest Trust to be designated by Congress from federal forest lands
within Idaho and further for Congress to provide those lands be managed
in trust by the state for the benefit of county governments and local
communities. Professional forest management would be provided by the
Idaho Department of Lands under the environmental laws as they apply to
all Idaho state forest trust lands. Proceeds from management of the
Community Forest Trust would be distributed to counties receiving
Secure Rural Schools funding in lieu of transfer payments from the
federal treasury, after having first reimbursed the Idaho Department of
Lands for land management costs. Management of the Community Forest
Trust would be overseen by an Idaho Community Forest Trust Board
consisting of five elected county commissioners from the counties with
the most significant proportion of federal forest land within the
state.
The Community Forest Trust would be required to be managed
sustainably and with multi-stakeholder input and environmental
monitoring. Each of our counties is actively engaged in multi-interest
collaborative discussions on federal lands management projects. We
would build on these relationships to solicit input to help shape
management plans and projects for the Community Forest.
We are not proposing any transfer of ownership of the Community
Forest Trust lands. They would remain in federal ownership and open to
public access and use for all Americans. We are proposing transfer of
management authority for the resources on the designated Community
Forest Trust land for the defined purpose of supporting rural counties
under the processes described herein.
Pilot Project
To demonstrate the benefits of the Community Forest Trust, we are
proposing a 200,000-acre Idaho pilot project be initially and
immediately approved by Congress, located in management blocks
throughout the forested region of the state. This is a small pilot
including less than 1% of the 20 million acres of national forest land
in Idaho. While it is unreasonable to expect a pilot of this small size
to fully offset established levels of SRS transfer payments, it is
sufficiently sized to prove and fine-tune the Community Forest Trust
model and, once functioning, we believe has the potential to generate
up to $15 million annually to offset federal SRS transfer payments to
Idaho counties.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 67404.010

.eps[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 67404.011

.eps[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 67404.012

.epsConclusion
We are committed to advancing this concept and very much appreciate
the opportunity to present this statement for the Committee record. We
look forward to further discussions with the Committee to move this
Community Forest Pilot Project forward.


