- CREATING ABUNDANT WATER AND POWER SUPPLIES AND JOB GROWTH BY RESTORING COMMON SENSE TO FEDERAL REGULATIONS

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

CREATING ABUNDANT WATER AND POWER SUPPLIES AND JOB GROWTH BY RESTORING
COMMON SENSE TO FEDERAL REGULATIONS

=======================================================================

OVERSIGHT HEARING

before the

SUBCOMMITTEE ON WATER AND POWER

of the

COMMITTEE ON NATURAL RESOURCES
U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

Tuesday, April 5, 2011

__________

Serial No. 112-19

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Natural Resources

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.fdsys.gov
or
Committee address: http://naturalresources.house.gov

U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
65-599                    WASHINGTON : 2011
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800; DC
area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104  Mail: Stop IDCC, Washington, DC
20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON NATURAL RESOURCES

DOC HASTINGS, WA, Chairman
EDWARD J. MARKEY, MA, Ranking Democrat Member

Don Young, AK                        Dale E. Kildee, MI
John J. Duncan, Jr., TN              Peter A. DeFazio, OR
Louie Gohmert, TX                    Eni F.H. Faleomavaega, AS
Rob Bishop, UT                       Frank Pallone, Jr., NJ
Doug Lamborn, CO                     Grace F. Napolitano, CA
Robert J. Wittman, VA                Rush D. Holt, NJ
Paul C. Broun, GA                    Raul M. Grijalva, AZ
John Fleming, LA                     Madeleine Z. Bordallo, GU
Mike Coffman, CO                     Jim Costa, CA
Tom McClintock, CA                   Dan Boren, OK
Glenn Thompson, PA                   Gregorio Kilili Camacho Sablan,
Jeff Denham, CA                          CNMI
Dan Benishek, MI                     Martin Heinrich, NM
David Rivera, FL                     Ben Ray Lujan, NM
Jeff Duncan, SC                      John P. Sarbanes, MD
Scott R. Tipton, CO                  Betty Sutton, OH
Paul A. Gosar, AZ                    Niki Tsongas, MA
Raul R. Labrador, ID                 Pedro R. Pierluisi, PR
Kristi L. Noem, SD                   John Garamendi, CA
Steve Southerland II, FL             Colleen W. Hanabusa, HI
Bill Flores, TX                      Vacancy
Andy Harris, MD
Jeffrey M. Landry, LA
Charles J. ``Chuck'' Fleischmann,
TN
Jon Runyan, NJ
Bill Johnson, OH

Todd Young, Chief of Staff
Lisa Pittman, Chief Counsel
Jeffrey Duncan, Democrat Staff Director
David Watkins, Democrat Chief Counsel
------

SUBCOMMITTEE ON WATER AND POWER

TOM McCLINTOCK, CA, Chairman
GRACE F. NAPOLITANO, CA, Ranking Democrat Member

Louie Gohmert, TX                    Raul M. Grijalva, AZ
Jeff Denham, CA                      Jim Costa, CA
Scott R. Tipton, CO                  Ben Ray Lujan, NM
Paul A. Gosar, AZ                    John Garamendi, CA
Raul R. Labrador, ID                 Edward J. Markey, MA, ex officio
Kristi L. Noem, SD
Doc Hastings, WA, ex officio

------
CONTENTS

----------
Page

Hearing held on Tuesday, April 5, 2011...........................     1

Statement of Members:
Garamendi, Hon. John, a Representative in Congress from the
State of California........................................     6
Labrador, Hon. Raul R., a Representative in Congress from the
State of Idaho.............................................     5
Prepared statement of....................................     6
McClintock, Hon. Tom, a Representative in Congress from the
State of California........................................     1
Prepared statement of....................................     3
Napolitano, Hon. Grace F., a Representative in Congress from
the State of California....................................     3
Prepared statement of....................................     5

Statement of Witnesses:
Keppen, Dan, Executive Director, Family Farm Alliance,
Klamath Falls, Oregon......................................     7
Prepared statement of....................................     9
Noble, Wade, President, National Water Resources Association,
Yuma, Arizona..............................................    16
Prepared statement of....................................    17
Orme, Paul, General Counsel, Central Arizona, New Magma, and
Maricopa-Stanfield Irrigation and Drainage Districts,
Mayer, Arizona.............................................    30
Prepared statement of....................................    32
Pool, Richard, President, Pro-Troll Fishing Products,
Concord, California........................................    25
Prepared statement of....................................    26
Scholl, Jon, President, American Farmland Trust, Washington,
D.C........................................................    19
Prepared statement of....................................    21
Semanko, Norman M., Executive Director and General Counsel,
Idaho Water Users Association, Inc., Boise, Idaho..........    34
Prepared statement of....................................    36

Additional materials supplied:
Headrick, Doug, General Manager, San Bernardino Valley
Municipal Water District, on behalf of the Santa Ana Sucker
Task Force, Statement submitted for the record.............    62
Modeer, David, General Manager, Central Arizona Project,
Statement submitted for the record.........................    65
Rushin, Carol, Deputy Regional Administrator, U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency, Letter submitted for the
record by The Honorable Grace Napolitano...................    44

OVERSIGHT HEARING ON ``CREATING ABUNDANT WATER AND POWER SUPPLIES AND
JOB GROWTH BY RESTORING COMMON SENSE TO FEDERAL REGULATIONS.''

----------

Tuesday, April 5, 2011

U.S. House of Representatives

Subcommittee on Water and Power

Committee on Natural Resources

Washington, D.C.

----------

The Subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 2:21 p.m. in
Room 1324, Longworth House Office Building, Hon. Tom McClintock
[Chairman of the Subcommittee] presiding.
Present: Representatives McClintock, Tipton, Gosar,
Labrador, Napolitano, Grijalva, Costa, and Garamendi.
Mr. McClintock. The Subcommittee on Water and Power will
come to order. The Chair notes the presence of a quorum, which
under Committee Rule 3(e) is two Members.
The Water and Power Subcommittee meets today to hear
testimony on a hearing entitled, ``Creating Abundant Water and
Power Supplies and Job Growth by Restoring Common Sense to
Federal Regulations.''
We will begin with five-minute opening statements, starting
with the Chair and Ranking Member. This hearing is being
conducted pursuant to House Resolution 72, which directs all
Committees of the House to identify current and pending
regulations that threaten existing jobs, or impede the creation
of new ones.
This Subcommittee, with jurisdiction over water and
hydroelectric resources administered by the Bureau of
Reclamation, is going to have its hands full in meeting this
obligation.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. TOM McCLINTOCK A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA

Mr. McClintock. In Southern Oregon, regulators have
devastated Klamath Valley agriculture, and now threaten to
squander $700 million of ratepayer and taxpayer funds to
destroy four hydroelectric dams that are capable of producing
155 megawatts of clean and cheap electricity, and to shut down
operation of the Iron Gate Fish Hatchery that produces 5
million salmon smolt each year.
Last year, this government diverted 200 billion gallons of
water away from Central Valley farms in California to dump into
the Pacific Ocean for habitat restoration, destroying a
quarter-million acres of the most productive farmland in the
Nation, throwing tens of thousands of farm families into
unemployment and contributing to unemployment rates in the
Central Valley exceeding 40 percent in some communities.
Even today, with the snowpack at 165 percent of normal for
the season--the wettest year in the last 16--San Joaquin Valley
farmers have only been guaranteed 65 percent of their
contracted allotments.
Family farms on the Rio Grande in New Mexico faced
extinction to provide nicer accommodations for silvery minnows
until its Delegation found the political will to act a few
years ago.
Just over the horizon, the Santa Ana suckerfish in Southern
California could have devastating impacts on residents seeking
to protect local water supplies. Across the Nation, the EPA has
waged an assault on rural America by imposing greenhouse gas
regulations that will destroy small livestock operations,
creating unjustified buffer zones on pesticide applications,
and opposing surface storage projects like the Two Forks
Reservoir in Colorado.
The great irony, of course, is that the very projects that
have made sustained year-around water flows possible, and that
have lowered water temperatures to the benefit of fish
populations annually are precisely those under attack by the
radical policies of the environmental left.
Not only have these water projects stabilized water flows
and lowered water temperatures, the employment of ample fish
hatcheries can provide for unparalleled abundance of salmon and
other species.
Yet, the Federal Government refuses to recognize fish-
hatchery salmon as part of endangered fish counts and refuses
to recognize the contributions that fish hatcheries can make to
thriving fisheries.
For many years, the central objective of our water and
power policy was to create abundance, to make the desert bloom
as the Bureau of Reclamation's founders put it. But this
original mission seems to have been lost to a radical and
retrograde ideology that seeks to create, maintain, and ration
government-induced shortages. That is the policy crossroads
where we have now arrived.
It is true that with enough government force, fines,
lawsuits, edicts, regulations, and bureaucracies, we can
restore plant and animal populations to their original
prehistoric conditions, but we have to do that by restoring the
human population to its original prehistoric conditions.
Or we can return abundance as the central objective of our
water and power policy by providing abundant water, clean, and
cheap hydroelectricity, new recreational centers, desperately
needed flood protection, burgeoning fisheries, reinvigorated
farms--not to mention lower electricity, water, and flood
insurance bills for American families.
It is toward that brighter and more prosperous future that
this majority seeks to proceed. It is my hope that the
testimony today will assist the House in identifying those
changes in law that will be necessary to get there.
With that, I will yield back the balance of my time, and
recognize the Ranking Member, the gentlelady from California,
Mrs. Napolitano.
[The prepared statement of Chairman McClintock follows:]

Statement of The Honorable Tom McClintock, Chairman,
Subcommittee on Water and Power

Today's hearing is conducted pursuant to House Resolution 72 which
directs all committees of the House to identify current and pending
regulations that threaten existing jobs or impede the creation of new
ones.
This sub-committee, with jurisdiction over water and hydro-electric
resources administered by the Bureau of Reclamation, will have its
hands full in meeting this obligation.
In Southern Oregon, regulators have devastated Klamath Valley
agriculture and now threaten to squander $700 million of ratepayer and
taxpayer funds to destroy four hydroelectric dams capable of producing
155 megawatts of clean and cheap electricity--and to shut down
operation of the Iron Gate Fish Hatchery that produces five million
salmon smolt annually.
Last year, this government diverted 200 billion gallons of water
away from Central Valley farms in California to dump into the Pacific
Ocean for ``habitat restoration,'' destroying a quarter million acres
of the most productive farmland in the nation, throwing tens of
thousands of farm families into unemployment and contributing to
unemployment rates in the Central Valley exceeding 40 percent in some
communities.
Even today, with snowpack at 165 percent of normal for the season--
the wettest year in the last 16--San Joaquin Valley farmers have only
been guaranteed 65 percent of their contracted allotments.
Family farms on the Rio Grande in New Mexico faced extinction to
provide nicer accommodations for silvery minnows until its delegation
found the political will to act a few years ago. Just over the horizon,
the Santa Ana sucker fish in southern California could have devastating
impacts on residents seeking to protect local water supplies.
Across the nation, the EPA has waged an assault on rural America by
imposing greenhouse gas regulations that will destroy small livestock
operations, creating unjustified buffer zones on pesticide applications
and opposing surface storage projects like the Two Forks reservoir in
Colorado.
The great irony, of course, is that the very projects that have
made sustained year-round water flows possible and that have lowered
water temperatures to the benefit of fish populations annually are
precisely those under attack by the radical policies of the
environmental left.
Not only have these water projects stabilized water flows and
lowered water temperatures, the employment of ample fish hatcheries can
provide for unparalleled abundance of salmon and other species. Yet the
federal government-refuses to recognize fish-hatchery salmon as part of
endangered fish counts and refuses to recognize the contribution that
hatcheries can make to thriving fisheries
For many years, the central objective of our water and power policy
was to create abundance--to make the desert bloom as the Bureau of
Reclamation's Founders put it.
But this original mission seems to have been lost to a radical and
retrograde ideology that seeks to create, maintain and ration
government-induced shortages. And that is the policy cross-road where
we have now arrived.
It is true that with enough government force, fines, lawsuits,
edicts, regulations and bureaucracies we can restore plant and animal
populations to their original prehistoric conditions by restoring the
human population to its original pre-historic conditions.
Or we can return abundance as the central objective of our water
and power policy--by provide abundant water, clean and cheap
hydroelectricity, new recreational centers, desperately needed flood
protection, burgeoning fisheries, re-invigorated farms--not to mention
lower electricity, water and flood insurance bills for American
families.
It is toward that brighter and more prosperous future that this
majority seeks to proceed. It is my hope that the testimony today will
assist the House in identifying those changes in law necessary to get
there.
______

STATEMENT OF THE HON. GRACE NAPOLITANO, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA

Mrs. Napolitano. Thank you, Mr. Chair, for today's hearing
that does focus on indirect and direct regulations that affect
the Bureau of Reclamation, and also specifically focused on the
impacts of regulations to the agricultural community, and to
our economy as such.
I hope that we don't forget that Native American water
rights are also impacted, and that we do include them in any of
the discussions that we might continue to have. We do agree
that we need to find a balance to ensure that regulations
protect the health and safety of the public, and help sustain
businesses and our economy--while protecting the environment
and allowing for that job growth.
This is one of the goals outlined in President Obama's
Executive Order, and we support the Administration's efforts
for regulatory review and job creation going hand-in-hand.
Regulations protect the public and, when done right, help
to provide a framework for partnership and collaboration, which
is sometimes much needed. I have always maintained that, in
some of these water wars, the only ones that win are the
attorneys.
Across the West, there are many instances of stakeholders
partnering together to achieve the goals of sustaining
agriculture, as well as improving our environment.
These partnerships were not done at the expense of one
party or the environment, but were done in a collaborative
manner that allowed for water deliveries and power production,
while minimizing and mitigating the risk to the environment.
Regulations should not be done one-sided. We should not
have to choose between the farmer who provides our food and the
salmon fishermen who also makes a living depending on the same
water resources, and economic sustainability in that area.
It has also been mentioned that some of these regulations
are decades old, and we agree that many of them have to be
thrown out, amended, or replaced with something that reflects
our current times.
Some regulations do need some reviewing, and we support the
efforts. We should also work with some of the other Federal
agencies which overlap in some of our jurisdictions to address
these issues collaboratively.
What has not changed is how we as a country put in place
these regulations, because we value our clean air, and we value
our clean water, and we value our public safety, especially in
our agricultural community and in our fishing industry.
We have an even more important task of leaving the next
generation with cleaner air, cleaner water, and a healthier
environment than what we found during our time, and to do so in
a way that allows for job growth--creating a win-win for all.
Mr. Chairman, I have a great grandson, and another one on
the way. I want to be sure that we leave something for our
future generations that is going to make them proud of the work
that was done, not that they will know about it, but that they
enjoy better air, a better environment, than we had in our
generation.
And I can tell you when I moved to Southern California back
in the early '60s that the pollution in the air was intolerable
in California. Well, we have worked on that, and we have
established a lot of new regulations, and now California does
not have the cleanest air, but certainly is one of the best
environments in the Nation.
So I understand the need for regulations. I applaud it, but
we also must understand how it impacts anything else that we
work with, and work to sustain not only our economy, but ensure
that we protect the future of our environment.
I do look forward to hearing from our witnesses, and thank
you for being here today. I yield back.
[The prepared statement of Mrs. Napolitano follows:]

Statement of The Honorable Grace F. Napolitano, a Representative
in Congress from the State of California

Good morning. This hearing focuses on the indirect and direct
regulations that affect the Bureau of Reclamation. This hearing also
specially focuses on the impacts of regulations to the agricultural
community.
We agree that we need to find a balance to ensure that regulations
protect the safety and health of the public and the environment while
allowing for job growth. This is one of the goals outlined in President
Obama's Executive Order and we support the Administration's ongoing
efforts on regulatory review and job creation.
Regulations, when done right, help to provide a framework for
partnership and collaboration. There are many instances across the west
of stakeholders partnering together to achieve the goals of sustaining
agriculture as well as improving our environment.
These partnerships were done not at the expense of one party or the
environment, but in a collaborative manner that allows for water
deliveries and power production, while minimizing and mitigating the
risks to the environment. Regulations should also not be a one sided
game where have to choose between the farmer who provides our food, and
the salmon fisherman who also makes his living depending on the same
water resource.
It has been mentioned that some of these regulations are decades
old, reflecting a different time. These regulations may need some
reviewing, and we support those efforts. What has not changed is how we
as a country put in place these regulations because we value our clean
air, clean water and our public's safety.
We have an even more important task of leaving the next generation
with cleaner air, cleaner water, and a healthier environment than what
we found, and do so in a way that allows for job growth.
We look forward to hearing from our witnesses, thank you for being
here today.
______

[NOTE: Charts submitted for the record entitled ``California 2006
Causes of Impairment for California Waters, Prepared by the U.S. EPA
Office of Water'' and ``California Waters Impaired by Pesticides:
Reporting Year 2006, Prepared by the U.S. EPA Office of Water'' have
been retained in the Committee's official files.]
______

Mr. McClintock. Thank you. The Chair recognizes Mr.
Labrador for an opening statement.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. RAUL LABRADOR, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF IDAHO

Mr. Labrador. Thank you, Mr. Chair. I will be very brief.
Good afternoon, and thank you, Chairman McClintock, and Ranking
Member Napolitano, for convening this important hearing today.
I would like to especially welcome Norm Semanko, who is the
Executive Director and General Counsel for the Idaho Water
Users Association, for testifying at this hearing, and also a
dear friend.
Today's topic is a high priority of mine, reducing the
burdensome regulations that the Federal Government has imposed
as critical to the vitality of our Nation. The EPA continues to
reach beyond their statutory authority to impose regulations
that affect not only the people of Idaho, but also people
nationwide.
I would like to thank my colleagues for their support in
passing H.R. 872, the Reducing Regulatory Burdens Act of 2011,
which is extremely important to the producers in my State. I
look forward to listening to the input our distinguished panel
has to offer. Thank you.
Mr. McClintock. Are there any other Members that wish to
make an opening statement? Mr. Garamendi, five minutes.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Labrador follows:]

Statement of The Honorable Raul Labrador, a Representative
in Congress from the State of Idaho

Good afternoon and thank you, Chairman McClintock and Ranking
Member Napolitano, for convening this important hearing today.
I would also like to welcome Norm Semanko, the Executive Director
and General Counsel for the Idaho Water Users Association for
testifying at this hearing.
Today's topic is a high priority of mine. Reducing the burdensome
regulations that the federal government has imposed is critical to the
vitality of our nation. The EPA continues to reach beyond their
statutory authority to impose regulations that affect not only the
people of Idaho but also people nationwide.
I would like to thank my colleagues for their support in passing
H.R. 872, the Reducing Regulatory Burdens Act of 2011, which is
extremely important to the producers in my state.
I look forward to listening to the input our distinguished panel
has to offer.
Thank you.
______

STATEMENT OF THE HON. JOHN GARAMENDI, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA

Mr. Garamendi. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and Ranking Member
Napolitano, and the witnesses. I look forward to your
testimony. We have been at this a long time, and the notion
that regulations are bad, you may want to talk to the Japanese
about the lack of regulations on their nuclear power
facilities.
Regulations are a mechanism that we use to provide a
balance and an assurance that what we would like to see happen
actually happens. Regulations to protect endangered species
have had an incredibly positive impact on species, including
the human species.
When the very first regulation dealt with DDT, it was not
just the raptors that were at risk. It was the human population
that was at risk. So we ought to not throw the regulatory
regimes out simply because they are called regulations.
I have spent a good portion of my life in the regulatory
environment as an insurance commissioner, and I can tell you
without it, without any qualms whatsoever, that it is the
regulatory environment in that sector that protects human
beings from the rapacious nature of the insurance industry.
The insurance industry does not like it, but then the
public does not like to be ripped off either. With regard to
endangered species, to substitute the natural environment for
really an unnatural environment called fish hatcheries. Yes, we
do need fish hatcheries but, at the same time, those fish
hatcheries don't work if the water in the river is too warm for
the fingerlings that leave the hatchery.
And that is a regulatory environment that provides that
opportunity for those fish to survive as they head down the
river. So abundance, yes, but abundance only for the purpose of
abundance will lead to destruction, and we have seen a lot of
that.
So we need to be balanced, and we need to be wise, and we
need to recognize that the political rhetoric of anti-
regulation does not really solve the underlying problems. So
with that, I look forward to hearing from the witnesses.
Mr. McClintock. Any further opening statements? Seeing
none, the Chair would like to begin by recognizing members of
the National Water Resources Association, who have taken time
out of their visit to the Capitol to attend today's hearing.
Welcome to you all.
And with that, we will begin with the statements of our
witnesses. And there is some additional seating over on the
other side if you get tired of standing.
Our panel of witnesses today includes Mr. Dan Keppen, who
is the Executive Director of the Family Farm Alliance, of
Klamath Falls, Oregon; Mr. Wade Noble, President of the
National Water Resources Association, in Yuma, Arizona; Mr. Jon
Scholl, President of the American Farmland Trust, in
Washington, D.C.; Mr. Richard Pool, President of Pro-Troll
Products, in Concord, California; Mr. Paul Orme, representing
the Central Arizona, New Magma, and Maricopa-Stanfield
Irrigation and Drainage Districts of Mayer, Arizona; and Mr.
Norm Semanko, Executive Director and General Counsel of the
Idaho Water Users Association, in Boise, Idaho.
Gentlemen, your written testimony will appear in full in
the hearing record, and so I would ask you to keep your oral
statements to five minutes, as outlined in our invitation
letter to you, and under Rule 4(a).
I also want to explain how our timing lights work. When you
begin to speak, our clerk will start the timer, and a green
light will appear on that device in front of you. After four
minutes, a yellow light will appear, and at that time, you
should begin to conclude your statement, and at five minutes a
red light will come on. Please feel free to complete your
sentence, but after that, I would ask you to wrap up. So I will
now introduce Mr. Keppen for five minutes.

STATEMENT OF DAN KEPPEN, EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR,
FAMILY FARM ALLIANCE, KLAMATH FALLS, OREGON

Mr. Keppen. Good afternoon, Chairman McClintock, Ranking
Member Napolitano, and Members of the Subcommittee. I am Dan
Keppen, and I am the Executive Director for the Family Farm
Alliance. We are a grassroots organization that represents
family farmers, ranchers, irrigation districts, and allied
industries in the 17 Western States.
Last February, we had our annual meeting in Las Vegas, and
staff members from this very Subcommittee participated in a
video conference, where they were able to interact with our
members.
At that time, one of our board members, Mark Ricks, from
Idaho, stood up and made a really impassioned speech, which I
won't be able to replicate, but I did take notes, and I would
like to share what he said at that time.
Quote, ``When I talk to my sons and their friends, and
start conversations, they often talk about the frustration they
feel over the amount of time they spend dealing with
regulations and bureaucracy.''
Right now, my kids are spending roughly a third of their
time trying to cut through what they see as unnecessary red
tape. This is time that they know could be spent in a more
productive way actually working the land, and starting to take
the joy out of their work. It is making young people choose
careers other than farming at a time when there are not many
young farmer people in the profession.
Mark Ricks is right and the statistics bear out his
observations. Right now only six percent of our farmers in this
country are younger than 35 years old. In my home state of
Oregon, only four percent are 35 years or younger. So this
oversight hearing comes at a real opportune time. We are in
danger of losing a generation of farmers.
And this is happening at a time when the United Nations
projects that the world will need 70 percent more food by the
year 2050 to keep pace with the world population growth and
hunger.
Today, our own western farmers and ranchers are being
subjected to potential restrictive and duplicative Federal
regulations on many fronts. Many of these rules have cropped up
in just the past two years.
My written testimony includes a nearly two page list of
various rulemaking processes that pose threats to agriculture.
Other witnesses on today's panel will further elaborate on some
of those very issues.
The related uncertainty that comes with all this increased
regulatory scrutiny will make it much harder for these farmers
to survive in such a harsh economy. Putting just a few of these
farmers out of work could impart huge limitations on our future
ability to feed our country and the world.
The rural west faces challenges today that demand strong
citizen engagement and aggressive outspoken leadership by our
elected officials. As western producers of food and fiber
continue to disappear, the ripple effect will extend far beyond
the rural communities.
As a country, we have become nearly complacent as food
production has been taken for granted for far too long. The
United States, for nearly four decades, helped defeat world
hunger through its massive productive output of affordable
food.
Western family farmers and ranchers will continue to this
campaign, but they need to be shown through leadership and
development of common sense agriculture and water policy
priorities that what they do really does matter to this
country.
Fortunately, policy leaders like you are beginning to
recognize the economic and social burdens caused by the layers
of regulations and bureaucracy. We were pleased to see
President Obama issue his Executive Order that requires Federal
agencies to ensure that regulations protect safety, health, and
the environment, while promoting economic growth.
The President's actions could provide an opportunity for a
bipartisan marriage of interest leading to a real beneficial
change in the way that the Federal Government adopts and
implements rules and regulations that impact people's lives and
livelihoods.
The Family Farm Alliance strongly affirms the original
goals of well intended laws like the Endangered Species Act,
the Clean Water Act, and the National Environmental Policy Act.
However, some of these laws are nearly 40 years old, and
some targeted reforms may be needed, including common sense
changes to make them work better, minimize confusion, and
discourage unnecessary litigation.
From the standpoint of the Western American farmer, it can
be bewildering, daunting, and frustrating to view the specter
of new rules, regulations, and guidance that are currently
under development by Federal regulatory agencies.
Unfortunately the very real impacts that existing laws and
regulations already exert on agricultural producers have
already been felt, and those rules do not appear to be going
away anytime soon.
I can see that it is simple enough to document these
efforts to the best of our abilities and register our
complaints as in our testimony. It is much more difficult to
propose constructive resolutions that can make existing laws
work better.
The Family Farm Alliance prides itself on employing this
very philosophy. We, and many other organizations representing
American producers, have developed detailed recommendations
over the past decade on how the negative effects of existing
environmental regulations can be corrected and improved.
We would be happy to provide a compilation of those efforts
and make them available to this Subcommittee. With the right
combination of incentives in the form of modernized streamlined
regulations, western irrigated agriculture will be posed to
help close the global productivity gap, and meet the world's
food and fiber needs in the year 2050 and beyond. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Keppen follows:]

Statement of Dan Keppen, Executive Director, Family Farm Alliance

Good afternoon, Chairman McClintock, Ranking Member Napolitano, and
Members of the Subcommittee. My name is Dan Keppen, and I serve as the
Executive Director of the Family Farm Alliance (Alliance).
The Alliance is a grassroots organization of family farmers,
ranchers, irrigation districts and allied industries in 16 Western
states. The Alliance is focused on one mission: To ensure the
availability of reliable, affordable irrigation water supplies to
Western farmers and ranchers. We are also committed to the fundamental
proposition that Western irrigated agriculture must be preserved and
protected for a host of economic, sociological, environmental and
national security reasons--many of which are often overlooked in the
context of other national policy decisions.
This oversight hearing could not have come at a more opportune
time. We are in danger of losing a generation of young farmers, and
productive farmlands and Western agriculture's traditional water
supplies are disappearing as urban, environmental and energy demands
increase. This is all happening at a time when the United Nations
projects that the world will need to produce 70 percent more food by
2050 to keep pace with world population growth and increased demand for
calories.
Today, our own Western farmers and ranchers are currently being
subjected to potentially restrictive and duplicative federal
regulations on everything from another added layer of water quality
protections to air quality requirements that would significantly
increase the cost of their water supplies. These farmers are facing
potentially ruinous recommendations from a federally-sanctioned
committee that could impose additional expensive but unfunded safety
standards to their irrigation canals and ditches. The related
uncertainty that comes with all of this increased regulatory scrutiny
will make it much harder for these farmers to survive in such a harsh
economy. Putting just a few of these farmers out of work could impart
huge limitations on our future ability to feed our country and the
world.
I should emphasize that all these regulations in particular hit the
small family farmer the hardest, as they are the least equipped to deal
with the maze of sometimes overlapping requirements. We fear that we
may be approaching a point where only the larger farm operators will be
able to economically deal with these issues, and even they will face
significant challenges and hardship.
The rural West faces challenges today that demand strong citizen
engagement and aggressive, outspoken leadership by our elected
officials. As Western producers of food and fiber continue to
disappear, the ripple effect will extend far beyond their rural
communities. As a country, we have nearly become complacent as food
production has been taken for granted for far too long. The United
States for nearly four decades helped defeat world hunger through its
massive productive output of affordable food. Western family farmers
and ranchers will continue this campaign, but they need to be shown--
through leadership and development of common sense agriculture and
water policy priorities--that what they do really does matter to this
country.
Fortunately, policy leaders like the Members of this Subcommittee
are beginning to recognize the economic and social burdens caused by
layers of regulations and bureaucracy. President Obama publicly noted
in a recent Wall Street Journal Op Ed article that some federal
regulations have gotten out of balance, placing unreasonable burdens on
business--``burdens that have stifled innovation and have had a
chilling effect on growth and jobs.'' We were pleased to see the
president issue his Executive Order that requires federal agencies
ensure that regulations protect safety, health and the environment
while promoting economic growth. That order also directs a government-
wide review of the rules already on the books to remove outdated
regulations that stifle job creation and make our economy less
competitive. The President's actions, in our view, could provide an
opportunity for a bipartisan marriage of interests leading to real
beneficial change in the way the federal government adopts and
implements rules and regulations that impact peoples' lives, and
livelihoods. We will remain hopeful but vigilant, and watch what the
regulatory agencies actually do on this front, instead of only what
they say.
While the Family Farm Alliance strongly affirms the original goals
of well-intended laws like the Endangered Species Act (ESA), Clean
Water Act (CWA) and National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA), some of
these laws are nearly 40 years old, and some targeted reforms may be
needed, including common-sense changes to make them work better,
minimize confusion, and discourage unnecessary litigation. The Family
Farm Alliance has a proven track record of providing solution-oriented
recommendations along these lines. For example, we have previously
testified before this subcommittee and provided recommendations for
legislation that would require the establishment of quality standards
for scientific and commercial data that are used to make decisions
under the ESA and other important regulatory laws. We believe that
greater weight should be given to data that have been field-tested or
peer-reviewed. We support peer review of ESA listing decisions and ESA
section 7 consultations by a disinterested scientific panel, and we
believe legislation can be crafted to create procedures for that
process.
IRRIGATED AGRICULTURE IS AN IMPORTANT COG IN OUR NATION'S ECONOMIC
ENGINE
The development of Western water resources over the past one
hundred years is one of the great success stories of the modern era.
Millions of acres of arid Western desert have been transformed into one
of the most efficient and productive agricultural systems in the world.
The Bureau of Reclamation (Reclamation) is the largest supplier and
manager of water in the 17 Western states west of the Mississippi. It
maintains 480 dams and 348 reservoirs with the capacity to store 245
million acre-feet of water. These facilities deliver water to one in
every five western farmers to irrigate about ten million acres of land,
and provide water to over 31 million people for municipal and
industrial (M&I) uses as well as other non-agricultural uses.
Reclamation is also the Nation's second largest producer of
hydroelectric power, generating 44 billion kilowatt hours of energy
each year from 58 power plants. In addition, Reclamation's facilities
provide substantial flood control benefits, recreational opportunities,
and extensive fish and wildlife habitat. All of this has been
accomplished with a total federal investment of only $11 billion,
according to the Bureau of Reclamation.
In early 2010, Secretary of the Interior Ken Salazar released a
first-of-its-kind report, Economic Impact of the Department of the
Interior's Programs and Activities, as an analysis of the job creation
and economic growth benefits associated with a wide range of
Departmental activities, including those related to Reclamation's
irrigation and hydroelectric projects in the West. The report estimates
that Reclamation's total estimated economic impact in 2008 was $39.5
billion, impacting an estimated 261,200 jobs. Of this total,
Reclamation's irrigation activities generated an estimated 193,000 jobs
and an economic impact of $25.3 billion, almost double the combined
economic impacts ($14.2 billion, 68,200 jobs) associated with
Reclamation's hydropower, municipal and industrial water, and
recreation functions.
A LOST GENERATION OF FARMERS?
One of the most troubling aspects of the on-going farm crisis is
the decline in the number of young farmers entering the field. More
than half of today's farmers are between the ages of 45 and 64, and
only six percent of our farmers are younger than 35 (www.farmaid.org).
Fewer than one million Americans list farming as their primary
occupation and among those, 40 percent are age 55 or older. In my home
state of Oregon, according to a State Board of Agriculture report
released earlier this year only 4 percent of farmers are between 25 and
34 years old and 8 percent are between 35 and 44 years old, and 39
percent are older than 65.
Both statistically and anecdotally, for the first time in many
generations we see sons and daughters of farmers opting to leave the
family farm because of uncertainty about agriculture as a career.
Meanwhile, Western irrigators continue to grow more food and fiber
using less water and land. For example, the California Farm Bureau
Federation reports that, between 1980 and 2000, water use and irrigated
acreage in California decreased, yet crop production still rose 35
percent. And, according to USDA's Economic Research Service statistics,
Americans are spending, on average, 9.7 percent of their disposable
income on food. To put this into perspective, consider what citizens
living in other countries pay. For example, in Brazil, 22.7% of annual
household expenditures go for food, and in some underdeveloped
countries these levels have reached 75%. Consider the following:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 65599.014

.epsAt a time when average Americans are feeling the pinch of the
economic recession in their pocket books, the foundation of our
country's ability to provide safe and affordable food and fiber is also
now at risk. Ironically, it is because Western irrigated agriculture
has been so adaptive and successful at providing plentiful, safe and
affordable food that it is now in a fight for its future existence--and
nobody believes there is a problem. The last Americans to experience
food shortages are members of the Greatest Generation and their
parents. For the most part, they have left us, taking with them the
memories of empty supermarket shelves, WWII Victory Gardens, the Dust
Bowl, and other times of significant hardship and shortage. Their
personal experiences helped build today's American agricultural
successes, but when the issue has never been personalized, it's easy to
become complacent.
WESTERN FARMERS & RANCHERS ARE NEEDED TO FEED A HUNGRY WORLD--NOW MORE
THAN EVER BEFORE
Earlier this year, the Global Harvest Initiative released its
Global Agricultural Productivity (GAP) Report, which measures ongoing
progress in achieving the goal of sustainably doubling agricultural
output by 2050. For the first time, the GAP Report quantifies the
difference between the current rate of agricultural productivity growth
and the pace required to meet future world food needs. The report
predicts that a doubling of agricultural output by 2050 will be needed
to meet future world requirements for food. This would require
increasing the rate of productivity growth to at least 1.75 percent
annually from the current 1.4 percent growth rate, a 25 percent annual
increase in the productivity growth rate.
Other signs point to the hard truth of a very real food crisis in
the world today. The Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations (FAO) in June 2009 reported that over 1 billion people world-
wide go hungry every day. The world's population is growing by 79
million people each year. The FAO estimates that the world needs to
produce 70 percent more food by 2050 to keep pace with population
growth and increased demand for calories.
The G-8 agricultural ministers committed at a summit last year to
increase international assistance for agricultural development to $20
billion over the next three years. We believe a similar focus must be
placed here in the United States closer to home, where less than two
percent of the nation's population produces food for our country and
the rest of the world.
Agriculture Secretary Vilsack said at a recent hearing that one of
his top priorities will be making sure farmers have access to capital
and credit--and that there is a next generation of farmers. Yet we have
not heard of any initiatives to reduce or eliminate redundant
regulations impacting agriculture that add burdensome paperwork and
additional restrictions on everything from critical irrigation water
supplies to the use of necessary farm inputs, all of which impact all
farmers, young and old, who want to stay in agriculture.
Congress can help by closely examining how current and proposed
rules and guidance regulating air and water quality protections are or
are not working, identifying the economic impacts, costs and benefits
associated with their implementation, and directing legislation that
corrects deficiencies and streamlines and modernizes their on-the-
ground implementation. Farmers and ranchers are exposed to overlapping
and inconsistent mandates from different regulatory agencies that
continue to be piled on year after year. Harry Cline in 2008 addressed
this point well in an article published in The Capital Press newspaper,
underscoring the point that pressure is building on farmers to give up
the lifestyle and preserve the remaining equity in their property for
their families, or to do the unthinkable--move farming operations to
other countries where labor is plentiful, environmental concerns
relaxed and economic development is welcomed.
THE DISCONNECT BETWEEN ENVIRONMENTAL AND AGRICULTURAL POLICY
The Family Farm Alliance has long worked on finding ways to
streamline the regulatory process, and worked closely with past
administrations and Congress towards that end. In the past two years,
our members have become increasingly concerned about the number of
environmental policies that are currently being re-written either as
guidance or in the rulemaking process by this Administration.
Currently, water and environmental policies seem to be considered
separately from foreign and domestic agricultural goals and objectives.
In the past year, federal agencies have steadily re-written numerous
environmental policies that--if left unchecked--could carry the risk of
real potential harm for Western agricultural producers. The list of new
rulemaking and other potentially burdensome, duplicative, or even
unattainable regulations and agency guidance that will impact the
availability of Western water supplies continue to grow, and includes
the following specific actions:

Economic and Environmental Principles & Guidelines
for Water and Related Resources Studies. The White House
Council on Environmental Quality (CEQ) has drafted new
standards for federal water projects that for the first time
put environmental goals on the same plane as economic
development concerns. These proposed changes may have a
significant impact on new water project planning and federal
funding in the future;

More stringent EPA pesticide restrictions, which
increases costs, liabilities, and risk of crop damage to
Western producers. Family Farm Alliance Advisory Committee
member Norm Semanko will testify to this in more detail at
today's hearing;

USFWS consideration of wide-ranging policy revisions
to ESA administration that could lead to greater legal exposure
to water users with ties to federal projects;

USFWS revisions to designations and critical habitat
associated with ESA-protected species, including Western bull
trout, the California red-legged frog, Greater Sage Grouse, and
Pacific smelt which could lead to even more restrictions on
western lands and water users, including family farmers and
ranchers;

CEQ intent to ``modernize and reinvigorate'' the
National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA). Based on our review
of the guidance, it appears CEQ would place more emphasis on
monitoring and reporting requirements for NEPA activities
associated with categorical exclusions and the use of
``frontloaded'' environmental mitigation where these exclusions
have traditionally been used. Western water managers often use
these legal NEPA mechanisms in conjunction with recurring
actions associated with annual operations and maintenance
activities on ditches or major rehabilitation and repair
projects on existing dams. If implemented as written, the CEQ
directives would definitely impact Western water users by
adding additional costs to formerly cost-effective NEPA
activities and analyses. Western irrigators and others in the
regulated community fear that the net result of these changes
will be more expense, delay and bureaucratic red tape in
pursuing federal actions as simple as the ongoing operation and
maintenance of existing water management facilities;

EPA's Strategic Plan for 2011-2016, which strongly
indicates that EPA will place more emphasis on regulating
greenhouse gases, setting nutrient standards for water bodies,
environmental cleanup, chemical regulation, and enforcing
environmental laws through ``vigorous and targeted civil and
criminal enforcement'' actions;

EPA emissions upgrades that may be mandated for the
Navajo Generating Station (NGS) in Arizona. The emission
requirements being considered by EPA are intended to satisfy
unique visibility criteria driven in part by the proximity of
NGS to Grand Canyon National Park, and they carry with them a
heavy cost to local farmers and ranchers. Family Farm Alliance
Advisory Committee member Paul Orme will testify to this matter
in greater detail at today's hearing;

Recent guidance from EPA regional offices which
demonstrates a clear bias against the planning and construction
of any new water storage projects, which appears to prejudge
potential projects without consideration of important civic,
economic and environmental needs;

The Obama administration reconsideration of a 2008
EPA rule recently upheld in the 11th Circuit Court of Appeals
that allows water transfers from one water body to another
without requiring a Clean Water Act (CWA) NPDES permit. This
new level of regulation, permitting and certain litigation
would hamstring the economies of states like Arizona,
California and Colorado, where millions of acre-feet of water
are transferred from one river basin to another every year;

EPA's failure to establish clear procedures for its
pesticide effects determinations and subsequent actions in the
Pacific Northwest consistent with 1988 amendments to the
Endangered Species Act (ESA). This has resulted in unnecessary
restrictions on the use of agricultural pesticides without any
indication that Pacific Northwest salmon will benefit and puts
producers along the West coast at a competitive disadvantage;

EPA has launched an effort to develop their ``Green
Book'', a project to ensure all EPA policies are driven by
``sustainability''. EPA's current policies and regulations are
driven by statutes that oversee individual issues, such as
pesticides, air pollution and drinking water contaminants. But
this new project, undertaken at EPA's direction by the National
Academy of Science, will develop a framework for the EPA to
link all environmental issues and ensure its policies rely on
sustainable use of energy, water, land and other resources.
There is much speculation of the impacts to agriculture and
other resource-dependent industries arising from the outcome of
this effort.

EPA late last year issued a memorandum that has the
effect of regulating air quality under the Clean Water Act
(CWA) based on the theory that air is tributary to waters of
the United States. The memorandum directs states to designate
waters bodies as impaired if they do not meet water quality
standards because of acidification caused by air pollution. In
other words, States or EPA could now regulate CO
2

and other pollutant emissions under the CWA.

In recent months, Western water managers have become
aware of and are becoming increasingly concerned with actions
undertaken by the National Committee on Levee Safety (NCLS).
This group, authorized and created in the Water Resources
Development Act of 2007, includes the U.S. Army Corps of
Engineers (Corps) and FEMA as the only federal agencies
represented on the Committee. The Committee was established to
deal with post-Katrina flood risk issues, with an emphasis on
Corps levees. However, the Committee has developed a plan that
essentially could apply Corps-level engineering specifications
and standards to both levees and water supply canal embankments
throughout the country, with little to no coordination with the
Bureau of Reclamation and Western water managers. The Committee
is now considering draft legislative language that could be
used to create a National Levee Safety Program to implement
this plan, and thus far, concerns raised by Reclamation and
Western irrigation interests do not appear to be gaining
traction with the Corps and FEMA. We believe Congress did not
intend for water delivery canals that are not part of a flood
control system to be subjected to new requirements administered
by the Army Corps of Engineers. Wade Noble, President of the
National Water Resources Association and a member of the Family
Farm Alliance Advisory Committee, will focus solely on this
troubling development in his testimony today.
The above federal water resources policy actions and regulatory
practices could potentially undermine the economic foundations of rural
communities in the arid West by making farming and ranching
increasingly difficult and costly. American family farmers and ranchers
for generations have grown food and fiber for the world, and we will
have to muster even more innovation and resolve to meet this critical
challenge. That innovation must be encouraged rather than stifled with
new federal regulations and uncertainty over water supplies for
irrigated farms and ranches in the rural West.
The Family Farm Alliance hopes that the Administration will give
significant consideration to the concerns of agricultural
organizations. We pledge to work with the Administration, Congress, and
other interested parties to build a consensus for improving the
regulatory processes associated with improving water management, water
quality, and our environment. At a minimum, federal policies on these
and various other water-related issues (Clean Water Act, aging water
infrastructure, climate change, land-use, to name a few) should be
informed and guided by the goals of preserving our domestic
agricultural production capacity and the vitality of rural western
communities.
ESA IMPLEMENTATION BY FEDERAL AGENCIES A MAJOR CONCERN
A growing concern to Western irrigators is the employment of the
ESA by the federal agencies as a means of protecting single species by
focusing on one narrow stressor to fish: irrigation diversions. For the
second time in a decade, Congress directed that the National Academy of
Sciences (NAS) convene a high-level, independent scientific review of
federal restrictions on water deliveries affecting thousands of Western
farmers and ranchers. In 2009, those restrictions--based in large part
on ESA biological opinions in the Sacramento-San Joaquin Delta
(Delta)--were a primary cause for the water cutbacks and rationing
afflicting hundreds of communities throughout California and the
resulting economic devastation in the San Joaquin Valley. Last year,
south-of-Delta water managers estimate that over 1 million acre-feet of
water that would normally be diverted to supply San Joaquin Valley
farms and Southern California communities were lost to the Pacific
Ocean during a five-month period due to the requirements for Delta
pumping restrictions of the biological opinions rendered by federal
fisheries agencies to protect endangered fish species.
A similar decision to focus exclusively on one stressor--a federal
irrigation project--was made by federal agencies in the Klamath Basin
in 2001, and that decision, and the science used by federal fish
agencies to support the decision, was criticized later in a review
conducted by the NAS.
Unfortunately, agency biologists apparently continue to cling to
their belief that the only ``switch'' that can be pulled to ``protect''
Klamath River fisheries is to reduce Klamath Project water supplies,
because there is no other perceived immediate fix. True solutions to
this complicated challenge cannot happen overnight, they are long-term
in scope, and all stakeholders must be at the table to contribute to
long-lasting success for all interests in this important watershed. We
encourage federal agencies to work collaboratively with local interests
to find realistic solutions that benefit fisheries in a way that avoids
economic hardship to family farmers and ranchers in the Klamath Basin.
The California and Klamath stories are very similar. The NAS
stepped in after Klamath Irrigation Project supplies from Upper Klamath
Lake were cut off by federal biological opinions under the ESA in 2001.
The Academies' objective scientific review concluded that there was
insufficient evidence to support these biological opinions in
restricting agricultural diversions from the river, which had led to
the near-collapse of the local agricultural community. In Klamath, the
federal regulators looked at only one of the stressors contributing to
the fisheries' decline and they focused on only one solution--cutting
off water supplies to agriculture.
Likewise, in California today, the same federal agencies have
refused to assess the impacts of the many stressors affecting the
health of the Delta. And for fifteen years, they have been restricting
or cutting off water deliveries, even though their experience during
those fifteen years have conclusively demonstrated that these
restrictions have done little to prevent the fisheries' decline in the
Delta.
As in California, the effects of the Klamath restrictions were
immediate and far-reaching- not just losses to the economy but also the
wildlife benefits that were lost with the water diversions to farms and
ranches (and a federal wildlife refuge). And yet, the federal
regulators failed to perform any environmental impact analysis before
they ordered cutbacks in California and Klamath.
Last year, U.S. District Judge Oliver Wanger handed a victory to
agricultural water users who were seeking to maintain pumping levels in
the Sacramento-San Joaquin Delta. In separate decisions involving
threatened delta smelt and endangered salmon, Judge Wanger found that
the federal government must consider humans along with the fish in
limiting use of the delta for irrigation. He also found that water
users made convincing arguments that the federal government's science
didn't prove that increased pumping from the delta imperiled the smelt.
Among the reasoning for the ruling offered by the court:

The federal agencies failed to undertake any
quantitative analysis to determine how many smelt there are;

As a result, the agencies' claims with respect to the
detrimental impact of water pumping on the overall smelt
population were not supported;

The agencies moreover failed to establish the
significance of pumping operations on smelt abundance in
relation to all of the other factors affecting the smelt; and

The court further found that the federal agencies
failed to address alternative approaches to avoid jeopardy to
the smelt.
Judge Wanger has directed the USFWS and the NMFS to revise the
biological opinions for smelt and for salmon. He has found that the
agencies have failed to meet the standards for scientific integrity
that the ESA requires. And he has determined that both agencies
violated the National Environmental Policy Act as well. As a result, in
developing these new biological opinions, the government will finally
be required to take into account the impact of these regulations on the
human environment. And for the first time, they will be required to
take public comment before imposing a new set of regulatory
restrictions on the two water systems that serve two-thirds of
California's population.
IMPEDIMENTS TO ON-FARM ENERGY OPPORTUNITIES
Farmers and ranchers also face difficulties when they seek to
develop new sources of clean, emission-free power using existing
infrastructure. A 2010 USDA survey focusing on the 20,000 American
farms using methane digesters, solar panels and wind turbines is part
of a larger effort from the Obama administration to promote rural
energy production. However, there are also tens of thousands of
opportunities in the West to install low-head hydroelectric power
facilities in existing irrigation canals. Many of our members operate
existing irrigation canals and ditch systems that may provide
opportunities to develop in-canal, low-head hydroelectric projects that
have tremendous potential for producing significant amounts of
renewable energy with virtually no negative environmental impacts.
Historic irrigation structures can be retained while the system is
updated with modern clean-energy producing technologies. Increased
revenues from the sale of this renewable energy could result in lower
irrigation costs to farmers. And, importantly, irrigation water
delivery services can continue while utilizing flows for clean,
emissions-free ``green'' energy production.
Unfortunately, water users who seek to implement multiple low-head
hydropower generation sites throughout their service area must undergo
costly and time-consuming FERC licensing processes that sometimes
impede their ability to implement these projects. Because there are
virtually no environmental impacts associated with these easy-to build
renewable projects, they should also be promoted and be accorded the
same streamlined permitting as new solar and wind projects.
The Alliance supports the ``Small-Scale Hydropower Enhancement Act
of 2011''--co-sponsored by Congressmen Adrian Smith and Jim Costa--
which intends to exempt any conduit-type hydropower project generating
less than 1.5 megawatts from FERC jurisdiction. This limited exemption
would promote the development of small-scale hydropower while still
protecting the environment. This would help stimulate the economy of
rural America, empower local irrigation districts to generate revenue
and decrease reliance on fossil fuels--all at no cost to taxpayers.
CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
From the standpoint of the Western American farmer, it can be
bewildering, daunting and frustrating to view the specter of new rules,
regulations, and guidance that are currently under development by
federal regulatory agencies. Unfortunately, the very real impacts that
existing laws and regulations exert on agricultural producers have
already been felt, and those rules do not appear to be going away any
time soon. Admittedly, it is simple enough to document these efforts to
the best of our abilities and register our complaints. While it is much
more difficult to propose constructive solutions that can make existing
laws work better, the Family Farm Alliance prides itself in employing
this very philosophy. The Alliance and many other organizations
representing American producers have developed detailed recommendations
over the past decade on how the negative effects of existing
environmental regulations can be corrected and improved. We would be
happy to provide a compilation of those efforts and make them available
to the subcommittee.
Our farmers and ranchers are increasingly subjected to duplicative
and expensive federal regulations and their related uncertainty of
increased costs, lost critical farm inputs, and reduced water supplies,
making it harder to survive in a harsh economy. And forcing farmers out
of business and taking farmland out of production so that water
supplies can be redirected to new environmental demands will impart
huge limitations on our future ability to feed our country and the
world.
With the right combination of tools and incentives--the latter, in
part, in the form of modernized, streamlined regulations--as well as
both public and private sector investments in water management
infrastructure for the future, Western irrigated agriculture will be
poised to help close the global productivity gap and sustainably meet
this Nation's and the world's food and fiber needs in 2050 and beyond.
Thank you for this opportunity to present testimony to you.
______

Mr. McClintock. Thank you very much. We welcome back Mr.
Wade Noble to the Committee. He is the President of the
National Water Resources Association in Yuma.

STATEMENT OF WADE NOBLE, PRESIDENT,
NATIONAL WATER RESOURCES ASSOCIATION, YUMA, ARIZONA

Mr. Noble. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member
Napolitano, and Members of the Committee. I am Wade Noble,
President of the National Water Resources Association. I want
to state at the outset that the NWRA is not opposed to Federal
regulations.
However, we are opposed to duplicative regulations which
serve no purposes and impose unnecessary paperwork, and
unwarranted expense, on America's farmers and communities.
In the wake of Hurricane Katrina, and the catastrophic
levee failure in New Orleans' Ninth Ward, we clearly understand
and support Congress' desire to ensure the safety of levees
throughout the Nation.
The establishment of the National Committee on Levee Safety
to make recommendations to Congress to ensure the future of
safety of levees contiguous with population centers is
essential.
However, we fear that the committee has taken on a life of
its own, and the extension of its Congressional mandate to the
United States Bureau of Reclamation's canals, is unsupportable.
The recommendations contained in the report identified
14,000 miles of core levees, and 8,000 miles of Reclamation's
canals. Irrigation canals and flood protection levees are very
different structures, and should not be regulated under a one
size fits all regime.
Therefore, we believe Congress should consider the
following facts regarding the United States Bureau of
Reclamation irrigation canals before embracing the Committee's
recommendation.
Reclamation inspects its facilities, including water
delivery canals, on a regular basis. In addition, Subtitle G of
Public Law 111-11, the Omnibus Public Land Management Act of
2009, directed Reclamation to conduct inspections of their
facilities in proximity to urbanized areas.
Reclamation has completed inspections on urban canals in
the Salt River project, Maricopa County, Arizona; the central
Arizona project, Maricopa County, Arizona; and the Yuma County
Water Users Association, Yuma County, Arizona.
Reports on the inspections are being completed. The
inspections were comprehensive and extensive. Of Reclamation's
8,000 miles of canals, West-wide, only one in eight,
approximately 1,000 miles, are in proximity to urbanized areas.
Unlike levees, if a breach occurs, the water can be shut
off in a short period of time, eliminating or greatly reducing
the potential of property damage and making the risk of loss of
life remote.
Equating canals to levees will require canal operators and
agriculture to pay the increased flood insurance premiums in
areas potentially impacted by a canal failure. Such unnecessary
additional costs will further compromise farmers' abilities to
provide a reliable and secure food supply to this Nation's
citizens.
In summary, we believe that this Committee needs to assert
its jurisdiction to ensure that future legislation resulting
from the recommendations of the National Committee on Levee
Safety does not adversely impact American agriculture.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and Members of the Committee, for
the opportunity to bring our concerns to your attention. The
NWRA stands ready to assist the Committee in any manner that it
deems appropriate.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Noble follows:]

Statement of Wade Noble, President, National Water Resources
Association

Good afternoon Chairman McClintock, Ranking Member Napolitano and
Members of the Subcommittee, my name is Wade Noble and I am here on
behalf of the National Water Resources Association (NWRA). I am the
President of the Association and also an attorney in Yuma, Arizona.
NWRA is a federation of state water associations representing
agricultural and municipal water providers in the seventeen Western
Reclamation states. Its strength is due to ``grassroots'' participation
on virtually every national issue affecting western water and power
resources conservation, management, and development.
We appreciate the opportunity to comment on federal regulations
impacts on water and power supplies. NWRA unequivocally supports common
sense federal regulations. We are increasingly concerned about
duplicative and unnecessary regulations, many of which may have
negative consequences for western water users. Specifically, I will
address the direct impacts the recommendations of the National
Committee on Levee Safety will have on Bureau of Reclamation projects
and irrigators west wide.
Western water managers are progressively apprehensive with actions
of the National Committee on Levee Safety (NCLS). The group, authorized
in the Water Resources Development Act of 2007 (WRDA), includes the
U.S. Army Corps of Engineers (Corps) and the Federal Emergency
Management Agency (FEMA) as the only federal agencies. The Bureau of
Reclamation, with thousands of miles of levees and canals, is not at
the table.
The Committee, established to deal with post-Katrina flood risk
issues emphasizing Corps levees, plans to apply Corps-level engineering
specifications and standards to levees and canals. There will be little
or no coordination with the Bureau of Reclamation and Western water
managers. Thus far, concerns raised by Reclamation and Western
irrigation interests do not appear to be gaining traction with the
Corps and FEMA.
Congress created the NCLS to develop recommendations for a national
levee safety program, including a strategic plan for implementation of
the program. The NCLS began development of recommendations in October
2008. The result so far is twenty recommendations for creating a
National Levee Safety Program which were in a January 15, 2009 draft
report, Recommendations for a National Levee Safety Program: A Report
to Congress from the National Committee on Levee Safety.
The recommendations for a National Levee Safety Program (NLSP) are
grouped into three concepts: (1) the need for leadership via a National
Levee Safety Commission which would--support state delegated programs,
provide national technical standards and risk communication, and
coordinate environmental and safety concerns; (2) the building of
strong levee safety programs in all states which would--provide
oversight, regulation, and critical levee safety processes; and (3) a
foundation of well aligned federal agency programs.
Federal legislation will be necessary to implement 12 of the 20
recommendations. The Corps and FEMA are working within existing
authorities and funding to implement several recommendations addressing
the basics of communication and outreach, use of common language and
refinement of their existing programs. The nonfederal members of the
NCLS have drafted a NLSP addressing areas where NCLS foresees needed
implementation legislation. The Corps is considering NCLS
recommendations in development of levee safety standards and risk
assessment and communication methodologies.
NWRA supports NCLS efforts applicable to Corps facilities. It is,
however, not appropriate to apply similar standards and methodologies
to water delivery facilities operated by the Bureau of Reclamation and
its local partners.
Bureau of Reclamation Position on NLSP Applicability to Reclamation
Facilities
Prior to the release of the draft Report, the Bureau of Reclamation
circulated an internal memo regarding (non-) applicability of the Levee
Safety Act (``Act'') to Bureau of Reclamation canals. The memo noted
that the Corps' interpretation of the Act included Reclamation canals.
Reclamation consulted the Interior Department Solicitor's Office
and was told the provisions of the Act do not apply to Reclamation. The
Solicitor determined the Act applies to levees defined as embankments
providing protection relating to seasonal high water and other weather
events. In contrast, Reclamation canals are designed to deliver water.
Additionally, the Act does not include inspection of Reclamation
canals among the responsibilities of the Secretary of the Army. The
test of agency jurisdiction assertion over another agency requires a
clear congressional statement of intent that one agency have
jurisdiction over another.
In this case, there is no clear statement of intent that the
Secretary of the Army have jurisdiction over Reclamation regarding
levees or canals. Further, there is no indication in the Act that
Congress intended to subject Reclamation to the jurisdiction of the
Secretary of the Army.
We agree with the Department of the Interior's and Reclamation's
position.
Concerns of Western Water Users
There is a need to address deterioration of aging flood control
facilities and preventing failures like the one which occurred in New
Orleans. It should be an immediate national priority.
However, after reviewing the NCLS' recommendations in detail, we
have critical concerns.
(1)  The approach is overly broad.
(2)  It mandates new standards that would apply to existing
Bureau of Reclamation water delivery facilities.
(3)  The focus should be on control facilities that pose actual
risk to life or property in the flood plain.
(4)  The Act was intended to deal with levees in and around New
Orleans into which flood waters were pumped to be conveyed away
from the low points in the city.
(5)  Legislation should not define ``levee'' as used in the Act
which created the NCLS.
(6)  The legislation should only address a program for
``levees'' as that term is traditionally understood, with the
embankment sections of water delivery canals and dams excluded.
Canals are designed and engineered different than levees. Applying
flood control levee standards to water delivery canals is a non-
sequitur. It will be expensive and for many, unaffordable. The nation-
wide inspection program and new project condition and maintenance
standards required in the legislative proposal would in most cases be
duplicative and undermine existing operation and maintenance (O&M)
standards and inspection procedures built into Reclamation contracts
for both reserved and transferred facilities. The cost increase, both
federal and non-federal, in almost every case would provide no increase
in public safety.
There would be a potential for greater liability to water project
operators because applying levee standards not meant for canal delivery
structures would make compliance difficult, if not impossible, due to
the excessive costs of rebuilding such structures. Although the draft
legislation would authorize financial assistance to non-federal
entities responsible for the maintenance of federally-owned facilities,
it is not clear how or when that assistance would be realized.
Finally, and perhaps most important, Congress and this Committee
recently provided new authority to Reclamation through P.L. 111-11,
signed into law in March 2009. The law addresses aging canal systems in
urbanized areas of the West. These authorities were proposed by Senate
Majority Leader Harry Reid (D-NV) who in early 2008 introduced a bill
(S. 2842) designed to make aging federally-owned canals safer across
the West. Reclamation is inspecting urban area canals. This program for
canal safety addresses the risk of canal failure in areas of highest
risk. The NLSP should not duplicate or hinder this effort with more
layers of federal bureaucracy.
The examples of the negative impact of the NLSP on irrigation
projects with federally owned facilities in Arizona are:
1.  Salt River Project, Maricopa County, Arizona

Reclamation project

131 miles of canals

30 miles of ``urban'' canals

Regular periodic inspections of canals

``Urban'' canals have been inspected by
Reclamation within the last year
2.  Yuma County Water Users' Association, Yuma County, Arizona

Reclamation project

60 miles of canals

14 miles of ``urban'' canals

Periodic canal inspection by Reclamation

``Urban'' canals have been inspected by
Reclamation within the last year
3.  North Gila Valley Irrigation and Drainage District, Yuma
County, Arizona

6,587 authorized irrigable acres

2.5 employees

20 miles of canals

0 miles ``urban'' canals

Regularly safety inspected by Reclamation
Conclusion
In the American West, water supply systems are essential components
of communities, farms, and the environment. These facilities are an
integral part of the nation's food-production system and their
consistent operation helps ensure our farmers' ability to provide a
reliable and secure food supply for our own citizens and the rest of
the world. Population growth, environmental demands and climate change
are placing an unprecedented strain on aging water storage and
conveyance systems designed primarily for agricultural use. The NCLS,
with no membership or representation from Reclamation or Reclamation
states in the West, represents a real and significant threat to the
continued operation of the canals with no additional public safety
benefit.
Our members have a long standing tradition of good working
relationships with the Bureau of Reclamation and have supported
updating Reclamation guidelines for analyzing projects to include
considerations for urbanization and other effects that did not exist
when these facilities were originally designed many decades ago.
However, one-size still does not fit all, and blanket inspections and
expensive, nonsensical standards for all Reclamation water delivery
facilities are not appropriate or cost-effective. Further, many local
districts do not have the financial capability to conduct required
repairs or upgrades to their facilities to comply with a national levee
standard on their canals, resulting in little or no commensurate
increase in public safety. We believe this Committee and Reclamation
have the appropriate knowledge and tools to develop strong safety
standards for our water supply systems and should not be subjected to a
``one size fits all'' approach by the NCLS.
______

Mr. McClintock. Thank you, Mr. Noble, and thank you doubly
for your brevity today. Our next guest is Mr. Jon Scholl,
President of the American Farmland Trust.

STATEMENT OF JON SCHOLL, PRESIDENT,
AMERICAN FARMLAND TRUST, WASHINGTON, D.C.

Mr. Scholl. Good afternoon, Chairman McClintock, and
Ranking Member Napolitano, and other Members of the Committee.
Thank you for inviting me to testify. My name is Jon Scholl,
and I am the President of the American Farmland Trust, a
national conservation organization dedicated to protecting
farmland, promoting sound stewardship, and helping to assure a
sustainable future for farms and ranches.
I am a partner in a family corn and soybean farm in McLean
County, Illinois. Prior to joining the AFT, I was the Counselor
to the Administrator for Agricultural Policy at the U.S. EPA,
and before that, I worked for the Illinois Farm Bureau for 25
years.
I began by acknowledging the tremendous demands and
pressures facing United States agriculture. With a global
population anticipated to reach nine billion, we will need to
produce more with less, nearly doubling production with less
land, less water, and less inputs.
I also acknowledge that there are legitimate environmental
concerns associated with agricultural production, but I firmly
believe that farmers and ranchers, if engaged properly, can be
the solution to a lot of the environmental challenges that our
Nation faces.
Last year the USDA published conservation effects
assessment project reports for the Upper Mississippi River
Basin and the Chesapeake Bay. The reports documented
significant progress of farmers in improving environmental
performance.
For example, in the bay, sediment loss has been reduced 55
percent, nitrogen, 42 percent, and phosphorus, 41 percent.
These are real reductions, real improvements. However, these
reports also highlight serious environmental concerns yet to be
addressed.
In the Upper Mississippi, it stated 8.5 million acres, or
15 percent of the crop takers, are critically under-treated for
one or more of water, sediment, nitrogen, phosphorus, and these
are real challenges at a real area of focus to be working on.
So the question then becomes what is the most effective way
to change the behavior of farmers on a landscape scale if we
are to take the steps toward cleaner air and water, and play
the role that agriculture can play in that.
I submit that economic incentives and markets, not
widespread regulation, are the most effective ways to change
behavior in the field. However, we must recognize the fact that
a regulatory framework is needed to propel progress.
An effective regulatory framework is important because it
provides several things. First, it assures a basic level of
performance that is needed to control pollution.
Second, it assures fair competition and a more level
playing field for those who do the right thing to protect their
farms and ranches.
And, third, it provides a measure of accountability. We
will not know if we are making sufficient progress if we don't
have a yardstick by which to measure.
I suggest three points on a way to move forward. First,
build a culture of collaboration. Every farmer wants to leave
their farm in better shape for their children than when they
got it.
In my years at the EPA, it was evidence to me that these
regulators cared about the environment, and wanted to assure
effective actions. We shared common objectives, but our
approach to solving problems, and the language that we used to
communicate, was very, very different.
A recent example helps illustrate what I mean. Eighteen
months ago, Region III EPA staff began a series of farm
inspections in the Chesapeake Bay States to assess compliance
with State and Federal regulations.
When EPA inspectors arrived in the Watson Run Water Shed in
Lancaster, Pennsylvania, not many doorbells were answered.
After an inauspicious start, the head of the county
conservation district suggested that district staff could help
by arranging visits and accompanying the inspection team.
With the assistance of trusted local partners, all 24 farms
were visited in relatively short order. What did they find?
Things weren't perfect. Many of the farms did not have
conservation and manure management plans required by State law.
But the EPA staff also discovered significantly more
conservation practices on the ground than what they expected to
find. What started as a predictably contentious regulatory
process turned into a collaborative effort focused on what
needed to be done.
The second point, combine incentives and regulations. Use
both carrots and sticks. We should rely on incentives in
markets to drive the change in behavior, and not the regulation
of each producer.
Simply applying traditional point source regulation to all
farmers, to all non-point sources for that matter, won't work.
It will not get us where we want and need to go, and that is
clean water and viable farms.
And, third, provide regulatory certainty. A common
complaint that I have heard from producers has been that they
are never certain if they take the prescribed actions that will
satisfy the regulators.
Our environmental policy must provide some sort of safe
harbor or regulatory relief. If a farmer has a plan and is on
track to making changes in conservation practices, they should
not be faced with the onerous regulatory burdens making it
difficult for them to stay in business.
Farming is one of the few businesses where multiple
generations of the family members continue to own and operate
family businesses. As farmers, we have to take a long term view
if our farms are to thrive for our children and their children.
We need an approach that builds trust, cooperation, and
innovation to make agriculture a part of our solution to our
Nation's efforts to clean water and air. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Scholl follows:]

Statement of Jon Scholl, President, American Farmland Trust

Good Afternoon, Chairman McClintock, Ranking Member Napolitano and
other Members of the Committee, thank you for inviting me to testify
today. My name is Jon Scholl. I am the President of the American
Farmland Trust headquartered in Washington, DC. I am a partner in a
family farm in McLean County, Illinois.
American Farmland Trust is an organization that has for the last
thirty years worked at the intersection of agriculture and the
environment. We work to protect farmland and promote sound stewardship
while also looking out for the economic viability of agriculture.
Before joining American Farmland Trust, I had the privilege of serving
for four years as the Counselor to the Administrator for Agricultural
Policy at the United States Environmental Protection Agency during the
Administration of George W. Bush. Before that, I worked at the Illinois
Farm Bureau for 25 years in a variety of capacities.
As someone involved in my family's farm operation, a former EPA
agricultural appointee, and the President of American Farmland Trust,
let me be the first to say that our Nation faces serious environmental
problems and that agriculture is both a contributor and a big part of
the solution to these challenges. Having spent my life in agriculture,
I know that farmers and ranchers across this country feel increasing
environmental pressure as a result of these challenges, especially with
respect to water. This pressure is coming on many fronts. It's not just
coming from the federal government but also states, localities and
increasingly corporations to whom we sell our products. I can
appreciate why you have called this hearing and thank you for the
opportunity to contribute to this discussion and the search for
answers.
I. Defining the Challenge
I begin my testimony by acknowledging that there are legitimate
environmental concerns associated with agricultural production. Let me
give you just a few concrete examples using two recent reports
published by the United States Department of Agriculture.
Last year USDA published the first report from their Conservation
Effects Assessment Project for the 8 states encompassing the Upper
Mississippi River Basin. In that report, USDA highlighted serious
environmental concerns attributable to the agricultural sector. USDA
found for example, 36 million acres (62 percent of cropped acres in the
watershed) ``are under-treated for one or more of sediment loss,
nitrogen lost with surface runoff, nitrogen in subsurface flow, or
total phosphorus loss,'' of which 8.5 million acres (15 percent of
cropped acres in the UMRB) are critically under-treated and are among
the most vulnerable cropped acres in the region; most of these acres
have either a high or moderately high soil runoff or leaching
potential'' (United States Dept of Agriculture, National Resources
Conservation Service, Summary of Findings of the Assessment of the
Effects of Conservation Practices on Cultivated Cropland in the Upper
Mississippi River Basin, June 2010, page 7).
Likewise, USDA's report evaluating the Chesapeake Bay watershed
shows that 19 percent of cropped acres have a high level of need for
additional conservation treatment. ``Acres with a high level of need
consist of the most vulnerable acres with the least conservation
treatment and the highest losses of sediment and nutrients.'' (United
States Dept of Agriculture, National Resources Conservation Service,
Summary of Findings of the Assessment of the Effects of Conservation
Practices on Cultivated Cropland in the Chesapeake Bay Region, March
2011, page 3). Using USDA's data, it is evident that agriculture has
legitimate environmental concerns that require attention.
Interestingly, those same two reports also help point the way on
how to move forward. Namely, both reports highlight the potential for
substantial progress that agriculture could make in years to come. In
the Upper Mississippi, for example, the report estimates that if we
apply a combination of fairly common nutrient management and soil
erosion prevention techniques onto the 36 million undertreated acres,
compared to the baseline, runoff of sediment could be reduced by 21
percent, nitrogen by 44 percent, phosphorus by 27 percent and Atrazine
by 18 percent. (United States Dept of Agriculture, National Resources
Conservation Service, Summary of Findings of the Assessment of the
Effects of Conservation Practices on Cultivated Cropland in the Upper
Mississippi River Basin, June 2010, page 7.) These gains would be in
addition to the significant record of accomplishment already evident in
the region. Existing application and treatment of conservation
practices has reduced sediment loads by 37 percent, nitrogen loads by
21 percent, phosphorus loads by 40 percent, and Atrazine loads by 51
percent (Id. at p. 4).
In the Chesapeake Bay, USDA reports that adoption of additional
conservation practices on undertreated acres would, compared to the
2003-06 baseline, ``further reduce edge-of-field sediment loss by 37
percent, losses of nitrogen with surface runoff by 27 percent, losses
of nitrogen in subsurface flows by 20 percent, and losses of phosphorus
(sediment-attached and soluble) by 25 percent'' (United States Dept of
Agriculture, National Resources Conservation Service, Summary of
Findings of the Assessment of the Effects of Conservation Practices on
Cultivated Cropland in the Chesapeake Bay Region, March 2011, page 3).
Again a focus on these acres would add to the impressive record of
achievement that conservation has had on the landscape in which
adoption of conservation practices has reduced edge-of-field sediment
loss by 55 percent, losses of nitrogen with surface runoff by 42
percent, losses of nitrogen in subsurface flows by 31 percent, and
losses of phosphorus (sediment attached and soluble) by 41 percent
(Id.).
It strikes me that an important place to start in addressing
agriculture's contribution to environmental problems is to recognize
and learn from the gains that agriculture has made.
II. What needs to be done?
So what then needs to be done to both address environmental
concerns and reduce burdens on producers - burdens which in some cases
lead to significant financial stress? I would suggest three general
courses to follow:
1) Build a ``culture of collaboration''
Farmers are pragmatic and they will acknowledge that the industry
can and should do more to address environmental concerns. But they also
need to be recognized for the progress they've made. Virtually every
farmer will tell you that he or she wants to leave their farm in better
shape for their children than it was when they got it. In the many
years I spent working at EPA during the Bush Administration, I can
attest to spending many hours talking about, explaining and working
through concerns that staff had with agriculture. It was quickly
evident to me that these ``regulators'' cared deeply about the
environment and wanted to assure that appropriate actions were taken to
achieve their worthy objectives. While we shared common objectives, our
approach to solving problems and the language we used to communicate
about them were very different. My time working with state government
likewise informed me that we need a lot more effort to overcome the
barriers to achieving common objectives if we are to assure a
productive agriculture and a clean environment.
A more recent field example also helps illustrate what I mean.
About 18 months ago, the staff in EPA Region III began a series of
inspections on farms in Bay states to assess environmental performance
and compliance with state and federal laws. When EPA inspectors arrived
in the driveways of farms in the Watson Run watershed in Lancaster
County, PA, not many doorbells were answered. After an inauspicious
start, the head of the county conservation district suggested that he
might help in arranging visits and accompany the inspection team. With
this local assistance all 24 farms were visited in relatively short
order. What did they find? Things weren't perfect. Many of the farms
did not have conservation and manure management plans required by
Pennsylvania state law. But EPA staff also learned that conservation
practices and stewardship performance was significantly higher than
what they expected, particularly in adoption of no till, soil testing
and use of cover crops. In the end, what had started as a predictably
contentious process that created ill will in the farming community
turned into a more collaborative effort that showed that farmers are
committed to good stewardship and the work yet to be done. An important
outcome of all this is that the Lancaster County Conservation District
is now implementing a program to ensure that farms are doing all they
need to do, both in terms of practices and paperwork, using education,
careful planning, follow-up, and, when necessary, compliance
enforcement by the local district board. I believe this serves as a
lesson in the value of collaborative action that can turn around an
adversarial relationship to one of engagement. In the end, EPA needed
local cooperation and guidance to do its job and local and state
officials were able to use momentum created by the inspections to focus
the attention of the community in a constructive manner.
2) Back up collaboration with action
I believe in that old adage that ``actions speak louder than
words.'' As a result not only do we need more talking, we need more
action to create real collaboration.
One measure of action is the commitment the federal government
applies to non-point sources under our water policies. Since 1988 the
federal government has made a significant commitment to wastewater
treatment and collectively has spent more than $30 billion dollars of
the Clean Water State Revolving Fund which has wastewater as a primary
purpose (Environmental Protection Agency, FY 2011 Budget in Brief, page
86). Indeed, in FY10 the federal government spent more than $2 billion
in the CWSRF with large sums flowing to wastewater (Environmental
Protection Agency, FY 2012 Budget in Brief, page 109). While that money
no doubt is necessary, by comparison, EPA's section 319 non-point
source funds measure in the millions, and in FY10 the federal
government spent $200 million, with most of this money directed towards
planning, not implementing (Id at page 89). While money is not the only
measure and it is a difficult resource to come by in a tough budget
environment, this disparity points out that we haven't really put a
priority on solving non-point problems, certainly as compared to what
we have invested in point source pollution issues.
Another way to translate collaboration into action is to work to
reduce farmers' and ranchers' fears. I can't tell you the number of
times I talk to producers and I am told that he or she doesn't want to
collect data, implement practices voluntarily or participate in EPA
monitoring for fear their actions will subsequently lead to additional
regulation. American Farmland Trust is currently working, for example,
in the Ohio River watershed with the electric power industry to develop
a region-wide water trading system. Utilities would pay farmers to
reduce nitrogen runoff and, in turn, those reductions would satisfy EPA
and state level water pollution standards. This is a classic win-win
scenario in which producers earn income, utilities avoid costlier
compliance obligations, and society gains cleaner water. Yet many
farmers have said that while they are attracted to the concept, they
fear that as soon as they begin implementing nitrogen reduction
practices, those practices will be used against them as the basis for
further regulation. This is one example of many I could give, the point
of which is we must create regulatory certainty for producers so when
they step up to help, they don't feel as though they will be
contributing to the establishment of a new regulatory standard that
different farms, climate conditions or evolving technology might not
find workable.
A strong emphasis on a classical regulatory approach to farm
conservation issues causes many farmers to fear the expensive,
unmanageable and tangled web in which they might get caught instead of
focusing their energy and resources on a more appropriate and natural
desire to strive for continuous improvement in their operations.
Incentivizing good behavior draws people into action; the threat of
regulations makes them hide.
Last year American Farmland Trust supported a bill (HR 5509) by
Congressman Goodlatte from Virginia and Holden from Pennsylvania that
created safe harbors for conservation practice adoption in the
Chesapeake Bay. Under this approach producers would be responsible for
undertaking certain conservation practices but doing so relieves them
of regulatory burdens. I encourage this Committee to explore changes
like that in order to create collaboration through certainty.
3) Overcome unnecessary barriers
In addition to creating a culture of collaboration, we need to
break down silos that send dramatically mixed signals to those whose
behavior we seek to influence. Since the Chairman and Ranking Member
are both from California, I use an example from your state. As all of
us know the State of California has created, with voter agreement, a
carbon cap and trade system. Under that system, the California Air
Resources Board has the power to create offsets. This means that
farmers and ranchers could be paid to capture and sequester carbon. One
well known technique to do that is by creating methane digesters that
destroy harmful methane gas generated from livestock manure. The Air
Resources Board has in fact acknowledged the high value of digesters by
approving them as one of California's first offset types. Yet while one
arm of ARB approved use of digesters, another arm of ARB refuses to
issue permits to build digesters over a concern they may violate
NO
x
standards.
Commonsense dictates that something is wrong here. I believe we
should be trying to examine the net environmental benefits of carbon
versus potential NO
x
emissions. I believe a culture of
collaboration, one of thinking with the parties involved about how to
get things done, would have the federal and state governments working
together to explore this problem and resolve it so that those digesters
can be built. In fact, at a recent meeting with the EPA, I asked them
to do just that - work outside the box, break down silos and help ARB
solve this obvious problem. I would note that in the world of water,
that sort of federal and state breaking down of silos and looking for
ways to overcome barriers has lead to recent work in the Chesapeake
Bay. USDA, the state departments of agriculture, state departments of
environment and the EPA are all now working together in the Bay to
tackle pressing environmental problems in which agriculture is part of
the problem but also a key to their solution.
III. Finding a better way
I find the current level of contention between agriculture and
those charged with protecting society's interest in a clean environment
to be very sad. We share common objectives but we can't seem to get
beyond classical means of dealing with pollution to creative and
workable ways to engage each other. At American Farmland Trust, we know
that there is a right way and a wrong way to work with farmers on
environmental issues. The environmental challenges farmers and ranchers
grapple with are complex, and difficult to identify and resolve. While
we know that regulations have their place and indeed are sometimes
necessary, we need to approach these issues differently because the
classic 1970s-era regulatory approach to environmental clean-up is a
poor fit for agriculture. Many of these laws, which have helped to
clean our air and clean our water, were expressly designed to deal with
industrial point source polluters. If we are entering a world in which
non-industrial, non-point source pollution is now one of our central
challenges then we must look to another approach.
It's critical to understand that protecting the environment is an
important issue to farmers and ranchers. They feel the effects first,
and often in their pocketbooks, if problems persist. They have a strong
incentive to keep their land productive and clean. Building upon these
natural and long standing realities of farm life while reaching out and
seeking ways to build trust and cooperation are vital to the future
success of our Nation's efforts to clean our air and water. We stand
ready to assist in this worthy endeavor.
______

Mr. McClintock. Thank you very much. Our next witness is
Mr. Richard Pool, President of Pro-Troll Products, in Concord,
California. You have five minutes.

STATEMENT OF RICHARD POOL, PRESIDENT,
PRO-TROLL PRODUCTS, CONCORD, CALIFORNIA

Mr. Pool. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. My name is Richard Pool.
I am a member of the California salmon fishing industry. I
appreciate the opportunity to appear before you today.
The fishing industry is a heavily regulated industry by
both the Federal Government and States. There is virtually no
fish in this country that does not have some sort of regulation
on its take, on its survival, and so on.
I am here today to talk about regulations that we are very
concerned about relative to salmon. We need some regulations to
remain intact. I was deeply disturbed to read the public
announcement of the hearing by this Subcommittee scheduled for
Fresno on April 11th.
It appears to me that some on this Committee are willing to
shut down the entire California salmon fishing industry and
allow the salmon runs to go extinct in an effort to get more
money for some junior water rights holders.
I am very concerned about this and the jobs and economic
repercussions that it could create. I am a manufacturer of
salmon fishing equipment located in Concord, California. We
have been in business for 32 years, and we are one of the
largest manufacturers of specialized lures and attracters that
catch salmon.
I have been involved in salmon recovery for over 30 years.
I am here today on behalf of my own company, other companies,
and all the organizations involved in the California sport and
commercial salmon industry.
On the back of my testimony is a chart, and I am not sure
that it was distributed to the Committee. It is a chart, and I
hope if it was not distributed that you can see, but it is a
chart which shows the decline of the most important salmon run
in California.
It is the fall run salmon of the Central Valley. The chart
shows that between 2002 and 2009 that this run declined 97
percent. Only three percent remain. This is the largest salmon
crash in the history of the United States since the era of the
dams.
The fall run is the mainstay of the salmon fishing
industry. Because of this crash, the entire salmon industry was
shut down completely in 2008 and 2009 with only a token season
in 2010.
The economic and jobs impact of that shutdown was
staggering. Tens of thousands of jobs were lost in coastal
communities from Morro Bay to Crescent City, who lost their
primary economic engine.
The primary reason for the fall run crash was a lack of
regulation in the policies of the government, which allowed
unlimited pumping of water from the California-Sacramento delta
between the years of 2000 and 2007.
In the spring of each year, in excess of 30 million tiny
salmon smolts attempt to migrate down the Sacramento River, and
through the delta on their way to the ocean. Studies show that
when the pumps are run to maximum without regulation, up to 92
percent of these smolts are either lost in the river, or are
pulled in the central delta, where there is no foliage cover
and there is no food.
The result is that most of these small smolts perish. If
you look at my chart again, you will see that in 2010 the trend
was finally reversed, and the run size increased. There are two
factors that appear to be the primary reasons for the increase.
First of all, in the spring of 2008 the Federal Court
curtailed the pumping rate, which in-turn cut the smolt
mortality in the delta. In essence, the Court brought in
regulations.
The result three years later in 2010 was that there were
more mature adult salmon came back. Another factor which helped
the 2010 recovery was trucking hatcheries smolts around the
delta.
In the spring of 2008 approximately 13 million hatchery
smolts were trucked around the delta to San Pablo Bay. These
two factors reduced pumping and the trucking of smolts around
the delta and reduced the regulatory problem in the delta. The
2010 returns increased.
The Brown Administration and the State Legislature are
working diligently to formulate the best water policies for all
sectors of California. We believe interference with this
process is counterproductive. It will only result in more
delays and more lawsuits, which compound the problem.
The salmon industry needs salmon recovery. We do not need
policies which only exacerbate our problems. We urge the Water
and Power Subcommittee, and the agricultural community, to work
with us toward real solutions for both farmers and fish. Thank
you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Pool follows:]

Statement of Richard Pool, President, Pro-Troll Fishing Products

My name is Richard Pool and I am a member of the California salmon
fishing industry. I appreciate the opportunity to appear before you
today.
I was deeply disturbed to read the public announcement of the
hearing by the Sub Committee on Water and Power scheduled for Fresno on
April 11th. Based on some very strong words by several representatives,
it appears that the objective of this hearing is to lay the groundwork
to shut down the California salmon fishing industry and allow the
Central Valley salmon runs to go extinct. Should these actions take
place, my company and thousands of others will be out of business. I am
here today to respond.
I am a manufacturer of salmon fishing equipment located in Concord,
California. My company has been in business 32 years. We are one of the
largest manufacturers of the specialized lures and attractors that are
used to catch salmon. I have been involved in salmon recovery efforts
for thirty years and have served on numerous state and federal advisory
committees involving salmon. I am here today on behalf of my own
company, Pro-Troll Fishing Products, The Golden Gate Salmon Association
and Water4Fish. I am also here on behalf of the thousands of businesses
involved in the economic activity related to salmon fishing in
California. This includes both sport and commercial businesses. We are
the fishermen who catch the salmon. We are the seafood processors who
handle the fish and bring it to market. We are the marinas and other
infrastructure facilities that support the salmon industry. We are the
manufacturers and distributors of the specialized equipment used to
catch salmon. We are the salesmen who represent the manufacturers in
the market. We are the retailers that provide the access to salmon
equipment in our stores. We are the ocean charter operators and river
guides that carry up to 300,000 salmon fishermen a year. We are the
recreational fishermen who choose salmon fishing as a preferred healthy
outdoor family activity. And finally, many of us are those that are
100% unemployed and have lost our businesses, our boats and sometimes
our homes.
It seems rather clear that the target of those who represent the
junior water rights holders of the West Side of the San Joaquin valley
is to undo the biological opinion of the National Marine Fisheries
Service that was put into place to keep salmon and steelhead from going
extinct. To accomplish this they appear willing to destroy the billion
dollar salmon industry and the economic engine for hundreds of coastal
communities.
For over one hundred years the salmon industry has been a mainstay
of the California economy and a major food producer for California and
the nation. As recently as 2002, 720,600 Central Valley salmon were
harvested sending over 8.6 million pounds of fresh salmon to the market
Since that time the policies of the state and federal water agencies
have devastated most of this production. It can be recovered, but it
cannot be recovered without policies that balance the water needs of
the salmon with the other water needs of the state. A water grab by a
few agricultural interests at the expense of the salmon industry and
the other water users of the state is simply fallacious public policy.
I am attaching a chart which shows the decline of the most
important salmon run in the state. It is the fall run salmon of the
Central Valley. The chart shows that between 2002 and 2009 the run
declined 97%. This is the largest salmon decline in U.S. history since
the era of dam construction. The fall run is the mainstay of the salmon
industry. Because of this crash, the entire salmon industry was shut
down in 2008 and 2009 with only a token season in 2010. The economic
impact of the shutdown was staggering. Tens of thousands of jobs were
lost and coastal communities from Morro Bay to Crescent City lost their
primary economic engine.
Last year Governor Schwarzenegger reported to the Commerce
Department that the economic damage from the closure of salmon fishing
in California amounted to at least $250 million per year. Southwick
Associates calculated the real cost at approximately $1.4 billion to
California alone and probably half that much again to Oregon. This
calculation was based on the use of federal and state data. It also
showed a job loss of 23,000.
The primary reason for the fall run crash was the policies of the
government which allowed unlimited pumping of water from the Delta
between 2000 and 2007. In the spring of each year, in excess of 30
million tiny salmon smolts migrate down the Sacramento River and
through the Delta on their way to the ocean. Studies show that when the
pumps run at maximum, up to 92% of these smolts are either lost in the
river or are pulled into the central Delta where there is no foliage
cover and there is no food. The result is that the smolts perish.
If you look at the fall run chart again, you'll see that in 2010
the trend was finally reversed and the run size increased. There are
two factors that appear to be the primary reasons for this increase. In
the spring of 2008, the Federal Court ruled that the biological opinion
which was in place did not protect the salmon from extinction. Based on
the scientific evidence, the court curtailed the spring 2008 pumping
rate which cut the smolt mortality in the Delta. The result, three
years later, was that the mature adults came back in increased numbers
in the fall of 2010. Another factor which helped the 2010 recovery was
trucking hatchery smolts around the Delta. In the spring of 2008,
approximately 13 million hatchery smolts were trucked around the Delta
to San Pablo Bay thereby avoiding the destruction by the Delta pumping.
These two factors minimized the damage by the pumps. The improved 2010
returns show the results.
There are some who say the decline of salmon was caused by poor
ocean conditions but this is contradicted by the fact that native delta
fish, which never venture to the ocean, declined precipitously at the
same time the pumps were ramped up and the salmon declined. In other
words, the ocean conditions theory doesn't explain the loss of fish
like the delta smelt that don't live in the ocean.
There are three other salmon runs in the Central Valley. They are
also in deep trouble. The table shows the current situation and how
much they have dropped. Unfortunately, these runs are wild fish and
cannot be trucked around the Delta. They suffer the full impact of the
pumps. The Winter Run, which is listed as endangered, is once again
very close to extinction.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 65599.015

.epsThe political thrust to overturn the biological opinion of 2009
is the wrong policy. In all likelihood the biological opinion is the
only thing left between survival and extinction of the salmon runs and
the thousands of jobs that depend on them.
The biological opinion also represents the best available science.
The National Marine Fisheries Service spent six years researching the
causes of the salmon declines and the needed corrective actions. Their
conclusions were peer reviewed three times. At the request of Congress,
the National Academy of Sciences also reviewed the NMFS findings. The
NAS supported the basic findings of the opinion.
The future water policies in California are extremely important and
are highly complex in nature. The Brown Administration and the State
Legislature are working diligently to formulate the best policies for
all sectors of the state. We believe the track which some in the Water
and Power Sub Committee are currently proposing which attempts to put a
small sector of the water users in a preferred position is highly
counterproductive to the states best interests. It will only result in
more delays and more lawsuits which compound the problem.
The salmon industry in California is hurting badly and we are
seeking government assistance for our plight. I am attaching two
exhibits which demonstrate the problems we are facing. The first is a
list of fifty salmon-related businesses that have completely shut down
since 2008. The other exhibit shows three examples of salmon businesses
that are hurting badly. I can add Pro-Troll to that list. We lost 40%
of our business with the 2008 salmon closure. In spite of our best
efforts at selling in other regions, we have not been able to replace
that loss. We have not made money in three years, our credit line has
been cut off and we have cut expenses to the bone to survive. We have
laid off employees, cut nearly all advertising and stopped most new
product development.
The salmon industry needs salmon recovery. We do not need policies
which only exacerbate our problems. We urge the Water and Power Sub
Committee and the agricultural community to work with us towards real
solutions for both the farmers and the fish.
______

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 65599.011

.eps[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 65599.012

.eps[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 65599.013

.epsMr. McClintock. Thank you for your testimony. Our next
witness is Mr. Paul Orme, who is an attorney for Stanfield,
Central Arizona, and New Magma Irrigation and Drainage
Districts, in Mayer, Arizona.

STATEMENT OF PAUL ORME, ATTORNEY, CENTRAL ARIZONA IRRIGATION
AND DRAINAGE DISTRICT, MARICOPA-STANFIELD IRRIGATION & DRAINAGE
DISTRICT, AND NEW MAGMA IRRIGATION AND DRAINAGE DISTRICT

Mr. Orme. Chairman McClintock, Ranking Member Napolitano,
and Members of the Committee, my name is Paul Orme, and I am an
Arizona attorney representing three irrigation districts which
receive irrigation water through the Central Arizona Project.
Combined, these three districts total over 200,000
irrigable acres in Pinal County, Arizona, and utilize
approximately 60 percent of the agricultural water delivered
annually through the CAP.
These remarks concern the Navajo Generating Station located
near Page, Arizona, and the emissions control options being
considered for improving visibility in that area, which
includes the Grand Canyon National Park.
The Environmental Protection Agency is in the process of
determining the best available retrofit technology, or BART, to
reduce nitrogen oxide emissions at NGS. Litigation has also
been filed by a coalition of environmental groups on these same
visibility standards, which may or may not be partially driving
this process.
The EPA's ultimate BART decision will significantly impact
the people and economy in and around Page, including the Hopi
and Navajo Indian Reservations. Their stories deserve to be
heard, and are being told by others.
My focus will be the impact in the farm communities of
Central Arizona. NGS is the source of power needed to deliver
the major share of Arizona's entitlement of Colorado River
water, over 300 miles, via the Central Arizona Project from
Lake Havasu to Tucson.
Twenty-four percent of the plant is held by the United
States Bureau of Reclamation. The majority of water delivered
through the CAP aqueduct is used by farmers. In a typical year,
non-Indian agriculture uses nearly 50 percent of the total
water delivered through the CAP. Agricultural water for Indian
use adds another 200,000 acre-feet to the total.
Vital to agriculture's future in Arizona is access to a low
cost, affordable, and reliable supply of water. Some of the
emissions control options being considered by the EPA at the
Navajo plant could render CAP water an uneconomical water
resource option for agriculture.
And for those farmers unable to access water resources
other than CAP water, these regulatory requirements will put
agriculture's viability as a business in jeopardy. Family
farmers, irrigation districts, associated farming and
agricultural businesses, and the local economies of several
farming communities in Central Arizona, face significant impact
and economic hardship should the emissions controls at NGS
render CAP water unaffordable for agricultural use.
Currently, two emission control options are being
considered. One are low NO
x
burners. The second is
selective catalytic reduction, or SCR, with bag houses to
collect particulates, options with a significant difference in
associated costs, but with air visibility results imperceptible
to the human eye.
If the EPA selects the more costly option for BART, it is
possible that the existing owners of the plant will decide to
shut it down, requiring CAP to find an alternative source of
power, resulting in water costs entirely beyond the capability
of agriculture to pay.
For a variety of reasons, a decision to shut down NGS would
be the worst possible result for Arizona and the CAP. The SCR
option is estimated to have an impact of adding $16 per acre-
foot to the water costs to agriculture, or a 33 percent
increase.
This increase will have a significant cascading negative
impact on agriculture and the economy of Central Arizona. If
available to farmers, they will increase their use of non-
renewable groundwater supplies, and some will have to
discontinue farming.
Local businesses that support agriculture will suffer,
aquifer levels will decline, with related degradation of water
quality, and increased unemployment can be expected due to
agricultural related job losses during one of the worst
recessions experienced by our country.
This is of particular concern for a community such as
Maricopa-Stanfield, which has seen astronomical population
growth in the last 10 years, which growth is dependent or
partially dependent on a stable groundwater supply for future
urban use.
The irony of this situation is that the 1968 CAP enabling
legislation passed by Congress, and then the 1980 Groundwater
Management Act passed by the State of Arizona, which is one of
the most restrictive groundwater pumping laws in the country,
both were passed with the idea that the CAP water would be a
replacement supply for groundwater--not a supplemental supply.
If the NGS is shut down, or the most expensive technology
is adopted, much of Central Arizona farming will have to return
to expensive groundwater pumping.
Arizona and western water policies are extremely
complicated, and interwoven throughout all water sectors. The
2004 Arizona Water Settlements Act was signed into law to
ensure certainly and reliability when it came to resource
management and planning in Arizona.
One such component resolved long term standing rights
associated with the Gila River Indian community. To make the
settlement work, non-Indian agricultural water users provided a
substantial supply of long term CAP water in return for short
term affordable CAP water use through the year 2030.
The Tribes received assurance of affordable water in lieu
of free winter rights water.
Mr. McClintock. I am sorry, but I am going to have to ask
you to wrap up here, and if you could summarize in a sentence.
Mr. Orme. Yes. If the NGS technology requires a 33 percent
increase in costs for agricultural water use, then the non-
Indian agricultural water use will be denied one of their main
benefits under the Gila River Indian Water Rights Settlement,
which will undoubtedly chill future water rights settlements if
one Federal agency, such as the EPA, can deny the benefits that
another Federal agency, the Department of the Interior, granted
in the original settlement. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Orme follows:]

Statement of Paul Orme, General Counsel to the Central Arizona
Irrigation and Drainage District, Maricopa-Stanfield Irrigation &
Drainage District, and New Magma Irrigation and Drainage District

My name is Paul Orme and I am an Arizona Attorney representing
three irrigation districts which receive irrigation water through the
Central Arizona Project. Combined these three districts total over
200,000 irrigable acres in Pinal County, Arizona and utilize
approximately 60% of the agricultural water delivered annually through
the CAP.
These remarks concern the Navajo Generating Station (NGS), located
near Page, Arizona, and the emissions control options being considered
for improving visibility in that area which includes the Grand Canyon
National Park. The Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) is in the
process of determining the Best Available Retrofit Technology (BART) to
reduce nitrogen oxide (NO
X
) emissions at NGS. Litigation has
also been filed by a coalition of environmental groups on these same
visibility standards, which may or may not be partially driving this
process.
EPA's ultimate BART decision will significantly impact the people
and economies in and around Page, including the Hopi and Navajo
Reservations. Their stories deserve to be heard and are being told by
others. My focus will be the impact in the farm communities in Central
Arizona.
NGS is the source of power needed to deliver the major share of
Arizona's entitlement of Colorado River water over 300 miles via the
Central Arizona Project (CAP) aqueduct from Lake Havasu to Tucson.
Twenty four percent of the output of the plant is held by the United
States Bureau of Reclamation.
The majority of water delivered through the CAP aqueduct is used by
farmers. In a typical year, non-Indian agriculture uses nearly 50% of
the total water delivered through the CAP. Agriculture water for Indian
use adds another 200,000 acre feet to the total. Vital to agriculture's
future in Arizona is access to a low cost and reliable supply of water.
Some of the emission control options being considered by the EPA at the
Navajo plant could render CAP water an uneconomical water resource
option for agriculture. And for those farmers unable to access water
resources other than CAP water, these regulatory requirements would put
agriculture's viability as a business in jeopardy. Family farmers,
irrigation districts, associated farming and agricultural businesses,
and the local economies of several farming communities in Central
Arizona face significant impact and economic hardship should the cost
of emission controls at NGS render CAP water unaffordable for
agricultural use.
Currently two emission control options are being considered: 1) low
NO
X
burners; and 2) selective catalytic reduction (SCR) with
bag houses to collect particulates, options with a significant
difference in associated costs, but with air visibility results
imperceptible to the human eye. If the EPA selects the more costly
option for BART, it is possible the existing owners of the plant will
decide to shut it down, requiring CAP to find an alternative source of
power resulting in water costs entirely beyond the capability of
agriculture to pay. For a variety of reasons, a decision to shut down
NGS would be the worst possible result for Arizona and the CAP.
CAP estimates that the impact to energy charges within the water
rates to install the low NO
X
burners at NGS are in the range
of $0.50 per acre-foot. This is a manageable increase in exchange for a
significant reduction on NO
x
emissions. Conversely, the SCR
treatment is estimated to have an impact of over $16.00 per acre-foot.
An increase of $16.00 per acre-foot will have a significant cascading
negative impact on agriculture, the economy and environment of Central
Arizona. Farmers will turn to increasing the use of non-renewable
groundwater supplies and some will discontinue farming. Local
businesses that support agriculture will suffer, aquifer levels will
decline with related degradation of the water quality, and increased
unemployment can be expected due to agriculture-related job losses
during one of the worst recessions experience by our country.
The introduction of CAP water as a renewable water supply to
Central Arizona has benefited the agricultural economy and the State of
Arizona--by assisting the agricultural user in meeting regulatory
objectives to reduce groundwater use, ensuring long term availability
of groundwater resources as a resource for future drought conditions,
and through a reliable water supply helping to sustain economic growth
and vitality of the agricultural communities that depend upon
agriculture for their livelihoods.
For example, one of my clients is the Maricopa-Stanfield Irrigation
& Drainage District (MSIDD) located in Pinal County Arizona. That
District pumped between 300,000--400,000 acre-feet of groundwater per
year before the introduction of CAP water in the late 1980's. During
calendar year 2010, MSIDD pumped a total of 81,000 acre-feet while
providing irrigation water services to over 70,000 acres. CAP water
during the same year constituted 70% of total water deliveries, or
approximately 200,000 acre feet. Should water costs increase by $16 per
acre foot as predicted through the installation of the SCR technology
and bag houses, irrigation districts such as MSIDD will resume
groundwater pumping as a less costly option for the farmers served by
this District. The 200,000 acre-feet of CAP water that was used by the
District in 2010 will be partially replaced with less expensive
groundwater.
To add further perspective, since 1987 MSIDD has delivered 3.8
million acre feet of renewable CAP water, essentially preserving a like
amount of groundwater in District aquifers for drought purposes. Where
historically during the 1970's and 1980's there was significant
overdraft of the aquifer within MSIDD boundaries and regularly
occurring subsidence, today the aquifers in Central Arizona have
stabilized or rebounded underlying those agricultural lands that have
had access to CAP water. Should the CAP water become uneconomic to use
due to NGS emission controls, aquifer overdraft and possible subsidence
will return. The irony of the situation is that two epic and very
successful Federal and State policies that were implemented in Central
Arizona in the 1980's, the CAP Enabling Act and the Arizona Groundwater
Management Act, originated to reduce groundwater overdraft and large
scale pumping in Central Arizona. Now, if the EPA requires SCRs and bag
houses on NGS, large scale groundwater pumping in central Arizona will
return.
If the EPA restrictions are fully implemented, MSIDD estimates
agricultural lands will shrink by 35-50% reaching upwards of 35,000
acres. With anticipated urban growth in the area over the next 50
years, water supply and water quality problems may be further
exacerbated due to over-pumping in the near term.
For a typical farmer in Central Arizona, the cost of purchasing and
delivering water is the single highest operating expense, comprising
over 20% of the total expense to operate a farm. In order for the
farmer to remain competitive, it is essential that all operational
costs are managed closely. Cost increases not related to the
agricultural market are difficult for the farmer to pass on to the
consumer. With increased water costs, farmers will be forced to absorb
those costs directly without the ability to pass on those cost
increases. A $16 per acre-foot increase in water costs equates to a
cost increase of over $50 per acre based on a farm using 4.5 acre feet
per acre of water per year, and assuming 70% of the water is from the
CAP. For a 1,000 acre farm, the total cost increase would be over
$50,000. Crops typically grown in this region are of the variety that
competes on the world market. There is very little room to pass on any
cost increases due to the nature of this highly competitive market.
Furthermore, the $16 per acre-foot will have the same impact on all the
farmers in the CAP including the Native Americans sector.
The impacts to an irrigation district such as MSIDD are also
substantial. MSIDD estimates that almost 75% of its entire budget is
devoted to water costs, both CAP and groundwater. Of those costs, 95%
is energy. Should EPA require the SCR control option be employed, MSIDD
would be facing a budget increase of over $3.0 million. It is this cost
increase that is passed along to farmers. Should NGS be shuttered, CAP
estimates that replacement energy costs would add $30--$115 an acre
foot to the price of water, or a 60--200% cost increase for MSIDD, and
all CAP agricultural water users.
Arizona and western U.S. water policies are extremely complicated
and interwoven throughout all water use sectors. In 2004, the Arizona
Water Settlements Act was signed into law. This comprehensive act had
several components associated with it in ensuring further certainty and
reliability as it came to water resource management and planning in
Arizona. One such component resolved a long standing dispute on
determining the extent of the water rights associated with the Gila
River Indian Community (GRIC). Substantial time and effort was spent by
the federal government, Gila River Indian tribes, cities, and
irrigation districts in negotiating a workable solution for all
parties. The agricultural sector provided the largest allocation of
water to settle the GRIC water claims. With the relinquishment of the
long term CAP water allocations, the agricultural sector was to receive
in turn an adequate and affordable supply of CAP water through the year
2030. The Tribes received assurance of affordable CAP water in lieu of
free Winters Rights water. Under the SCR emission control options
proposed by the EPA, the principles associated with the assurance of
affordable CAP water for agricultural use will be violated.
Consequently, an uneconomical CAP water source will have far reaching
impacts not only to the individual Indian and non-Indian farmers, but
may also have the potential to undermine the water settlement
agreement. It will certainly give potential parties to future water
settlements pause, if one agency of the Federal government (EPA) can
undo benefits agreed to by another agency (DOI) before the ink is
barely dry on the settlement agreement.
Unplanned or unforeseen adverse economic impacts due to
catastrophic natural events are well understood risks that farmers
accept as a cost of doing business. Farmers, where possible, protect
the business by insuring for such occurrences. Adverse economic impacts
that are purposefully planned without consideration on a broader scale
on how those actions impact others are careless and irresponsible.
Farmers going out of business, irrigation district and farming related
job loss, and local communities economies harmed as a result of the
questionable emission control options currently being considered at NGS
are major economic implications for Central Arizona. Pinal County's
economy will be hit particularly hard, with some of the nation's most
productive farmland going fallow. The EPA's emission control options
will have real impacts directly on many people's livelihoods not only
on the Hopi and Navajo Reservations in Northern Arizona and in the Town
of Page, but also on the farm and tribal communities of Central
Arizona.
We urge the House Water and Power subcommittee to recognize the
damaging economic, social and environmental impacts these actions from
the EPA may have on the agriculture industry in Central Arizona.
Thank you for the opportunity to provide the Subcommittee with this
testimony.
______

Mr. McClintock. Thank you, and your full testimony will be
included in the record. Our final witness is Mr. Norm Semanko,
Executive Director and General Counsel of the Idaho Water Users
Association, in Boise, Idaho. Welcome.

STATEMENT OF NORM SEMANKO, EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR AND GENERAL
COUNSEL, IDAHO WATER USERS ASSOCIATION, BOISE, IDAHO

Mr. Semanko. Thank you, Chairman McClintock, Ranking
Member, and Members of the Subcommittee, my name is Norm
Semanko, and I am the Executive Director and General Counsel of
the Idaho Water Users Association.
I appreciate the opportunity to provide testimony on this
important topic. It is a particular pleasure for me to appear
before my Congressman and good friend, Subcommittee Member Raul
Labrador, from Idaho's First Congressional District. We
appreciate his ongoing dedication and support on issues of
importance to our membership.
Recent regulatory efforts at the EPA carry the risk of real
potential harm for western irrigators and the rural communities
that they serve. Our concerns with EPA's actions are numerous.
I focus my testimony on issues related to the use of pesticides
and water storage.
With regard to the issue of pesticides, the proposed
regulations at the EPA, and the ongoing consultations regarding
the use of pesticides threaten our very ability to deliver
water.
On June 2 of last year, the EPA released its draft NPDES
permit for point source discharges from the application of
pesticides to waters of the United States. This permit is also
known as the Pesticide General Permit, the PGP.
The PGP was developed in response to the 2009 decision of
the Sixth Circuit Court of Appeals in National Cotton Council
versus EPA case. The court vacated EPA's 2006 rule and
longstanding interpretation that NPDES permits were not
required for the applications of pesticides to United States
waters.
As a result of the court's decision, discharges to waters
of the United States from the application of pesticides will
now require NPDES permits when the court's mandate takes
effect.
The EPA intends to issue a final general permit by October
31 of this year, just a few short months away. Western
agricultural water users regularly apply aquatic herbicides in
accordance with FIFRA approved methodologies to keep their
water delivery systems clear and free from aquatic weeds.
The use of aquatic herbicides provides the efficient
delivery of water, avoids flooding, promotes water
conservation, and helps avoid water quality problems associated
with other methods of aquatic weed control.
Working Americans rely upon the use of these products. We
have several concerns with the pesticide general permit. First,
the definition of water in the United States is expansively
included in the Pesticide General Permit beyond what was
interpreted and established by Congress.
The PGP does not clearly exempt aquatic weed and algae
control activates from expensive and duplicative Federal Clean
Water Act regulations. Multiple opportunities exist for Stacked
Clean Water Act violations and citizen suits in the PGP, with
$37,500 per occurrence or day of violation.
Implications of the Endangered Species Act requirements
resulting from consultation are also extreme. The consultation
process with the fishery services has not been completed, and
we don't know what those requirements will look like in the
PGP.
The draft PGP requirements are unrealistic, impractical,
and burdensome for local governments and small amount profit
organizations to implement. It is just too much paperwork, too
much red tape, and services no purpose beyond the requirements
of FIFRA, which we are fully compliant with.
The EPA did not properly solicit comments on the PGP. We
showed up at a public hearing in Boise that was advertised in
the Federal Register as an ability to give comments, and we
were not allowed to give public comments at that hearing. We
were allowed to ask a few questions, but we were not allowed to
provide testimony.
There are legal risks to operators associated with the
likelihood of the EPA and the States meeting the current
October 31, 2011 deadline. It is not just the EPA. It is also
the 44 delegated States.
If that process is not in place, if that permit is not in
place, what will the regulators do? How will they view the
ability of folks to continue to treat for mosquitos, to keep
the canals clear? They will be in violation of the NPDES permit
requirement.
We are also very concerned about EPA's process for
consultation on the use of aquatic herbicides and the ongoing
process resulting from the different court actions as detailed
in my written statement.
Finally, I wanted to highlight that the EPA has shown a
clear anti-water storage bias, thereby jeopardizing our ability
to continue to provide sufficient water supplies. Both in
Region IV and in Region VIII, clearly EPA staff have shown that
instead of building storage, we first need to demonstrate how
we can reduce the need for the water in the first place. This
puts cities and rural communities pitted against one another.
It is a shortsighted and arbitrary strategy by the EPA.
Mr. Chairman, it appears that the EPA and other Federal
agencies are moving in a direction where a heavier regulatory
hammer will be wielded, and litigious actions will be
encouraged through the use of citizen suits, and products used
by American farmers and ranchers in the production of food and
fiber will be regulated to death.
While it may be difficult for the EPA and the
Administration to change their policies, we appreciate your
attention to these issues, and thank you for your time today.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Semanko follows:]

Statement of Norman M. Semanko, Executive Director & General Counsel,
Idaho Water Users Association, Inc., Boise, Idaho

Chairman McClintock, Ranking Member Napolitano, and members of the
House Subcommittee on Water and Power, my name is Norm Semanko and I am
the Executive Director and General Counsel of the Idaho Water Users
Association (IWUA), located in Boise, Idaho. I am also the Chairman of
the Federal Affairs Committee and Past President of the National Water
Resources Association, a long-standing member of the Advisory Committee
for the Family Farm Alliance, and a past member of the Western States
Water Council. I appreciate the opportunity to provide testimony on the
important topic of creating abundant water and power supplies and job
growth by restoring common sense to federal regulations. It is a
particular pleasure for me to appear before my Congressman,
Subcommittee member Raul Labrador from Idaho's First Congressional
District. We appreciate his ongoing dedication and support on issues of
importance to our membership.
IWUA is a statewide, non-profit association dedicated to the wise
and efficient use of our water resources. IWUA has more than 300
members, including irrigation districts, canal companies, water
districts, municipalities, hydropower companies, aquaculture interests,
professional firms and individuals. Our members deliver water to more
than 2.5 million acres of irrigated farms, subdivisions, parks,
schoolyards and other lands in Idaho.
Western water users are becoming increasingly concerned about the
number of environmental regulations and policies that are currently
being rewritten or reconsidered by the Obama Administration. In
particular, recent rulemaking efforts at EPA and the White House
Council on Environmental Quality carry the risk of real potential harm
for Western irrigators and the rural communities that they serve.
These types of federal water resource actions and regulatory
practices threaten to undermine the economic foundations of rural
communities in the arid West by making farming and ranching
increasingly difficult and costly. In the rural West, water is
critically important to farmers and ranchers and the communities they
have built over the past century. However, in recent decades, we have
seen once-reliable water supplies for farmers steadily being diverted
away to meet new needs. Rural farming and ranching communities are
being threatened because of increased demand for limited fresh water
supplies caused by continued population growth, diminishing snow pack,
increasing water consumption to support domestic energy production,
continually expanding environmental demands--and additional, burdensome
requirements imposed by EPA.
Our concerns with EPA's actions are numerous. Many of them are
addressed in the testimony of other witnesses. I have focused my
testimony on issues related to the use of pesticides and water storage,
as detailed below.
1.  Proposed Regulations and Consultations Regarding the Use of
Pesticides Threaten Our Ability to Deliver Water.
Pesticide General Permit (PGP) for Point Discharges to the Waters of
the United States from the Application of Pesticides (Draft)
On June 2, 2010 EPA released its draft National Pollutant Discharge
Elimination System (NPDES) permit for point source discharges from the
application of pesticides to waters of the United States. This permit
is also known as the Pesticide General Permit (PGP). The PGP was
developed in response to a 2009 decision by the Sixth Circuit Court of
Appeals (National Cotton Council, et al. v. EPA). The court vacated
EPA's 2006 rule that said NPDES permits were not required for
applications of pesticides to U.S. waters. As a result of the Court's
decision, discharges to waters of the U.S. from the application of
pesticides will require NPDES permits when the court's mandate takes
effect. EPA intends to issue a final general permit by October 31,
2011. Once finalized, the PGP will be implemented in six states, Indian
Country lands and federal facilities where EPA is the NPDES permitting
authority, and will be the benchmark for permit issuance in the 44
delegated states.
Western agricultural water users regularly apply aquatic
herbicides, in accordance with FIFRA approved methodologies, to keep
their water delivery systems clear and free from aquatic weeds. The use
of aquatic herbicides provides for the efficient delivery of water,
avoids flooding, promotes water conservation and helps avoid water
quality problems associated with other methods of aquatic weed control.
The organizations I represent include members responsible for
irrigating millions of acres of farmland, as well as residential
subdivisions, parks, schools, yards and other irrigated lands
throughout the West. All of these working Americans and the general
public stand to be directly impacted by regulations proposed by EPA in
the draft PGP, as outlined further below.
Concern: Definition of ``Waters of the United States''
One key concern with this draft general permit is that the
definition of ``Waters of the United States'' used in the PGP is the
one that existed in Federal Regulations prior to the U.S. Supreme
Court's Rapanos decision. The decision was made by the Bush
Administration not to issue a new rule, but instead to issue guidance
in interpreting Clean Water Act jurisdiction under Rapanos. We have
compared the December 2, 2008 guidance memo issued by the U.S. Army
Corps of Engineers and EPA that takes into account the Rapanos decision
to the current regulations and discovered discrepancies.
However, as we understand it, the guidance was not prepared in
accordance with the Administrative Procedures Act and instead merely
provides guidance to field offices. It therefore does not rise to the
level of a regulation and technically does not supersede the pre-
existing regulations. However, the guidance is, to our knowledge, the
only post-Rapanos statement by either EPA or the U.S. Army Corps of
Engineers on Clean Water Act jurisdictional determinations. 33 CFR
Sec. Sec. 328.3(a)(1), (a)(5), and (a)(7), and 40 CFR
Sec. Sec. 230.3(s)(1), (s)(5), and (s)(7) defining ``navigable waters''
and ``waters of the United States'' all predate the Supreme Court
decision in Rapanos and, to the extent they are inconsistent with the
Rapanos decision, have been effectively voided by that decision. The
proposed permit thus: (i) uses a regulatory definition that is
inconsistent with the current judicial interpretation; (ii)
incorporates language from antiquated definitions; and (iii)
effectively attempts by administrative action to overturn Supreme Court
precedent.
The guidance memo is much more detailed as to what is
jurisdictional and what is not under Rapanos. We have recommended that
the section of the draft permit that defines and addresses ``Waters of
the United States'' be rewritten to provide consistency with the
December 2, 2008 guidance memo. As was the case during the development
of the guidance memo, EPA should coordinate with the Corps of Engineers
in this endeavor.
The draft definition of ``Waters of the United States'' in the PGP
opens up the potential for non-navigable ``Waters of the State''
enforcement through CWA citizen suits and federal penalties. NPDES
permits should limit their coverage to federally protected waters of
the U.S., and not extend federal enforcement (e.g. citizen suits) to
every pond or other water of the states.
Our concern about EPA's expansive interpretation of ``Waters of the
United States'' is further collaborated by the agency's statements that
H.R. 5088--legislation introduced during the last Congress that would
have radically expanded jurisdiction under the Clean Water Act--is
consistent with previous agency interpretations. Through administrative
fiat, EPA is attempting to expand its jurisdiction beyond what Congress
has chosen to do.
Concern: The PGP Does Not Clearly Exempt Aquatic Weed and Algae Control
Activities from Expensive and Duplicative Federal Clean Water
Act Regulations
The application of aquatic herbicides in canals, ditches, drains
and other irrigation delivery and drainage facilities is statutorily
exempt from the definition of ``point source'' under the Clean Water
Act and therefore does not require an NPDES permit. The PGP fails to
clearly state that NPDES coverage is not required for these activities.
EPA appears to be employing the PGP as a vehicle to eliminate or dilute
the existing statutory point source exemptions.
Canals, ditches, drains and other irrigation delivery and drainage
facilities are not uniformly ``waters of the U.S.''. Therefore, the
application of aquatic herbicides to these facilities does not
automatically require an NPDES permit. Once again, EPA is using the PGP
as a vehicle to summarily and inappropriately make these jurisdictional
determinations.
Concern: Multiple Opportunities for Stacked Clean Water Act Violations
and Citizen Suits
The current draft creates numerous, overlapping opportunities for
paper violations to be tacked onto a violation associated with a water
quality criteria exceedance or the observance of an adverse effect on a
water body use. Such additional violations include the requirement for
very timely mitigation plus very timely reporting plus updating of the
pesticide discharge management plan plus update of other records. Each
of these could be separate violations according to EPA. We have
suggested that EPA should eliminate such overlapping or stacked
potential violations
Concern: Implications of Endangered Species Act requirements resulting
from consultation
The current draft has a placeholder for the potential severe NPDES
permit restrictions that the ongoing consultation with the U.S. Fish
and Wildlife Service (FWS) and National Marine Fisheries Service (NMFS)
could produce. EPA's economic analysis does not take into account any
such ESA restrictions. However, we know from the extremely stringent
requirements for buffers around all Pacific Northwest waters that both
Services' requirements and the economic consequences thereof can be
severe. If the Services add significant restrictions to the permit
prior to its finalization, EPA should conduct a new economic analysis
and then re-propose the permit for public comment.
Concern: Draft PGP Requirements Are Unrealistic, Impractical and
Burdensome for Local Governments and Small, Non-Profit
Organizations to Implement
The measures set forth in the Draft PGP to ``identify the
problem'', develop ``pesticide discharge management plans'' and provide
new levels of record keeping and annual reporting are beyond the
capacity of small government irrigation districts, and small non-profit
canal company organizations. Irrigation districts and canal companies
are responsible for irrigation delivery systems that often cover
hundreds or thousands of square miles. These small government and small
non-profit organizations do not have the staff or the budget to
identify all areas with aquatic weed or algae problems, identify all
target weed species, identify all possible factors contributing to the
problem, establish past or present densities, or any of the other
documentation requirements in the Draft PGP. Several of the measures
set forth in the draft PGP are overly burdensome and, in many cases,
impractical--if not impossible--to implement.
Concern: EPA Did Not Properly Solicit Public Comment on the PGP
I have personally witnessed EPA's failure to provide meaningful
public input on this matter. Relying upon EPA's Federal Register
notice, my organization--the Idaho Water Users Association--encouraged
our members to attend the public meeting in Boise and provide oral
comments. However, at the meeting, EPA staff told meeting attendees
that comments would not be accepted, but instead would need to be
submitted in writing afterwards; oral comments were not accepted at
all. This meeting certainly was not conducted in accordance with the
notice published in the Federal Register.
Concern: There are Legal Risks to Operators Associated with the
Likelihood of EPA and States Meeting the Current October 31,
2011 Deadline
Some significant questions remain surrounding the current October
31, 2011 deadline. What is EPA's and states' contingency plan if the
permits aren't operational? How are operators (applicators and
decision-making organizations) expected to continue their work if their
protections under the 2006 EPA rule disappear on October 31, 2011? How
are these organizations expected to plan between now and then? While we
appreciate EPA and the Obama administration securing a recent extension
of the stay from the Sixth Circuit Court of Appeals, extending the
deadline from April 9 to October 31, 2011, this does little to
alleviate our underlying concerns.
Concern: The Time for Action by Congress is Now
We are hopeful that a concerted good-faith effort working with EPA
will result in a streamlined pesticide permitting regulatory process
that will be efficient, fair and effective to American farmers and
ranchers, as well as consistent with existing statutory exemptions in
the Clean Water Act. However, because of our experience with EPA
earlier on in the public comment process, and the agency's failure to
defend the 2006 rule or pursue other reasonable alternatives, we have
concerns about how serious our comments will be received. In addition,
we are concerned about the possibility of so-called citizen lawsuits by
activist environmental groups once the PGP is adopted and implemented.
As a result, we believe the better course--and the necessary one--is
for Congress to approve legislation to eliminate the double-permitting
requirement imposed by the Sixth Circuit Court of Appeals' decision.
We do not support, and believe it would be counterproductive, to
pursue alternative regulatory or legislative approaches to the problem,
as suggested by some. The solution is not to provide EPA with more
regulatory authority under FIFRA or the Clean Water Act. Rather, the
answer is to eliminate the unnecessary and burdensome double-permitting
requirement imposed by the Court.
We applaud the U.S. House of Representatives' approval of H.R. 872,
the Reducing Regulatory Burdens Act of 2011, on March 31, 2011, by a
vote of 292-130. This was a significant step in the process of
clarifying that the additional regulatory requirements of the NPDES
permitting process are not necessary and that continued use of
pesticide products pursuant to FIFRA is sufficient. We look forward to
your Senate counterparts moving forward in a similar fashion so that
legislation can be signed into law later this year, prior to the
current October 31 deadline imposed by the Sixth Circuit Court of
Appeals.
EPA's Failure to Improve Implementation of the Endangered Species Act
The Endangered Species Act (ESA) consultation process is broken.
EPA and the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) have
been required by a federal court to consult regarding how the pesticide
registration process may affect salmon in the Pacific Northwest. The
current process is not based on the ``best available data.'' It takes
too long, excludes input from affected stakeholders, and results in
unneeded restrictions on pesticide use which will be harmful to food
production while failing to help salmon. In Washington State,
monitoring data shows that salmon are already being protected by
current labeling laws.
Congress recognized the need to include agricultural producers in
the implementation of the ESA when it wrote Section 1010 in the 1988
Amendments to the ESA. [Pub. L. No. 100-478, 102 Stat. 2306, Section
1010 (1988); codified as a note to 7 U.S.C.]. The intent of Section
1010 is to minimize harm to agricultural producers. The Conference
Report states:
Agriculture is a major part of the U.S. economy and provides
nutritional sustenance for our population and exports abroad. . .. The
Conferees, therefore, anticipate that. . .[the Federal agencies shall]
implement the Endangered Species Act in a way that protects endangered
and threatened species while minimizing, where possible, impacts on
production of agricultural foods and fiber commodities. [Conference
Rpt. at 23-24 (Sept. 16, 1988).]
In 2005, when EPA announced changes to the Endangered Species
Protection Program [ESPP; 70 Fed. Reg. 66392, 66400 (Nov. 2, 2005)], it
acknowledged that Section 1010 ``provided a clear sense that Congress
desires that EPA should fulfill its obligation to conserve listed
species, while at the same time considering the needs of agriculture
and other pesticide users.''
EPA committed at that time to provide an opportunity for input at
three points in an ESA assessment:

Prior to making a ``may affect'' determination

In identifying potential mitigation options, if
necessary; and

Prior to issuance of a Biological Opinion to EPA by
the Services.
Despite a 20-plus year old statute and a 2005 commitment by EPA to
include agricultural producers, pesticide applicators, and other end
users in the effects determination and consultation processes, EPA has
yet to establish procedures to do so. Last year, a coalition of Western
grower organizations was forced to file a petition with the court
requesting EPA take immediate action to establish clear procedures for
EPA's pesticide effects determinations and subsequent actions
consistent with Section 1010 of the 1988 amendments to the ESA.
Failure to correct a process resulting in unnecessary restrictions
without any indication that salmon will benefit puts producers along
the West coast at a competitive disadvantage. The magnitude of the
damage could be severe enough to drive fruit, berry, citrus and
vegetable growers to foreign countries, costing both jobs and exports.
An additional problem with the consultation process, very frankly,
is that the ``federal family'' is a dysfunctional family--particularly
EPA, NOAA and the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service. The federal agencies'
inability to coordinate--let alone agree--on critical aspects of the
consultation process and resolution of important issues has adversely
impacted agriculture and irrigators in terms of cost and time in
meeting the requirements of the ESA.
We welcome continued Congressional oversight in this area in the
days to come.
2.  EPA Has Shown a Clear Anti-Water Storage Bias, Thereby Jeopardizing
Our Ability to Provide Sufficient Water Supplies.
One key concern voiced by water users relates to administrative
policy making occurring within EPA that will make it even tougher to
accomplish what is already a daunting challenge: the obvious need to
develop new water supplies to meet growing water demands and to adapt
to, or mitigate for, the impacts on water supply due to climate change.
For example--EPA Region 4 (which covers the Southeastern U.S.)--is
implementing new guidelines that focus on proposals calling for
additional storage capacity due to projected future demands. These
guidelines were developed to inform local governments and water
utilities of the actions EPA expects them to take ``in order to
eliminate or minimize the need for additional capacity before
consideration of a water supply reservoir project on a stream or
river.'' EPA will also use these guidelines to evaluate water demand
projections for new or significantly increased public surface water
withdrawals or public ground water supply wells which are being
reviewed through the National Environmental Policy Act or EPA programs.
The Clean Water Act permit process requires a clearly stated
project purpose, which for water supply reservoirs includes a projected
demand analysis to support additional water capacity needs, and an
analysis of alternatives. Before EPA considers a water supply reservoir
as an alternative to address the need for additional water capacity,
the water utility must take actions to ensure that, to the maximum
extent practicable, they are implementing ``sustainable'' water
management practices, which consist primarily of water use efficiency
measures. According to EPA, these measures ``are designed to help an
applicant eliminate the need for, or reduce the impacts to aquatic
resources from future water facility expansions including the
construction of water supply reservoirs.''
While these guidelines have been proposed for Region 4, and we
don't yet know if similar standards will be proposed for the Western
U.S., it is troubling that EPA is so blatantly biased against
structural solutions to water challenges. EPA is already one of the
more obstructionist agencies when it comes to developing new storage
projects, something Colorado interests recently learned. On August 9,
2010, then-Colorado Governor Bill Ritter sent a letter to EPA
Administrator Lisa Jackson describing the cooperative/collaborative
efforts regarding the Chatfield Reservoir Reallocation Project, which
involved numerous interests representing municipal, environmental and
agricultural entities and would result in up to 20,600 acre-feet of
additional storage space for beneficial uses in the Denver metro area.
Although the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers supports the proposed
reallocation plan, EPA Region 8 staff in June of 2010 stated that they
would deny it, and recommended that the ultimate decision be elevated
to higher levels in Washington, D.C.
``I am greatly concerned that a disagreement between two
federal agencies could result in denial of a project so
important to Colorado and fifteen of our communities,'' Gov.
Ritter wrote Jackson. The Governor also asked that EPA proceed
with ``a thoughtful and transparent process that does not
prejudge a project but instead balances important civic and
environmental needs.''
This should never occur when all of the stakeholder interests have
agreed on a workable solution for all parties.
Unfortunately, based on the Region 4 guidelines and the behavior of
Region 8 staff, it appears that some in EPA clearly have anti-storage
biases and are not afraid to insert those biases into critical federal
decision-making processes. This is reckless, arbitrary and short-
sighted. Without new sources of water, increasing urban and
environmental demands threaten to deplete existing agricultural
supplies and seriously threaten the future of Western irrigated
agriculture.
The often slow and cumbersome federal regulatory process is a major
obstacle to realization of projects and actions that could enhance
Western water supplies. We must continue to work with federal agencies
and other interested parties to build a consensus for improving the
regulatory process, instead of using administrative channels that
create new obstacles.
Conclusion
Mr. Chairman, it appears that EPA and other federal agencies are
moving in a direction where a heavier regulatory hammer will be
wielded, litigious actions will be encouraged through the use of
``citizen suits'', and products used by American farmers and ranchers
in the production of food and fiber will be foremost in the sights of
federal regulators. Important water management and supply tools like
pesticides and water storage have certainly been put at risk.
American family farmers and ranchers for generations have grown
food and fiber for the world, and we will have to become more
innovative than ever before to meet this critical challenge. That
innovation must be encouraged rather than stifled with new federal
regulations and uncertainty. Unfortunately, many existing and proposed
federal policies on water issues make it more difficult for farmers in
an arena where agricultural values are at a disadvantage to federal
ecological and environmental priorities. Right now, it seems that water
policies being developed at EPA and the White House Council on
Environmental Quality are being considered separately from foreign and
domestic agricultural goals. Many of these administrative changes are
drawing praise from environmental organizations that have been
advocating for them for some time, but ultimately the huge negative
impacts of such destructive policies will be aimed at the heart of the
economy in rural America.
We can only hope that the Obama Administration will give equal
consideration to the concerns of agricultural organizations. We welcome
your leadership to help make that possible.
While it may be difficult to get EPA and other Administration
agency policy makers to change the approach they are taking, we are
pleased that this Congressional hearing is being provided and that you
are paying attention. We look forward to working with you and other
Members of Congress towards this end.
Thank you for the opportunity to share this testimony with you
today.
______

Mr. McClintock. Thank you for your testimony. At this
point, we will begin with questions of the witnesses. To allow
all of our members to participate, and to ensure that we can
hear from everyone today, we will be limiting Members to five
minutes for their questions. But if there are additional
questions, we will continue to a second round, and I will begin
with five minutes, and begin with Mr. Keppen.
Your testimony states that water supply restrictions
benefit fish, quote, ``conclusively demonstrated that these
restrictions have done little to prevent the fisheries decline
in the Delta.'' Yet, Mr. Pool in his testimony suggests
otherwise. How did you come up with that conclusion, and what
are your observations?
Mr. Keppen. Well, primarily based on my review of the
National Academy of Sciences report that was done, and also
some other reports that were done. In 2010, the Academy put out
a report called Scientific Assessment of Alternatives to
Reducing Water Management Effects on Threatened and Endangered
Species in California's South Delta.
In that report, there are flat out statements that suggest
that there are other things than the pumps that are affecting
the fish, and I will just stick to the facts. This comes out of
page 33 of the study.
It says that no scientific studies have demonstrated that
pumping in the South Delta is the most important or the only
factor accounting for the Delta's smolt population decline.
Therefore, the multiple other stressors that are affecting
the fish in the Delta environment, as well as in the other
environments they occupy during their lives must be considered,
as well as their comparative importance with respect to the
effects of exporter pumping.
And the report goes on to suggest a holistic approach to
managing the ecology of the fish in the Delta will be required
if species declines are to be reversed. It is very similar to
the findings that the National Academy had in Klamath in 2003.
Mr. McClintock. This is also similar to the National Marine
Fisheries Service Southwest Science Center report to the
Pacific Fisheries Management Council, where the NMFS scientist,
Steve Lindley, concluded that the primary reason for the
decline of the fall run was poor ocean conditions.
I would also note that the claim that 92 percent of the
salmon smolt died because they were lost in the river or pulled
into the Central Delta when the pumps were operating at maximum
capacity does not mean that the pumps caused 92 percent
mortality.
Most of the mortality, I am told, occurs in the main stem
of the Sacramento River, and not at the pumps.
Mr. Keppen. Good points, and there is another study, too,
that I dug up on the flight out here. It is Bruce McFarland's,
who did a report in 2008 to the Delta Stewardship Council, and
he said that that year, all up and down the coast, the salmon
population suffered, which again suggests that it might have
been ocean conditions.
Mr. McClintock. And I think I would also want to note for
the record that the Sacramento hatchery fall chinook fish
output increased dramatically in 2008, and in 2006, for
example, the release was 3 million, and in 2008, it went up to
8.5 million, and current shifts and dramatically increased
hatchery releases coincided with increased salmon populations.
Mr. Keppen, how would new water storage help overcome the
negative impacts of water regulation?
Mr. Keppen. Well, we always use a term, I guess, in our
organization, and my board members like to say this term, that
in the West right now, we have probably four competing sectors
for water.
We have agriculture, urban growth, the environment and
ecology, and then power. Those are kind of the big four
demands. And over the last several decades that pie has pretty
much stated the same, the same size.
I am talking about the water supply that is available, and
we have not developed a lot of new infrastructure relative to
storing water. However, what has happened particularly with the
environmental demands that we now have, because society places
greater value on that now than it did perhaps 40 years ago, we
have a bigger slice of that pie going to the environment
primarily.
So storage makes the pie bigger, and I think that the new
demands that we are seeing I don't think come from agriculture
in the west. It is really coming from development, power, and
the environment.
Our guys are just saying let us have the water that we
originally were provided when these projects were built, and
thus create storage to meet some of these new demands.
Mr. McClintock. Mr. Noble, the same question, additional
water storage, good for the environment?
Mr. Noble. Yes, Mr. Chairman, I believe it is. The
additional water storage is good for the environment, but we
have to be careful. All too often, we place the environment
above human needs, and I believe they can be reconciled.
But additional water storage is something that needs to be
looked to in the future, and I find in the areas that I deal
with that there is a lot more talk about providing that now.
Mr. McClintock. Mr. Keppen, very briefly, what are the
impediments to water storage in California these days?
Mr. Keppen. Regulatory impediments. I think it is the way
that the Endangered Species Act, and NEPA, and the Clean Water
Act, are implemented. It is just the overlapping sense of
regulations that you have.
I would also say that it comes down to litigation.
Environmental laws provide all kinds of opportunities for
opponents to projects to stop all kinds of citizens
supervision, and that sort of thing.
And then finally I just think leadership. I think some
folks are just concerned that if they stand up for storage that
they are going to get blasted by some environmental community
and the urban media.
In fact, there are actually surveys out there that show
that when average Americans are asked about what kinds of
things need to be done to deal with these challenges, storage
is way up there. Taking water away from farmers and giving it
to cities is way down there.
Mr. McClintock. Thank you very much. My time is expired. I
will now yield to the Ranking Member, Ms. Napolitano.
Mrs. Napolitano. Thank you, Mr. Chair, and this is my
thirteenth year on this Subcommittee, and we have had great
discussions, and lengthy discussions, about some of the
impacts, especially on the Delta, and the fish, and the pumps,
and all that good stuff.
So in certain areas it is redundant. We have asked for
collaboration, and we have asked for all of this that we keep
hearing, but Mr. Keppen, in your testimony, you mentioned that
the agencies should use the best available developing
regulations.
Would you agree that the agencies should use the best
available science and developing regulations even if the use of
those science results, those scientific results, result in
reduced water deliveries to some of the farmers?
Mr. Keppen. Well, definitely we support the use of the best
available science, and I think again how do you define that. In
my experience the agencies often times are given deference, and
their science kind of trumps everybody else's science.
We just want to make sure that we have a place at the table
so that our science can be considered along with theirs, and
with the same weight.
Mrs. Napolitano. That is where we should view the
partnerships, and I agree with you on being able to work
together. But are you aware that the National Academy of
Sciences determined that most of the restrictions in the Bay-
Delta biological opinions were scientifically justified?
Mr. Keppen. I am aware of that.
Mrs. Napolitano. All right. That is all. Thank you.
Mr. Keppen. Yes.
Mrs. Napolitano. Thank you. My time is running low. I would
like to introduce a couple of things into the record:

The California 2006 Causes of Impairment for
California Waters, prepared by the USEPA Office of Water,
Number 1 on the list is Pesticides.

The California Waters Impaired By Pesticides
Report, Year 2006, prepared by USEPA Office of Water. It lists
all the water bodies in California that are affected.

The National Summary Causes of Impairment. It
says for rivers and streams that pesticides again are number 16
on that list.

Specific Causes of Impairment that makes up the
National Pesticides cost of impairment and growth threatened
for impairment of rivers and streams. Third is pesticides.
Those I would like to have entered into the record, Mr. Chair.
Mr. McClintock. Without objection.
[NOTE: The documents submitted for the record have been
retained in the Committee's official files.]
Mrs. Napolitano. And to Mr. Semanko, you mentioned in your
testimony that the EPA has taken an anti-storage position,
citing the Chatfield Reservoir Reallocation Project. Were you
aware that last October the EPA sent a letter to the Corps
endorsing the Corps analysis in its proposal to permit the
project?
And I would like to introduce into the record a letter from
Carol Ruskin, Deputy Regional Administrator, dated October 6,
from the EPA, reversing the EPA statements made on September
7th.
Mr. McClintock. Without objection.
[A letter from Carol Rushin, Deputy Regional Administrator,
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, to the U.S. Army Corps of
Engineers submitted for the record by Mrs. Napolitano follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 65599.010

.epsMr. Semanko. I believe there was a question. Thank you.
No, I was not aware of that, and we will pass that information
along to our members in California.
Mrs. Napolitano. We would be glad to furnish you a copy of
this if you don't mind. That way they will have that letter.
Mr. Semanko. Thank you.
Mrs. Napolitano. Because that kind of contradicts your
statement, because they did reverse it according to that
letter.
Mr. Semanko. Thank you. We are still concerned about the
bias, but thank you very much for the update. We appreciate
that.
Mrs. Napolitano. Thank you. Mr. Pool, you have shown us a
list of 50 salmon related businesses that have completely shut
down since 2008. Do you expect these businesses and the jobs
that they have created to be permanently lost, and if they are
permanently loss, what other forms of employment do these
people are likely to turn to?
We hear a lot about farming losing a lot of farmhands and
farms being fallowed, and all of that. What about the
fishermen?
Mr. Pool. The 50 some-odd businesses on that list, it is
only a partial list. When people go out of business, it is hard
to identify them, but they are gone permanently. They have lost
their equity in their businesses.
One of them that I cite, two ladies lost their business,
and they were very profitable, and the salmon closure came, and
a year-and-a-half later, they lost their business, they lost
their boat, and they lost their house, and they lost their life
savings, and they left town on a Greyhound bus.
Mrs. Napolitano. Mr. Pool, let me cut you because I only
have a few more seconds left. Was it just in California or were
there other places affected?
Mr. Pool. No, about 50 percent of the impact occurs in the
State of Oregon from the Central Valley Delta.
Mrs. Napolitano. So it isn't just California?
Mr. Pool. It is not.
Mrs. Napolitano. How about Washington and Oregon?
Mr. Pool. Some. I would say Southern Oregon mainly, and
below the Columbia River, where the Central Valley fish
migrate, and the impacts there are just as serious as along the
California coast.
Mrs. Napolitano. Thank you. Mr. Chair, I hear a lot about
the use of pesticides, and as I sat in the State House, I
remember going through the list of pesticides being used.
And I know that they are used for vector control, for
termite control, and for all those things. But those are very
regulated by the States. So to me it makes no sense to equate
them to the pesticides that are used in farms and other
agricultural products. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Mr. McClintock. Next is Mr. Tipton.
Mr. Tipton. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I appreciate our
panel being here. Mr. Keppen, I was kind of interested. You
started the closing of one question about the Academy of
Sciences, and when you said but, and so go ahead and continue.
Mr. Keppen. Thanks for that opportunity. Yes, what I was
going to say is that the National Academy report found general
conceptual support for aspects of the biological opinions,
meaning that the smolt and salmon opinions.
But it also criticized specific management measures as not
being well supported. That was the rest of my sentence.
Mr. Tipton. Thank you so much. Mr. Scholl, I was interested
during some of your commentary where you had mentioned about a
culture of collaboration and gave an example. When the EPA went
through did they issue any fines?
Mr. Scholl. I am not aware of any specific fines being
levied in that case. I think the main point that we were trying
to make is that having a regulation is one thing, but then what
you do to try and get compliance with those regulations is
something that certainly requires a lot of work to be done.
Farmers don't want to see bad stuff get into the water.
They care about the land, and trying to build upon their
desires to run clean operations, and to be able to pass their
farms on to future generations, is something that I think that
we can build upon, and create a much more healthy environment
on which to really solve environmental issues.
Mr. Tipton. Great. Thank you. And, Mr. Noble, I was just a
little interested about when you were talking about in regards
to irrigation canals being related to levees down south, and
farmers and ranchers being required to take out flood
insurance.
What does that add in terms of costs of operations and the
rest?
Mr. Noble. Congressman, I am not exactly sure what the cost
of the flood insurance would be, but it does add a cost, and
that was one of the recommendations that was contained in the
report of 2009 by the NCLS committee, as well as when they
equate them under the proposals, and then farmers would have to
provide those types of coverages in areas that really have no
risk of flooding, except for the failure of an irrigation
canal.
Mr. Tipton. Right. Are farmers and ranchers able to pass
those costs on?
Mr. Noble. Not really.
Mr. Tipton. Not really? So that leads us back to Mr.
Keppen. When you were talking about that six percent of our
farmers and ranchers are under the age of 40. Is that a correct
representation?
Mr. Keppen. Under 35.
Mr. Tipton. So we have an aging farm population, and to
quote someone else who is saying that we are producing on less
land, with less water, with fewer farmers, are we literally
starting to drive farmers out of business in this country?
Mr. Keppen. Well, I am seeing it. Mark Ricks, as I
mentioned in my testimony, one of my directors from Idaho very
passionately said the same thing, and a lot of our members are
seeing that.
I travel throughout the west, and going to irrigation
district meetings, and water conferences all the time, and
don't see to many folks under 40 at those meetings, and there
are other factors, but the regulatory climate is definitely an
issue.
Where I live in Klamath Falls, certainly parents are
telling their kids that you don't even want to go into farming.
Mr. Tipton. And on a nationwide basis, we are seeing
statistics that are showing that we are spending $1.750 billion
a year in regulatory costs in this country. It is staggering.
And we all know that there needs to be some sort of
regulations to be able to manage things. We heard great
testimony to that point. What are the regulatory costs? Do you
have some overall regulatory costs? What type of burdens is it
adding to driving more farmers out of their jobs?
Mr. Keppen. I think that it would be very useful to get
such a study done kind of nationwide, but what I have seen just
in the community that I moved to Klamath Falls in 2001 when the
farmers got their water supply shut off at the beginning of the
irrigation season for the first time in 90 some years.
And there are so many costs. I have actually provided
testimony to this Subcommittee on impacts to the community. But
in the Central Valley, it was tens of thousands of jobs, and
hundreds of thousands of acres that went fallow.
It has a ripple effect through the community that affects
businesses, and that affects fertilizer, and implement dealers,
and all those sort of things.
It has a horrible dynamic on the community, just as far as
relationships go, because some people are able to take
advantage of programs and get assistance, and others are not.
You get a have versus a have not mentality that can really tear
up a community.
Mr. Tipton. You bet. You know, we were talking a little bit
about pesticide application, and I found coming from a farm and
ranch community that they are pretty good stewards, and they
all read, and they typically follow directions well.
Are you seeing an overreach by the EPA clamping down and
hurting our farmers and ranchers ability to be able to earn a
living?
Mr. Keppen. Is that directed at me?
Mr. Tipton. Anybody that would like to take a short.
Mr. McClintock. A brief shot.
Mr. Semanko. I will take a shot at that. Thank you,
Congressman. The issue here really is not whether the EPA is
clamping down or not. There is a very comprehensive program
under the Federal Insecticide, Fungicide, and Rodenticide Act,
that requires that these products be tested against the
environment, and make sure that they are not having an adverse
impact on the environment. Then they are certified by the EPA
for general sale and use out in the community, and our folks
have used these products for any number of years to assist in
the delivery of water.
Mr. McClintock. I am going to interject. That is a brief
answer. Mr. Garamendi.
Mr. Garamendi. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I have been in
agriculture my entire life, and I have yet to have a farmer or
a rancher not complain about everything. It is the nature of
the beast.
When they are complaining the loudest, it is usually when
they are doing the best. When they shut up and don't complaint,
then the bank is probably about to knock on their door.
Enormous progress has been made over the years that I have
been involved in agriculture. We have seen regulations in the
cattle industry that have, in fact, been difficult. I endure
those myself because I am a cattle rancher. But the end result
has been a much better and more stable cattle industry, all the
way from animal health to the regulations about the quality of
the supply. You can scream and yell about quality, but you get
bad meat on the market, and it is a serious problem for the
cattle industry.
One recall and serious. You want to shut down Japan, and do
you want to shut down Korea? Have a bad meat issue. It will
happen. Regulation is not bad. It is necessary to protect the
industry as a whole.
With regard to the report that you cited, sir, about the
National Academy of Science, I think you are talking about a
report that was in fact not peer reviewed, and was put aside as
being not completely peer reviewed, and based upon a limited
study.
In fact, there are many, many stressors in the Delta. We
understand that. And certainly pumping is one of the stressors.
So is the ammonia released from the Sacramento Municipal
Sanitation Project.
We understand that. Also, from my own operation, I run a
ranch or a farm in the Delta and, fortunately, the EPA
regulations, the clean water regulations, require that all of
us who operate in the Delta, and in the streams flowing into
the Delta, we have gotten together, and we are monitoring our
water. And when somebody is out of line, we find out who it is,
and we go after that person, and require them to clean up their
act. All of this is good for Jimmy Costa downstream, who wants
to pump.
But the reality is that the pumping is also a problem. We
need to deal with all of these things, and to simply say that
regulation is the problem is ignoring the fact that the problem
is us. It is all of us. It is the demand for water in the
urban, and it is the demand for water in the agriculture, and
it is the demand for water for the environment, and it is those
of us who are polluting the water. And we do it.
We need the regulatory environment to set up the framework
in place in dealing with the multiple interests. So, a
committee hearing such as this, and for whatever its purpose
is, OK, let's hear about the regulations. Fine. But,
simultaneously, we need to understand that the regulatory
environment is necessary because there are a whole heck of a
lot more of us on this planet today than there were 50, 60, or
100 years ago. We are going to have to live together and the
regulatory environment allows us to do that.
Now, with regard to the salmon, and let's focus directly on
those. There was a crash, was there not? And it was directly
associated with the pumping due to the dramatic increase in
pumping. Is that what you----
Mr. Pool. Are you directing that to me?
Mr. Garamendi. I am.
Mr. Pool. Well, yes. According to the study after study,
those fish are being lost, and they have this acoustical
tracking now where they can see exactly where fish is lost. And
even in the upper river, the fish are being lost because of the
pumping and the movement of the water, and the lifecycle of the
salmon.
Mr. Garamendi. In your opinion, and as someone who has been
involved in this forever, is the solution more hatcheries?
Mr. Pool. The solution--unfortunately, hatcheries are
mitigating for the dams, but hatchery fish are not--they are
inferior to wild fish. One of our problems in California is
that our hatchery fish are increasing, and the wild fish are
decreasing.
We do not want to stop the hatcheries. We rely on that for
business, but we have to improve the wild fish populations.
Mr. Garamendi. OK. There are a whole series of questions
that we ought to get into on hatcheries, and we ought to deal
with it. You have laid out the foundation for a much further,
and a much more detailed discussion on that.
I am going to let it go at that. We are going to go round
and round on this, I suspect, for some time, but we have to
look at this in a very holistic and in a very comprehensive
way.
The regulation in and of itself is not the--is part of the
overall solution, as well as part of the overall problem. There
are duplications and there are foolish regulations along the
way.
Rather than just generally trash regulations, I appreciate
your lists that you put together on the two pages. I would like
more detail. Most of that deals with the potential problem, and
not that the problem has been actually created. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
Mr. McClintock. Thank you. Mr. Labrador.
Mr. Labrador. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Norm, according to
the statement just made, regulation is not bad. It is necessary
to protect industry. I don't think you disagree with that, do
you?
Mr. Semanko. Congressman, no. We comply with FIFRA, and we
understand the purpose for it, and we want to make sure that we
can deliver clear, clean water to our folks.
Mr. Labrador. So what exactly are you trying to say,
because there seems to be an argument that is being made on the
other side that we are completely against all regulations.
Mr. Semanko. Well, Congressman, this issue arises from
litigation, and it is what I call gamesmanship by certain
national environmental groups who enjoy filing these lawsuits,
and frankly recouping attorneys fees.
Under FIFRA, there is no citizen suit provision. If someone
violates the label, and does not do what they are supposed to
do, and jeopardizes the environment, and kills fish, that is
clearly a violation of law, and something that the EPA can
enforce.
But there is no hook under the Clean Water Act, and through
years, and in fact decades of litigation, environmental groups
have found the hook through the argument that these products
are pollutants when they break down into the water, and
therefore require a discharge permit under the Clean Water Act.
So this entire regulatory standard that was not meant for this
context is applied over the top of the regulatory context that
was required.
It is just another piece of paper. It is another permit. It
brings in a whole another statute, and importantly for the
environmental groups, it brings in the citizen suit provision.
So, for example, if you under the regulations fail to do
something that is in the label, now you can be accorded a
$37,500 a day or occurrence Clean Water Act violation, and
attorneys fees go to the citizen suit, and the folks that bring
the citizen suit.
So we are saying avoid the duplicative regulations. We
understand FIFRA, and we agree with FIFRA. We agree with the
registration, and re-registration processes, because they
protect the environment.
Our folks understand them, and they are trained on those,
but this NPDES overlay on top of that. When you are talking
about something that increases by five times the current
regulated universe under NPDES, which is what this would do,
increase what we have been doing over the last 40 years by five
times. That is not what was intended, and so we appreciate
Congress, and the House in particular, helping to clarify that.
Mr. Labrador. So your concern is with taking advantage or
overuse of regulations, and misuse of the regulatory process;
is that correct?
Mr. Semanko. Congressman, yes, and frankly, the misuse of
the EPA's resources. The EPA has a lot of work to do out there
under the NPDES permit program, and other programs, and doing
this kind of paperwork exercise within an NPDES general permit,
when the Office of Pesticides is already fully regulating that,
the Office of Water that is over NPDES, has other things to do,
and it is just inconceivable that that much regulation, and
that much resources is going to be dedicated.
So equally we are concerned about the wise use of precious
taxpayer dollars that you all allocate.
Mr. Labrador. OK. In Idaho, there are numerous Federal
agencies that are responsible for the implementation of the
Endangered Species Act, like the Bureau of Reclamation, and the
United States Fish and Wildlife Services.
How does the coordination or lack thereof of Federal
agencies impact water users?
Mr. Semanko. Well, Congressman, it is incredibly important.
The Federal agencies sometimes look like a dysfunctional family
in their inability to communicate and get on the same page on
these regulations, and when they are frozen, and certainly when
they don't know how to act, it boxes our folks out, in terms of
getting the permissions, getting the permits granted, and
getting the reasonable terms and conditions granted that allow
us to proceed and to move forward.
So at the end of the day, the lack of decision, and the
delay in process, creates uncertainty amongst our folks, and an
inability to operate and move forward. That is a worst case
scenario.
And when they operate together, and we are able to work
with them, and when we get the biological opinion issued, as we
did in the walk of the Nez Perce Water Rights Settlement, and
the biological opinion that resulted from that, then things
work well, and we all understand what needs to be done to
protect the fish, and to deliver the water.
Mr. Labrador. OK. Now, you mentioned the regulatory bias
against water storage at EPA regional offices. Now, when water
storage is taken off the table, does that place pressure on
municipalities to find water from other sources, like the
purchase of agricultural water rights and the fallowing up of
farmland?
Mr. Semanko. Congressman, absolutely, as Mr. Keppen said
earlier, the pie is only so big. There is enough for
irrigation, and if there need to be additional water supplies
for other purposes, we need to look at building additional
storage.
Otherwise, it pits one interest against the other in this
scarce resource, and once you get through NEPA, and ASA, and
the Clean Water Act, the water is available, and it meets those
requirements, there ought to be discussion about additional
storage.
I can't believe that in the past that if we had made these
kinds of limitations that we would be where we are in the west
with water development.
Mr. Labrador. Thank you.
Mr. McClintock. Mr. Grijalva.
Mr. Grijalva. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Pool,
if I may, without the protections for salmon, will we see
fishing communities also dry up? And what will this do to the
opportunities that remain for a new generation of fishermen? A
younger generation? We hear one side of it, but I want to ask
you about this particular side.
Mr. Pool. Sure. We are already seeing the opportunities dry
up. The fishing season or the salmon fishing has essentially
been shut down for three years. Thousands of boats have been
abandoned, and they are in yards now being disposed of because
they couldn't pay their fees.
Communities from Morro Bay through Crescent City in
California, and on into Oregon, are hurting very badly right
now, and this can be recovered. Salmon can be recovered, and
our organizations have outlined policies to the State and
Federal Governments on what has to happen for them to be
recovered. These communities can recover, but we have a big job
ahead of us.
Mr. Grijalva. Thank you. Mr. Orme, as I understand it,
negotiations are ongoing, or are underway for the Navajo
Generating Station with EPA, and can you maybe outline for the
Committee what the owners are proactively doing at this point
to improve air quality outside of the EPA BART process that is
going on right now?
Mr. Orme. Yes, Congressman. The owners are adopting the low
NO
x
alternative, and implementing that before being
required to do it by the EPA or whatever that the BART finally
requires.
The stakeholder group that has been working to come up with
a recommendation to the EPA, which the EPA can accept or
reject, would provide a situation where the low NO
x

option, which we favor, would be implemented initially, and
then stricter standards would be adopted sometime in the
future, which would allow a transition of time to those
stricter admission standards, which could include the SCR
technology, or something as effective, but maybe less costly.
That appears to be the way the stakeholder process is
moving. That will ultimately be a recommendation to the EPA,
which they can reject or not.
Mr. Grijalva. So at this point, if I may, at this point the
negotiations are relative to the low NO
x
. It is an
interim transition step that is--I am assuming the stakeholders
will be recommending to the EPA as an interim step toward the
full implementation of the regulations as time goes forth?
And the timeline on that would be what? Do you know, from
this initial transition step, to what year?
Mr. Orme. The timeline has been discussed from the stricter
admission standards anywhere from 2020 to 2030 time period. But
I want to emphasize the point that the low NO
x

burners are being put in place now without any requirement by
the EPA yet.
The owners have just done that on their own accord to move
forward with that.
Mr. Grijalva. With the intention of making that
installation part of the transition period?
Mr. Orme. Correct.
Mr. Grijalva. OK. Thank you. I don't have any further
questions. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. McClintock. Thank you. Mr. Gosar.
Dr. Gosar. Mr. Pool, just as a quick followup to the Member
on the other side, fish hatcheries have had a big impact,
particularly if I am not mistaken, in our war against Whirling
Disease, has it not?
Mr. Pool. Oh, fish hatcheries are the life blood of a lot
of the industry. They take care of the losses of the fish for
the dams. There is quite a movement to analyze. There has been
a lot learned about fish, and fish hatcheries, and Whirling
Disease, and a lot of other things.
There is a big effort to improve hatchery quality, and to
more closely match the wild fish.
Dr. Gosar. I understand, but I wanted to make sure that got
in there. I would like to focus my next questions on the
regulatory aspect of NGS, Mr. Orme. And for Arizona, this is
extremely--in the southwest, it is extremely important, not
only that it has a thousand jobs that are on the line, and most
of them Native American. But this has a severe consequence to a
number of situations in Arizona.
Can you express if we lost NGS what kind of impact that
would have on the cost of irrigation, or water for irrigation
down the southern part of the State, and the impact if the
costs went up significantly?
Mr. Orme. Yes, Congressman. If we were to lose NGS, and if
the owners had to make the decision to shutter the plant, the
Central Arizona Project estimates that alternative power supply
to move CAP water would run in the range of 60 to 300 percent
more than what we are paying right now.
It would be completely and totally unaffordable for
agriculture. Agriculture, which is over 50 percent of the use
of CAP water now, would go off-line the minute that occurred.
That would obviously cost many jobs, and be very harmful to
the economy, and not only to the non-Indian areas of Central
Arizona, but also the reservation areas that depend on CAP
water for irrigation water as well, because they are required
to pay the costs of energy just like the non-Indian agriculture
users are.
Dr. Gosar. Well, I think this is a fabulous story. I look
particularly at the southern part of the State of Arizona. For
example, the Teddy Roosevelt Dam. A lot of the landowners, and
ranchers, and farmers, gave up their water just to get that dam
put into place.
The farmers, particularly in the southern part of the
district, did that as well did they not with CAP water, and
giving up some of those entitlements or water rights, to
actually have some water?
Dr. Gosar. Well, what we recently did in the 2004 Indian
Water Rights Settlement is that non-Indian agricultural water
users, the irrigation districts have held the long term
contracts of CAP water, and gave up those long term contracts
so the water would be available for reallocation, mostly for
Indian settlements, but also a fairly significant piece of M&I,
municipal and industrial use in the State.
And in return for partial relief from payment of their
distribution systems, and an assurance of a short term supply
of affordable CAP water through the year 2030, while the non-
Indian irrigators could figure out a transition away from CAP
water after that time.
One of our concerns in this with the NGS is that affordable
feature of CAP water to 2030 will not be provided because of
these requirements on the Navajo Station.
Dr. Gosar. Now, I know that we are sitting with a number of
Native American water settlements coming up here. So this has
some real dire consequences right now and in the future of
shaping of Arizona's water supply, as well as their
agriculture, does it not?
Mr. Orme. Yes, I would say that it does. With respect to
settlements in place, the largest is the Gila River Indian
community, and one feature of that settlement is that they were
to receive an affordable supply of CAP water indefinitely in
return for their winter's rights, which was to be free water.
And the cost of the energy increased for NGS threatens
again that affordability feature for them. If NGS were to be
shuttered altogether, and the Central Arizona Project would not
be able to sell Navajo surplus power, it is the revenues from
the sale of that power that go into the Lower Basin Development
Fund to fund not only the Gila River settlement, but future
Indian settlements as well.
That revenue stream would no longer exist, and would
jeopardize future settlements.
Dr. Gosar. A real quick question. Is there anything on the
horizon that could replace the Navajo Generating Station?
Mr. Orme. In my opinion, there is not.
Dr. Gosar. Five years?
Mr. Orme. No.
Dr. Gosar. Ten years?
Mr. Orme. No.
Dr. Gosar. Thank you.
Mr. McClintock. Thank you. Mr. Costa.
Mr. Costa. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, for this
hearing, and the future hearings that we are going to hold on
issues affecting waters of the west, and particularly obviously
our focus this afternoon seems to be on California.
Let me make just a couple of overlapping statements,
because I think my problem with the regulatory environment, and
the restrictions that we are dealing with, is the lack of
flexibility as they are applied.
But let me first make a couple of general statements. I do
agree that there are a number of stress factors that are
impacting fisheries. But the fact is that California produces
half of the Nation's fruits and vegetables, half of the
Nation's fruits and vegetables.
And we have an issue of food not only in our country as it
relates to hunger, but also the world, and water is going to be
the big issue in how we ensure that we can grow as much as we
can, not only in the Indian Nation, but in the world.
We have a host of issues that we deal with as it relates to
biological opinions that have been in place. We have had
numerous biological opinions in place on the Columbia River,
and they have been reconsulted, and we have established new
biological opinions. And that is not different than in the
Sacramento-San Joaquin Delta area.
The mortality rate. Since 2000, the National Marine
Fisheries established a jeopardy standard for winter runs of
chinook salmon. Originally, it was a 25 percent of the adult
population as a result of ocean fisheries. Now it is 20 percent
as of 2010. But for the smolts, for the impacts of the exports
that we were talking about here today, it is one percent. One
percent.
Now, Mr. Pool, I am symbiotical that the fishery, the
salmon fishery, was closed down for the last two years. As you
have testified, it has a dramatic impact. But when there was a
zero allocation to the farm communities on the west side over
the last three years, it had a devastating impact to us as
well.
And I am happy that they opened up the fisheries this year,
the salmon fisheries, for your folks. But you are allowing a 20
percent take. These are adult salmon that can come back and
spawn and repopulate. Not hatchery fish.
But we are saying a one percent take at the exports. I
don't understand the fairness, nor do I understand the
justification, for that extreme amount of differential on the
take.
Now, Mr. Pool, we have testified or we have stated that
exports are not the only stress factors. Do you agree with that
or not?
Mr. Pool. I agree they are not the only stress factors.
They are the most important stress factor.
Mr. Costa. Well, then you and I disagree on that point. On
the final draft on 11/28 of the San Joaquin River Fall Run
Chinook Salmon Population, the Department of Fish and Game
reviewed the scientific analysis on exports in salmon
production, and found that it appears that the Delta export are
not having the negative influence on the San Joaquin River
salmon production they once thought they had.
But you disagree with the Department of Fish and Game
analysis don't you?
Mr. Pool. Yes. I have to confess that I am not privy to all
of those details, and so I am sorry, but I can't answer.
Mr. Costa. OK. Well, can you refer to me the scientific
analysis that supports your position that the pumping, that the
export pumping, is the major reason of the decline of the
salmon?
Mr. Pool. Yes. I think if you go back to the biological
opinion and the science behind that. There were six years of
studies.
Mr. Costa. But that was under reconsultation as ordered by
the Court?
Mr. Pool. Certain small pieces.
Mr. Costa. Dr. Ken Newman wrote on a peer review report the
evaluation of the Sacramento-San Joaquin River Scholl to
Juvenile salmon survival studies, and have you reviewed Dr.
Newman's report?
Mr. Pool. Not on the San Joaquin. I have focused on the
solution to our salmon problems are in the Sacramento for the
most part. So that is where most of us in the industry have
focused on.
Mr. Costa. Well, you talked about, and you are familiar
with, I am sure, the National Geographics study that talked
about the decline of salmon from Alaska, all the way down the
Canadian West Coast, down to Washington and Oregon, are you
not?
Mr. Pool. I am. Ocean conditions for two years impacted the
fishery pretty much along the coast. A lot of those things have
survived.
Mr. Costa. And on the Napa River as well?
Mr. Pool. Everywhere except the Central Valley, there have
been some pretty good recoveries.
Mr. Costa. Well, if there was not a recovery, you testified
that there was a recovery, and that is why we have opened up
the salmon season this year, right?
Mr. Pool. There was a recovery, yes, for a couple of
reasons. Regulatory reasons. The Court shut the pumps down in
2008.
Mr. Costa. But the Court also said that the scientific
study did not support the biological opinion. The best science
was not being used.
Mr. Pool. Well, maybe----
Mr. Costa. I mean, why are we having a reconsultation of
both biological opinions?
Mr. Pool. I don't think we are having----
Mr. Costa. Well, we are.
Mr. Pool. We are responding to lawsuits by the water
contractors.
Mr. Costa. The Judge has ruled that the best science was
not used, and so they are reconsulting.
Mr. McClintock. I am afraid that I am going to have to
intervene here. The gentleman's time has expired. We will go to
a second round of questions in a few minutes.
Mr. Costa. Thank you.
Mr. McClintock. Actually, we will go to that second round
of questioning right now, and I will begin. Mr. Keppen, could
you give us a picture of the human toll of these policies for
the family farms in the San Joaquin Valley, or in the Klamath
Valley?
Mr. Keppen. Well, Mr. Chairman, as I testified here a
little bit ago, in Klamath--and I would actually ask to have
this document maybe resubmitted to the Subcommittee. I provided
testimony of personal experiences of farmers and business
people in the Klamath Falls area after the 2001 water shutoff,
and how their lives were impacted in a lot of ways that you
just don't read about in the papers. And it has to do with
financing, ability to get loans, mental health issues, and so I
guess to be brief, if I could perhaps submit that testimony to
the Committee and the Committee could review that.
Mr. McClintock. How many families have been thrown out of
work by these policies?
Mr. Keppen. Well, in 2001, and again this is just based on
my personal experience in Klamath Falls, there were 1,400
family farms that were impacted and did not receive water, and
they were all impacted one way or the other.
Mr. McClintock. How many in the San Joaquin Valley? I have
seen estimates----
Mr. Keppen. Tens of thousands I would say. There is a lot
of controversy over the exact number, but I would say tens of
thousands. I would say hundreds of thousands of acres to just
generally characterize it.
Mr. McClintock. Thank you. Mr. Pool, you said that there is
a difference between hatchery salmon and wild salmon. Would you
explain to us the genetic differences between those two types
of fish? It seems to me that the difference is between a baby
born at a hospital, and a baby born at home.
Mr. Pool. In genetic differences, I am not sure that you
will find a lot, but----
Mr. McClintock. Do you find any?
Mr. Pool. You find differences in their surviving.
Mr. McClintock. Well, isn't that because we mutilate them
when we release them by cutting off their fins in the case of
the Klamath? I understand the policy is to remove the left or
right lower mandible, and that is the jaw bone of the fish,
before they are released?
Mr. Pool. I think that most of those policies----
Mr. McClintock. And we wonder why they don't do quite as
well in the natural environment, and yet even so, tens of
thousands return every year to spawn.
Mr. Pool. Well, I agree that there is concern about those
fins. They have to pull the fin, and it is perfectly safe to
remove, and that is where most of the marking of the fish takes
place.
Mr. McClintock. Well, in Alaska, the marking is done simply
by varying nutrients that does not require any mutilation, and
those fish seem to get along just fine.
Mr. Pool. A lot of fish get along fine if they have the
ability to reproduce, and spawn, and migrate. Salmon will
recover quickly if the conditions are good for them.
Mr. McClintock. And again we want to see an abundance of
salmon. We want to see healthy, thriving salmon populations as
well. What struck me as being bizarre was to discover that the
huge populations being produced by these fish hatcheries are
simply ignored in the counts for Endangered Species Act
population counts, as well as in mitigation to assure that we
do have large abundant thriving populations. And again that is
the objective that we are after. Mr. Keppen, and Mr. Semanko,
and Mr. Noble, I have one question and if each of you could
take a 30 second whack at it. There are a lot of water users
that we are hearing from that believe that the Obama
Administration has come up with proposed rules called the
Principles and Guidelines That Govern New Water Infrastructure
Construction, and that are going to stack the deck against new
water storage. What are your views on these policies? Just very
briefly in 30 seconds.
Mr. Keppen. I will take a crack at it. In a nutshell, the
old traditional analysis that they used to figure out if a
water project was viable or not was kind of a cost benefit sort
of approach.
This factors in the environment. So the environment has to
be looked at with the same sort of attention. I guess our
concern is the environment issues might be elevated above other
issues, and that is kind of the language that you see in the
draft rules right now.
Mr. McClintock. Mr. Noble.
Mr. Noble. Mr. Chairman, I agree with Mr. Keppen. The risk
that is being run by these guidelines is that we are going to
elevate as the Endangered Species Act has the environment and
the environmental uses threatened the endangered species above
human consideration, without giving the flexibility to deal
with the issue.
Mr. McClintock. Mr. Semanko.
Mr. Semanko. The only thing I would add, Mr. Chairman, is
that these projects are projects largely that Congress has
decided to authorize, and they are already subject to NEPA, and
ESA, and the Clean Water Act, and all these things. And what
you are doing potentially through the principles and guidelines
is inserting the substitution of judgment for what Congress has
decided, and intruding Congress' areas. That is one of the
things that we are concerned about.
Mr. McClintock. Great. Thank you. Ms. Napolitano.
Mrs. Napolitano. Thank you, Mr. Chair, and I would start
off with a clarification for the record. That the NOAA salmon
biological opinion is not under reconsultation, and the science
has been upheld by the National Academy of Sciences, and that
is for the record.
Now, Mr. Noble, in your testimony, you mentioned that
Reclamation currently has programs in place to assist canal
safety. How do we ensure that the reclamation of water canals
is safe, and that another canal breach like the one in Fernley,
Nevada, will not happen again?
Mr. Noble. Congresswoman Napolitano, canals and levees are
not designed or built to fail. But I am not sure that there is
any program that can guarantee that they won't. Currently,
Reclamation has introduced an aggressive program following
Public Law 111-11 to inspect canals in urban areas, and the
experience that we have had with those inspections is that they
are thorough and detailed, and are looking at issues that
present the greatest risk.
Mrs. Napolitano. Thank you. Mr. Scholl, you mentioned in
your testimony that a culture collaboration is necessary in
solving our environmental concerns, while preserving industry.
There are others who believe that removing all regulations
would be the solution. Do you believe that removing all
regulations would solve all of our Ag problems?
Mr. Scholl. No.
Mrs. Napolitano. Why?
Mr. Scholl. Well, some of the reasons that I stated in my
testimony, if you talk to farmers, and I think they understand
that there needs to be rules and fair play. There are certain
standards, or minimum standards, that need to be met.
And lots of times, I think we have concerns in the farming
communities ourselves. There are issues that we need to make
sure that there is somebody there to make sure that the
environment is clean, and that fair play is taking place.
But again as I said in my statement, I think what we do
from there is really the critical issue. You know, kind of the
approach that we have taken to addressing point sources doesn't
necessarily work for the way that we deal with non-point
sources.
Particularly when you are dealing with a group of people
who have a lot of self-interest in making sure that they take
steps, and take actions, to make sure that the environment is
protected.
That is really the part that we think the focus needs to be
on, and that changes could be made.
Mrs. Napolitano. Thank you. Mr. Pool, during 2009 and 2010,
what percent of fishermen were put out of work?
Mr. Pool. 100 percent. People talk about 40 percent. We had
100 percent unemployment, and I know hundreds and hundreds of
people that still have found no employment.
Mrs. Napolitano. And so your economy has suffered?
Mr. Pool. The economy has suffered tremendously.
Mrs. Napolitano. Thank you, sir. Go ahead. OK. Mr. Orme,
you mentioned Tribal trusts responsibilities, including water
right settlements. Why is it important to settle Indian water
rights?
Mr. Orme. Representative Napolitano, it is important to
give certainty to all water use sectors. Certainly my
experience in Arizona has been that until you determine the
Native American water rights in any particular adjudication, it
is really hard to know what anybody else will have, given in
most cases their winter rights claims.
So it is important to settle Indian claims where you can to
provide the certainty for what water is available to meet other
claims within an adjudication and settlement.
Mrs. Napolitano. Are Native Americans good stewards of
water?
Mr. Orme. I don't represent any Native Americans myself. My
irrigation districts are adjoining to several large
reservations, the Gila River Indian Reservation, and the Tohono
O'odham Reservation, and as far as I am aware of, those Tribes
do a good job with their water resources.
Mrs. Napolitano. Thank you. Mr. Keppen, in your testimony,
you say that Federal agencies should work collaboratively with
stakeholders to find realistic solutions that benefit both
fisheries and local economies.
Do you believe the Klamath settlement agreements are an
honest and cooperative effort to achieve by all affected
parties realistic locally developed solutions in that area?
Mr. Keppen. Well, I would say yes, and primarily based on
my own experience, because again I used to run an association
at a time when we were suing the Tribes, and the Tribes were
suing us. We were attacking each other in the papers. Just the
amount of conflict and the money that was just thrown down the
drain because of that----
Mrs. Napolitano. And who benefitted from that?
Mr. Keppen. I have no answer, Congresswoman.
Mrs. Napolitano. The attorneys.
Mr. Keppen. And so I guess relatively speaking, what I see
now is improved relations between some of those parties, and
for me, I am not a big fan of litigation. No offense to my
fellow attorneys up here. I am not an attorney by the way like
these guys.
I feel that there has just been an improved relationship.
Some people are actually trying to work together
collaboratively, instead of lobbying and suing each other.
Mrs. Napolitano. Let's do that here in Congress.
Mr. Keppen. I think that it is a pretty good example.
Mrs. Napolitano. We should do that here in Congress, too.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. McClintock. You are welcome, and last but not least,
Mr. Costa.
Mr. Costa. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. Again, I
think it is a false choice to be putting salmon against
farmers. The fact is that we need successful, sustainable
ability to farm, as well as to fish.
And my problem has been that too often this is where the
discussion and the debate ends up. We have a water system in
California that was designed for 20 million people, and we have
38 million people today, and we are going to have 50 million
people by the year 2030.
Unless we stop litigating and arguing about salmon fish
versus food, versus farm workers, versus farmers, we are not
going to solve the problems, and so we have to fix the problems
in the Delta.
Mr. Keppen, the 2010 National Academy of Sciences report--
it is a preliminary report--and the final report is not done
yet, entitled, Scientific Assessment of Alternatives for
Reducing Water Management Effects of Threatened and Endangered
Species in the California Bay-Delta, found general conceptual
support for the aspect that the biological opinions. But didn't
the National Academy of Sciences criticized specific management
measures as not being well supported?
Mr. Keppen. Yes, Congressman Costa, and I think before you
arrived, we discussed this briefly.
Mr. Costa. Then let me go on, because I don't want to
repeat that.
Mr. Keppen. Sure.
Mr. Costa. In listening to the river report that the
Department of the Interior did in 2008, they again indicated
that the reasonable and prudent alternatives were not working
in the best science.
And in particular regarding the Delta Smelt Biological
Opinion, the National Academy of Sciences found that there is
substantial uncertainty regarding the amount of flows that
should trigger reduction in exports on page 5. Isn't that
correct?
Mr. Keppen. Yes.
Mr. Costa. And the National Academy of Sciences found that
a historical distribution of smelt in which the restrictions on
exports were based no longer exist?
Mr. Keppen. That is my understanding, yes.
Mr. Costa. And with respect to the salmon biological
opinion, the National Academy of Sciences concluded--and this
is where I guess I take issue with my colleague--that the
effectiveness of reducing exports to improve salmonid survival
is less certain, and that the rates of the export have a weak
influence on the survival rates, and that I believe was on page
59.
The final criticism of the two biological opinions
expressed by the National Academy was a lack of quantitative
analytical framework that ties the two biological opinions
together within the species, between both smelt and salmonid.
This type of systematic, formalized analysis, was we
believe necessary to determine an objective opinion on the
actions based upon the reports the report found to be a serious
deficiency, Mr. Keppen. Have you seen that sort of deficient
analysis employed in areas of restrictions on the project
operations?
Mr. Keppen. Yes, Congressman. Again, I would point to
Klamath. The Klamath and Central Valley Project issues are very
similar, and I think both reports identify that the National
Academy put together, identify the need to do a holistic sort
of approach, and look at all the stressors in the watershed.
Mr. Costa. Do you believe that when we look at the
regulatory framework that agency biologists often times claim
preconceived, unsubstantiated beliefs about the effects of
water projects on this?
Mr. Keppen. You know, I do in some cases, and I think there
are a lot of reports out there that have looked for some sort
of a statistically significant relationship between exports and
like salmon smolt survival.
And each report kind of concludes that the relationship
cannot be established, but the agency biologists continue to
say that it is in there, but just masked by other data.
Mr. Costa. They just have not found it?
Mr. Keppen. Right. There are reports out there, and I can
provide you with a list of those reports.
Mr. Costa. I mean, we want to see the salmon recovery. It
is in our interests to see the salmon recovery, just as we want
to see farmers have a sustainable supply of water. I mean,
those goals should not be mutually exclusive.
The Judge said in the opinion as it related to the salmon
biological opinion, that there are serious questions on whether
there is support in the record for the general proposition that
exports reduce the survival of salmonid in the interior Delta.
Was that not correct on the consolidated salmonid case?
Mr. Keppen. That is my understanding, but again I have not
been real, real close to that particular situation, but that is
my general understanding, yes.
Mr. Costa. And the record is that the Judge went further on
to say that the record does not support a finding that the
specified flows to export ratios imposed by these actions that
were necessary to avoid jeopardy, and adverse the modification
of any listed species, which is why in essence we are going
back to the drawing board just as they did with the Columbia
River to try to get this right.
Mr. Keppen. That is correct, and I think--you know, Mr.
Semanko might want to weigh in on the issues on the Columbia,
but again that is another project that comes to mind.
And to get back to your earlier question of an area where
it seems that the agencies focus usually just on irrigation
flows or dams, and a lot of times these other stressors aren't
reviewed.
Mr. Costa. I guess the real debate, Mr. Chairman, and my
time is expired, but let me just close on this note, is that we
have a difficult time coming to agreement when we talk about
the most multiple stress factors, and in this case, in the
Sacramento and San Joaquin River Delta System, as to trying to
accurately determine which of those stress factors are
associated to the loss in the case of the salmon or the smelt.
We know that they are all impacting them, but there is
serious disagreement as to what degree certain stress factors
over other stress factors are causing the decline.
Mr. McClintock. Thank you. Mr. Garamendi.
Mr. Garamendi. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Costa, for
really raising this issue. What was being discussed here in the
last few moments is really the science, not the regulations
that require the science to be done.
And I think we need to be pretty clear about exactly what
we are talking about here. Clearly the science is and the Judge
found it to be inadequate, and back to the scientific drawing
board to see if we can get a more accurate description, or a
more accurate understanding of the science.
But again the regulations that are in place protecting the
species are not being called into question here. What is being
called into question is the science that follows that is to
deal with those regulations.
And I agree that we ought to follow the science. We ought
not short-circuit the science at all, and I agree with Mr.
Costa and others that there are multiple stressors in the
Delta.
As I said a few moments ago, some of those are caused by
the Delta farming interests themselves, and we are working to
clean that up, and undoubtedly the Delta--and I live in the
Delta, and farm in the Delta.
We will be hammered if we continue to dump pesticides or
other bad things into the water, as we should, but again it is
not the regulations. The question is about the science and the
adequacy of the science.
And an issue that I would like to move to is the storage
issue. Now, this is really important, and for all of the west,
the storage of water is important. Many studies on storage are
underway as we speak, and some projects are underway.
I believe the Los Vaqueros Reservoir will begin as soon as
the rains stop, which is hopefully not soon. But nonetheless
that will be done. I asked Jim a moment ago, Mr. Costa, about
the Temperance Flat. I would hope that study proceeds, and we
will out the issues there.
I know that there is a hydroelectric power issue there, and
there are also some environmental issues, as well as the effect
that it may have on the San Joaquin itself. Other storage sites
and other storage reservoirs, we ought to proceed with those
studies, all of them, including the underground water storage
potential throughout California.
We do need storage, and we ought to proceed with those.
Ultimately, we are going to have to deal with the costs of
those systems and who is going to pay for it. But I would urge
this Committee, in every case possible, to push the storage
studies along so that we understand completely the benefits,
the costs, and whatever the issues are involved in those.
Mr. Costa. Would the gentleman yield?
Mr. Garamendi. Sure.
Mr. Costa. I just want to underline your point there,
because this year, with 165 percent of snowpack, and we have
record runoffs. We have flooding in California. Yet, Southern
California is getting under the State Water Project like 70
percent of their allocation.
My westside area was receiving 55 percent until this week,
and then they moved that to 65 percent. But the ability to
plan, it gets back to a broken water system, and when you have
great snow years and rain years like this year, you know that
we need to do a better job on our storage, and in our water
supply. I thank the gentleman for yielding.
Mr. Garamendi. Well, you covered that point well. I just
want to wrap up on the Delta here. The Delta is in deep trouble
for a variety of reasons. The aquatic species in the Delta are
in deep, deep trouble. There are a variety of reasons.
It is incumbent upon all of us for the purposes of the
economy, of the Delta, of the fishing economy, as well as the
agricultural economy, that we proceed with considerable speed
and attentiveness in including money for the studies to get the
science right.
And to do the very best that we can to understand the
stressors, all of them, and to mitigate those that are possible
to mitigate. It is of utmost importance for everybody involved.
Again, it is not the regulatory system. That sets the
parameters. It is the science underlying it that we need to
really be busy about. With that, I guess I didn't ask a
question, but Jimmy, thanks for your help. Excuse me, Mr.
Costa, thank you for your help.
Mr. McClintock. I believe that concludes all the time that
we have allocated for questions. I would like to thank all of
our witnesses for their valuable testimony. Members of the
Subcommittee may have additional questions for witnesses, and
we would ask that you respond to those in writing, and the
hearing record will be open for 10 business days to receive
those responses, and if there is no further business, then
without objection, the Subcommittee stands adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 4:08 p.m., the Subcommittee was adjourned.]

[Additional material submitted for the record follows:]

[A statement submitted for the record by Doug Headrick on
behalf of the Santa Ana Sucker Task Force, follows:]

Statement submitted for the record by Doug Headrick, General Manager,
San Bernardino Valley Municipal Water District, on behalf of the Santa
Ana Sucker Task Force

Chairman McClintock and Members of the Committee, thank you for
this opportunity to submit testimony for the record. My name is Doug
Headrick, and I am the General Manager of the San Bernardino Valley
Municipal Water District. I am contacting you today as a representative
of the Santa Ana Sucker Task Force, a group of thirteen water agencies,
flood control districts and cities from Southern California who have
banded together in the face of regulatory overreach by the US Fish and
Wildlife Service. The Task Force agencies serve almost three million
Southern Californians and cross numerous Congressional districts.
Member agencies of the Task Force are: San Bernardino Valley Municipal
Water District, Western Municipal Water District, City of San
Bernardino Municipal Water Department, City of Riverside Public
Utilities Department, San Bernardino Valley Water Conservation
District, East Valley Water District, City of Redlands, Yucaipa Valley
Water District, Bear Valley/Crafton Water Companies, Riverside County
Flood Control District, and Big Bear Municipal Water District.
The USFWS, under heavy political and legal pressure by the Center
for Biological Diversity, recently set aside their own carefully
defined designation of the critical habitat of the Santa Ana Sucker and
has now expanded the territory into areas that guarantee dire economic
consequences for our communities. Worse, the addition of these new
areas is not supported by the known biology of the species. This
situation is the subject of my testimony.
Background on the Santa Ana Sucker and the Task Force:
The Santa Ana Sucker is a small fish that lives in the Santa Ana
River and has been listed as a Threatened Species under the Endangered
Species Act since 2001. The fish has been the subject of much regional
concern and has been protected for over ten years by the state of
California and local agencies under a Species Management Plan. Members
of our Task Force have worked with Fish and Wildlife to study the fish
and monitor its progress, and many of us have spent great sums of time
and money doing so. We all recognize the important role that we play in
protecting the delicate ecosystems of Southern California, and we do so
willingly.
In 2005, the USFWS established an area of Critical Habitat for the
fish, a process which my agency and many others in the Task Force
participated in and remember well. At the time, the Service proposed
that a very broad region be included in the designation. Ultimately,
they decided not to designate the dry upper Santa Ana River areas as
critical habitat, finding that these areas were not, and I quote,
``essential to the conservation of the species'' and that the enormous
costs to the Inland Empire's economy far outweighed any benefits to the
species. Our water agencies have subsequently been successfully
conserving the Santa Ana Sucker, and will continue to do so. Our
efforts have included working with the California Department of Fish
and Game to fund the efforts of the Santa Ana Sucker Conservation Team
to recover and restore its habitats. In addition, we have clearly and
repeatedly expressed to the USFWS our willingness to cooperatively
design and protect habitat for the Santa Ana Sucker because we care
about the health of the fish.
After the 2005 process concluded, everyone in the region considered
the issue to be well-settled. My agency and many others undertook long-
term planning for construction of infrastructure and water supply
projects which are critical to our region. However, in December 2009,
the USFWS announced that they would revise the Critical Habitat. This
was done without giving any scientific or economic rationale for doing
so. Certainly, nothing in the biological data showed the species to be
in decline, and the USFWS has not produced any such data. A legal
settlement between the USFWS and the Center for Biological Diversity
directed the Service to undertake a review of the Sucker's habitat, but
it did not require a habitat expansion. Moreover, the lawsuit
settlement did not override existing law.
The Task Force I represent today was organized in early 2010 in
response to the US Fish and Wildlife Service's announcement that it
would re-visit the Critical Habitat for the Santa Ana Sucker. We were
alarmed at the announcement because of the lack of justification by the
Service. With the USFWS' announcement of the Final Critical Habitat
Designation for the Santa Ana Sucker in December of 2010, our fears
were realized because the decision totally disregards the scientific
and economic realities which should have been central to the agency's
decision based on the requirements of the Endangered Species Act. In
short, the Service did not follow its own rules or Federal law.
Problems with the Revised Critical Habitat
Allow me to underscore the fact that none of the areas that USFWS
has newly designated currently or have ever supported a population of
Santa Ana suckers. The Endangered Species Act requires a very high
standard for the designation of unoccupied territory, specifically:
that the territory be ``essential'' for the species' preservation.
USFWS' proposed rule ignores that requirement and also ignores its
prior determination that these areas were not ``essential'' to the
preservation of the species. By contrast, the California State Water
Resources Control Board recently spent considerable time analyzing the
needs of the Santa Ana Sucker before granting water rights to my agency
and Western Municipal Water District of Riverside County. They found
that the diversion of water from the upper reaches of the Santa Ana
River, where the fish has never been in evidence, would not interfere
with the public trust resource of the suckers. With the recent Critical
Habitat expansion, we are worried that the millions of dollars of
public money invested in securing this new water supply for the benefit
of those we serve are in jeopardy.
Amazingly, the USFWS has included areas of dry riverbed in the
habitat for this fish. These stretches of river are periodically wet
when Southern California gets a lot of rain, but they are bone dry for
an average of nine to eleven months a year. No fish currently live, nor
is there any evidence that a sustainable population of Suckers ever
lived, in these reaches of the Santa Ana river. Members of the
Committee, I am an engineer by training, but I picked up enough biology
along the way to know that fish cannot live in dry riverbeds. This
represents the USFWS's greatest overreach since there is no evidence
that these areas have ever been occupied by Santa Ana suckers, let
alone that they are ``essential'' to the species' preservation.
There are some wet areas of the Santa Ana River that have been
added in the revised habitat; however, they are subject to flooding and
otherwise do not have the proper substrates, water temperatures or
other environmental conditions needed for the Santa Ana sucker.
Importantly, these creeks and the dry areas of the upper Santa Ana
River are subject to periodic flooding that are an entirely normal part
of Southern California's weather cycle. These floods send water and
cobble stone down the river to the where the Suckers are located and
fulfill its needs. A critical habitat designation is totally irrelevant
since these flows are entirely natural. A habitat designation would
have no meaningful impact on the volume of water or cobble involved.
Membership of the Santa Ana Sucker Task Force includes cities,
water districts and other agencies that provide critical services in
the region and are undertaking projects to improve the quality of life
for all Southern Californians. Together, we repeatedly presented
scientific and economic information to the agency and participated at
every available opportunity. Unfortunately, much of this effort was in
vain.
Consequences of the USFWS Decision
Members of the Committee, I would not be appearing today if it was
not for the enormous water supply and economic consequences that the
reopening of the Santa Ana Sucker habitat, just five years after the
issue was settled, can have on the communities that I am representing
here today. As you no doubt know, water is a huge issue in Southern
California. In part, this is because of the impact of repeated
droughts. In part, it is because Southern California's growth, 70% of
which is simply the natural increase of births over deaths in our
families with 2.1 million more people expected to live in the inland
area between 2008-2035.
Taking a very broad view of the problem, this decision aggravates
the water shortages currently being experienced in the entire state of
California and the Southwest region of our nation. Restrictions on
drawing water from the Delta have a widespread effect, and one of the
most effective methods of compensating for reduced Delta water supplies
is the creation of reliable local water supplies.
The expanded Critical Habitat for the Santa Ana Sucker directly
opposes our efforts to capture stormwater, recharge our basins and
reduce our reliance on imported water. Member agencies of the Task
Force want to undertake water recycling projects, desalination efforts
and flood control projects which will expand our supplies of local
water and recharge our depleted groundwater basins. We know that these
projects will save money for our customers and make our communities
drought-proof while reducing pressure on the Sacramento--San Joaquin
Delta. The Critical Habitat designation will prohibit important
projects from going forward. Here, it is important to understand that
the dry, ephemeral reaches of the upper Santa Ana River are where those
of us concerned about water supplies have worked for years to capture
and conserve water that our periodic rainfall would normally send to
the Pacific Ocean. For a century, this dry riverbed has been the site
of spreading basins where some of our mountain runoff is captured,
allowing it to seep into an underground aquifer, equivalent in size to
Lake Shasta. If this area becomes habitat, access to this historical
local supply of water will be lost.
Meanwhile, several years ago Congress financed the Seven-Oaks Dam
on the Santa Ana River to provide downstream protection from what the
Army Corps of Engineers called the greatest risk for catastrophic
flooding west of the Mississippi River. This opened the possibility of
storing some mountain runoff behind the dam, further increasing local
water supplies. Together with monies from our local agencies, Congress
authorized spending to alter the dam's design for that purpose. The
California State Water Resources Control Board later spent considerable
time analyzing the needs of the Sucker and granted rights to this
``new'' water to our local agencies. They found that capturing this
water would not harm the Sucker since it came from areas where the fish
has never existed. Also, they found that it would not harm the Sucker
since natural water and cobble moving flows below the dam were
sufficient to satisfy its needs. Should the habitat expansion be
granted, our rights and access to this water would be
nullified...violating Congress's clear intention.
Loss of the water from these two efforts, plus several others by
local agencies working in the normally dry, ephemeral upper reaches of
the Santa Ana River added to the Sucker habitat, would mean the loss of
up to 125,800 acre feet of water a year to the Inland Empire. If it
could be replaced, the 25 year cost would be $2.87 billion. If local
taxpayers could put aside money today to buy this water, using a 3%
interest rate that is logical in today's economy, the cost would be
$1.87 billion. Fish & Wildlife used several tricks to have their
economists lower this number, such as using an unrealistic 7% rate.
Still, they ended up with a $694 million present day cost to local
taxpayers. All this for the inclusion of a dry habitat zone that has
nothing truly to do with helping the fish.
Worse by far, however, is the fact that it is highly unlikely that
the 125,800 acre feet of local water that would be lost could be
replaced at any cost. Thus, in March 2011, with California's snow pack
at 165% of normal, the State Water Project estimated that it will only
be able to supply its regional water agencies with 70% of their current
water allocations. In recent years those shares were 50% in 2010, 40%
in 2009, 35% in 2008 and 60% in 2007. If we need more water from the
State Water Project, we will very likely not be able to get it.
California law mandates that local water agencies must certify a 20
year supply of water before any major residential, retail, office or
industrial project can be built. The San Bernardino and Riverside
region, with a current unemployment rate of over 13%, desperately needs
economic development. When that law is combined with the restricted
flow of water to Southern California because of the Delta Smelt
situation and the restriction of the Inland Empire's local water supply
with the Santa Ana Sucker, we come close to having the Endangered
Species Act control growth and economic activity in Southern
California. Despite that chilling result, and the fact that this issue
was repeatedly raised with Fish & Wildlife, their economic analysis of
the proposed expansion of the Sucker habitat did not even evaluate this
issue. Yet, the impact would run into the billions and billions of
dollars.
Next steps for the Task Force:
Right now, our Task Force is undertaking a thorough review of the
ruling that the designation should be expanded into areas that will
harm our economy, but do nothing for the Santa Ana Sucker. After that
review is completed, the Task Force will file a formal notice with the
Service outlining the deficiencies in their decision. From the point of
that filing, the USFWS will have 60 days to either make changes to the
Critical Habitat designation or leave it the same. The Task Force
remains hopeful that the agency will consider all of the
relevantscientific and economic information during this next phase of
the process. In the meantime, I ask the Committee to please undertake
an active role in oversight of the USFWS and its use of the Endangered
Species Act as a regulatory tool.
______

[A statement submitted for the record by David Modeer,
General Manager, Central Arizona Project, follows:]

Statement submitted for the record by David Modeer, General Manager,
Central Arizona Project

As General Manager of the Central Arizona Project (CAP), I thank
Chairman McClintock, Ranking Member Napolitano, and other members of
the Committee for the opportunity to submit for the record written
testimony for the Oversight Hearing on ``Creating Abundant Water and
Power Supplies and Job Growth by Restoring Common Sense to Federal
Regulations.'' Our goal at CAP is to provide a reliable and sustainable
supply of Colorado River water to cities, industries, farms, and Tribal
users in a service area that includes over 80 percent of the state's
population. We have successfully achieved this goal for the past 25
years.
Background
The Central Arizona Project, constructed by the Bureau of
Reclamation (BOR) for the State of Arizona, is a multi-purpose water
resource development and management project that delivers Colorado
River water into central and southern Arizona. The largest supplier of
renewable water in Arizona, the CAP delivers an average of over 1.5
million acre-feet of Arizona's 2.8 million acre-foot Colorado River
entitlement each year to municipal and industrial users, agricultural
irrigation districts, and Indian communities. The CAP meets
approximately 50 percent of municipal demand within its service area,
including 45 percent of the City of Phoenix's total water demand and
nearly 80 percent of the City of Tucson's water demand by the year
2020. In addition, 47 percent of the long-term CAP entitlement is
dedicated to Indian Tribal use, while 41 percent of current CAP
deliveries support non-Indian agricultural production.
These supplies of renewable water are integral to the economy of
the State of Arizona and to the economies of the Navajo Nation, the
Hopi Tribe, and other Native American communities. CAP has also helped
the State of Arizona meet its water management and regulatory
objectives of reducing groundwater use and ensuring availability of
groundwater as a supplemental water supply during future droughts.
CAP infrastructure includes a 336-mile-long delivery system with 14
pumping plants and one combination pumping/generating facility; 10
siphons that carry water under riverbeds and washes; three tunnels;
over 45 turnouts that connect the CAP aqueduct with consumers' systems;
a large storage reservoir; and a state-of-the-art control center. The
Central Arizona Water Conservation District (CAWCD) was established in
1971 as the state agency that manages and operates the CAP system,
collects revenues from ratepayers and, since substantial project
completion in 1993, repays the federal government for the reimbursable
costs of construction.
The Colorado River Basin Project Act allowed the federal government
to participate in the non-federal Navajo Generating Station (NGS), near
Page, Arizona, to provide power for pumping CAP water as an alternative
to building additional dams on the Colorado River. Construction of NGS
was the result of an environmental compromise brokered by then-
Secretary of the Interior Stewart Udall. In addition to providing CAP
pumping energy, NGS also provides electricity to retail customers in
Arizona, Nevada and California. BOR's share of NGS' annual output is
24.3 percent, or 546,750 kilowatts per year for the benefit of CAP.
NGS was constructed by the Salt River Project Agricultural
Improvement and Power District of Arizona, now part of the Salt River
Project (SRP). In addition to BOR and SRP, other participants in NGS
are NVEnergy (formerly Nevada Power Co.), Tucson Electric Power Co.,
and Los Angeles Department of Water and Power.
CAP maintains an ongoing, constructive dialogue with BOR and other
federal agencies, including the Environmental Protection Agency, to
discuss issues of mutual interest and concern. CAP also works closely
with its customers regarding their needs and concerns. Our ongoing
focus includes collaborative efforts to:

Manage water resources sustainably in partnership
with CAP customers, BOR, the Colorado River states, and others
to assure long-term, affordable supplies of water;

Maintain access to critical energy supplies,
including working with the NGS participants and others to
reduce air emissions and explore clean-energy options for the
future;

Work with Tribes and others, as appropriate, to
fulfill provisions of Indian water rights settlements; and

Collaborate with other agencies on data- and
information-sharing on water quality issues facing the Lower
Colorado River.
Critical Regulatory Issues--Water and Energy
Energy Needs: To deliver water to its customers, CAP moves over 500
billion gallons of Colorado River water over 300 miles and nearly 3,000
feet uphill. Moving water across this distance and up this elevation
requires approximately 2.8 million megawatt hours of electricity,
making CAP the largest end user of electricity in Arizona. Nearly all
of CAP's power is derived from the coal-fired Navajo Generating Station
near Lake Powell; the plant is essentially the sole source of power for
pumping CAP water.
Regulatory Issues: NGS is near numerous national parks, monuments,
and wilderness areas, and controlling plant emissions has been and
still remains a priority for CAP and the plant participants. Pursuing
that commitment, in the1990's NGS participants invested over $400
million in scrubbers to reduce sulfur dioxide emissions. In 2008, the
plant began voluntary installation of additional environmental controls
to reduce smog-forming nitrogen oxide (NO
x
), with completion
expected by the end of 2011. The low-NO
x
burners with
separated over-fire air (LNB/SOFA) will cost approximately $45.2
million for installation on all three units at NGS. This price tag
translates into expected increases in CAP energy rates of about 1
percent.
Despite these ongoing investments in air quality improvements, NGS
is now the focus of additional proposed regulatory requirements. The
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) is in the process of setting
new rules to control NO
x
emissions at coal-burning power
plants, including NGS, under the Regional Haze Rule of the Clean Air
Act.
Potential Regulatory Impacts: While EPA is looking at low-
NO
x
burners such as those currently being installed at NGS,
the agency is also considering a different control system known as
Selective Catalytic Reduction (SCR). In comparison to the low-
NO
x
technology, the SCR system (including baghouses), has a
potential price tag of over $1 billion, as much as 20 times the cost of
low-NO
x
burners. If SCR is required at NGS, CAP energy rates
could climb 33 percent higher than 2010 rates (or even higher if
financing of less than 20 years is required). These higher energy costs
would affect water rates for the majority of Arizona's population.
Agricultural water users, both Indian and non-Indian, would be
particularly hurt by these higher rates. (For more details on this
analysis, see the attached letter from CAP to EPA dated November 22,
2010; for additional background, please also see the attached letter
from CAP to EPA dated December 18, 2009).
Impacts from such regulatory requirements extend beyond the
increased costs for energy and water. As authorized by the Congress,
NGS power not used for CAP pumping is sold to help repay CAP
construction costs and to help fund Arizona Indian water rights
settlements. These amounts are not trivial. Revenues from the sale of
surplus NGS power now contribute about $22 million per year toward the
$57 million in annual repayment obligations for the CAP. In the future,
revenues from the sale of surplus NGS power are expected to contribute
$50 million or more per year toward CAP repayments and toward Indian
water rights settlements.
The extremely high costs of the SCR/baghouse option could
jeopardize continued operation of the NGS facility, with severe
economic impacts to CAP users and to the Navajo Nation and the Hopi
Tribe. Because a number of critical uncertainties face the Navajo
plant, including the renewal of land and water leases and future
federal air quality regulations, a near-term requirement to install SCR
at Navajo could raise the specter of plant closure. Rather than risk a
huge investment in retrofitting the plant with SCR technology prior to
the resolution of these uncertainties, NGS participants could decide
simply to close the plant and meet their energy needs through other
means. As a consumer of NGS power rather than a retail marketer CAP,
however, would be catastrophically impacted by closure of NGS, as would
be Arizona Indian tribes.

Should the NGS facility cease operations, CAP would
have to acquire a substitute source of pumping power at market
rates. Using several forecasts, CAWCD estimates that, CAP
pumping energy costs could increase by 50 to 300 percent
(rising from $65 per acre foot to $95--$180 per acre foot) by
2017.

NGS employs 545 full-time employees, nearly 80
percent of whom are Navajo. The Kayenta Mine, which supplies
coal to the plant, employs another 422 tribal members. In 2010,
the power plant and mining operations contributed $137 million
in revenue and wages to the Navajo Nation and its tribal
members and $12 million annually (88 percent of the Tribe's
annual operating budget) to the Hopi Tribe.

Arizona tribes that have accepted delivery of CAP
water in lieu of pursuing their claims to other water rights
could find their newly-developed agricultural operations
uneconomical.
Collaboration and Information: The CAP, along with other interested
stakeholders, has participated since January 2011 in a series of
collaborative dialogues to identify reasonable solutions that would: 1)
meet the energy needs of CAP so that the project can fulfill its
mission of providing affordable and reliable water supplies to Arizona
and Tribal communities; 2) result in continued reductions in regional
haze; 3) uphold provisions of the 2004 Arizona Water Settlements Act;
and 4) expand clean energy opportunities, including use of renewable
energy. To date, these discussions continue but have not resulted in a
consensus solution.
In addition, the Department of the Interior, working with the
National Renewable Energy Laboratory, has proposed to undertake a study
of energy infrastructure development within the Colorado Plateau region
of the Hopi and Navajo Reservations and possible options for use of
renewable energy to meet CAP pumping energy requirements and other
needs. The CAP supports initiation of this study. Pumping of CAP water
requires large amounts of baseload power to meet the project's 24/7
operational requirements. Despite many efforts by CAP to identify
alternative sources of energy to meet its needs, no options exist now
or in the immediate future of sufficient scale to supply those baseload
needs. This proposed study could provide critical information and
analysis to assist the CAP in evaluating and planning for future energy
needs.
Improving Water Reliability and Sustaining Water Quality
While facing numerous challenges as it strives to maintain a viable
energy supply, CAP has actively invested in technologies and processes
to improve water supply reliability, increase system efficiency and
reduce system losses. These efforts include construction and operation
of additional storage along the Lower Colorado River system to capture
previously non-storable water ordered but not delivered to users as a
result of changes in irrigation schedules. Through the 2010 completion
of the Brock Reservoir along the All American Canal, funded by CAP
along with the Metropolitan Water District of Southern California and
the Southern Nevada Water Authority, more than 70,000 acre-feet of
water per year will be saved, improving operational efficiency and
reducing the impact of any periodic water shortages during droughts.
Building upon analysis from a 2007 Drought Impacts Study, CAP also has
developed plans to recover water stored underground for use in times of
Colorado River supply shortages.
In 2007, the seven Colorado River Basin States and the Bureau of
Reclamation completed an agreement, the Shortage Sharing Guidelines,
identifying steps to be taken should a shortage situation arise,
including provisions to coordinate operations and storage at Lake
Powell and Lake Mead. Water professionals throughout Arizona and the
Basin states have spent many years developing infrastructure, programs,
and practices to make the water supply system more resilient to changes
in variable water levels. Examples include making efficiency
improvements to the Colorado River delivery system; developing ways to
reuse water and increase supplies; and treating agricultural drainage
water for reuse. Careful CAP system design limits annual evaporation to
4.4 percent from the aqueduct.
As a service to its municipal and industrial customers and the
millions of people who ultimately drink the water, CAP employs a
comprehensive water quality testing program.
These accomplishments underscore CAP's commitment to sustainable
water management that meets the needs of Arizona, Tribes, and the
Nation. I welcome the opportunity to discuss these issues with the
Subcommittee and invite you and other members of the Subcommittee to
visit the Central Arizona Project at an appropriate time.
Attachments
1.  Letter to Mr. Jared Blumenfeld, Regional Administrator, Region 9,
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, dated November 22, 2010
2.  Letter to Ms. Colleen McKaughan, Associate Director, Air Division
Region IX, U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, dated December 18,
2009
[NOTE: Attachments have been retained in the Committee's official
files.]


