- OVERSIGHT FIELD HEARING TITLED ``NOAA'S STELLER SEA LION SCIENCE AND FISHERY MANAGEMENT RESTRICTIONS -- DOES THE SCIENCE SUPPORT THE DECISIONS?''

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

NOAA'S STELLER SEA LION SCIENCE AND FISHERY MANAGEMENT RESTRICTIONS
DOES THE SCIENCE SUPPORT THE DECISIONS?

=======================================================================

OVERSIGHT FIELD HEARING

before the

COMMITTEE ON NATURAL RESOURCES
U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

Monday, October 17, 2011, in Seattle, Washington

__________

Serial No. 112-72

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Natural Resources

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.gpoaccess.gov/congress/
index.html
or
Committee address: http://naturalresources.house.gov

_____

U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE

70-764 PDF                WASHINGTON : 2012
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800; DC
area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104  Mail: Stop IDCC, Washington, DC
20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON NATURAL RESOURCES

DOC HASTINGS, WA, Chairman
EDWARD J. MARKEY, MA, Ranking Democrat Member

Don Young, AK                        Dale E. Kildee, MI
John J. Duncan, Jr., TN              Peter A. DeFazio, OR
Louie Gohmert, TX                    Eni F.H. Faleomavaega, AS
Rob Bishop, UT                       Frank Pallone, Jr., NJ
Doug Lamborn, CO                     Grace F. Napolitano, CA
Robert J. Wittman, VA                Rush D. Holt, NJ
Paul C. Broun, GA                    Raul M. Grijalva, AZ
John Fleming, LA                     Madeleine Z. Bordallo, GU
Mike Coffman, CO                     Jim Costa, CA
Tom McClintock, CA                   Dan Boren, OK
Glenn Thompson, PA                   Gregorio Kilili Camacho Sablan,
Jeff Denham, CA                          CNMI
Dan Benishek, MI                     Martin Heinrich, NM
David Rivera, FL                     Ben Ray Lujan, NM
Jeff Duncan, SC                      John P. Sarbanes, MD
Scott R. Tipton, CO                  Betty Sutton, OH
Paul A. Gosar, AZ                    Niki Tsongas, MA
Raul R. Labrador, ID                 Pedro R. Pierluisi, PR
Kristi L. Noem, SD                   John Garamendi, CA
Steve Southerland II, FL             Colleen W. Hanabusa, HI
Bill Flores, TX                      Vacancy
Andy Harris, MD
Jeffrey M. Landry, LA
Charles J. ``Chuck'' Fleischmann,
TN
Jon Runyan, NJ
Bill Johnson, OH

Todd Young, Chief of Staff
Lisa Pittman, Chief Counsel
Jeffrey Duncan, Democrat Staff Director
David Watkins, Democrat Chief Counsel
------

CONTENTS

----------
Page

Hearing held on Monday, October 17, 2011.........................     1

Statement of Members:
Hastings, Hon. Doc, a Representative in Congress from the
State of Washington........................................     1
Prepared statement of....................................     3
Young, Hon. Don, the Representative in Congress for the State
of Alaska..................................................     4
Prepared statement of....................................     5

Statement of Witnesses:
Cotter, Larry, Chair, North Pacific Fishery Management
Council's Steller Sea Lion Mitigation Committee and Chief
Executive Officer, Aleutian Pribilof Island Community
Development Association....................................    43
Prepared statement of....................................    45
Knapp, Dr. Gunnar, Professor of Economics, Institute of
Social and Economic Research, University of Alaska
Anchorage..................................................    37
Joint prepared statement of..............................    32
LeVine, Michael, Pacific Senior Counsel, Oceana..............    64
Prepared statement of....................................    66
Little, David, President, Freezer Longline Coalition.........    57
Prepared statement of....................................    58
Loomis, Todd, Government and Industry Affairs, Cascade
Fishing, Inc...............................................    52
Prepared statement of....................................    53
Ragen, Timothy J., Ph.D., Executive Director, Marine Mammal
Commission.................................................    39
Prepared statement of....................................    41
Schwaab, Eric, Assistant Administrator for Fisheries,
National Marine Fisheries Service, National Oceanic and
Atmospheric Administration, U.S. Department of Commerce....     6
Prepared statement of....................................     8
Trites, Dr. Andrew, Professor and Director, Marine Mammal
Research Unit, Fisheries Centre, University of British
Columbia...................................................    30
Joint prepared statement of..............................    32
Tsukada, Ryuichi Rudy, President, Aleut Enterprise, LLC......    60
Prepared statement of....................................    62
Tweit, Bill, Special Assistant, Washington Department of Fish
and Wildlife...............................................    17
Prepared statement of....................................    19
Vincent-Lang, Doug, Special Assistant to the Commissioner,
Alaska Department of Fish and Game.........................    13
Prepared statement of....................................    15

OVERSIGHT FIELD HEARING TITLED ``NOAA'S STELLER SEA LION SCIENCE AND
FISHERY MANAGEMENT RESTRICTIONS -- DOES THE SCIENCE SUPPORT THE
DECISIONS?''

----------

Monday, October 17, 2011

U.S. House of Representatives

Committee on Natural Resources

Seattle, Washington

----------

The Committee met, pursuant to call, at 9:30 a.m., at the
Ruth Fisher Boardroom of Union Station, 401 South Jackson
Street, Seattle, Washington, Hon. Doc Hastings [Chairman of the
Committee] presiding.
Present: Representatives Hastings and Young.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. RICHARD ``DOC'' HASTINGS, A
REPRESENTATIVE IN CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF WASHINGTON

Mr. Hastings. I want to thank everybody for being here
today, and I note that we have a quorum under our rules.
The Committee on Natural Resources today is meeting to hear
testimony on an oversight hearing on ``NOAA's Steller Sea Lion
Science and Fishery Management Restrictions: Does the Science
Support the Decisions?''
I ask unanimous consent that in addition to my oral
statement that I will be giving that my colleague from Alaska,
Congressman Don Young, be permitted to give an opening
statement. Without objection, so ordered.
I will recognize myself now for an opening statement.
I would like to thank all of our witnesses that will be
here today for their willingness to testify on the issue of
Steller sea lions and whether fishery management measures that
were in place to protect sea lions are based on sound science.
These management actions are the latest in a series of
restrictions placed on commercial fishing activities in the
Bering Sea and the Gulf of Alaska in an effort to protect
Steller sea lions.
The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, or
NOAA's, own documents state that the imposition of the fishery
management restrictions put in place last January will cost the
commercial fishing industry between $44 million and $61 million
per year, and cause a job loss of between 250 and 750 jobs.
Now, at a time when every effort should be focused on
creating jobs and economic opportunities, it certainly stands
out when an action by a Federal agency will result in this
degree of economic loss, especially when one of the missions of
the agency is to fully utilize our Nation's fishery resources.
Now, having said that, I understand that NOAA has multiple
missions. I also understand that there is a lot about Steller
sea lions that is still poorly understood. However, I am
concerned that the decision to impose these restrictions was
based on whether fishing was, and I quote, ``not likely to
jeopardize the continued existence of a listed species.''
Now, that standard seems to put the burden of proof on
whether the Agency could disprove that the commercial fishing
industry was responsible for harming Steller sea lions. The
fact that the Biological Opinion uses the word ``may''
throughout the document indicates to me that the Agency is not
sure what is going on in the Bering Sea and, therefore, cannot
disprove any of its theories.
When an agency puts in place a restriction on an industry
that will result in a loss of $61 million per year, and a cost
of up to 750 jobs, I expect them to be certain in their
deliberations. The Biological Opinion leaves one to wonder
whether there is any certainty.
The independent scientific review that was commissioned by
the States of Washington and Alaska appear to share this
concern. In fact, their report states, and I quote, ``The
conclusions of the BiOp regarding the finding of jeopardy and
its posited cause (nutritional stress from food competition
with fisheries) do not follow logically from scientific,
economic, and social information presented in the BiOp and
attendant documents.''
The report goes on to say, and I quote again, ``The
conclusions are contradicted by both information presented in
the BiOp as well as information not presented in the BiOp.''
When 13 of the 14 criteria assessed by NOAA to determine if
nutritional stress was restricting recovery for the western
population came up negative, while at the same time the
Biological Opinion concludes that the fishing industry is
restricting food availability, it simply raises questions about
the validity of the entire Biological Opinion.
This is just one question that has been raised regarding
the science behind the fishing restrictions. When the agency's
own science conflicts with their conclusions, it is no wonder
the States of Washington and Alaska commissioned an independent
scientific review.
It is also concerning that so little has changed since 2000
when Congress began to appropriate funding for Steller sea lion
research. Beginning in Fiscal Year 2001, Congress has
appropriated more than $150 million for Steller sea lion
research, and more than half of that went directly to NOAA for
their own research program. And 10 years later, we are still
asking many of the same questions.
Despite this funding, NOAA still has not been able to
answer the questions regarding whether the commercial fishing
industry is limiting the food available for Steller sea lions.
This is the first area of research that should have been
conducted so that we would not be in the situation we are now,
facing new restrictions that will cost jobs and restrict
economic activity.
We now have a final report from the independent scientific
review panel, and the report raises serious issues with the
conclusions in the Biological Opinion, and also raises
questions whether the science even supports the conclusions
made by NOAA. The real question is what the Agency will do with
this new information.
Now, I hope our witnesses, and particularly our NOAA
witnesses, will discuss what happens next. NOAA has the
authority, and I would argue, the obligation, to take this
independent review panel's report and to take another look at
their findings in the Biological Opinion.
I would also strongly suggest that NOAA look at other new
information, such as the Atka mackerel stock assessment that
was completed after the BiOp was finalized. This new
information is certainly relevant, and the Agency has an
obligation to review all new information when it becomes
available.
I understand NOAA has its own plans for its own independent
review of the BiOp. I hope this independent review will allow
for public input as the Washington State and Alaska review did.
I would also encourage NOAA to develop the terms of reference
for the review in a manner suggested by the North Pacific
Fishery Management Council, and to include a review of the
science and the conclusions contained in the BiOp.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Hastings follows:]

Statement of The Honorable Doc Hastings, Chairman,
Committee on Natural Resources

I would like to thank our witnesses for their willingness to
testify today on the issue of Steller sea lions and whether the fishery
management measures that were put in place to protect sea lions are
based on sound science. These management actions are the latest in a
series of restrictions placed on commercial fishing activities in the
Bering Sea and the Gulf of Alaska in an effort to protect Steller sea
lions.
The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration's own documents
state that the imposition of the fishery management restrictions put in
place last January will cost the commercial fishing industry between
$44 million and $61 million per year and cause the loss of between 250
and 750 jobs. At a time when every effort should be focused upon
creating jobs and economic opportunities, it certainly stands out when
an action by a Federal agency will result in this degree of economic
loss--especially when one of the missions of the agency is to fully
utilize the Nation's fishery resources.
Having said that, I understand that NOAA has multiple missions. I
also understand that there is a lot about Steller sea lions that is
still poorly understood. However, I am concerned that the decision to
impose these restrictions was based on whether fishing was ``not likely
to jeopardize the continued existence of a listed species...'' That
standard seems to put the burden of proof on whether the agency could
disprove that the commercial fishing industry was responsible for
harming Steller sea lions. The fact that the Biological Opinion uses
the word ``may'' throughout the document indicates to me that the
agency is not sure what is going on in the Bering Sea and therefore
cannot disprove any of the theories.
When an agency puts in place a restriction on an industry that will
result in a loss of up to $61 million per year and cost 750 jobs, I
expect them to be certain. The Biological Opinion leaves one to wonder
whether there is any certainty. The independent scientific review that
was commissioned by the States of Washington and Alaska appears to
share this concern. In fact, their report states, ``the conclusions in
the BiOp regarding the finding of jeopardy and its posited cause
(nutritional stress from food competition with fisheries) do not follow
logically from scientific, economic, and social information presented
in the BiOp and attendant documents.'' The report goes on to say, ``The
conclusions are contradicted both by information presented in the BiOp
as well as information not presented in the BiOp.''
When 13 of the 14 criteria assessed by NOAA to determine if
nutritional stress was restricting recovery for the western population
came up negative while at the same time the Biological Opinion
concludes that the fishing industry is restricting food availability,
it raises questions about the validity of the entire Biological
Opinion. This is just one question that has been raised regarding the
science behind the fishing restrictions. When the agency's own science
conflicts with their conclusions, it is no wonder the States of
Washington and Alaska commissioned an independent scientific review.
It is also concerning that so little has changed since 2000 when
Congress began to appropriate funding for Steller sea lion research.
Beginning in Fiscal Year 2001, Congress appropriated more than $150
million for Steller sea lion research and more than half of that went
directly to NOAA for their research program. And ten years later, we
still are asking many of the same questions. Despite this funding, NOAA
still is not able to answer the questions regarding whether the
commercial fishing industry is limiting the food available for Steller
sea lions. This is the first area of research that should be have been
conducted so that we would not be in the situation we are in now--
facing new restrictions that will costs jobs and restrict economic
activity.
We now have the final report from the independent scientific review
panel and the report raises serious issues with the conclusions in the
Biological Opinion and also questions whether the science even supports
the conclusions made by NOAA.
The real question is what the agency will do with this new
information. I hope our witnesses--in particular our NOAA witness--will
discuss what happens next. NOAA has the authority, and I would argue
the obligation, to take this independent review panel's report and to
take another look at their findings in the Biological Opinion. I would
also strongly suggest that NOAA look at other new information such as
the Atka mackerel stock assessment that was completed after the
Biological Opinion was finalized. This new information is certainly
relevant and the agency has an obligation to review all new information
when it becomes available.
I understand NOAA has plans for its own independent review of the
Biological Opinion. I hope that independent review will allow for
public input as the Washington state and Alaska review did. I would
also strongly encourage NOAA to develop the terms of reference for the
review in the manner suggested by the North Pacific Fishery Management
Council and to include a review of the science and the conclusions
contained in the Biological Opinion.
______

Mr. Hastings. And with that, I would like to recognize my
colleague from Alaska, Mr. Young.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. DON YOUNG, A REPRESENTATIVE IN CONGRESS
FROM THE STATE OF ALASKA

Mr. Young. Thank you, Chairman Hastings, and thank you for
holding this hearing on a topic that is of great interest to
both of our States, and for hosting me in your great State of
Washington--although I think where you are from is a lot nicer,
but that is beside the point.
The other day, I was reminded about a hearing held on this
same topic in 1999. At that hearing, my friend, former Chairman
Jim Saxton, said, ``If you can clearly identify a problem and a
solution, then everyone will work together to accomplish the
goal. If there is scientific uncertainty, distress, and
animosity, then the process of cooperatively working together
to find a solution is doomed to fail.''
Over a decade later, sadly nothing has changed, as you
mentioned in your statement. We are talking about the same
issue and asking the same questions. Most shocking, significant
taxpayer dollars have been directed toward research on the
Steller sea lion. The National Marine Fisheries Service, NMFS,
still cannot answer basic questions, and is making decisions
that impact the economies of an entire region and countless
individual families with grossly limited data.
Once again, the Agency cannot say with certainty what is
causing the population decline. But again, fishermen are paying
the price. While we have no idea if these closures and
restrictions will benefit the sea lion, we do know they will
have devastating effects on fishermen and fishing communities.
From all the evidence I have seen, I can reasonably draw
only one conclusion: We are confronted with an agency that has
a premise, but a lack of information to prove or disprove it.
And out of fear of a lawsuit by extreme organizations, the
Agency hides behind the ``best available science'' excuse. The
worst thing, Mr. Chairman, their ``best available science'' did
not use any science from the State of Washington or the State
of Alaska. They used excuses and exercised an overabundance of
precaution akin to someone who cannot swim refusing to bathe.
I want to commend the States of Alaska and Washington for
taking it upon themselves to work together to find answers for
these outstanding questions. Among other things, they found
that the Biological Opinion's conclusions were contrary to
their own science, it was not adequately peer reviewed, and was
not supported by scientific evidence.
As Alaska and Washington have aptly demonstrated, this NMFS
proposal does not have the best available science, or even
complete science, and as a result, our fishermen and
communities will suffer.
Mr. Chairman, I do believe this is being driven within the
Agency. I am trying to find who is pushing this issue, and I
think there is a political agenda. It is not new. It has
happened in the past, and it will probably happen in the future
unless you and I and NMFS and NOAA work together with those
involved to solve this problem.
There is no shortage of sea lions. I have always fought
this issue to arbitrarily set the number of sea lions. It had
no scientific information behind it, and what it should be. And
even in their own report, they said there was no availability
of science to say fishermen are causing the problem. And, in
fact, the sea lion herds are stabilized. I even called the head
of NOAA when this occurred and asked them are they the same,
because the so-called Western stock has declined, but the
Eastern stock has increased, and it has the same DNA. And yet,
they are punishing my fishermen, your fishermen, and they are
doing what I think gives NOAA a black eye.
NOAA is not really on my favorite list anyway, I want you
to know that. Over the years I have introduced bills to
eliminate NMFS because you do some real stupid things. And I
just argue work together, let us do what is right, and do not
caught get into this mid-management pushing of something that
is an agenda. Get everybody off the water. No human fishermen
will raise all our fish in fish farms off our shores. That is
coming right out of your department. That is not right.
With that, I yield back.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Young follows:]

Statement of The Honorable Don Young, the Representative in Congress
from the State of Alaska

Chairman Hastings, thank you for holding this hearing on a topic
that is of great interest to both of our states, and for hosting me in
your great state of Washington.
The other day, I was reminded about a hearing held on this same
topic in 1999. At that hearing, my friend, former Chairman Jim Saxton
said,
``If you can clearly indentify a problem and a solution, then
everyone will work together to accomplish the goal. If there is
scientific uncertainty, distrust and animosity, then the
process of cooperatively working together to find a solution is
doomed to fail.''
Over a decade later, sadly, nothing has changed and we're talking
about the same issue and asking the same questions. Most shocking,
significant taxpayer dollars have been directed towards research on the
Steller Sea Lion, yet the National Marine Fisheries Service (NMFS)
still cannot answer basic questions, and is making decisions that
impact the economies of an entire region and countless individual
families with grossly limited data.
Once again, the Agency cannot say with any certainty what is
causing the population decline, but fishermen and again paying the
price. While we have no idea if these closures and restrictions will
benefit the sea lion, we do know that they will have devastating
affects on the fishermen and fishing communities.
From all the evidence I've seen, I can reasonably draw only one
conclusion--we're confronted with an Agency that has a premise, but a
lack of information to prove or disprove it. And out of fear of a
lawsuit by extreme organizations the Agency hides behind ``the best
available science'' excuse and exercises an overabundance of precaution
akin to someone who can't swim refusing to bathe.
I want to commend the States of Alaska and Washington for taking it
upon themselves to work together to find answers to these outstanding
questions. Among other things, they found that the Biological Opinion's
(BiOp) conclusions are contradictory to their own science, weren't
adequately peer reviewed, and are not supported by scientific evidence.
As Alaska and Washington have aptly demonstrated, this NMFS doesn't
have the best available science or even complete science, and, as a
result, our fishermen and communities will suffer.
Once again, Chairman, thank you for holding this hearing and I,
like you, look forward to examining this issue more closely today and
hearing from our witnesses.
______

Mr. Hastings. I thank the gentleman for his opening
statement, and obviously in your remarks trying to ascertain
what exactly is happening. That is the reason for this hearing.
That is why we are holding this hearing here in Seattle--more
closely to where all this activity happens. So, I thank you
very much for being here and for your statement.
On our first panel, we have Mr. Eric Schwaab, Assistant
Administrator for Fisheries, National Marine Fisheries Service,
part of NOAA, Mr. Doug Vincent-Lang, Special Projects
Coordinator of the Alaska Department of Fish and Game, and Mr.
Bill Tweit, Special Assistant to the Washington Department of
Fish and Wildlife.
Thank you all very much for being here. I will just remind
you, if you have not had an opportunity to testify, your entire
written statement will appear in the record. But we have these
lights there sitting right in front of you and sitting right in
front of me. It is a five-minute light, and when the green
light goes on, that means you are doing really, really very,
very well. But when the yellow light goes on, that means you
have done four minutes, and you have one minute left. And when
the red light goes on, then that means that your time has
expired. Now, I want to accommodate you as much as we can, but
because we have several panels, if you could confine your
remarks to the five minutes, I would very much appreciate that.
So, we will start with Mr. Schwaab. Mr. Schwaab, you are
recognized for five minutes.

STATEMENT OF ERIC SCHWAAB, ASSISTANT ADMINISTRATOR FOR
FISHERIES, NATIONAL MARINE FISHERIES SERVICE, NATIONAL OCEANIC
AND ATMOSPHERIC ADMINISTRATION, U.S. DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE

Mr. Schwaab. Chairman Hastings, Congressman Young, thank
you for the opportunity to testify today on NOAA's Steller sea
lion science and fishery management decisions to protect the
species. My name is Eric Schwaab. I am the Assistant
Administrator for Fisheries within NOAA.
Also with me today is Dr. Doug DeMaster. Doug has been the
Science and Research Director of the Alaska Fishery Science
Center since October 2001. They have directed most of the
Steller sea lion research for the agency.
NOAA has been assessing Steller sea lion population status
and the interactions between Alaskan groundfish fisheries and
Steller sea lions for many years. Between the late 1970s and
the late 1990s, the endangered Western population of the
Steller sea lion declined by almost 90 percent throughout its
range, reaching its smallest size in 2000.
In the late 1990s and early 2000s, NOAA and the North
Pacific Fishery Management Council implemented a number of
significant changes in fishery management that lessened the
potential impact of the fisheries on sea lions. Most of these
changes were made in the area to the east of 178 degrees west
longitude. In those areas, we have seen significant improvement
in the numbers of sea lions. However, there appears to be a
significant problem west of 178.
This geographic boundary is significant because it is the
same boundary where the National Marine Fisheries Service
employed a different management strategy in 2001. The
management strategies west of 178 degrees provided considerably
more opportunity for commercial fishermen to prosecute
fisheries inside of critical habitat.
More recently in November 2010, NMFS released the 2010
final groundfish Biological Opinion, and in December 2010 we
published an interim final rule to implement Steller sea lion
protection measures. Prior to finalizing the Biological
Opinion, we provided draft to the public, comments were sought,
and over 10,000 were received. All of these comments were
evaluated and analyzed for possible inclusion.
In addition, an economic analysis was conducted to examine
a wide range of potential impacts, including costs to the
fishing industry and local communities.
In the Biological Opinion, NOAA determined that the
continued operation of the fishery as it was currently being
conducted was likely to jeopardize the continued existence of
the Steller sea lions. Without protective measures, sea lions
will likely continue to decline in abundance in the Western
Aleutian Islands in the foreseeable future. Extirpation or
localized extinction in the Western Aleutian Islands sub-region
is likely, and possible in the Central Aleutian Island sub-
region as well.
NMFS is committed to ensuring that all management decisions
are based on the best available science. In the coming months,
we will be taking a number of steps to address concerns being
raised. On October 8th, 2011, the States of Alaska and
Washington released a review of the Biological Opinion. We will
review and consider the findings in the final report and any
future consultations concerning impacts of Federally managed
groundfish fisheries on Steller sea lions.
If new information on the impacts of the groundfish
fisheries on Steller sea lions reveals effects on listed
species or critical habitat that were not previously
considered, then re-initiation of formal consultation is
required and will be undertaken.
In addition, we will obtain a review of the Biological
Opinion by the Center of Independent Experts. The CIE will be
asked to examine information that was available at the time of
the Biological Opinion's development. The draft terms of
reference for this review will be provided to the North Pacific
Fishery Management Council for review and comment during the
December 2011 Council meeting. The Council's comments will be
considered by NMFS and the completion of the terms of reference
for the review.
Furthermore, the Agency has proposed to the Council that
the Steller sea lion Mitigation Committee be reconstituted, and
asked to focus on management issues in the Aleutian Islands.
The Agency will continue to work with the Council toward this
goal.
Finally, the Agency will invite State of Alaska and
Washington representatives to a meeting to discuss alternative
approaches to resolving questions concerning the management of
Steller sea lions under the Endangered Species Act and Marine
Mammal Protection Act.
The ultimate goal of the actions taken by NMFS is the
recovery of the Western Steller sea lion population so it can
be removed from the list of endangered and threatened wildlife.
These actions are designed to conserve Steller sea lion prey in
important times and areas, while allowing as much fishing as
possible to continue.
Thank you for the opportunity to discuss NOAA's Steller sea
lion work. We are available to answer any questions that you
may have at the appropriate time. Thank you again, Mr.
Chairman.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Schwaab follows:]

Statement of Eric Schwaab, Assistant Administrator for Fisheries,
National Marine Fisheries Service, National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration, U.S. Department of Commerce

Chairman Hastings and members of the Committee, thank you for the
opportunity to testify before you today on NOAA's Steller sea lion
science and fishery management decisions to protect the species. My
name is Eric Schwaab and I am the Assistant Administrator for
Fisheries, within the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration
(NOAA), Department of Commerce. NOAA's National Marine Fisheries
Service (NMFS) is dedicated to the stewardship of living marine
resources through science-based conservation and management, and the
promotion of healthy ecosystems. As a steward, NMFS conserves,
protects, and manages living marine resources to ensure functioning
marine ecosystems and recreational and economic opportunities for the
American public.
On November 24, 2010, NMFS released the 2010 Final Groundfish
Biological Opinion, which analyzed the effects of the groundfish
fisheries in Alaska on the western population of the Steller sea lion.
On December 13, 2010, NMFS published an interim final rule to implement
Steller sea lion protection measures to insure that the Bering Sea and
Aleutian Islands management area groundfish fisheries off Alaska are
not likely to jeopardize the continued existence of the western
distinct population segment of Steller sea lions or adversely modify
its designated critical habitat (75 Fed. Reg. 77535). This rule went
into effect on January 1, 2011. For purposes of consultation under the
Endangered Species Act (ESA), NMFS was both the action agency as well
as the consulting agency. The actions taken were designed to conserve
Steller sea lion prey in important times and areas while allowing as
much fishing to continue as possible.
On October 6, 2011, the acting Secretary of Commerce received an
invitation from the Natural Resources Committee of the House of
Representatives to testify at a hearing to be held on October 17, 2011
in Seattle, WA concerning several aspects of management decisions
regarding the federally managed groundfish fishery in Alaska and
potential interactions with the endangered population of Steller sea
lion. In particular, the concerns of the Committee are outlined in a
series of questions that were posed by the Committee and are addressed
herein.
Background
NOAA has been assessing the interactions between Alaskan groundfish
fisheries and Steller sea lions for many years. The endangered western
population of Steller sea lion has declined by almost 90% throughout
its range, reaching its smallest size in 2000. In the late 1990's and
early 2000's, NOAA and the North Pacific Fishery Management Council
implemented a number of significant changes towards fisheries
management that lessened the potential impact of the fisheries on the
sea lions. Most of these changes were made in the area to the east of
178+ W longitude and in those areas we have seen significant
improvement in the numbers of sea lions. However, as Figure 1
indicates, there appears to be a significant problem west of 178+ W
longitude.

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

This boundary at 178+ W longitude is significant because this
geographic boundary is the same boundary where NMFS changed its
management strategy in 2001 by implementing the Steller sea lion
protection measures analyzed in the 2001 Biological Opinion, such that
the management strategies west of 178+ W longitude provided
considerably more opportunity for commercial fishermen to prosecute
fisheries inside of critical habitat.
The best, peer-reviewed available science indicates that continued
declines in sea lions in the western and central Aleutian Islands sub-
region are due in part to reduced birth rates. One possible explanation
for lowered birth rates in marine mammals is insufficient nutrition.
Atka mackerel and Pacific cod are primary prey of Steller sea lions in
the Aleutian Islands and they are targeted by the fisheries. Unless pup
production in the western and central Aleutian Islands sub-regions is
improved, the recovery of this ESA listed population will remain in
doubt. As noted, historically, fishing was allowed in closer proximity
to sea lion rookeries and haulouts in the western and central Aleutian
Islands sub-regions than other parts of the western population's range.
NMFS, therefore, took action to reduce fishing pressure in important
times and areas for sea lions with the expectation that the biomass of
Pacific cod and Atka mackerel will increase appreciably.
In its Biological Opinion, NOAA determined that the continued
operation of the fishery as it was currently being conducted,
particularly in the western Aleutians, was likely to jeopardize the
continued existence of the Steller sea lions. NOAA then worked with the
Council to craft a suite of measures to address the situation in a
Reasonable and Prudent Alternative or RPA. The Biological Opinion
required closing the western Aleutian Islands fishery management area
(543) to fishing for Atka mackerel and Pacific cod, two Steller sea
lion prey species. Protective measures in the Central Aleutian Islands
(Area 542 and 541) include establishing a 3 nm no-fishing buffer around
a newly-established rookery; new closures of important Steller sea lion
critical habitat foraging zones to fishing for Atka mackerel and
Pacific cod; reductions in Atka mackerel harvest amounts; and varying
seasonal closures for various sectors targeting Pacific cod. The
protective measures implemented as part of the interim final rule in
2010 are designed to increase the availability of forage fish (e.g.,
Atka mackerel and cod) in the region where sea lion abundance is
currently in decline. NMFS took action because, without these
protective measures, sea lions will likely continue to decline in
abundance in the foreseeable future. Extirpation, or localized
extinction, in the western Aleutian Islands sub-region is likely, and
possible in the central Aleutian Islands sub-region.
Development of the 2010 Final Groundfish Biological Opinion
The fishery management decisions in the 2010 Final Groundfish
Biological Opinion were developed through a collaborative process
between the NMFS Alaska Region, Sustainable Fisheries Division and NMFS
Alaska Region, Protected Resources Division. The Protected Resources
Division identified the fishing activities that were likely to
jeopardize the continued existence and recovery or adversely modify
designated critical habitat for the western distinct population segment
of Steller sea lion (hereafter referred to as the western population).
The potential impacts of all Alaska groundfish fisheries on the western
population of sea lions and their critical habitat were examined. NMFS
determined through the analysis in the Biological Opinion that it could
not ensure the groundfish fisheries in the Bering Sea and Aleutian
Islands Management Area (primarily Atka mackerel and Pacific cod
fisheries in the Aleutian Islands) were not likely to jeopardize the
continued existence of the western population of sea lions or adversely
modify its critical habitat. This determination required changes in
these fisheries to ensure the effects of these fisheries were not
likely to adversely impact the western population of Steller sea lion.
NMFS included an RPA for the management of the Atka mackerel and
Pacific cod fisheries in the Biological Opinion. The Protected
Resources Division identified in the Biological Opinion the protective
measures that were needed to be met to remove the likelihood of
jeopardizing the continued existence of the western population of sea
lions and adversely modifying critical habitat in the development of
the RPA. The Protected Resources Division then worked with the
Sustainable Fisheries Division on the development of the RPA to ensure
the fishery management decisions would meet the requirements of the ESA
and that these measures could be developed and implemented in a timely
manner for the start of the 2011 fishing year.
NMFS presented the draft RPA to the North Pacific Fishery
Management Council (Council) in August 2010. Council and public
comments were considered in development of the final RPA. In the final
Biological Opinion, a result of the Council and public comment,
revisions were made to the RPA as to further reduce the potential
burden of the RPA on the fishing industry while maintaining the
protection measures necessary to ensure no likelihood of the action
jeopardizing the continued existence or adversely modifying critical
habitat for the western population.
The RPA was structured to mitigate effects of the fishery in sub-
regions where Steller sea lion abundance continues to decline (western
and central Aleutian Islands sub-region) and where available
information indicates that reproduction may be reduced to a level that
cannot support positive population growth (the western Aleutian Islands
sub-region). The western and central Aleutian Islands were the two sub-
regions where population growth was negative from 2000-2008 and of most
concern. NMFS determined that additional mitigation measures in the
other three sub-regions in U.S. waters were unwarranted (i.e., western,
central and eastern Gulf of Alaska). Currently, the western population
of the Steller sea lion is growing at a rate of 1.4% per year. However,
as explained in Chapter 7 of the Biological Opinion, the western
population is not meeting the criteria of a recovering population as
determined by the Revised Recovery Plan and is at risk of being
extirpated in the western portion of its range in U.S. waters.
Scientific Information for the Biological Opinion
Information referred to in the Biological Opinion, on which the
Agency made its determination regarding whether the action was likely
to jeopardize the continued existence or adversely modify critical
habitat of the western population, included: (1) counts of pups and
non-pups by sub-region, (2) food habits data by sub-region, (3)
telemetry data on foraging behavior, and (4) differences in fishery
management strategies by sub-region. In addition, NMFS conducted
research on the abundance of killer whales in the Aleutian Islands.
One of the most important pieces of information is shown in Fig
3.10 of the Biological Opinion (change in pup counts from 2005 to 2009
by degrees of longitude). Another very important piece of information
is shown in Table 3.6 of the Biological Opinion (pup to non-pup ratios
by sub-region). A summary of the underlying evidence supporting the RPA
can be found on pages 359 and 360 of the Biological Opinion.\1\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ NOAA would be happy to provide the referenced documents to
Committee Members upon request.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
These data suggested that some factor was acting west of 178+ W
longitude that was leading to the declines in pup production. Given the
presumed linkage between Steller sea lion declines and nutritional
stress, and the increased fishing effort in this region since 2001, it
was reasonable to conclude that a restriction in fishing effort would
remove fishery effects that may contribute to nutritional stress and
potentially ameliorate the decline in pup production.
Economic Analysis of the Biological Opinion
The economic analysis examined a wide range of potential impacts,
including 1) costs to the fishing industry directly affected and the
communities deriving jobs and income from this fishing activity, and 2)
benefits derived from recovering Steller sea lion populations.
The impacts on directly regulated Atka mackerel and Pacific cod
fishing operations were evaluated by estimating the loss in gross
revenue in Atka mackerel and Pacific cod production in prior years that
would have occurred if the proposed measures had been in place. This
information was supplemented by an analysis (based on past fishing
patterns, and information on regulatory measures) of how the affected
vessels might redeploy, what this might mean to their catches, and how
this might affect other fishing fleets. Information from industry,
primarily obtained during a special Council meeting in August 2010, and
from comments on the draft Biological Opinion and draft environmental
assessment/regulatory impact review, was used in this process.
Impacts on communities were evaluated in several ways. Licensing
and permit records were used to identify homes and home ports for
fishermen and vessels directly involved in the fishery. Case studies
were performed on regional communities especially likely to be impacted
by the action, including Adak, Atka, and Unalaska. More general
discussions were provided for areas not local to the fisheries. A new
impact model prepared by economists at the Alaska Fisheries Science
Center was used to make quantitative estimates of job, and other
impacts, associated with the fishery management decisions. Potential
impacts on Community Development Quota groups were also discussed.
Potential benefits of the action were evaluated qualitatively for
persons placing a value on Steller sea lion population health, and for
persons using Steller sea lion populations for subsistence purposes.
While these findings were the primary focus of the analysis, the
regulatory impact review also discussed impacts on other ecosystem
resources, on consumers, on in-season management and enforcement, on
safety, and on the collection of scientific information.
North Pacific Fishery Management Council Involvement in the Development
of the Biological Opinion
Prior to finalizing the Biological Opinion, NMFS provided to the
public a draft Biological Opinion with a draft RPA. The public review
process involved a special meeting of the Council and its Scientific
and Statistical Committee and Advisory Panel in August 2010. Public
comments were sought, and over ten thousand were provided to NMFS. The
Council submitted a recommendation for an alternative RPA that was
initially crafted by its Advisory Panel. The Council's Scientific and
Statistical Committee also reviewed the draft Biological Opinion and
RPA, and drafted comments on the scientific analyses and the logic of
the underpinning science supporting NMFS' recommended draft RPA. All
comments and the Council's suggested alternative RPA were evaluated by
NMFS and analyzed for possible inclusion in a revised RPA. NMFS
ultimately accepted eight modifications to the RPA to the draft
Biological Opinion. NMFS analyzed these modifications and found that
there was a comparable conservation benefit in the revised RPA. For
example, proposed restrictions were relaxed for vessels less than 60'
in length using nontrawl gear, additional areas inside critical habitat
in Area 542 was made available to nontrawl vessels, and small portions
of critical habitat in the central Aleutian Islands were opened to
trawling in a manner similar but not as extensive as the Council's
motion. The revised draft RPA was presented to the Council and the
public in October 2010, and then included in the final Biological
Opinion.
Independent Scientific Review of the Biological Opinion
On October 8, 2011, the final version of the States of Alaska and
Washington's review of the Biological Opinion (Bernard et al. 2011) was
released. NMFS will review and consider the findings in the final
report in any future consultations concerning impacts of federally
managed groundfish fisheries on Steller sea lions. If new information
on the impacts of the groundfish fisheries on Steller sea lions reveals
effects on listed species or critical habitat that were not previously
considered, then reinitiation of formal consultation is required (50
CFR sec. 402.16).
Future Review of the Biological Opinion
NMFS will obtain a review of the Biological Opinion by the Center
of Independent Experts. NMFS has a contract with the Center of
Independent Experts to conduct independent reviews for the Agency of
controversial or complex decision documents or assessments. The Center
of Independent Experts will be asked to examine information that was
available at the time of the Biological Opinion's development (through
May 2010). The draft Terms of Reference for this review will be
provided to the Council for review and comment during the December 2011
Council meeting. The Council's comments will be considered by NMFS in
the completion of the Terms of Reference for the Center of Independent
Experts review, which is scheduled for completion in 2012.
Plans for Gathering Additional Scientific Information about Steller Sea
Lions
NMFS will continue to conduct studies on Steller sea lions in
Alaska, Washington, Oregon, and California, as well as in collaboration
with other researchers in the U.S., Russia and Canada. These studies
address critical data needs to support stock assessment and recovery
efforts, test multiple hypotheses related to population decline, and
inform management decisions and monitor protection measure
effectiveness. Collectively this research encompasses population
abundance and trend monitoring, estimation of survival and reproductive
rates, determination of short and long-term movements within and
between stock, state, and international boundaries, measures of
foraging behavior, diet, and marine habitat requirements, and
assessments of sea lion health and condition. The following types of
research will be undertaken in FY12, assuming funding levels similar to
those in FY11: (1) monitoring of population trends by sub-region for
Steller sea lions in Alaska, (2) estimation of vital rates of Steller
sea lions in Alaska and Russia, (3) research on the foraging ecology
and composition of the diet in Alaska, and (4) surveys to determine the
biomass of Atka mackerel and cod in the western, central, and eastern
Aleutian Islands sub-regions.
Recovery Criteria in the Biological Opinion
NMFS assembled a Steller Sea Lion Recovery Team (Team) in 2001 to
assist in revising the Recovery Plan to promote the conservation of the
Steller sea lion. The Team included: experts on marine mammals from the
private sector, academia, and government; experts on endangered species
conservation; and representatives of the commercial fishing industry,
the Alaska Native Steller sea lion subsistence hunting community, and
the environmental community. In March 2006, the Team submitted a draft
of the Recovery Plan to NMFS, at which time it became an agency
document. NMFS made minor editorial changes prior to releasing the
first draft for public review and comment in May 2006. Upon review of
the comments and recommendations submitted by peer reviewers and the
public, and in light of new information available, NMFS further revised
and updated the Plan. The changes made by NMFS were reflected in the
Agency's updated (May 2007 version) Draft Revised Steller Sea Lion
Recovery Plan, released by NMFS for further public review and comment
on May 21, 2007 (72 Fed. Reg. 28473), with the comment period closing
on August 20, 2007. NMFS reviewed the comments and recommendations
submitted by peer reviewers and the public on the 2007 version of the
draft revised plan and modified the plan as appropriate to produce the
Final Revised Steller Sea Lion Recovery Plan in February 2008.
The Final Revised Steller Sea Lion Recovery Plan (2008) is a
guidance document for the Agency as it continues to manage Steller sea
lions and their habitat throughout their range. It contains recovery
criteria which are described in several chapters of the Biological
Opinion, and are stated as performance measures by sub-region (sub-
regions from west to east are: Russia/Asia; western, central, and
eastern Aleutian Islands; western, central, and eastern Gulf of
Alaska). The Steller Sea Lion Recovery Team believed, and NMFS
concurred, it was important to consider sub-population vital rates and
demographic characteristics when considering the status of the western
population of sea lions relative to recovery. The Recovery Plan notes
that significant declines over large areas (two or more adjacent
subareas) could indicate that extinction risk may still be high and
that further research would be needed to understand the threats and
would indicate a lack of recovery for the western population as a
whole. Thus, NMFS believes it was important to maintain viable sub-
populations within the western population and not rely solely on the
core of the range to provide for increasing population numbers over the
short term.
The 2008 Revised Recovery Plan for Steller sea lions provided NMFS'
rationale for considering sub-population vital rates and demographic
characteristics when considering whether the western population of
Steller sea lion was sufficiently recovered to merit delisting.
According to the Revised Recovery Plan, significant declines over large
areas could indicate that the extinction risk for the western
population may still be high and would indicate a lack of recovery. The
Revised Recovery Plan stressed the importance of maintaining viable
sub-populations throughout the range of the western population to
achieve recovery and the ability to delist.
The current decline in abundance of Steller sea lions in the
adjacent western and central Aleutian Islands sub-regions is,
therefore, inconsistent with the recovery criteria of this population.
Therefore, it was necessary to develop RPAs associated with the
Biological Opinion for the Fishery Management Plans that could improve
the availability of forage fish for sea lions in these sub-regions.
Only then could NMFS ensure that authorization of the federal
commercial fisheries was not likely to jeopardize the continued
existence of the western population of sea lions or adversely modify
its critical habitat.
The RPA recommended in the Biological Opinion was designed to
insure that the action, the authorization of Federal fisheries off
Alaska, was not likely to reduce appreciably the likelihood of recovery
of the western population of the Steller sea lion. A key consideration
in making the determination that the action, as modified by the RPA,
would not reduce appreciably the likelihood of recovery was use of the
criteria developed by NMFS and the recovery team to determine when
recovery has been achieved and when the western population no longer
requires protection under the ESA.
Conclusion
The ultimate goal of the actions taken by NMFS is the recovery of
the western Steller sea lion population so it can be removed from the
list of endangered and threatened wildlife. These actions are designed
to conserve Steller sea lion prey in important times and areas while
allowing as much fishing to continue as possible.
Thank you again for the opportunity to discuss NOAA's Steller sea
lion science and fishery management decisions. We are available to
answer any questions you may have.
______

Mr. Hastings. Thank you very much, Mr. Schwaab.
And next, we will recognize Mr. Vincent-Lang, Special
Projects Coordinator for the Alaska Fish and Game. You are
recognized for five minutes. Thank you.

STATEMENT OF DOUG VINCENT-LANG, SPECIAL PROJECTS COORDINATOR,
ALASKA DEPARTMENT OF FISH AND GAME

Mr. Vincent-Lang. Good morning, Mr. Hastings, Mr. Young.
Thank you for the opportunity to speak with you today.
I am going to speak with you regarding concerns the State
of Alaska has with the National Marine Fisheries Service
Biological Opinion for the Western stock of Steller sea lions.
In this Biological Opinion, the Service concluded that
fishing in some areas of the Aleutian Islands jeopardizes the
Steller sea lion stock and adversely modifies its critical
habitat. Based on this finding, the Service adopted expansive
new area closures and restrictions to fishing of a magnitude
that cripples the fishing based economy of the Western
Aleutians and raises environmental justice concerns.
As many as 900 people are employed by fishing fleets and
processors in the area facing restrictions. The Service
acknowledges that implementation of this decision would cause
fishery losses of up to $61 million annually and 750 jobs.
Alaska questions whether these restrictions are justified
in light of evidence that the stock now numbers over 73,000
animals, is growing overall across its range, and that there is
a lack of credible data showing that fishing is, in fact,
jeopardizing Steller sea lions or adversely modifying their
critical habitat.
The conclusion that fishing is affecting the Western stock
is based on speculation, not hard facts. Let us look at the
scientific data upon which the Service based its jeopardy and
adverse modification finding.
First, the Western stock of Steller sea lions as a whole is
recovering and is not in jeopardy at this time. The stock is
growing at a rate of 1.4 percent per year, and now numbers over
73,000 animals.
Second, recovery objectives established by the 2008 Steller
sea lion recovery plan are not being violated. Rather, the
current status of the stock achieves the criteria established
within the recovery plan.
Third, the primary rationale for the positive jeopardy and
adverse modification finding is that Atka mackerel and Pacific
cod fishing is causing nutritional stress to Steller sea lions.
However, there is little sound scientific evidence that
nutritional stress is in fact causing slower than desired rate
of recovery in the Western Aleutians, and the scant available
evidence is extremely weak.
Fourth, the cause for restrictions for Pacific cod as an
important prey species for Steller sea lions in the Western
Aleutians is tenuous at best, and the basis for its inclusion
in the interim final rule is unjustified.
Fifth, while it may be theoretically possible for
commercial fisheries to adversely affect the prey field of
Steller sea lions, the data are very inconclusive. Studies
founded by the Service itself, and largely ignored in the
Biological Opinion, reveal that correlations between Steller
sea lion population growth and fishing intensity over time and
space indicate no significant relationship, much less a
negative relationship.
Sixth, the biomass of both Pacific cod and Atka mackerel
were increasing under the prior management regime, thus
negating the need for drastic changes implemented by the
Service. In fact, the most recent biomass surveys for these two
species so increasing biomasses in the Western Aleutians, even
to the level sought as targets in the final rule.
Finally, even accepting as true the false conclusion that
fishing is negatively affecting Steller sea lions in the
Western Aleutians, the Biological Opinion presented no
information demonstrating that this effect is adversely
modifying critical habitat as a whole for the Western stock as
required under the Endangered Species Act.
In summary, there is simply insufficient scientific
evidence to conclude that fishing is causing acute nutritional
stress and, thus, jeopardy to the Western Steller sea lions and
adverse modification of their critical habitat, much less to
any level of effect that would require immediate implementation
of correction actions at this time.
Alaska submitted extensive comments identifying these
foundational science issues, as well as issues regarding the
process used by the Service to reach its decision. We do not
believe the Service adequately considered the State's concerns.
Instead, they simply relied on their deference to justify their
invalid conclusions and discount valid concerns raised by the
State and others.
In reaching their conclusions, the Service failed to
conduct an independent review of their work. In fact, the
subsequent independent analysis contacted by the States of
Alaska and Washington substantiated many of the scientific
concerns identified by affected users.
We understand that the Service is planning to conduct a CIE
review in the upcoming months. We strong urge the Service to
employ the Council-adopted terms of reference and established
working groups to finalize the CIE process. Specifically, we
request that the terms of reference mandate all of the science,
including the report from aforementioned State review be
examined. We also request that the BiOp findings regarding the
effects of Steller sea lions be examined. Finally, we request
that the public process be as transparent as that employed by
the State panel.
Also, at the request of the Service, the North Pacific
Fishery Management Council held a special meeting to review the
Biological Opinion. The Service maintained that a special
Council meeting was needed to accommodate its severely
shortened decision time frame after working on the Biological
Opinion for over four years. At this meeting, the Council
developed a reasonable and prudent alternative that would have
increased protection for Steller sea lions while minimizing the
effects of fishing as required under the Magnuson-Stevens Act.
We are disappointed he Service did not more fully incorporate
the recommendations of the Council in the implemented action.
Finally, the State is concerned about the lack of
meaningful public process allowed by the Service in evaluating
the status of Steller sea lions. Specifically, we have concerns
about the adequacy of the environmental assessment associated
with the Biological Opinion. In particular, we question whether
the economic valuations presented in the economic assessment
reflect the real impacts to affected communities and fishing
fleets. For example, the draft environment assessment released
to the public was missing large pieces of critical information
necessary to the public to make informed decisions.
This concludes my remarks. I would be happy to answer any
questions. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Vincent-Lang follows:]

Statement of Doug Vincent-Lang, Special Assistant to the Commissioner,
Alaska Department of Fish and Game

Good Morning. Thank you for the opportunity to speak with you
today.
My name is Doug Vincent-Lang. I am a Special Assistant to the
Commissioner of the Alaska Department of Fish and Game (ADF&G). As part
of my duties I am the Endangered Species Act (ESA) Coordinator for the
State of Alaska. I have worked in this position since September, 2007.
Previously I worked for the ADF&G as a biologist and Assistant Director
for 26 years. I hold a B.S. degree in biology/population dynamics from
the University of Wisconsin--Green Bay and a M.S. degree in Biological
Oceanography from the University of Alaska Fairbanks.
Today I am here to speak with you regarding concerns the State of
Alaska has with the National Marine Fishery Service's Biological
Opinion for the western stock of Steller sea lions. In this Biological
Opinion, the National Marine Fisheries Service (Service) concluded that
fishing in some areas of the Aleutian Islands jeopardizes the Steller
sea lion stock and adversely modifies its habitat. Based on this
finding, the Service adopted expansive new area closures and
restrictions to fishing of a magnitude that cripples the fishing-based
economy of the western Aleutians and raises environmental justice
questions. As many as 900 people are employed by fisheries fleets and
processors in the area facing restrictions. The Service acknowledges
that implementation of its decision would cost fishery losses of up to
$66 million annually.
Alaska questions whether these restrictions are justified in light
of evidence that the stock now numbers over 73,000 animals, that it is
growing overall across its range, and that there is a lack of credible
data showing that fishing is in fact jeopardizing Steller sea lions or
adversely modifying their habitat.
The conclusion that fishing is affecting the western stock of
Steller sea lions was based on speculation, not hard facts. Let's look
at the scientific data upon which the National Marine Fisheries Service
based their jeopardy and adverse modification:
1.  The western stock of Steller sea lions as a whole is
recovering and is not in jeopardy at this time. This stock is
growing at a rate of 1.4% per year and now numbers over 73,000
animals. As noted in the Biological Opinion itself ``Since
2000, the decline has ceased and in most sub-regions the wSSL
population is increasing.''
2.  Recovery objectives established by the 2008 Steller Sea
Lion Recovery Plan are not being violated; rather the current
status of the stock achieves the criteria established by the
Recovery Plan. To achieve recovery, the plan criteria dictate
that the population trend in any two adjacent sub-regions
cannot be significantly declining. In fact, the data show that
no two adjacent sub-regions are significantly declining: one
area does show a decline, but it is not possible to determine
if this decline is significant. The plan also dictates that the
population trend in any one sub-area cannot have declined by
more than 50%. The data show that the population in one sub-
region, the Western Aleutians, has declined, but at a rate less
than 50%.
3.  The primary rationale for the positive jeopardy and adverse
modification finding is that the Atka mackerel and Pacific cod
fisheries are causing ``nutritional stress'' to Steller sea
lions. There is little sound evidence, however, that
nutritional stress is causing the slower-than-desired rate of
recovery in the western Aleutians, and the scant available
evidence is extremely weak. For example, of the 17 possible
life history indicators identified to assess nutritional stress
for which the Service has data to evaluate, only 1 indicator
showed a positive relationship: reduced birth rate. The
remaining 16 biological indicators showed a negative
relationship. These negative findings included emaciated pups,
reduced pup body size, reduced pup weight, reduced growth rate,
reduced pup survival, reduced juvenile survival, reduced adult
survival, reduced overall survival, reduced pup counts, reduced
non-pup counts, changes in blood chemistry, and increased
incidence of disease. And even the reduced birth rate
relationship should be viewed with caution given the lack of
life history data for sea lions in the western Aleutians. Low
birth rates could be attributed to factors other than
nutritional stress, for example, predation. Other recent data,
collected by the ADF&G and funded by cooperative research
monies from the Service, confirms that first-year Steller sea
lions pups in the western stock show no evidence of poor body
condition. This is yet another source of data that calls into
question the Service's unproven and untested nutritional stress
theory, on which their onerous Reasonable and Prudent
Alternative is based. In addition, other National Marine
Fisheries Service funded research demonstrates out-migration of
branded Steller sea lions that move between the western and
eastern Steller sea lion stock boundaries, which calls into
question the assertion in the Biological Opinion that there is
no cross-migration between the two stocks.
4.  The case for restrictions for Pacific cod as an important
prey species for Steller sea lions in the western Aleutians is
tenuous at best and the basis for its inclusion in the
Reasonable and Prudent Alternatives and interim final rule is
unjustified. Information available to assess sea lion diets in
the western Aleutians is extremely limited. Only 46 total scat
(feces) samples are available, and within that limited sample,
94% of the scat samples collected contained no cod at all.
Information to assess the extent of sea lion feeding ranges is
also extremely limited. The primary justification for the
expansive closures in the western Aleutians is the foraging
behavior of 3 juvenile males, which may not be representative
of all Steller sea lions, particularly adult females, the
population component most critical for determining population
trends.
5.  While it may be theoretically possible for commercial
fisheries to adversely impact the prey field of Steller sea
lions, the data are very inconclusive. Studies funded by the
Service, but largely ignored in the Biological Opinion, reveal
that correlations between Steller sea lion population growth
and fishing intensity over time and space indicate no
significant relationship, much less a negative relationship.
6.  The biomass of both Pacific cod and Atka mackerel were
increasing under the prior management regime, thus negating the
need for the drastic changes implemented by the Service. As a
result, the management measures imposed by the final Reasonable
and Prudent Alternatives are not consistent with the most
recent 2010 biomass estimates for either Pacific cod or Atka
mackerel, which were not considered in the Biological Opinion
and Reasonable and Prudent Alternative analysis even though
they were available before the final Biological Opinion was
signed. These most recent (November 2010) biomass surveys for
these two species show increasing biomass in the western
Aleutians, even to levels sought as targets in the Reasonable
and Prudent Alternative.
7.  Finally, even accepting as true the false conclusion that
fishing is negatively affecting Steller sea lions in the
western Aleutians, the Biological Opinion presented no
information demonstrating that this effect is adversely
modifying critical habitat as a whole for the western stock, as
required under the Endangered Species Act.
In summary, there is simply insufficient scientific evidence to
conclude that fishing is causing any nutritional stress and thus
jeopardy to western Steller sea lions and adverse modification of their
critical habitat, much less any level of effect that would require
immediate implementation of corrective actions at this time. The State
of Alaska submitted extensive comments identifying these foundational
science issues, as well as regarding issues with the process used by
the National Marine Fisheries Service to reach their decision. We do
not believe that the Service adequately considered the State's
concerns. Instead, they strongly relied on their deference to justify
their conclusions and discount valid concerns raised by the State and
others.
In reaching their conclusion, the Service failed to conduct an
independent review of their work, as is normally undertaken and which
we believe would have highlighted these shortcomings. In fact, a
subsequent independent analysis contracted by the States of Alaska and
Washington substantiated many of the scientific concerns identified by
affected users.
Also, at the request of the National Marine Fisheries Service, the
North Pacific Fishery Management Council held a special meeting to
review the Biological Opinion and associated Reasonable and Prudent
Alternative. The Service maintained that a special Council meeting was
needed to accommodate a severely shortened decision timeframe--after
working on the Biological Opinion for over four years. At this meeting
the Council developed an alternate Reasonable and Prudent Alternative
that would have increased protections for sea lions while minimizing
effects on fishing communities as required by the Magnuson-Stevens Act.
We are disappointed that the National Marine Fisheries Service did not
more fully incorporate the recommendations of the Council in their
implemented action.
Finally, the State is also concerned about the lack of meaningful
public process allowed by the Service in evaluating the status of
Steller sea lions. Specifically, we have concerns about the adequacy of
the Environmental Assessment associated with the Biological Opinion; in
particular, we question whether the economic valuations presented in
the Economic Assessment reflect the real impacts to the affected
communities and fishing fleets. For example, the draft Environmental
Assessment released to the public was missing large pieces of critical
information necessary for the public to make informed comments.
The state is challenging this Biological Opinion and the associated
fishery restrictions on various scientific and procedural grounds.
Nevertheless, we fully support the recovery of this stock and will work
cooperatively with NMFS on joint research.
This concludes my remarks. I would be happy to answer any
questions.
______

Mr. Hastings. Thank you very much, Mr. Vincent-Lang. I
appreciate your testimony.
And last, we will go to Mr. Bill Tweit, Special Assistant
for the Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife. You are
recognized for five minutes.

STATEMENT OF BILL TWEIT, SPECIAL ASSISTANT, WASHINGTON
DEPARTMENT OF FISH AND WILDLIFE

Mr. Hastings. Press the button on your----
Mr. Tweit. Thank you. Good morning, Chairman Hastings and
Representative Young. Thank you for the opportunity to speak
with you today.
I work for the Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife
and represent Director Phil Anderson on the North Pacific
Council.
In addition to Council representation, my duties at the
Department include salmon harvest management, Columbia River
water management, hydro powered mitigation, and tribal
relations.
In my testimony this morning, I will describe the State of
Washington concerns regarding the Biological Opinion on Steller
sea lions, the operating guidelines developed by Washington and
Alaska for the independent science review of this Biological
Opinion and, third, our suggestions for resolution of the
science and management conflicts that have been fostered by
this Biological Opinion.
The State's fundamental concerns are described by Governor
Gregoire in a pair of letters to Secretary of Commerce Locke.
Copies of these letters are attached to my written testimony.
The Governor expressed two fundamental and interrelated
concerns: first, the high degree of scientific uncertainty that
this Biological Opinion is addressing, and, second, the top
down approach that NMFS has adopted to developing the
Biological Opinion and its reasonable and prudent alternatives.
For contrast with the approach they have chosen here, I am
very familiar with the process for crafting another notable
Biological Opinion, this one regarding the impacts of the
operation of the Federal Columbia River power system on listed
salmonids.
While that process certainly has some considerable
difficulties associated with it, the State of Washington
strongly supports the current Federal approach. This approach
has not ended all of the controversy or litigation surrounding
this Biological Opinion, which is probably an impossible task
anyway, but it has brought many of the parties together to
focus on solutions and implementation of salmon recovery
actions. It has become a regionally driven, bottom up process,
in considerable contrast to the Steller sea lions BiOp, which
has had virtually no constructive regional engagement and
represents essentially an edict from the National Marine
Fisheries Service.
Washington saw the need for an independent scientific
review of this Biological Opinion due to the very significant
scientific uncertainties. We took a great deal of care in
developing the guidelines for the independent science review to
ensure that the science advice we received would be unbiased
and credible. Alaska shared our objectives.
We wish to avoid, on the one hand, an ill-informed review
due to the reviewer's lack of familiarity with the subjects. At
the same time, we also wish to avoid panelists that have
already drawn their own conclusions about the Biological
Opinion. Consequently, we in Alaska chose the two co-chairs for
their extensive knowledge of their fields, their professional
integrity and credibility, and their lack of engagement in this
BiOp.
We gave them free reign to choose the remaining panelists,
develop their terms of reference, and conduct their review. The
panel conducted their work in an open and transparent process,
holding two public meetings to solicit input. Until we received
their draft report, we had no advance knowledge of their
findings or even whether they would be able to reach consensus
on any or all of the issues they examined.
The fact that these four scientists were able to provide us
with a consensus final report is very convincing to us. Their
findings are Washington's position on the economic and
scientific underpinnings of the Biological Opinion and its
RPAs.
Based on their findings, it is apparent to us that the BiOp
is flawed, likely as a consequence, in our judgment, of the top
down Federal process that was employed.
In concluding, I would like to return to a primary theme of
both of the letters from Governor Gregoire that NMFS commit to
an open and transparent process to be implemented as quickly as
possible for revisions to the Biological Opinion that are
responsive to both the science panel findings and to regional
comments. If NMFS chooses to initiate its own CIE review of the
BiOp, their first step should be to develop the terms of
reference concurrently with the Council. These terms should
include the CIE's ability to examine the results of the State's
independent review and should also include opportunity for
public input.
I believe the North Pacific Council is willing to
facilitate a process for engaging all stakeholders. In our
view, that process should start now, and not wait for the
results of another science review or for litigation to be
settled. And most importantly, the top down approach with a
one-sided and erroneous application of the precautionary
approach is not acceptable.
Mr. Chair, the ingredients for a successful regional
collaboration are present in this case. The North Pacific
Council is a leader in applying ecosystem management principles
to fishery management issues. The States of Washington and
Alaska are experienced with and very supportive of
collaborative approaches to solving thorny resource management
issues, and the stakeholders are willing to participate. The
only missing ingredient at this point appears to be a NOAA
interest in collaborative development of measures that will
support sea lion recovery.
We urge the Committee to express its support for NOAA to
participate in a regional collaborative process to revise the
Biological Opinion to address the errors and shortcomings
identified by the State's independent science review.
Thank you. I would be pleased to answer any questions the
Committee may have.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Tweit follows:]

Statement of Bill Tweit, Special Assistant,
Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife

Good Morning. Thank you for the opportunity to speak with you
today.
My name is Bill Tweit. I represent Director Phil Anderson on the
North Pacific Fishery Management Council (NPFMC), and it is in that
capacity that I provide our testimony to you today. I have worked for
the Department since 1988; in addition to NPFMC representation my
duties include salmon harvest management, Columbia River water
management, hydropower mitigation, and tribal relations. I received my
Bachelors degree in Ecology and Field Biology from The Evergreen State
College in 1976.
In my testimony, I will describe the State of Washington concerns
regarding the NMFS Biological Opinion that addresses potential impacts
of the North Pacific groundfish fisheries on Stellers Sea Lions (BiOp),
the operating guidelines developed by Washington and Alaska for the
Independent Science Review that we commissioned to review this BiOp,
and our suggestions for resolution of the science and management
conflicts fostered by this BiOp.
The State's concerns are described by Governor Gregoire in a pair
of letters to Secretary of Commerce Locke; copies of those letters are
attached to my written testimony. The Governor expressed two
fundamental and inter-related concerns: the high degree of scientific
uncertainty and the ``top-down'' approach that NMFS adopted to
developing the BiOp and its Reasonable and Prudent Alternatives (RPA).
She noted that NMFS was proposing regulations that would have
significant impacts to the fishing fleets, and that there was
considerable scientific uncertainty concerning the need for and the
effect of those regulations.
In view of the significance of both the impacts and the level of
scientific uncertainty, in October 2010 she urged NMFS to adopt the
interim measures proposed by the NPFMC and to initiate a collaborative
approach to development of the long-term measures. NMFS decided that
the Council's proposed interim measures were inadequate, implemented
their own recommended measures on January 1 via an interim final rule
that allows enactment without public comment, and have yet to describe
a collaborative approach for either resolution of the uncertainties or
development of alternative measures.
In her January letter, following the NMFS interim final rule,
Governor Gregoire reiterated her support for establishing a
collaborative process, expressed her concern that the public process
to-date had allowed little room for substantive public involvement, and
emphasized her belief that controversial resource management issues
with high levels of scientific uncertainty are best addressed through
fair and transparent inclusion of all perspectives, and concluded that
``there is great benefit in having all sides work together toward a
solution''.
I am very familiar with the process for crafting another NMFS
Biological Opinion, regarding the impacts of the operation of the
Federal Columbia River Hydropower System on listed salmonids. While
that process has some difficulties, the State of Washington strongly
supports the current Federal approach for development of the most
recent version. The approach is inclusive of all regional governments,
including plaintiffs, acknowledges the scientific uncertainties, and is
oriented to solutions that are robust to the uncertainties and
sensitive to economic impacts. An Adaptive Management process was
developed to alter the Columbia River BiOp provisions if the
assumptions proved incorrect.
This approach has not ended all of the controversy or litigation
surrounding this BiOp, probably an impossible task, but it has brought
many of the parties together to focus on solutions and implementation
of salmon recovery actions. It became a regionally-driven, bottom-up
process, in considerable contrast to the Stellers Sea Lion BiOp, which
has had virtually no constructive regional engagement, and is
essentially an edict from NMFS.
Washington acknowledged that there are very significant scientific
uncertainties concerning factors for decline for Stellers Sea Lions in
the central and western Aleutians, and was hesitant to draw our own
conclusions regarding the NMFS scientific and economic assessments
until we had the benefit of an independent review. Consequently, we
took a great deal of care in developing the guidelines for the
independent science review, to ensure that science advice would be
unbiased and credible. Alaska shared our objectives. We wished to avoid
an ill-informed review due to lack of familiarity with Stellers Sea
Lion biology and population dynamics, fisheries population assessments,
or North Pacific fisheries. We also wished to avoid panelists that had
already made their own conclusions about the BiOp.
Consequently, we chose the two co-chairs for their extensive
knowledge of their subjects, and their professional integrity and
credibility. We gave them free reign to choose the remaining panelists,
develop their terms of reference and conduct their review. Dr. David
Bernard, a retired quantitative scientist, has a long and distinguished
history in international arenas and knows population modeling and
exploitation issues. Steve Jeffries, a researcher for WDFW, is a coast-
wide authority on pinnipeds. They chose two additional panel members;
Dr. Andrew Trites and Dr. Gunnar Knapp, finalized their terms of
reference, and did their review without further policy direction from
either state. The panel conducted their work in an open and transparent
process, holding several public meetings to solicit public input. Until
we reviewed their draft report, we had no advance knowledge of their
findings, or even whether they would be able to reach consensus on any
or all of the issues that they examined. The fact that these four
scientists were able to provide us with a consensus final report is
very convincing to us. Their findings are Washington's position on the
economic and scientific underpinnings of the BiOp and its RPAs.
I understand that Dr. Knapp and Dr. Trites will provide the
Committee with an overview of the panel's finding at this hearing, so I
will focus on a few highlights from our perspective. The panel was
critical of the science used in the NMFS finding of Jeopardy with
Adverse Modification for the groundfish fisheries, for two reasons.
They characterized the NMFS logic as a classic fallacy, confusing
correlation with causation. The panel noted there was very scant
scientific evidence supporting the fishery induced nutritional stress
hypothesis, and that evidence is now over a decade old and not
supported by more recent years' data, so it appears that NMFS applied
the precautionary principle to fisheries simply because they believed
that something had to be done.
As state managers, we value consistency in application of the ESA,
and we appreciate that this extreme version of the precautionary
approach has not been applied more broadly. The panel found that there
is little overlap between sea lion prey and fishery catches; the
fishery typically harvests larger fish than sea lions eat. NMFS
acknowledges that reproduction of the primary prey species is not
affected by fishing, and the science panel notes that the sea lions are
eating younger fish than the fishery harvests. We conclude that the
BiOp fishery restrictions are misdirected, will not benefit sea lions,
but clearly are detrimental to the fishery.
This hearing comes shortly after the release of the science panel
final report; I am sure that we will have more suggestions for BiOp
revisions as we study their report. One conclusion that we draw from
their report is that the BiOp is very flawed, and we believe that is
likely a consequence of the ``top-down'' Federal process. In
concluding, I'd like to return to a primary theme of both of the
letters from Governor Gregoire: that NMFS commit to an open and
transparent process, to be implemented as quickly as possible, for
revisions to the BiOp that are responsive to the panel findings and
regional comments. NMFS used an interim final rule process to implement
this BiOp, and while we are still uncertain what that means, we hope
that it provides more flexibility and timeliness for modification than
a permanent final rule.
The North Pacific Council remains willing to facilitate a process
for engaging all stakeholders in what Governor Gregoire terms a
``regional collaborative process''. In our view, that process should
start now, and not wait for the results of a NMFS CIE review, or for
litigation to be settled. NMFS needs to engage in this process with
staff from their Sustainable Fisheries Division, not just the Protected
Resources staff responsible for this flawed BiOp, and most importantly,
NMFS should be told that their ``top-down'' approach, with a one-sided
and erroneous application of the precautionary approach, is not
acceptable.
The ingredients for a successful regional collaboration are present
here. The North Pacific Council is a leader in applying ecosystem
management principles to fishery management; the States of Washington
and Alaska are experienced with and very supportive of collaborative
approaches to thorny resource management issues; and the stakeholders
are willing to engage when the science is solid. The long-list of
sustainable fishing practices that North Pacific industry has supported
includes development of seabird avoidance gear, protection of coral
gardens, bottom trawl gear modifications, bycatch reduction programs,
and support for scientifically established allowable catch levels. The
only missing ingredient appears to be NOAA interest in collaborative
development of measures that will support sea lion recovery.
We urge the committee to express its support for NOAA to
immediately initiate a regional, collaborative process to revise the
BiOp to address the errors and shortcomings identified by the state's
independent science review.
Thank you, I would be pleased to answer any questions the Committee
may have.
______

Mr. Hastings. Thank you very much, Mr. Tweit, and thank all
three of you for you testified here. As to your last comment,
Mr. Tweit, that is why we are here.
Mr. Schwaab, according to Mr. Vincent-Lang's testimony that
he alluded to orally, and in his written statement, he said
that the November 2010 biomass survey show that the biomass for
both cod and Atka mackerel are increasing, and in his written
testimony he said, and I quote, ``Even to the level sought as
targets in the reasonable and prudent alternatives.''
Now, is this not this significantly new information that
should almost be a requirement for immediate review of the BiOp
and the RPAs?
Mr. Schwaab. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. That type of
information certainly could be grounds for re-initiation.
Mr. Hastings. Just grounds for?
Mr. Schwaab. Well, significant new information. Obviously,
when we reach that critical point at which re-initiation would
yield some significantly different result is something that we
would be looking closely at.
Mr. Hastings. Well, we heard kind of specifically that the
process by which, at least this decision or this observation
from this group came about was very transparent.
Let me just ask a question then. I will use your terms
``grounds,'' except that there is a process by which you go
through. But will this information be discussed openly and
transparently as you go forward?
Mr. Schwaab. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Obviously as I
indicated in my testimony, the new report initiated by----
Mr. Hastings. Do I take that as a yes then?
Mr. Schwaab. The answer is that that new report, along with
a number of other new----
Mr. Hastings. My question was open and transparent. Do I
take it as a yes that you will treat that openly and
transparently?
Mr. Schwaab. Yes.
Mr. Hastings. Thank you.
Another question for you, Mr. Schwaab. Other than the
funding that was appropriated by Congress for Steller sea lion
research, and I alluded that $150 million has been appropriated
on that, what has been the Administration's request for this
research?
Mr. Schwaab. This research, you know, generally falls into
a range of other competing priorities that we put forward.
Mr. Hastings. Well, let me ask you. The reason I ask, if
the economic impact is such that you stated in your report of
up to 750 job loss and an impact of $61 million, should the
Administration not be requesting money for Steller sea lion
research rather than saying, OK, it is part of the process if
this is a big economic impact?
Mr. Schwaab. We do request money that is allocated to
Steller sea lion research. I could, if you would like, perhaps
defer to my colleague, Dr. DeMaster, to say in a little more
detail what that ask is and to what purpose.
Mr. Hastings. Real quickly, go ahead.
Dr. DeMaster. Thank you, Chair. Most of the funding
requests are on the order of $3 million to $5 million a year
for the National Marine Fisheries Service's work on Steller sea
lions. Most of that work goes toward doing pup surveys to
determine trends in pup counts, trends in non-pup counts in
terms of abundance whether it is increasing or decreasing, food
habits work, telemetry work to look at foraging. And our focus
this year, in fact, right in the next two weeks----
Mr. Hastings. My question was not so much what you are
doing because I assume that is all part of that. My question
was, given the economic impact and the potential job loss by
your own report, should you not be requesting enough to get
this done in a very timely manner? That is my question.
Dr. DeMaster. In the end of last Fiscal Year and this
Fiscal Year, Fiscal Year 2012, we specifically reprogrammed
funding to do the telemetry work that the Council asked us to
do regarding Steller sea lions in the Western Aleutians. We are
doing that work jointly with ADF&G.
Mr. Hastings. OK. And finally, and you alluded to this, as
you go through with this process, and both the witnesses on
your panel suggested very strongly that their process was open
and transparent. I will just ask again, because I think it is
very important just that that process be as open and
transparent.
Will you just give me your commitment that you will do that
in a way that all people that have an interest in this will
have adequate time in order to respond?
Mr. Schwaab. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Can I just clarify?
Are you speaking specifically to the CIE process or to the
process in totality that we would introduce CIE information?
Mr. Hastings. Probably both.
Mr. Schwaab. So, the CIE process, as I mentioned, would
involve a process whereby we would initiate with, as I
indicated, work with the Council on establishing the terms of
reference. That process then includes outreach to appropriate
information that was available to the Agency at the time at
which the BiOp was developed.
There is, of course, a broader process that involves
significant opportunity for public engagement, consideration of
RPAs and the like with the Council going forward.
Mr. Hastings. My time has run out, but that is the process
that I want to make sure is more fully open and transparent.
Mr. Schwaab. Yes, sir, I can commit that to you.
Mr. Hastings. Thank you.
Mr. Young?
Mr. Young. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
We are going to have a series of questions because I know
you have some more, I hope.
Mr. Hastings. Yes.
Mr. Young. OK.
Mr. Schwaab, have you ever worked in Washington, D.C.? Do
you work in Washington, D.C.?
Mr. Schwaab. My office is based in Silver Spring. I spend a
lot of time in Washington, D.C., yes, sir.
Mr. Young. That explains how you learned how to dance. You
guys are really good at that. I say, I have watched the
Administration come down time again, dance around an answer
better than anybody I have ever seen. So, congratulations.
Is it true the Agency did a phone survey of the lower 48
States to ask people how much they would be willing to pay to
recover the Steller sea lions? And how does that have any
bearing whatsoever on anything relevant to the scientifically
based Biological Opinion?
Mr. Schwaab. Mr. Young, I do not know the answer to that
question. Perhaps Dr. DeMaster does.
Dr. DeMaster. The answer is yes.
Mr. Young. They do not even know what a Steller stock is,
let alone Steller sea lion. If you took the money and the time
in your research, Doctor, to call people in the lower 48 and
ask them whether they would be willing to save--did they ever
write you a check? Did you ever ask for any money?
Dr. DeMaster. No, we did not.
Mr. Young. You did not. So, if I find a check written to
you, how much they would be willing to pay, you would have to
take that back, would you not? I would suggest you say yes, OK?
We have spent $150 million in sea lion research since the
Fiscal Year of, I believe it is 2001. And we still do not have
any scientific information. When you have the term ``best
science available,'' and you do not use the science of other
peer review groups, is that best science available, Mr.
Schwaab?
Mr. Schwaab. Mr. Young, if you are referring to the report
that we just received, we have indicated that we will take that
under consideration. If there is new evidence there that is
useful, we will use that.
Mr. Young. But I go to what science did you use? What was
the science that you used to put this species and eliminate the
fishing? What science was there? What did you do?
Mr. Schwaab. So, you know, perhaps I can mention a few
items that we found particularly compelling--declining counts
of pups and non-pups in the Western Aleutians and Central
Aleutian Islands sub-region since 2000.
Mr. Young. But, again, that, by the way, if I can say so
has been refuted. There is an increase of population, not a
decrease in population. The fact is there are probably more sea
lions now in that area than there ever has been. Yet you are
affecting about $60 million in fisheries and affecting
communities because you are sitting in Washington, D.C. or
Silver Springs.
Now, are you going to listen to gentleman from Washington,
the gentleman from Alaska? Are you going to review their
findings?
Mr. Schwaab. Yes.
Mr. Young. And what if you find that they are right.
Mr. Schwaab. If we find new information----
Mr. Young. How long is that going to take?
Mr. Schwaab. Obviously there are a number of steps that are
under way right now.
Mr. Young. How long is it going to take?
Mr. Schwaab. I do not have an answer for you right now.
Mr. Young. So, you mean you are going to shut the fisheries
down. In fact, there is a paragraph here that really interests
me, if I can find it, that if there a review of--and some
things found that there could be a possible threat--I think it
is in your testimony. It is on independent scientific review.
That would be the States of Alaska and Washington, am I
correct? Then I to go ahead and read it and it says, ``NMFS
will review and consider the findings of the final report of
any future consultations concerning the impacts of Federally
managed groundfish or fisheries of Steller sea lions. If any
new information or impacts of the groundfish fisheries of the
Steller sea lions reveals effects on the list of species or
critical habitat that were not previously considered then, a
formal consultation is required.''
So, if you review those, do you have another formal
consultation, or are will you threaten them if they come in
with their peer review?
Mr. Schwaab. There would be, at the point at which
consultation was re-initiated, we would be entering into
approximately an 18-month process. Obviously some of the
information that was provided by the State's review might
either be useful in that consultation or be grounds for
initiation. There might be new scientific information based on
some of the research that Dr. DeMaster mentioned that would be
useful or cause re-initiation. There is new information
relating to groundfish stocks that could also contribute to--of
subsequent biological review.
Mr. Young. Well, what I am looking at here, you say 18
months. We have communities that are directly affected,
infrastructure will be directly affected. And you have done
something from the top down with no consultation, no
understanding, and no science. You have no science. That is why
you lean on the term ``best science available,'' I want to
eliminate that, Mr. Chairman, take it away. The ``best science
available'' to just say the ``best science'' so we can utilize
that so you cannot arbitrarily go out and do things as you have
been doing.
There is no shortage of sea lions, none. The pups are
growing. We know that. We have evidence of that, about a 14
percent increase.
I am out of time, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Hastings. I thank the gentleman. And I have--just have
a couple of questions and let him proceed if he has more
questions.
Mr. Schwaab, my understanding is you are required to make a
decision by a petition from the State of Alaska, I think, to
down list the Eastern population of the Steller sea lion by
August of this year. It is obviously beyond August. When will
you make that decision, and why did you not make the August
deadline?
Mr. Schwaab. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. That process has been
under way. We did have that August deadline. We are proceeding
with preparation regarding that finding.
Mr. Hastings. Wait, wait, and wait, preparation for the
finding. Now, it was August. When will you--maybe you are
getting to the point, but when will you have that?
Mr. Schwaab. Yes, sir. The analysis has taken longer than
anticipated. We are committed to completing that review and
publishing our 12-month finding as soon as practicable. Other
workload associated with Steller sea lion work falls on the
same people who are following through on that review.
Mr. Hastings. So, when will it be done?
Mr. Schwaab. I cannot, as I sit here today, give you an
exact date, sir.
Mr. Hastings. One month? One year?
Mr. Schwaab. I would certainly think it would be within a
period of months.
Mr. Hastings. OK, that is plural. That is two months, less
than six months?
Mr. Schwaab. More than one month, less than one year, sir.
Mr. Hastings. You know, if you sense that both of us are a
little frustrated, you can understand why.
Mr. Young. Incompetent.
Mr. Hastings. I mean, it was something that you had agreed
to in August, and it has not happened. So, I ask you a
straightforward question, you give me your reasons why, but you
give me essentially a one year time frame, and we are already
two months beyond that time frame. And meanwhile, meanwhile,
the activities here are potentially costing jobs in the fish
industry by your own support.
I mean, so I just get pretty frustrated when I hear that. I
do not know how much more to pursue it seeing that--do I have
to get down on my hands and knees and plead? Do they have to
get down on their hands and knees and plead and say, get this
before a one year time frame? I mean, I just do not know how to
respond to that sometimes.
This information that came to me, and I guess I will just
to have to ask it straight forward. Is it true that some of the
assumptions on the Steller sea lion feeding behavior was based
on just three juvenile males?
Mr. Schwaab. Mr. Chairman, if you do not mind, could I
defer to Dr. DeMaster?
Mr. Hastings. If he answers my question, yes.
Dr. DeMaster. I believe the total number was more like 13.
Mr. Young. Wow.
Mr. Hastings. Oh, 13. OK. So, it wasn't three. Now, if one
were in statistics, you would say, well, it is four times the
number, but it is still 13. And you are basing everything on 13
juvenile males in a population--what did I hear you say--of
over 70,000?
Dr. DeMaster. The population in the U.S. Western population
is about 55,000, is our best estimate. But nonetheless, it is a
large number. The decision was based on all of the available
information, and part of that information was the telemetry
data that was based on those 13 or so animals.
Mr. Hastings. Well, this goes to the frustrations, I think,
that both of us share here about the scientific data. And I
think it is something that both our other witnesses on the
panel probably have a concern with. Thirteen, and I am sorry, I
thought it was 70,000, but 13 out of 55,000 is still a pretty
darn small number.
I recognize the gentleman from Alaska.
Mr. Young. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
You know, Mr. Tsukada notes that the Western DPS since 2000
has increased 14 percent, yet your opinion relies on a theory
that birth rate is declining. That seems to be a major
inconsistency. How can you explain that?
Mr. Schwaab. I believe that number is 1.4 percent.
Mr. Young. No, it is 14 percent. It is 14 percent.
Mr. Schwaab. Oh, I am sorry.
Mr. Young. That is right.
Mr. Schwaab. Over the decade. So, the focus obviously has
been on the sub-regions, particularly the Western Aleutian sub-
region, and that portion of the Central Aleutian sub-region
that is west of that 178 degree west longitude line.
Mr. Young. Well, those restrictions were put in in 2000,
and the pups are increasing significantly, yet you shut that
area down. What grounds? Where is the science behind that?
Mr. Schwaab. So, the focus, again, is on those westernmost
sub-regions.
Mr. Young. That is where you shut it down, and that is
where the population increased.
Mr. Schwaab. I do not think that is accurate.
Mr. Young. OK. It is accurate. I mean, I got some of the
best staff in the world on this issue.
Mr. Schwaab. Could I allow Dr. DeMaster----
Mr. Young. No. OK. I will leave Mr. Schwaab alone for a
moment. I have had enough of him.
Dr. Vincent-Lang, State of Alaska, you noted that research
conducted by the Alaska Department of Fish and Game confirms
that the first Steller sea lion pups in the Western stock
showed no evidence of poor body condition. Was this research
considered when the Biological Opinion was drafted? And, if so,
why did NOAA apparently disregard this information?
Mr. Vincent-Lang. Thank you, Mr. Chair, Mr. Young, some of
the critical pieces of information that we felt were available
out in the science were not considered by NMFS in this
Biological Opinion, including that. And, I guess, one of the
things that we were most disturbed about was the really lack of
consultation with the State of Alaska overall in the
development of the Biological Opinion, or in the significant
comments that the State provided and having a significant
amount of interaction with how those comments might have been
incorporated into the draft Biological Opinion that was
released, and then the final that was put out upon which the
RPAs were based.
Mr. Young. OK. Is your department information best
available, or is it good science?
Mr. Vincent-Lang. Well, I think it is both.
Mr. Young. You get rid of that word ``available.'' Best
science.
Mr. Vincent-Lang. It is best science.
Mr. Young. OK, that is good.
Another one you say, marine mammal research has argued that
fisheries are causing localized depletion or nutritional stress
since the 1990s. Is this inherent bias by those who write the
Biological Opinion, that it is not supported by available data?
By the way, who wrote that opinion? Mr. Schwaab, who wrote the
opinion?
Mr. Schwaab. The Biological Opinion came out of our
Protective Resources Division----
Mr. Young. Who did you hire to write it?
Mr. Schwaab. I cannot answer that question, sir.
Mr. Young. Well, we probably can. It was the person who
wrote the 2000 opinion, I believe. Is that correct? One of the
people. Yet you went out and hired an outsider outside your
department. The same person wrote it in 2000. Is that correct?
Mr. Schwaab. Mr. Chairman--Mr. Young, if I could obtain----
Mr. Young. You can call me Chairman. It makes him mad; it
does not make me mad.
Mr. Schwaab. I could find out for you----
Mr. Young. I would appreciate that if you would.
Mr. Schwaab.--on who provided the writings for it, but I do
not know that answer directly.
Mr. Young. Who wrote it, if it was an outsider, a
consultant paid by taxpayers' dollars, and you had somebody
write an opinion that wrote it in 2000. I want all that
information for the Committee. Thank you.
I go back to the amount of fisheries. Have there been any
studies about how much--I believe you can answer this, Mr.
Lang. How much fish were--cod was apparently being consumed by
sea lions? What is the percentage? Do you have any idea? Is
that their major sources of food?
Mr. Vincent-Lang. I am not sure what you are asking, Mr.
Young.
Mr. Young. Well, I would say, what do sea lions eat?
Mr. Vincent-Lang. Well, they are fairly opportunistic
feeders, and I think they will feed on almost any kind of fish
that are out there that is available to them.
Mr. Young. OK. And the study----
Mr. Vincent-Lang. I guess in our opinion that the amount of
biomass that is out in the Western Aleutians, there is no
evidence whatsoever that biomass is insufficient or is causing,
in this case, nutritional stress to Steller sea lion.
Mr. Young. In fact, there is larger biomass than expected,
is that correct?
Mr. Vincent-Lang. The recent biomass estimates that were
put out after the BiOp release indicating that the target
levels for the reasonable and prudent alternatives have been
met. So, in fact, the biomass probably should be sufficient
even if there was nutritional stress to alleviate that.
Mr. Young. And it is increasing in numbers as far as the
biomass?
Mr. Vincent-Lang. The Western DPS is definitely increasing
in number.
Mr. Young. But that is the area that NOAA and NMFS shut
down, is that correct?
Mr. Vincent-Lang. They shut down an area west of 178.
Mr. Young. OK. Mr. Chairman, again, my frustration goes
beyond this. I have been in this business 40 years, and I have
negotiated with NMFS and NOAA and they seem to ignore the
paying customers, the States, and you do that. And those
directly involved, the shareholders, for a sea lion. I am not
talking about sea lions at the locks. I am talking about--they
are all related, you know. It is my aunt or uncle, but they are
all related, and there is no shortage of sea lions.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Hastings. Thank you, Mr. Young.
I just have one further question because it came up
earlier, again, Mr. Schwaab. You asked about the CIE review,
and my question to you is, why, as I understand it, the CIE
information is available for only information that is available
through May 2010? Why is that cutoff date there?
Mr. Schwaab. The review would be focused on the information
that was available at the time that the BiOp was undertaken.
Mr. Hastings. Right. OK. Now, you have new information. Are
you going to open up that CIE review to the new information,
for example, or is just going to make a report based on the old
information?
Mr. Schwaab. The new information would be a basis for re-
initiation, not evaluation of the BiOp that is currently in
place.
Mr. Hastings. Well, are you bound and rigidly saying that
you can only look at something prior to, and not look ahead in
that review process?
Mr. Schwaab. Mr. Chairman, I would just say there are two
separate processes. One is a review of the Biological Opinion
that is governed under which actions to date have been
developed. The second would be a re-initiation which would take
into account any number of pieces of new information.
Mr. Hastings. And that will happen?
Mr. Schwaab. That will happen if, based on any of either
the information that is presented by the State's review, some
new scientific information, some new fishery information, or
any range of other pieces of information might suggest the need
to do that.
Mr. Hastings. One last question. Will the CIE be open to
public input?
Mr. Schwaab. That would be something that we could consider
in the terms of reference, sir, that----
Mr. Hastings. Would you consider that?
Mr. Schwaab.--that such a provision should be.
Mr. Hastings. Would you consider that?
Mr. Schwaab. Yes. Yes.
Mr. Young. Mr. Chairman?
Mr. Hastings. Go ahead. I yield to the gentleman from
Alaska.
Mr. Young. I go back to Mr. Lang. In scat examples taken, I
believe, by the State, 94 percent of the scat from sea lions
shows no cod evidence. What do you have to say about that Mr.
Doctor? Mr. Schwaab?
Mr. Schwaab. Could I defer to Dr. DeMaster for that?
Mr. Young. Yeah.
Mr. Schwaab. Thank you.
Dr. DeMaster. I think that number is correct. It is six
percent of the scats in the summer in the Aleutians contained
cod. Ninety-four percent did not. In the winter, 26 percent of
the scats contained cod, and the rest did not. So, there is a
summer and winter contrast that is reflected in the Biological
Opinion.
Mr. Young. It is in the Biological Opinion?
Dr. DeMaster. Yes.
Mr. Young. I thought you ignored that. I go back to the
other one, Mr. Schwaab. NOAA did hire somebody outside the
Agency to write the BiOp. I wonder, again, I said, that was the
same person that was involved in drafting the 2000 BiOp. Had a
lot of irregularities. In fact, it was looked upon as a bad
piece of work. How much did NOAA spend in hiring that person?
This is the question I am going to ask you, and I want it in
writing. How long was the employee of NOAA, and where was he
working before NOAA brought him back? I just want to know his
background when it comes to who wrote this thing and why you
guys did not do it on your own, because you are supposed to be
the one doing that work, not somebody you hire outside who has
another special interest.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Hastings. Thank you very much.
And I want to thank all of you on the panel. Mr. Schwaab,
it might appear you are treated like a pinata here, but
sometimes that goes with the territory. But I think that you
can understand why sometimes we come to this view.
Now, maybe you are being told that this is what you have to
say and to follow the company line, and I suppose that is all
part of it. But I would just get back to what I mentioned in my
opening statement referencing your BiOp is a potential job loss
and the costs to the industry, and yet all we are trying to
ascertain here or get to a point where there is a give and take
in understanding why all of this is happening.
And the frustration would be--I am not going to ask you to
respond to this, but I think anybody that is observing this,
when we see the wide range of time lines on very specific
questions, that leads one to become a pinata. And so, I will
just say that very respectfully.
And before I dismiss this panel, I do want to say that if
there are further questions that the two of us or others on the
Committee would like to ask of you, we will send them to you
written later, and if you would respond in a very timely
manner, I would appreciate it very much.
I want to thank all of you for coming, and I will dismiss
the first panel. At the same time, we will call up the second
panel.
The second panel is Mr. Andrew Trites, Professor and
Director of Marine Mammal Research at the University of British
Columbia, Dr. Gunnar Knapp, Professor of Economics at the
University of Alaska, Dr. Tim Ragen, from the U.S. Marine
Mammal Commission, and Mr. Larry Cotter, Chair of the North
Pacific Fishery Management Council. I invite you all to come
up.
Thank you all very much for being here. You observed the
first panel, but I will go through the rules one more time. The
timing lights are in front of you, and when the green light is
on, it means you have--you are doing very well. When the yellow
lights comes on, it means you have one minute, and when the red
light comes in, it means your five minutes is up. And as I
mentioned earlier, your entire statement that you submitted for
the record will be part of the record.
So, Dr. Trites, we will start with you.

STATEMENT OF ANDREW TRITES, PROFESSOR AND DIRECTOR, MARINE
MAMMAL RESEARCH UNIT, UNIVERSITY OF BRITISH COLUMBIA

Dr. Trites. Good morning. My name is Andrew Trites. I am a
Professor at the University of British Columbia's Fishery
Center, and Director of the Marine Mammal Research Unit. I am
also the Research Director of the North Pacific University's
Marine Mammal Research Consortium. I have conducted research on
marine mammals for the past 31 years, and I focus most of my
research and understanding on the decline of Steller sea lions
and other fur seals in Alaska.
I am one of four scientists who recently completed an
independent scientific review of the Biological Opinion that
NMFS finalized in November 2010. One of our first tasks as a
review panel was to read all 664 pages of the BiOp. Now, this
is something that not many people can say they have done,
although everyone seems to have an opinion about the BiOp.
There are not many people who can actually said that they have
read it.
The BiOp is a long document with a plot and a cast of
characters that is at time difficult to follow. In fact,
reading the BiOp is much like trying to read John Milton's
Paradise Lost, or Tolstoy's War and Peace. It requires dutiful
reading and a keen awareness of the fact to distinguish between
those facts that are correctly reported and those that are
misused, mistaken, or missing all together.
Three of our panel members read the BiOp for the first time
this summer. This included Dr. Gunnar Knapp, Dr. David Bernard,
and Mr. Steven Jeffries. As for myself, I spent a good part of
my summer reading it for a third time.
As a panel, we were asked by the States of Alaska and
Washington to determine whether the National Marien Fisheries
Service used all of the relevant scientific information, and
whether they were impartial in how they considered the facts in
the final Biological Opinion.
We tabled our final report this past week, which is
available on the Alaska Department of Fish and Game's website.
Our report draws four conclusions about the science and the
way in which NMFS chose to use it.
First, we found that the theory put forward by NMFS that
Steller sea lions are nutritionally stressed from competition
with fisheries is not well supported in the BiOp.
Second, we found that NMFS did not adequately examine and
consider the alternative scientific explanations to explain the
current decline, namely that killer whales are eating
disproportionately greater numbers of sea lions, and that birth
rates are lower because sea lions are eating too much
groundfish.
Third, based on this and the evidence presented in the
BiOp, we concluded that the finding by NMFS of jeopardy and
adverse modification were not warranted.
And, finally, we concluded that the reasonable and prudent
alternatives that NMFS put forward in the Biological Opinion
are likely to contribute to sea lion recovery.
This last conclusion is perhaps the most regrettable
conclusion of all. To think that the significant fishery
closures and restrictions that went into effect on January 1st
of this year in the Western Aleutian Island are unlikely to do
any good, and could possibly even cause greater harm to sea
lions.
In addition to reviewing the BiOp, we conducted a meta-
analysis of the eight studies cited in the BiOp, plus two
additional studies that looked for a statistical relationship
between fisheries and sea lion numbers. Two things stood out
from this analysis. First, there were a few weak statistical
associations between fisheries and sea lion numbers prior to
2000; however, none of the studies found statistically
significant associations consistent with the fisheries causing
harm to sea lions after 2000. That is 100 percent of the
statistical tests were consistent with the groundfish fisheries
not having an effect on sea lion numbers in the last 10 to 20
years.
Second, the available data indicate that current harvest
rate of Atka mackerel have been too low, and that the removals
of Pacific cod have been too small for the fishery on either
species to cause nutritional stress to sea lions.
The BiOp never presented any direct evidence that sea lions
are not finding enough groundfish to eat; thus, implementing an
RPA that might increase prey abundance seems to be less about
correcting a real problem and more about repeating something
that NMFS did in the past in the Gulf of Alaska in the 1990s
where sea lion numbers rose after RPAs were implemented.
Unfortunately, the BiOp provides no evidence that this
increase in sea lions in the Gulf of Alaska was anything more
than coincidental with management actions. In fact, the BiOp
presents a multi-species model that indicates that this
increase in sea lion numbers was just a coincidence in the last
decade, and was not due to fishery restrictions.
So, the belief that RPAs will work in the Aleutian Islands
was not based on science, and is simply a case of confusing
cause with coincidence.
I would like to conclude by noting that as a review panel,
we appreciate that many people may have difficulty believing
that the BiOp could have gotten things so wrong, or that the
BiOp did not properly consider the two leading alternative
hypotheses. We, therefore, encourage others to read the 664
pages of the BiOp as we have done, as well as our review, which
is available online, to judge for themselves.
Whereas unpleasant as the prospect of reading a Paradise
Lost or War and Peace might sound, it is only by reading these
documents that others will fully understand that the science
simply does not support the decisions made by NMFS. Thank you.
[The joint prepared statement of Dr. Trites and Dr. Knapp
follows:]

Statement of Andrew Trites, Professor and Director, Marine Mammal
Research Unit, Fisheries Centre, University of British Columbia; and
Gunnar Knapp, Professor of Economics, University of Alaska

We are two of four scientists who recently completed an independent
scientific review of the NMFS November 2010 Biological Opinion of the
Fisheries Management Plan for the Bering Sea/Aleutian Islands
Management Areas. This written testimony provides background
information about our review, followed by the Executive Summary of our
report.
Background of our Review
Our review was jointly funded by the States of Alaska and
Washington in response to widely-expressed concerns about the science
in NMFS' 2010 Biological Opinion (the BiOp). In April 2011, the Alaska
Department of Fish and Game (ADFG) and the Washington Department of
Fish and Wildlife WDFW developed initial terms of reference for the
review and selected two panel co-chairs, who in turn selected two
additional panel members. We developed the final terms of reference,
timeline for our work, and format of our report.
The panel members were:

Dr. David Bernard (co-chair), a fisheries scientist,
biometrician, and private consultant with over 30 years post-
graduate experience involving management of commercial and
recreational fisheries for salmon and non-salmon species in the
Pacific Northwest.

Mr. Steven Jeffries (co-chair), a Research Scientist
and marine mammal specialist for the Washington Department of
Fish and Wildlife, with more than 30 years of experience
working on a variety of Northwest marine mammal issues.

Dr. Andrew Trites, Professor and Director of the
Marine Mammal Research Unit in the Fisheries Centre at the
University of British Columbia, who has conducted extensive
research on the ecology, population biology and bioenergetics
of marine mammals.

Dr. Gunnar Knapp, Professor of Economics at the
University of Alaska Anchorage Institute of Social and Economic
Research, who has been engaged in research on fisheries
management, seafood markets, and the Alaska economy for the
past 30 years.
We conducted our review fully independently. The conclusions
expressed are our own and represent our consensus. None of us are
federal employees. None of us had any role in developing the BiOp or
the FMP. None of us have any personal or financial involvement in any
fisheries involved in the BiOp.
We brought a variety of backgrounds and perspectives to our review.
One member of the panel (Dr. Trites) has an extensive background in
Steller sea lion research, is widely cited in the BiOp, and commented
on the draft BiOp and final BiOp. One member (Mr. Jeffries) has
extensive experience in sea lion research, marine mammal fishery
interactions, and is a member of the Pacific Scientific Review Group.
Two members of the panel (Dr. Bernard and Dr. Knapp) had no previous
background in or knowledge of Steller sea lion research. Three members
of the panel (Dr. Bernard, Mr. Jeffries and Dr. Knapp) had never seen
the BiOp prior to beginning work on this review.
Various parties are now involved in litigation relating to the
BiOp. Our review has no relationship to that litigation, and we
expressed no opinions about the litigation in this review, or about any
legal questions related to the BiOp or the EA/RIR (Environmental
Assessment/Regulatory Impact Review). We focused strictly on the
scientific questions in our Terms of Reference.
We held two public hearings to provide an opportunity for the
public to provide comments for our consideration. We also invited and
received written comments.
Our full 111-page review is posted on the website of the Washington
Department of Fish and Wildlife at: http://wdfw.wa.gov/conservation/
steller_sealions/
Summary of our Independent Scientific Review of the Biological Opinion
We were charged as a review panel to answer a series of questions
concerning the BiOp and its central conclusion of jeopardy:
``After reviewing the current status of critical habitat that
has been designated for the western population of Steller sea
lions, the environmental baseline for the action area, the
proposed action for Alaska Groundfish in the Bering Sea and
Aleutian Islands and Gulf of Alaska, and the cumulative
effects, it is NMFS' Biological Opinion that the action, as
proposed, is likely to adversely modify the designated critical
habitat for the western DPS of Steller sea lion.'' [BiOp,
xxxiv]
We answered each of the specific questions in our terms of
reference (see Chapter 10). For this Executive Summary, however, we
have grouped our findings into four categories pertaining to:

the finding of jeopardy of extinction or of adverse
modification of habitat (collectively JAM) for groundfish
fisheries in the western and central Aleutian Islands;

the effectiveness of reasonable and prudent
alternatives (RPAs) to the federal action under consultation;

the requirement under the Environmental Policy Act
(EPA) that RPAs in the BiOp be the least-cost choice from all
efficacious RPAs; and

consideration of public and peer comment in the
writing of the BiOp.
In our review, we looked for consistencies and inconsistencies
between data and conclusions in the BiOp based on our experience,
knowledge of the relevant scientific literature, and relevant public
comments. Besides information referenced in the BiOp, we considered
recently published scientific papers, recent stock assessments, and
recent groundfish surveys. We also considered comments by industry,
scientists, and the North Pacific Management Council through their
Scientific and Statistical Committee concerning the BiOp in general and
specific modifications to RPAs, as well as comments submitted to us at
public hearings held 2 June, 2011 in Seattle and in Anchorage on 22
August, 2011 and by e-mail.
The Finding of Jeopardy
We do not agree with the finding of JAM (jeopardy of extinction and
adverse modification of habitat) for Steller sea lions in the western
and central Aleutian Islands as concluded in the BiOp for the FMP. We
find that NMFS misinterpreted crucial evidence from statistical studies
of relationships between fishing and sea lion demographics. NMFS also
failed to scientifically support their explanation of how fisheries
affected sea lions (fishery-driven nutritional stress), and disregarded
or misreported evidence that refutes the fishery-driven nutritional
stress hypothesis. And finally, NMFS did not seriously consider
alternative ecologically mediated explanations for declines in sea lion
numbers not involving fisheries (environmentally-driven nutritional
stress and the killer whale predation hypotheses).
Statistical analyses are the starting point for examining the
relationship between fishing and Steller sea lions. If fisheries
adversely affect sea lion numbers, statistically significant negative
associations should be detectable between measures of fishing and
measures of sea lion numbers. Failing to find any such associations
should lead to a conclusion that there is no adverse effect unless
there are clear reasons why the effects would not be observable in the
data (e.g. measurement error, insufficient variation, or low power).
Eight studies looking for such statistical associations were cited in
the BiOp. NMFS concluded results from these studies to be ``equivocal''
and that ``it is not possible. . .to conclude that commercial fisheries
are not having a significant impact on the recovery of [sea lions]''.
We found these studies insightful and their results hardly
``equivocal''.
We undertook a meta-analysis of the eight statistical studies cited
in the BiOp plus two additional studies. The tests in earlier studies
were based on a few years of data, and as expected, resulted in mostly
non-significant outcomes with a few negative and a few positive
associations being statistically significant. These results can be
considered equivocal. Studies published after 2000 involved more years
and consequently had more power to detect an association between
fisheries and Steller sea lions. Results from these studies for years
prior to 2000 were less equivocal in that 40% of tests produced
statistically significant associations that were scientifically
consistent with fisheries having had a negative impact on Steller sea
lions; the remaining tests (60%) had statistical outcomes that were
scientifically consistent with fisheries not having had a negative
impact on sea lions. All of the detected statistical associations for
years prior to 2000 were weak. However, results for years after 2000
are unequivocal. None of these studies found statistically significant
associations consistent with harm by fisheries, that is, 100% of the
tests resulted in outcomes consistent with the groundfish fisheries
having had no effect on sea lion numbers in the last 10-20 years. Power
analyses in these latter studies and the results themselves show that
even weak statistical associations would have been detected had they
been present. The methodological issues brought forward through
comments to the draft BiOp concern statistical significance in tests
when significance is not warranted. None of the issues would make an
association less likely to be detected.
For a specific scientific hypothesis that fisheries negatively
impact sea lion numbers, significant negative associations between
fishery and sea lion statistics are evidence that this hypothesis is
possibly true. Non-significant and statistically significant positive
associations are evidence this hypothesis is probably false. What the
meta-analysis provides is evidence that a scientific hypothesis that
fisheries had a negative impact on Steller sea lions of the WDPS in
general, and specifically on sea lions in the western and central
Aleutian Islands, was possibly true in the past, but in the last 10-20
years, this hypothesis is probably false. On this basis we find that
not only is it possible ``that commercial fisheries are not having a
significant impact on the recovery of [sea lions]'', but the
proposition that fisheries are not negatively affecting Steller sea
lions is highly likely.
In our judgment, the fishery-driven nutritional stress hypothesis
proffered by NMFS as an explanation for population declines in the
western and central Aleutian Islands should be scientifically rejected.
We base our conclusion on the process and conditions specified in the
decision trees given in the BiOp for determining the risk of exposure
and subsequent nutritional stress [BiOp; Figures 4.24, 4.25]. The BiOp
drew some incorrect conclusions as it navigated through its own
decision tree to arrive at the finding Atka mackerel and Pacific cod
fisheries were fisheries of concern. The BiOp also ignored evidence
contradicting the hypothesis of fishery-driven nutritional stress.
The available data and analyses indicate that current harvest rates
of Atka mackerel have been too low, and the population of Pacific cod
has been too small for the fishery on either species to cause
nutritional stress in sea lions. Modeling efforts by NMFS reported in
the BiOp support this observation, especially the lack of an effect of
the Pacific cod fishery on sea lion biomass. Attempts in the BiOp to
show spatial overlap between catches in fisheries and diets of sea
lions, and hence local depletion of prey, failed to convincingly do so.
Uncertainty in estimates of forage biomass is large and was ignored in
the BiOp. Other measures of possible competition between fisheries and
sea lions (e.g., size overlap, temporal overlap, depth overlap) were
specified in the BiOp, but not investigated. We provide data that were
not presented in the BiOp showing limited overlap in sizes of fish
taken in fisheries and by sea lions, especially limited in regards to
Pacific cod. Steller sea lions ate younger, smaller fish than fisheries
caught.
Arguments presented in the BiOp that Steller sea lions are
experiencing nutritional stress caused by a lack of groundfish are not
convincing. Forage ratios of groundfish to sea lions were higher in the
western and central Aleutians than in regions where sea lions are
recovering, thereby indicating a quantity of groundfish area-wide
sufficient for sea lions to avoid nutritional stress. Sea lions in the
eastern Bering Sea and the Gulf of Alaska (GOA) show no signs of
nutritional stress despite having forage ratios within critical habitat
that are lower than in the western and central Aleutian Islands.
Direct evidence of sea lions being in nutritional stress is lacking
in the BiOp. We compared the signs of fishery-driven nutritional stress
listed in Figure 4.26 of the BiOp with data provided in Table 3.17 of
the BiOp. Of the eight general conditions consistent with fishery-
driven nutritional stress in sea lions, no recent information (after
2000) was available on four. Nutritional stress was not indicated for
three conditions (sea lions were not emaciated, body size was not
reduced, and survival was not reduced). Information on the final
general condition (reduced reproduction) was contradictory.
Considering the compelling evidence that the amounts of prey are
sufficient to support sea lions in the western and central Aleutian
Islands specifically, and for the western population in general, it
should not be surprising that direct evidence for fishery-driven
nutritional stress could not be found as posited. Making two ``yes''
decisions at the only two operable decision points of the decision
process laid out in Figure 4.25 of the BiOp should have ended in a
decision of ``No Nutritional Stress''. Such a decision would have been
consistent with the results of the meta-analysis on statistical studies
described above.
Of the two leading alternate hypotheses to explain the reduced
numbers of Steller sea lions in the western and central Aleutian
Islands, we conclude that neither the hypotheses of environmentally-
driven nutritional stress (the ``junk food'' hypothesis) or killer
whale predation can be scientifically rejected with available data.
Both hypotheses remain viable explanations of sea lion demographics. Of
the five necessary conditions for acceptance of the ``junk food''
hypothesis, there is evidence supporting one (good pup condition) in
the western and central Aleutian Islands. There is no information on
three of the other necessary conditions (good adult body condition,
short foraging trips, and older age at weaning for pups) and ambiguity
on the fourth (low birth rates).
While the BiOp contained no conclusion as to rejecting or not
rejecting the ``junk food'' hypothesis, the BiOp did state ``killer
whale predation can be an important factor in either causing continued
declines or contributing to a robust recovery [of sea lions].'' We
interpret this statement as implying that the killer whale predation
hypothesis cannot be rejected at this time. We concur.
Effectiveness of RPAs
Based on the evidence presented in the BiOp, we conclude that the
proposed RPAs will not arrest the decline in the numbers of sea lions
in the western and central Aleutian Islands. Evidence presented in this
BiOp from multispecies modeling indicates that any future increase or
stabilization in sea lion biomass in the western and central Aleutian
Islands will not be due to restricting fisheries for Pacific cod. There
is some modeling evidence in the BiOp indicating that halting fishing
for Atka mackerel in the western and central Aleutian Islands might
cause sea lion biomass to increase, but it is inconsistent with the
data on forage ratios showing greater declines of sea lions are
associated with greater relative biomasses of groundfish. The BiOp does
not consider this possibility--that increased amounts of groundfish
might have negative consequences to sea lions as postulated by the
``junk food'' hypothesis.
Aydin (2010) predicted a 6% increase in sea lion biomass with a 10%
reduction in the mortality rate for Atka mackerel. His model assumed
that sea lions can assimilate the increase in Atka mackerel biomass,
but did not consider that young sea lions can become full on low-energy
diets before they have attained enough energy to meet their daily needs
(see Rosen and Trites 2004).
The virtual 10 percentage point reduction in Atka mortality
projected by Aydin (2010) represents closure of the fishery (which
harvests 8% of the stock) plus an additional two percentage point
reduction in the mortality rate for this species. Unfortunately certain
critical bits of information relative to evaluating this finding were
not included in the BiOp. Most notably, the BiOp did not explain or
discuss:

How could mortality rates on Atka mackerel be further
reduced beyond the closure of the virtual fishery?

How many years would be needed to realize virtual
increases in sea lion biomass?

Would these virtual increases persist?

What would the virtual effect of closing both cod and
mackerel fisheries be on sea lion biomass?
Without such information, the relevance of these simulations
involving closing the Atka mackerel fishery cannot be fully evaluated.
However, this full evaluation would probably be of marginal value,
considering the lack of evidence for the fishery-driven nutritional
stress hypothesis (our Chapter 4) and the meta-analysis of statistical
studies we described in Chapter 3 showing no negative effects of
fishing for Atka mackerel in the western and central Aleutian Islands
on sea lion demographics in the last 20 years.
Results from multispecies models can provide insights into the
effectiveness of RPAs even though the models used in the BiOp were not
well explained. The food web containing fish, fisheries, and sea lions
must be modeled as a whole if the best ecological information
(scientific data) is to be used. While such modeling is at the edge of
current understanding of the ecosystem in the Aleutian Islands, such
modeling directly addresses the objective of the consultation, which is
the response of sea lions to implementation of the RPAs.
In the BiOp, NMFS appears to have eschewed multispecies modeling in
favor of the simple dictum that ``what worked there and then, will work
here and now''--with the ``there'' being the Gulf of Alaska, the
``then'' being when RPAs from two previous BiOps were implemented, and
the ``here'' being the western and central Aleutians. Such a simple
approach is empirical in that it depends on personal experience and
belief, and does not use the scientific method. In other words, the
expectation that the RPAs will result in increased numbers of Steller
sea lions was not determined using science.
Sea lion numbers in the Gulf of Alaska (GOA) increased following
implementation of RPAs in the 1990 and early in the last decade.
However, no evidence was given in the BiOp that this increase in sea
lions was other than coincidental with management actions. Evidence in
the BiOp from multispecies modeling for the GOA indicate that the
increase in sea lion numbers was a coincidence in the last decade and
was not due to fishery restrictions. While NMFS did use single-species
modeling of prey species to show the effectiveness of proposed RPAs--
their results were preordained by the model they chose. Thus the models
do not support the unscientific premise of the BiOp that RPAs had
worked in the past, and would therefore continue to be effective if
implemented elsewhere. There is insufficient evidence that past RPAs
were ever effective.
The reason given in the BiOp for forgoing a scientific
investigation in favor of an unscientific argument is that multi-
species modeling is too complex and subject to too much error. We
disagree. By its very nature, the fishery-driven nutritional stress
hypothesis requires consideration of the fishery and sea lion food
webs. Ecosystem considerations and modeling of the food web is a must
for developing RPAs if the BiOp accepts the fishery-driven nutritional
stress hypothesis. Such modeling is complex and does have uncertainty
in outcomes. However, a good scientific investigation would include
measures of uncertainty in parameters, in initial conditions, and in
environmental conditions. It would also include an analysis of the
sensitivity of results to model structure; and would report results in
probabilistic terms.
We believe that NMFS has the resources to conduct ecosystem
modeling, yet relied on the simplest of arguments to support the RPAs
they proposed. Arguing that sea lions must be nutritionally stressed
because fishing has occurred where sea lions have declined is prone to
error in the most obvious of ways by confusing cause with coincidence.
Economic Analysis of RPAs
In general, the analysis described in the Environmental Assessment
and Regulatory Impact Review (EA/RIR) of economic impacts of the chosen
set of RPAs is reasonably complete, scientifically valid and adequate.
It addresses most of the questions it should have addressed in an
objective and reasonable manner given the limits of available data and
confidentiality restrictions. It supports the conclusion that ``. .
.this action will impose relatively heavy costs on the fishing and
processing industry that targets Atka mackerel and Pacific cod in the
Aleutian Islands.'' More detailed analysis might have strengthened but
not have changed this fundamental conclusion.
The EA/RIR includes an analysis of the economic benefits of full
Steller sea lion recovery. This is not an analysis of the economic
benefits attributable to the uncertain effects of the alternatives. The
EA/RIR does not provide a cost-benefit analysis of the alternatives.
The BiOp and RIR failed to demonstrate that the RPAs minimize
economic and social impacts compared with potential alternatives which
would achieve the same benefit for Steller sea lion recovery. Neither
document could demonstrate this because neither demonstrated what the
benefits of the RPAs would be for sea lion recovery, or demonstrated an
effort to identify alternatives that would have the same level of
benefit but lower economic and social impact.
Standard for Likelihood of Jeopardy
The BiOp responds to the mandate in the ESA that ``Each Federal
agency shall. . .ensure that any action. . .is not likely to jeopardize
the continued existence of any endangered species or threatened species
or result in the destruction or adverse modification of habitat. . .''
In reaching or evaluating any conclusion about jeopardy, a key issue is
what standard of scientific evidence is required to conclude that an
action is ``likely'' to jeopardize the continued existence of an
endangered species or result in the destruction or adverse modification
of its habitat.
There is no formal scientific standard for ``likely.'' Given a high
degree of uncertainty about whether fishing jeopardizes Steller sea
lions, we contend that most scientists would define a scientific
standard for ``likely'' based on their interpretation of the
preponderance of available evidence. This is the standard we used for
our review.
The BiOp does not explicitly define its standard for ``likely.''
Implicitly, it uses a standard which is significantly weaker than the
scientific standard of preponderance of evidence.
Representatives of NMFS argue that the Endangered Species Act
mandates a precautionary standard for ``likely'' and that evidence that
adverse effects of fishing on Steller sea lions ``may exist'' requires
a conclusion of jeopardy. We claim no expertise as to the appropriate
legal standard for a conclusion of jeopardy. However, whatever the
standard, it should be explicitly defined, and the scientific evidence
should meet that standard.
Peer and Public Comment
The BiOp was prepared by NMFS without active interaction with
scientists outside the agency or with people in the fishing industry
that could have provided useful insights. The period of time provided
by NMFS for comment on the draft BiOp was insufficient for serious peer
and public review. The time between the receipt of review comments and
NMFS's self-imposed deadline for release of the final document was also
insufficient for adequate consideration of review comments or any
substantial revision of the BiOp in response to comments. There is
little evidence that comments on the draft BiOp's finding of jeopardy
were seriously considered when developing the final BiOp. There is
evidence that comments on RPAs in the draft BiOp were considered in
developing the final RPAs, although responses to these comments were
very brief and most suggested changes were rejected. NMFS did not
summarize or address comments received on the draft BiOp as had been
promised, nor has it scheduled a formal independent review as promised.
In contrast, the Regulatory Impact Review (RIR) clearly addressed and
was strengthened by consideration of public and peer comments on the
economic analysis.
______

Mr. Hastings. Thank you, Dr. Trites. I appreciate your
testimony.
Next, we will go to Dr. Gunnar Knapp, who is a Professor of
Economics at the Institute of Social and Economic Research at
the University of Alaska Anchorage. Dr. Knapp, you are
recognized.

STATEMENT OF GUNNAR KNAPP, PROFESSOR OF ECONOMICS, INSTITUTE OF
SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC RESEARCH, UNIVERSITY OF ALASKA ANCHORAGE

Dr. Knapp. Thank you. My name is Gunnar Knapp. I am a
Professor of Economics at the University of Alaska Anchorage's
Institute of Social and Economic Research, where I have been
engaged for the past 30 years on research about the fisheries
management, fisheries markets, and the Alaska economy. I also
participated in this independent scientific review of the BiOp.
I would like to highlight a few findings of our review that
have to do with the BiOp standard for likelihood of jeopardy,
the economic analysis associated with the BiOp, and NMFS'
consideration of peer and public comment.
Beginning with the standard for likelihood of jeopardy, the
Endangered Species Act mandates that each Federal agency shall
ensure that any action is not likely to jeopardize the
continued existence of any endangered species or threatened
species, or result in the destruction or adverse modification
of habitat.
So, in reaching or evaluating any conclusion about
jeopardy, a key issue is what standard of scientific evidence
is required to conclude that an action is ``likely'' to
jeopardize the continued existence of the species or result in
the destruction or adverse modification of its habitat.
Now, there is not any formal scientific standard for
likely, but most scientists would base a conclusion about
whether or not something is likely based on their
interpretation of the preponderance of available evidence. The
BiOp's conclusions are not based on the preponderance of
scientific evidence; rather, the conclusion of jeopardy is
based on the possibility that fishing might affect Steller sea
lions, or that that possibility cannot be excluded.
So, for example, here is some of the language from the
BiOp's conclusions about its conclusion of jeopardy. ``Analysis
of available data indicate that an adverse relationship between
Steller sea lion and the commercial fisheries may exist,'' or,
``Fishery removals of prey in the Western and Central Aleutian
Islands sub-region may be adversely affecting the Western
DPS,'' or, ``The possibility that this interaction may be one
of several primary causes of the observed declines in non-pup
counts cannot be eliminated.''
What this means in effect is that NMFS is not basing its
conclusions on the preponderance of scientific evidence. The
possibility that an effect could exist trumps the fact that
there is almost no scientific evidence that it does exist.
Now, NMFS argues that it is legally mandated to be
precautionary in its evaluation of the science. We do not claim
any expertise on how NMFS is legally mandated to evaluate the
evidence. But if you use the argument that you cannot prove
that fishing does not have an effect to trump the available
scientific evidence, it is hard for scientists or the public to
understand the reasoning, and it is also hard to call it
science.
Next, I will comment on the economic analysis associated
with the regulatory impact analysis that accompanied the BiOp.
In general, the analysis of the economic impacts of the
RPAs is reasonably complete, scientifically valid, and
adequate. It correctly concludes that this action will impose
relatively heavy costs on the fishing and processing industry
that targets Atka mackerel and Pacific cod in the Aleutian
Islands.
What the analysis does not do is to demonstrate any attempt
to reduce economic impacts of the RPAs. NMFS only considered
one alternative for RPAs to address its conclusion of jeopardy.
It invited almost no input from industry about whether there
might be a less costly way to achieve the same benefits for
Steller sea lions. And that is a striking contrast with the
collaboration that occurred in developing the RPAs for the 2001
BiOp through the work of the North Pacific Fishery Management
Council's Reasonable and Prudent Alternatives Committee.
Finally, I will address NMFS' consideration of peer and
public comment in preparing the BiOp. The BiOp was prepared by
NMFS without active interaction with scientists outside the
Agency or with people in the fishing industry who could have
provided useful insights. The period of time provided by NMFS
for comment on the draft BiOp was insufficient for serious peer
and public review.
The time between the receipt of review and NMFS' self-
imposed deadline for release of the final document was also
insufficient for adequate consideration of review comments for
any substantial revision of the BiOp in response to comments.
There is little evidence that comments on the draft BiOp's
finding of jeopardy were seriously considered when developing
the final BiOp.
Finally, NMFS did not address or summarize comments
received on the draft BiOp as had been promised, nor has it yet
undertaken any formal independent review. Why does this matter?
The BiOp addresses very complex issues. Even for good
scientists, understanding these issues is difficult without
actively interacting with and learning from other people who
have insights about the issues and data, including both
independent scientists and people in industry.
Listening to comments does not mean you have to agree with
the people who are commenting, but if you do not listen to
comments, there is a much higher chance that you will make
mistakes and miss or misinterpret relevant evidence. Good
science actively seeks review. In preparing the BiOp, NMFS
avoided review.
Thank you.
Mr. Hastings. Thank you very much, Dr. Knapp.
And next, we will go to Dr. Ragen, Executive Director of
the U.S. Marine Mammal Commission. Dr. Ragen, you are
recognized.

STATEMENT OF TIM RAGEN, EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR,
U.S. MARINE MAMMAL COMMISSION

Dr. Ragen. Thank you, Chairman Hastings and Congressman
Young, for the privilege of appearing before you on this
matter.
I am Tim Ragen. I am the Executive Director of the Marine
Mammal Commission. From 1998 to 2000, I was the Steller sea
lion Recovery Coordinator for NOAA Fisheries based in the
Alaska region.
Section 7 are critical to the way that we manage these
fisheries, and I have focused my testimony on the process by
which we conduct those consultations. I will just make a few
points this morning.
First of all, with regard to information, I think the most
meaningful opportunity for all participants in this issue, all
the various parties, is to share information or input into this
process. In fact, there are massive amounts of information
available on the topic, and as a rule, parties should be able
to provide input into the Section 7 consultation.
Transparency is critical, and one way to promote
transparency is through the open sharing of information.
However, NOAA must weigh all of that information based on its
relevance and quality.
With regard to analysis of effects, the fundamental
question here is whether there is a clear and reasoned
relationship between the available information and the effects
analysis. And my guess is that much of what you will hear and
be interested in today pertains to the question of whether or
not NOAA arrived at its conclusions given the information
available to it.
Compiling and analyzing all the data is a daunting task,
and with the exception of one major point, the Commission
supports NOAA's analysis.
Decision making. My third point involves decision making in
the consultation process. First, other agencies and
organizations can and should conduct their own reviews and form
their own conclusions. But those reviews and conclusions are
not a substitute for the responsibilities of the consulting
agency.
If you look back over the past decade, you will see a long
series of reviews, and although they may be helpful, they do
not usurp or in any way diminish NOAA's responsibilities.
That brings me to the role of the Council. I believe the
Council has a very important role in the consultation process
as a source of information, a facilitator of coordination, a
supporter of research, and a forum for developing management
measures to meet standards imposed by NOAA Fisheries.
However, the constitution of the Council is such that it is
subject to conflicts of interest, and for that reason, it does
not have and should not share the responsibilities of a
consulting agency for decision making purposes.
My last two points are my most important. With regard to
the recovery plan criteria, the recovery plan laid out three
general principles for consideration for recovery. One is to
continue with research and monitoring. The second is to
maintain the same or equivalent protections from fishery
effects. And the third was to develop an adaptive management
plan for assessing the ecological effects of fishing on Steller
sea lions.
In my view, NOAA Fisheries and Fisheries Management
generally have not developed an adequate adaptive plan for
assessing the ecological effects of fishing. This is a major
shortcoming of the Agency's current approach to fisheries
management. Our fishing strategy under the Magnuson-Stevens
Fishery Conservation and Management Act is based on the concept
of an optimum view, but optimum is defined in terms of the
maximum sustainable yield as reduced by any relevant social,
economic, or ecological factor.
Although we have a relatively good understanding of the
theory behind MSY and its effects in a single species context,
we do not have a good understanding of it in an ecological
context. Again, NOAA has not developed the kind of adaptive
research and management program to clarify those facts. Doing
so would be a considerable challenge and would require
cooperation from all interested parties. But until we do so,
and by we I mean all interested parties, I fear we will
continue to engage in the kind of back and forth debates that
are undermined by this ecological uncertainty.
Doing so likely imposed unnecessary constraints on the
fishing industry, and exposes our marine resources to
unnecessary risk. Unless we tackle this challenge, we will
simply end up foisting it on to the future generations for them
to deal with. I would like to think that none of us consider
that the best plan forward.
Again, Chairman Hastings, thank you for the opportunity of
appearing before the Committee, and I look forward to your
questions and thoughts.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Ragen follows:]

Statement of Timothy J. Ragen, Ph.D., Executive Director,
Marine Mammal Commission

Chairman Hastings, members of the House of Representatives
Committee on Natural Resources, thank you for inviting me to testify
before you on ``NOAA's Steller Sea Lion Science and Fishery Management
Restrictions: Does the Science Support the Decisions?'' I am Timothy
Ragen, Executive Director of the Marine Mammal Commission. From 1998 to
2000, I served as the Steller Sea Lion Recovery Coordinator for the
Alaska Region, National Marine Fisheries Service. In that position, I
was responsible for drafting a number of biological opinions on fishery
effects on sea lions under section 7 of the Endangered Species Act.
Section 7 consultations
Debates regarding the nature and quality of NOAA's science are
heightened during section 7 consultations concerning fishery
management, as is evident from the number of law suits related to
consultations over the past decade. The Marine Mammal Commission's
concerns regarding those consultations fall under three separate but
related headings.
Information management: With regard to managing the information
needed for section 7 consultations, the Commission believes that--

Consultations should be based on the best scientific
and commercial data available;

All affected parties should be allowed to contribute
information to the consultation process as long as it is
related to the proposed activity and falls within the limits
established by the Endangered Species Act;

Such parties could include state agencies, fishery
management councils, the industry, tribal governments or
organizations, non-governmental conservation organizations, and
the public;

Information management should be transparent--that
is, the information used in a section 7 consultation should be
available for all to see (with some exceptions for certain
classes of information, e.g., national security information);
and

The information involved in such consultations should
be weighted by its relevance and quality, and clear standards
are needed to do so.
Analysis of effects: For a variety of reasons, analysis-of-effects
chapters of biological opinions often are the weakest elements of
section 7 consultations. Here, the Commission believes that--

Such analyses must be comprehensive, including
assessment of cumulative effects;

They must be clearly linked to the available
information and describe important information that is needed
but lacking;

They must include measures of uncertainty or
confidence in their results; and

They must be described fully in the resulting
biological opinion or in available references.
Decision-making: Conclusions regarding jeopardy to a species or
destruction or adverse modification of critical habitat often are the
most controversial elements of a section 7 consultation. The
Commission's main concerns with regard to such decision-making are
that--

Biological opinions resulting from section 7
consultations, and all decision-making therein, remain the
responsibility of the expert or consulting agency. However,
that agency should work closely with the action agency to
ensure that all relevant information is considered in each
consultation process;

The consulting or expert agency must not have a
conflict of interest with regard to the proposed action and the
outcome of the consultation;

The National Marine Fisheries Service is in a
potentially conflicted position when one branch of the agency
consults with another on fishery-related actions; maintaining
the integrity of the consultation process is essential and in
such cases the agency must impose strong measures and
procedures to avoid such conflicts;

Decisions regarding the two standards of jeopardy to
a listed species and destruction or adverse modification of
critical habitat must be clearly explained in biological
opinions; and

Decisions and supporting rationale must provide the
basis for any reasonable and prudent alternatives needed to
avoid jeopardy or adverse modification.

Although other agencies or organizations may wish to,
or may be invited to, conduct reviews of the same information,
the expert or consulting agency alone remains responsible for
final decisions in section 7 consultations and the accompanying
biological opinions.
Under each of these headings, the Commission's primary concern is
with maintaining the integrity of the process as described in section 7
of the Endangered Species Act.
Role of the North Pacific Fishery Management Council
Section 7 consultations on the management of Alaska groundfish
fisheries clearly are relevant to the North Pacific Fishery Management
Council. Given its important role in fishery management, the Council
should have ample opportunity to provide information considered during
section 7 consultations. The Council also may play a number of other
important roles:

It may serve as a conduit through which the industry
can provide input;

It may serve as a forum for helping to develop
reasonable and prudent alternatives as long as the framework
and/or standards for those measures are clearly articulated by
the consulting agency--in this case, NOAA Fisheries' Office of
Protected Resources;

It also may serve as a forum for developing and
recommending research to address important uncertainties; and

It may help foster cooperation between research
organizations and the industry.
However, the Council is not part of the consulting or expert agency
and should not assume the responsibilities of the consulting or expert
agency because it is subject to potential conflicts of interest.
Recovery Plan Criteria
Ultimately, the purpose of the recovery plan is the same as the
purpose of the Endangered Species Act: ``. . .to provide a means
whereby the ecosystems upon which endangered species and threatened
species depend may be conserved, to provide a program for the
conservation of such endangered species and threatened species. . ..''
More specifically, the recovery plan should include reasoned criteria
for determining when the species of concern is no longer at risk of
extinction and when the protections provided under the Endangered
Species Act are no longer needed. The Commission believes that the
Steller Sea Lion Recovery Team and the National Marine Fisheries
Service should have given more weight to the population viability
analysis used to support the recovery criteria. Such analyses provide
the best possible indication of the risk of extinction, which is the
key measure of success in the management of endangered and threatened
species under the Act. That being said, the recovery plan criteria were
based on a reasoned analysis of the five listing factors set forth in
the Endangered Species Act. In addition, the criteria gave appropriate
emphasis to three important principles calling for--
(1)  Continued population monitoring and research on the key
threats potentially impeding sea lion recovery;
(2)  Maintaining current or equivalent fishery conservation
measures until new information indicates that changes are
warranted; and
(3)  Designing and implementing an adaptive management program
to evaluate fishery conservation measures.
In the Commission's view, the third principle has not been given
adequate consideration in fisheries management. In the Alaska
groundfish case, a disproportionate share of research has been focused
on Steller sea lions, without adequate attention to assessing the
ecological effects of fishing to obtain the optimum yield. The
Magnuson-Stevens Fishery Conservation Act defines the optimum yield to
be based on the maximum sustainable yield as reduced by any relevant
social, economic, or ecological factors. However, NOAA Fisheries has
yet to develop a robust research program to investigate the ecological
effects of such fishing. This fundamental issue has been neglected for
several decades and must be addressed if the United States is to assert
with justification that its fishery management paradigm is ecosystem-
based.
The need for scientific information
The information used to manage fisheries is not what all parties
would like it to be. In the case of the Alaska groundfish fisheries,
the primary concern is that the fisheries severely out-compete sea
lions for their prey. Such competition may occur in the form of
fishery-induced localized depletion of prey, where fishing effort is
concentrated in space and time and causes marked reductions in the
availability of prey to sea lions. These types of depletions were
clearly evident in fisheries data collected in the late 1990s. The
other type of depletion results from the long-term effects of
harvesting a fish stock year after year, causing intentional reductions
of 60 percent or more in the total stock biomass. This type of effect
has not been evaluated but is at the heart of the debate over the
ecological effects of fishing.
Regarding the scientific information used to justify the fishery
restrictions in the recent biological opinion, the Commission assumes
that all parties would like to have better information to guide the
development and implementation of fishery management measures. However,
the Commission would respectfully suggest that the issue should be
rephrased to recognize that the burden for providing the necessary
information appropriately lies with the action agency--in this case the
Office of Sustainable Fisheries. Section 7(a)(2) of the Endangered
Species Act clearly places that burden on the action agency, requiring
it to ``insure that any action authorized, funded, or carried out by
such agency. . .is not likely to jeopardize the continued existence of
any endangered species or threatened species or result in the
destruction or adverse modification of [critical] habitat of such
species. . ..''
Gathering the necessary information on the ecological effects of
fishing will be a challenge, particularly if research budgets for
fisheries-related research remain at current levels or are reduced in
the foreseeable future. In the Commission's view, the best approach for
collecting the needed information would be through a long-term, well
conceived, and well planned adaptive management approach aimed at
investigating the ecological effects of fishing. To the Commission's
knowledge, NOAA Fisheries does not now have such a plan in place.
Conclusion
The issue to be resolved here involves the ecological interactions
between the Alaska groundfish fisheries and Steller sea lions. NOAA
Fisheries has done an admirable job of reducing direct interactions
between the fisheries and sea lions. However, it has not evaluated, in
a suitably rigorous way, the ecological effects of fishing aimed at
achieving, on an ongoing basis, the maximum sustainable yield from a
single target fish stock. Unless and until it does so, the ecological
consequences of fishing under this paradigm will be left for future
generations to resolve.
______

Mr. Hastings. Thank you very much, Dr. Ragen.
And our last panelist is Mr. Larry Cotter, Chair of the
North Pacific Fishery Management Council, Steller Sea Lion
Mitigation Committee, and Chief Executive Officer of the
Aleutian Pribilof Island Community Development Association.
Mr. Cotter, you are recognized.

STATEMENT OF LARRY COTTER, CHAIR, NORTH PACIFIC FISHERY
MANAGEMENT, COUNCIL'S STELLER SEA LION MITIGATION COMMITTEE AND
CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER, ALEUTIAN PRIBILOF ISLAND COMMUNITY
DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION

Mr. Cotter. Thank you, Chairman Hastings and Congressman
Young. I appreciate the opportunity to testify before you
today.
I have been down this road twice before--the National
Marine Fisheries Service Biological Opinion road. The first
time was in 2001. At that time, the RPA Committee was formed in
February with myself as chair. The Committee was given two
tasks. The first was to provide the North Pacific Council with
draft emergency rules to implement fishery management changes
by mid-summer to allow the groundfish fisheries in the Gulf and
Bering Sea Aleutian Islands to continue without causing
jeopardy or adverse modification. The second role was to
provide the Council with draft emergency rules by the fall for
subsequent years, so that those fishers could continue, again,
without causing jeopardy or adverse modification.
Both of those tasks were successfully completed. In my
opinion, this was one of the highlights of fishery management
in the North Pacific. An enormous amount of work, cooperation,
and collaboration were necessary. Everyone participated,
including the Agency. Protected resources staff were not walled
off from us, nor were they walled off from sustainable
fisheries. We all worked together, and we got it done.
Somehow the world changed between then and 2006, and then
it simply deteriorated continuously. I am going to be very
blunt. There was not a single moment of this most recent
process when any action by NMFS resembled the development of an
unbiased scientific evaluation of Steller sea lions and issues
they face regarding recovery.
The Agency was simply on a mission, and they still are.
Even Dr. Schwaab includes a series of references to the Steller
sea lion recovery team in his testimony to you today concluding
with, ``NMFS' review of the comments and recommendations
submitted by peer reviewers and the public on the 2007 version
of the draft revised plan and modified the plan as appropriate
to produce the final revised Steller sea lion recovery plan in
February 2008.''
There is really only one small problem with that. Eight of
the 17 recovery plan members signed a letter repudiating the
recovery plan, and NMFS continues to this day to pretend that
that did not happen. It did.
Our Mitigation Committee paid its own way. Easily in excess
of half a million dollars was spent on behalf of the volunteers
who sat on the Committee. From the beginning, the process was
tortured.
The Committee first started to meet in the winter of 2006.
We were told to expect a BiOp in the fall. We met seven times
that year. The due for the BiOp was delayed repeatedly until
finally it was delayed until June 2008. The Committee met five
more times in 2007.
That jeopardy and adverse modification review found in this
BiOp was guaranteed, in my opinion, from the beginning. The
cornerstone for the recovery plan and ultimately the Biological
Opinion is something referred to as Holmes et al. Holmes et al.
is a model that was constructed to predict that decreasing pup
rates by female sea lions was inhibiting the recovery of the
species. In fact, we were told the increases we were observing
in the sea lion population would prove to be an anomaly, and
would, in fact, start reversing themselves.
NMFS assumed that that study was accurate, and assumed that
that study applied to all sea lions throughout their range,
despite the fact that the study focused only on one area in the
Central Gulf. If the Agency is going to assume that Holmes et
al. is accurate and applies across the entire range of the
WDPS, then it will be impossible to avoid jeopardy and adverse
modification since the population will continue to decline. In
essence, the recovery plan, with its down and delisting
criteria, were doomed for failure.
I personally pointed this out to major senior members of
National Marine Fisheries Service, proclaiming that a train
wreck was just around the bend, but no one cared.
A few years later, the Seward Sealife Center, through an
individual whose name I am going to mispronounce, Maniskopo,
presented a paper that directly contradicted Holmes, et al., by
reviewing the photographic proof of female sea lions at
Chiswell Island pupping consistently over the preceding eight
years. NMFS did everything they could possibly do to debunk
this paper. There was no way they were going to let new
scientific information get in the way.
The development of the new BiOp commenced in 2006. NMFS
delayed the release of the BiOp 10 times before issuing it in
August 2010. Along the way, in late 2009 or 2010, they totally
changed their writing staff. They even sought to retain on a
sole source contract a former Alaska Region protected resources
employee to write the new BiOp. NMFS reportedly offered this
individual a six-figure contract to do the job.
That individual, by the way, was then employed by the
Department of Energy, and presumably could have been made
available on an inter-agency employment loan. I do not know
what ultimately happened with that contract.
The next thing that happened was Alaska Regional Director
Jim Balsiger rejected the draft BiOp in April 2010. If you
think about that, that was really an incredible act of courage.
It was then, and remains now, an almost singular clarion call
from one person in the Agency to call a spade a spade.
Mr. Hastings. Mr. Cotter, if you could wrap up. The time is
over. So, if you could----
Mr. Cotter. I am so sorry.
Mr. Hastings. Well, your full statement is in the record,
so if you would just conclude, I would appreciate it.
Mr. Cotter. I am going to conclude if I can with four
questions, and they will be brief.
Mr. Hastings. Quickly. Very quickly.
Mr. Cotter. Is the ESA being applied consistently between
the Fish and Wildlife Service and the National Marine Fisheries
Service? And is it being applied consistently with the regions
of both agencies?
How can the delisting criteria for Steller sea lions
require a less than one percent if they will go extinct in the
next 100 years, and gray wolves only require 10 breeding pairs
in four States, or California sea otters, a population excess
of 3,000 animals for three consecutive years?
Last, how can Fish and Wildlife Service conclude that
transient marine mammal eating orcas are the reason for the
collapse of sea otter populations in the Aleutian Islands, yet
NMFS concludes predation by the same orcas has no impact on sea
lions in the same area? Should this not be----
Mr. Hastings. Just the question. Just the question. OK.
Mr. Cotter. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Cotter follows:]

Statement of Larry Cotter, Chairman, North Pacific Fishery Management
Council Sea Lion Mitigation Committee, and CEO, Aleutian Pribilof
Island Community Development Organization (APICDA)

Chairman Hastings and Congressman Young: I would like to thank you
for inviting me to testify before your committee today. As I believe
you are aware I had major back surgery one week ago. That made it
impossible for me to complete my written testimony in advance. I
apologize for that and have copies available now.
My invitation to testify asked that I share my views, as Chair of
the North Pacific Council's Steller Sea Lion Mitigation Committee,
regarding the process used to develop the Biological Opinion, my views
of the role of the North Pacific Council in the process, my concerns
with the recovery plan criteria and my concerns with the science relied
upon in justifying the fishery restrictions.
I have been down this road twice with NMFS. The first time was in
2001. At that time the RPA Committee was formed in February with me as
Chair. We were given two tasks: the first was to provide the North
Pacific Council with draft emergency rules to implement fishery
management changes by mid-summer to allow the groundfish fisheries in
the Gulf and Bering Sea/Aleutian Islands to continue without causing
jeopardy or adverse modification; the second was to provide the North
Pacific Council with draft emergency rules to implement fishery
management changes by October to allow the groundfish fisheries in the
Gulf and Bering Sea/Aleutian Islands to continue operating into
subsequent without causing jeopardy or adverse modification.
Both of these tasks were successfully completed. In my opinion this
was one of the highlights of fishery management in the North Pacific.
An enormous amount of work, cooperation and collaboration were
necessary. Everyone participated, including the agency. Protected
resources staff were not walled off from us and sustainable fisheries--
we all worked together and got smart together.
Somehow the world changed between then and 2006, and then they
simply deteriorated. I am going to be very blunt. There was not a
single moment of this most recent process when any action by NMFS
resembled the development of an unbiased scientific evaluation of
Steller sea lions and issues they face regarding recovery. The agency
was simply on a mission. They still are. Even Dr. Schwab includes a
nice series of references to the Steller Sea Lion Recover Team in his
testimony to you today, concluding with ``NMFS reviewed the comments
and recommendations submitted by peer reviewers and the public on the
2007 version of the draft revised plan and modified the plan as
appropriate to produce the Final Revised Steller Sea Lion Recovery Plan
in February 2008.'' Only one small problem with that statement--8 out
of 17 recovery plan team members signed a letter repudiating the
recovery plan, and NMFS continues to this day to pretend that didn't
happen.
Our mitigation committee paid its own way. Easily in excess of
$500,000 was spent on behalf of the volunteers who sat on the
committee. From the beginning the process was tortured. The committee
first started to meet in winter, 2006. We were told to expect a draft
BiOp in the fall. We met seven times that year. The due date for the
BiOp was delayed repeatedly, until June, 2008. The committee met five
more times in 2007.
That jeopardy and adverse modification would be found in this BiOp
was guaranteed from the beginning. The cornerstone for the recovery
plan and ultimately the BiOp is something referred to as Homes, et al.
Homes et al is a model that was constructed to predict that decreasing
pup rates by female sea lions was inhibiting the population recovery of
the species. In fact, we were told the increases we were observing in
the sea lion population would prove to be an anomaly. NMFS assumed the
study was accurate, and assumed it applied to all sea lions throughout
their range--despite the fact that the study only focused on one area
in the central Gulf of Alaska.
If the agency is going to assume that Holmes et al is accurate and
applies across the entire range of the WDPS, then it will be impossible
to avoid jeopardy and adverse modification since the population will be
continuing to decline. In essence, the Recovery plan with its down and
de-listing criteria were doomed for failure. I personally pointed this
out to the most senior members of NMFS, proclaiming that a huge train
wreck was now just around the bend, but they were contentedly fixed on
their position.
A few years later the Seward Sea life Center presented a paper that
directly contradicted Homes et al by reviewing the photographic proof
of female sea lions at Chiswel Island pupping consistently over the
preceding eight years. NMFS did everything they could possibly do to
debunk this paper. There was no way they were going to let new
scientific information get in their way.
The development of the new BiOp commenced in 2006. NMFS delayed the
release of the BiOp ten times before finally issuing it in August,
2010. Along the way--in late 2009 or early 2010--they totally changed
their writing staff. They even sought to retain on a sole source
contract a former Alaska Region Protected Resources employee to write
the new BiOp. NMFS reportedly offered this individual a six figure
contract to do the job. That individual, by the way, was then employed
by the Department of Energy and presumably could have been made
available on an intra-agency employment loan. I do not know what
ultimately happened with that contract.
The next thing that happened was Alaska Regional Director Jim
Balsiger rejected the draft BiOp in April, 2010. If you think about it,
that was really an incredible act of courage. It was then and remains
now an almost singular clarion call from one person in the Agency to
call a spade a spade--this BiOp process has failed!
Unfortunately, there was no time to start the process anew and do
it right. The environmental NGO litigants were pounding on the door at
NOAA in Washington DC--do it our way or we sue. So, having no choice,
Dr. Balsiger put together a new BiOp team that spent the next four
months pounding together the best, flawed BiOp they could. 4
This was a crazy, frantic, keystone cops type of process that
clearly violated the APA, NEPA Magnuson-Stevens Act and other laws.
NMFS was not focused on sound science--they simply had to get jeopardy/
adverse modification BiOp in place before the environmental NGOs would
sue. This was political, pure and simple. And incompetently handled.
The Agency should be ashamed of themselves. And thank you for the
hearing, but what we really need is a whole scale investigation.
In conclusion, I do think some question must be posed and answered:
1.  Is the ESA being applied consistently between the Fish &
Wildlife Service and the National Marine Fisheries Service, and
is it being applied consistently within the regions of both
agencies?
2.  How can the delisting criteria for Steller sea lions
require a less than one percent chance that they will go
extinct in the next 100 years, and grey wolves only require ten
breeding paids in for states, or California sea otters simply
need a population in excess of 3,000 animals for three
consecutive years?
3.  How can Fish & Wildlife Service conclude that transient
marine mammal eating orcas are the reason for the collapse of
sea otter populations in the Aleutian Islands (resulting in
their status as endangered), yet NMFS concludes predation by
the same orcas has no impact on sea lions in the same area?
Shouldn't this be an issue to be resolved and agreed upon by
these two agencies?
4.  How is it that the Seward Sea Life Center is able to do
such high quality research on sea lions in Russia when NMFS can
never find the time to do anything in the western Aleutians?
5.  Should it mean anything to discover what we already know--
there is no commercial fishing with 50 miles of the Komondorski
Islands just west of our Aleutian Islands, and their sea lions
are apparently doing the same thing as ours.
Thank you.
______

Mr. Hastings. Thank you, Mr. Cotter. And I want to thank
all of you for your testimony.
Dr. Trites, you alluded to this several times in various
ways in your testimony what I am going to ask you. And the BiOp
appears to rely significantly on the research that you have
done. So, my question to you is really pretty direct in that
regard.
Do you believe that NOAA correctly interpreted your data,
and are the NOAA conclusions supported by your research?
Dr. Trites. I guess the short answer is, no. We have
published through the research that I have worked with a lot of
research, and that research is cited in the BiOp. But there are
different ways of citing information. One is you can just put
the author's name and list the paper, or you can actually
reference the work and try to put some understanding into it.
And I would say for the most part, the BiOp is a fairly
complete list of the scientific record in terms of what was
studied. But in terms of how they chose to expand the sub
parts, overlook others, and, in some cases, even misinterpret
what was published, it has got those shortcomings.
Mr. Hastings. Well, you alluded to that. That is why I
asked the question directly.
Dr. Knapp, you also talked about economics. So, do you
believe that any future review of any BiOp should include a
review of all the economic impacts?
Dr. Knapp. Yes, I certainly believe that when you are
studying economic impacts, you should study all the economic
impacts.
Mr. Hastings. OK. And if I heard your testimony correct,
there were some major parts were left out of this, is that
correct?
Dr. Knapp. My main point actually was the--I actually do
not have any particular criticism of the analysis of the
economic impacts that was done. There was an analysis done, and
it looked at many different kinds of impacts, and came to the
conclusion that they were quite substantial from these RPAs.
The major point that I wanted to make was that there was no
evidence whatsoever of any attempt to ask the question, how can
we reduce these economic impacts. Is there a way to do this
that would have a lower economic impact.
Mr. Hastings. Which falls under the category of looking at
all economic impacts. I mean, clearly if you are going to have
some impact, then what is potentially to mitigate that. That is
what you are saying, is that correct?
Dr. Knapp. Yes, sir.
Mr. Hastings. OK. I agree with that.
Dr. Ragen, you said there is one thing you do not agree
with on the BiOp. What is that?
Dr. Ragen. Mr. Chairman, if you look at the types of
analyses that go into fisheries' effects, most of them are
focused on the effects of removal within a given year. Our
strategy under the maximum sustainable yield approach is to
reduce the biomass of the target species by roughly 60 percent.
The analyses that are often done in fisheries management do
not deal with that. They look at the 10 percent, so that over
time, because these are age structured stocks, if you have
knocked the biomass down by 60 percent, and then you only focus
on taking 10 percent of that remaining 40 percent, I think you
have missed what is probably the major driver in terms of
fishery effects; that is, the nature of fishing under the MSY
paradigm. We have never really examined the ecological effects
of those kinds of reductions.
Mr. Hastings. Why? Why has that not been done?
Dr. Ragen. I do not understand that, and that was one of
the key questions that really came up in the 2000 Biological
Opinion is, what are the impacts of removing 60 percent of
Pacific cod, Atka mackerel, flat fish, et cetera, on an
ecosystem.
Mr. Hastings. Let me ask you another question because maybe
this lends into what you are talking about. Because new
information has been referenced several times, available since
the BiOp on the Atka mackerel stock assessment, do you believe
that the Agency has responsibility to re-initiate consultation
based on this new information? I think that is in line with
what you are saying.
Dr. Ragen. I think the Agency has to look at all of its new
information to decide whether or not it is significant enough
for a renewal. You have to recognize that the information on
these stocks that is available in any given year or any given
season is going to change, and they will need to look and see
does this warrant a reexamination of their overall approach.
So, surely they should be tuned into new information, but I
also would not say outright that any time there is new
information, they should start a consultation, or they would be
locked into----
Mr. Hastings. Unless it is significant, I suppose that is
in the eye of the beholder, is that correct?
Dr. Ragen. I think they have to make their best judgment in
terms of what the----
Mr. Hastings. Which unfortunately does not make it
objective; it makes it subjective potentially.
Dr. Ragen. I do not think it necessarily means that you are
being subjective. I think you need to look at the information
and say what constitutes sufficient new information to make a
decision. And that sort of thing is best served by making that
judgment in advance.
Mr. Hastings. My time has expired. Mr. Young?
Mr. Young. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Cotter, would you repeat those last four questions you
were going to read? Because they are good questions, I want
them in the record totally.
Mr. Cotter. The first question is, is the ESA being applied
consistently between the Fish and Wildlife Service and the
National Marine Fisheries Service, and is it being applied
consistently within the regions of both agencies?
The second question, how can the delisting criteria for
Steller sea lions require a less than one percent chance that
they will go extinct in the next 100 years, and gray wolves
only require 10 breeding pairs in four States, or California
sea otters simply need a population in excess of 3,000 animals
for three consecutive years?
Third question. How can Fish and Wildlife Service conclude
that transient marine mammal eating orcas are the reason for
the collapse of sea otter populations in the Aleutian Islands
resulting in their status as endangered, yet NMFS concludes
predation by those same orcas has no impact on sea lions in the
same area? Should this not be an issue that demands to be
resolved and agreed upon between the two agencies.
The fourth question, how is it that the Seward Sealife
Center is able to do such high quality research on sea lions in
Russia when NMFS has difficulty getting anything done in the
Western Aleutians.
And the last question, should it mean anything to discover
what we already know? There is no commercial fishing within 50
miles of the Komandorski Islands just west of our Aleutian
Islands. And their sea lions are apparently doing the same
thing as ours.
Mr. Young. Thank you, Mr. Cotter, and I appreciate that.
That is a good comment. It is the same area, same conditions.
In Mr. Schwaab's testimony, any future scientific review
will only be allowed to look at information available to May
10th--I do not understand that--and will not include
information, like the most recent Atka mackerel assessment.
What do you think of this restriction, Mr. Cotter?
Mr. Cotter. Well, I think that is ridiculous, quite
frankly. Any time we have access to new information, we need to
incorporate that new information; otherwise, why are we seeking
new information? Why do we seek to improve our knowledge base
if we are not going to use it?
Mr. Young. Thank you.
Mr. Chairman, I cannot understand the reluctance of not
accepting new information. I know Dr. Trites, you know, you
made a comment--by the way, I understand you are the expert on
sea lions, and I congratulate you. At least you give some
common knowledge on things that can be done and should be done.
And I do think they have misinterpreted your report or your
information.
Question to Mr. Cotter, any one of you. I may, with the
help of the Chairman, ask for an independent review of the
Steller sea lion funding. Do you think the marine mammal
scientists who already seem to have a bias against fisheries,
have used the funding in an unbiased manner? Any one of you?
Mr. Cotter, do you want to go first?
Mr. Cotter. Well, I would ask Dr. Trites to speak candidly
to that.
Mr. Young. Dr. Trites?
Dr. Trites. Yeah. I would like to say that there has been a
lot of research done, a lot of money was put into this. And a
lot of very, very good research has been done by broad group of
individuals. So, I do not think we can fault the science per se
outside of perhaps saying, why did people not get into the
Aleutians sooner.
I think what the problem comes down to in the end is who is
interpreting the scientific record. There is a huge amount of
information, and unfortunately, I mean, my take from the BiOp
is it is almost as though we have not learned anything, and
that is so far from the truth. So much has been published. We
know so much more today. And if it was not for congressional
support, we would literally still be in the forest.
So, we know a lot more. I think really the issue is the
interpretation of----
Mr. Young. How would we correct that, because this is what
I am asking. NMFS is an agency that has no real qualification
for anything, and they are maintaining their brown envelope
jobs. How would we do that, independently, or how could that be
done?
Dr. Trites. And this would be just be my opinion----
Mr. Young. It is my opinion, too, but you go ahead.
Dr. Trites. I think the Agency has some excellent
scientists, and some of the leading marine scientists, marine
mammal scientists as well. The trouble comes down to who in the
end is going to help write these management documents?
I do not think it is a leading scientist. They are not
raising their hand to volunteer for this. And I think until
there is a system put in place where you ensure that the best
scientists help interpret the scientific record as opposed to
perhaps, from my impression, it is more like looking for
volunteers who will help write these. I think then the system
is open to abuse, and perhaps some of the people writing it do
not necessarily have the qualification to understand the
science that has been done.
Perhaps there should be a better relationship between
protecting resources and science, and in particular, not just
the science done within the Agency, but also science done by
the non-Agency.
Mr. Young. What I am saying, though, they write this
thing--Mr. Chairman, if I may.
Mr. Hastings. Go right ahead.
Mr. Young. I could take this panel of four here--I do not
agree with Dr. Ragen, that is OK, but he has got to be on this
side anyway--and probably interpret the science. What you are
telling me, the science is not bad in NOAA, it is the people.
And I asked the question, who writes it? So, maybe we ought to
have an independent peer board involved in the interpretation
of the science, because they cannot interpret themselves, Mr.
Chairman. You do not have to answer that, but I would like to
think about that anyway.
Mr. Hastings. That may be something that we should look at
directly. There are a lot of ``what ifs'' involved in Dr.
Trites' response.
I have no other questions for this panel. Mr. Young, if you
would like to ask more, then I will yield to you?
Mr. Young. I want to thank the panel. This is my 40th year
on marine mammal and fisheries, and this issue is over actually
20 years old. It started earlier than that. It started with the
Endangered Species Act. And we have to straighten it out
because if we are going to do these things and give faith back
into the government, there has to be accountability. That is
why I am interested in the concept of an independent panel. You
guys all may be paid a job, you do not know. I will ask for
volunteers and see how many do it.
But we have to do something that makes this work, or I
would just as soon dis-fund the organization. This is my pet
peeve. If you are not doing the job, if you run an agenda
without putting all the shareholders in it, we are doing a very
poor job. And we as congressmen have the oversight privileges
in actually funding these agencies. So, I think that is our
job. And if they are not doing it correctly, let them go out
and ask with a tin cup.
Mr. Hastings. Well, I want to thank the panel very much for
your testimony. And as usual--I will not say as usual, but many
times questions arise afterwards. If we submit questions to
you, if you would respond in a timely way, I would very much
appreciate it.
I will dismiss this panel, and at the same time we will
call up our third and final panel. We have Mr. Todd Loomis,
Government and Industry Affairs with Cascade Fishing, Inc., Mr.
Dave Little, President of the Freezer Longline Coalition, Mr.
Rudy Tsukada, President of Aleut Enterprise, LLC, and Mr.
Michael LeVine, Senior Counsel of Oceana.
Thank you all for joining me. And by now you have heard, if
you were sitting through the first two panels, what the ground
rules with the timing lights in front of you.
Your entire statement that you have submitted will appear
in the record. The entire statement will. And so, I would ask
you to, with your oral statements, to keep it confined, if you
would, to the five minutes.
And, again, the timing lights, when the green light is on,
that means you are doing very, very well. When the yellow light
goes on, it means you have one minute, and when the red light
goes on, that means that the five minutes have expired.
So, Mr. Loomis, we will recognize you, Government and
Industry Affairs with Cascade Fishing. You are recognized for
five minutes. Turn on that mic.

STATEMENT OF TODD LOOMIS, GOVERNMENT AND INDUSTRY AFFAIRS,
CASCADE FISHING, INC.

Mr. Loomis. Good morning, Mr. Chairman, and thank you for
the opportunity to be here today. For the record, my name is
Todd Loomis, and I work for Cascade Fishing, a company that
catches, processes, and sells frozen seafood. We have been in
business since 1988 and are the largest single vessel quota
holder of Atka mackerel.
Our company has also been involved in research in the
Aleutians for nearly a decade.
We employ 110 individuals, and our payroll will exceed $4
million this year, but we have been deeply impacted by the
Biological Opinion.
I would like to accomplish several things today. I will
begin by describing how the closures in the Aleutians are
impacting businesses and people, how the BiOp's analysis
presented no evidence that fisheries were impacting sea lions.
I will provide some examples of how the economic analysis was
insufficient, and then I will close with suggestions for how we
should proceed from here.
Prior to the closures, each year we fished about 140 days
in the Aleutians. Under the closures, we lost about 70 of those
days at a cost of just under $4 million to our crew, vendors,
the State of Alaska, and our CDQ partner, APICTA.
NMFS estimated aggregate annual losses of up to 750 jobs
and $83 million, but the closures also impact the U.S. trade
balance and exports to countries such as China, Japan, and
Korea. Losses in the trade imbalance could be even more
dramatic in coming years if the current measures are kept in
place.
The North Pacific fisheries are among the best managed in
the world, and we are fortunate to be part of the Amendment 80
sector. Amendment 80 ended nearly 20 years of Olympic style
derby fishing and allowed us to form harvesting cooperatives.
This has resulted in stability for our sector and increased
earnings for our crew.
Amendment 80 also brought additional costs and monitoring
requirements for our fisheries, but these came with the
benefits of being able to very accurately manage and monitor
our catch. I am very proud of our company, our industry, and
the benefits that we provide to our employees and the Nation,
but the BiOp and the fishery closures threaten to derail all of
our hard work and progress.
NMFS has put our livelihood at risk by instituting fishery
restrictions in an area twice the size of New England and
foreclosing on the harvest of over 70 million pounds of
mackerel. As you heard this morning from representatives from
the State's review panel, their case was anything but rock
solid, and there is no established link between fisheries and
the Steller sea lion decline.
NMFS built their case around assertions that the Aleutians
were an unproductive ecosystem, that a high fraction of the
local biomass was being removed, and that sea lions were
suffering from nutritional stress. But all of these statements
are not true, Mr. Chairman, and the science simply does not
support these claims. Both the public and independent
scientists challenged NMFS on many of their assertions, and
while much of the information was corrected in the final BiOp,
the closures remain.
The North Pacific Council made a herculean effort to review
the draft BiOp and take public comment on it. They looked at
the available science and made surgical recommendations that
would have allowed mackerel fisheries to continue outside the
critical habitat in the West and continue inside critical
habitat in the Central Aleutians. The Council's motion passed
unanimously, but was largely ignored by NMFS in the final BiOp,
and they opted instead for sweeping fishery restrictions.
Instead of preparing an environmental analysis for this
action, NMFS should have prepared an EIS, which would have
provided a more rigorous assessment of the impacts. The EA
assumed revenue would be made up by moving to fisheries such as
yellow fin and rock sole. Unfortunately, we are mackerel boats,
and we earned a large portion of our catch history in the
Aleutians. Our larger vessels need more crew and are costlier
to operate than flat fish boats.
As such, we do not have the quota portfolio necessary to
make a wholesale change from mackerel and code to flat fish in
the Bering Sea. And even if we did, it would not be a one-to-
one replacement for the revenue we have lost in the Aleutians.
To state it plainly, Mr. Chairman, the information NMFS had
before them simply does not support their findings or the
fishery closures they have implemented. NMFS has been reluctant
to proceed with a review similar to the one conducted by the
States of Alaska and Washington, but I think that type of
review is critical to bringing some sanity to this process.
If NMFS will not accept the State's review, then they
should conduct their own, but it must be one that is open and
transparent, conducted jointly by NMFS and the Council. It
should consider all of the scientific information and public
comment to date, as well as the conclusions reached in the
BiOp.
In a recent meeting between several industry leaders and
Dr. Lubchenco, we discussed this very type of review, and I am
hopeful that it will be conducted as I have described.
In closing, I would like to recommend that perhaps it is
time for a broader scientific review of the sea lion programs.
We have spent roughly $180 million and counting, and we still
have many unanswered questions and are lacking crucial data. We
need this information to make informed decisions as opposed to
precautionary guesses at what needs to be done. Perhaps the
National Science Foundation or a similar body should audit this
program and prescribe some recommendations as to how we should
proceed.
I think this approach is the best way to get some of the
basic questions answered so that we may truly understand what
is happening with sea lions in the North Pacific.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Loomis follows:]

Statement of Todd M. Loomis, Government & Industry Affairs,
Cascade Fishing, Inc.

Mr. Chairman, thank you for giving me the opportunity to testify on
the recent Steller Sea Lion (SSL) biological opinion (BiOp) and the
resultant Aleutian Islands fishery closures that were put in place
earlier this year. I work for Cascade Fishing, Inc., a Seattle-based
seafood company that has been in business since 1988 and one that is
heavily dependent on the Aleutian Islands Atka mackerel and Pacific cod
fisheries. Our company owns one catcher/processor and is the largest
single-vessel quota holder of Atka mackerel. Our vessel catches,
processes, and freezes various species of groundfish and in recent
years has operated over 225 days each year in the Bering Sea, Gulf of
Alaska, and the Aleutian Islands. Our company is also heavily involved
in research and has partnered with NMFS, the University of British
Columbia, and the University of Alaska Fairbanks on numerous projects.
I'd like to accomplish several things in my testimony today. First,
I want to describe our company so you can see how the unnecessary
fishery closures that NMFS has imposed are impacting real businesses
and real people. Second, I'd like to touch on the analysis that led to
these closures and illustrate how NMFS failed to take into account
important information that showed their analysis was flawed and that
there is no evidence these closures will promote SSL recovery. And
finally, I'd like to give you some examples of how the economic
analysis (EA) that was prepared was insufficient for this highly
controversial action. I'll close with several suggestions for a way
forward including the idea of a high level scientific audit of NMFS'
SSL scientific programs.
Prior to the BiOp and implementation of the fishery closures, our
vessel annually fished approximately 140 days in the Aleutian Islands
targeting mackerel and cod. This year, under the new fishery closures,
we lost about 70 fishing days in the central and western Aleutians. We
estimate these lost days came at a cost of just under $4 million to our
crew and vendors and we are just one of the affected companies. The
combined loss for all participants in the Aleutian Islands fisheries
was estimated by NMFS to be up to 750 jobs and over $83 million in lost
annual earnings. There are seven catcher processors and several catcher
vessels that participate in the mackerel fishery and all have been
similarly impacted by the fishery closures NMFS has imposed. We expect
losses to be even bigger over the next few years if NMFS continues the
measures that are now in place.
As a seafood company, we produce high-quality all natural,
affordable frozen food that we believe is one of the best protein
sources in the world. We are also exporters, with most of our product
going overseas to China, Japan and Korea, a plus for the U.S. trade
balance. And most importantly, we create and sustain jobs during these
uncertain economic times. Our company employs 110 people and our
payroll will exceed $4 million this year.
The North Pacific fisheries are among the best managed in the
world. We have a healthy resource, conservative management by the North
Pacific Fishery Management Council (Council), and we are part of a
catch share program created by Amendment 80 (A80) to the Fishery
Management Plan for the Bering Sea and Aleutian Islands. A80 ended
nearly 20 years of Olympic-style derby fishing for our sector and
empowered us to form harvesting cooperatives. We have taken full
advantage of this opportunity and have fished as a member of a
cooperative since the program's inception in 2008. A80 has resulted in
stability to our sector and increased annual pay for our crew by
enabling us to operate more efficiently. While A80 brought additional
costs and monitoring requirements it has resulted in improved
management and conservation measures for our fisheries. We now carry
two fisheries observers at all times, have electronic monitoring of our
catch and fishing locations, use motion-compensated scales to weigh all
catch, and every haul is sampled by an observer. All of these tools and
technologies have enabled us to very accurately manage and monitor our
catch such that we can manage harvest very precisely. We are very proud
of our company, the industry we work in, the accomplishments we've
made, and the benefits we provide to both our employees and the Nation.
The BiOp and the fishery closures, however, threaten to derail all of
our hard work and efforts.
To put this at risk, NMFS surely must have had strong evidence and
scientific proof that fisheries were causing jeopardy and adverse
modification for SSL before closing or restricting fisheries in 145,000
square miles of ocean (that's more than twice the size of New England
or roughly the size of the Dakotas) and causing over 32,000 mt (70
million lbs.) of mackerel to become unavailable for harvest and sale?
Unfortunately, if you review the BiOp, I think you'll come to the same
conclusion that the States of Washington and Alaska came to in their
recent review of the BiOp--the information that NMFS had before them
does not support a jeopardy or adverse modification finding and there
is no established scientific link between fisheries and the SSL decline
or recovery. Also recall that, as a whole, the western distinct
population segment (DPS) of SSL has increased in numbers over the past
decade to the point that they may be on track for downlisting. With
this BiOp however, NMFS has chosen to manage SSL for recovery in sub-
units smaller than the DPS, which we believe is not consistent with the
letter or spirit of the Endangered Species Act.
To put it plainly Mr. Chairman, what you have is an agency that is
taking what it deems are `precautionary measures' that will likely have
no impact on the status of SSL, but they are having a profound negative
impact on the commercial fishing industry, support services, and
communities. Much of the work that the public and the Council have done
to participate in the process has fallen on deaf ears. Critiques of the
analysis by independent scientists were dismissed and the work of the
Council to develop more practical measures designed to meet NMFS
criteria were ignored. To date, responses from NMFS have not been
received by anyone that took the time to review and submit comments on
the draft BiOp and the interim final rule and that is not acceptable.
The process that NMFS has undertaken has been driven by an artificial
timeline and a pre-conceived notion that the problem is fisheries in
spite of the fact that no scientific link to fisheries has been
established. NMFS has not responded to public comments as is common
practice with Federal actions of this nature and in my opinion, did not
allow for adequate external review of the BiOp (including its
conclusions and mitigation measures) prior to its release.
I think you'll also find that many of the statements that NMFS made
in the draft BiOp and then later corrected based on public input (e.g.,
the Aleutians are an unproductive ecosystem) should have resulted in
different conclusions or persuaded NMFS to modify the fishery closures
they originally proposed. For example, NMFS' original assertion in the
draft BiOp that fisheries were removing a high fraction of the local
biomass of mackerel was turned on its head when challenged in public
comments. In reality, the fishery in the western Aleutians was shown to
have a relatively low harvest rate--a rate that was even lower than
other areas of the Aleutians where the SSL population is more stable.
There are several other examples of areas where NMFS' draft BiOp
reached to make a case that fishing was affecting SSL and each of their
arguments fell apart in the face of comments and information brought
forward by outside scientists and the public. In some cases NMFS did
modify the final BiOp to correct their mistakes, but they failed to
measurably change their conclusions and resulting fishery closures. One
would think that NMFS would have reconsidered the closures and the
possibility that nutritional stress wasn't to blame, but they just
rolled on as if the closures were a pre-ordained outcome that couldn't
be modified because they were too far down the road.
In my view, NMFS has become entrenched in their nutritional stress
hypotheses and cannot seem to find a way to believe that perhaps
something else caused the decline or is preventing recovery. I find
this very frustrating in light of the fact that 13 of 14 nutritional
stress indicators that have been studied show that nutritional stress
is not present in SSL. I remain hopeful, Mr. Chairman, that you and
your committee can bring some sanity to this process--a process that
has, without good cause, closed fisheries upon which my company's
livelihood depends.
What is particularly appalling is the total disregard NMFS had for
the efforts put forth by the Council who worked under an extremely
tight timeline to address a serious management issue. In my opinion,
the Council did an admirable job given the schedule set by NMFS. The
Council took the time and made the effort to digest the huge amount of
information that NMFS made available when it released the draft BiOp on
August 2, 2010. The Council and public had a mere two weeks to review
nearly a thousand pages of materials and provide substantive comments
during a special Council session that was held August 16--20, 2010. It
was made clear that this would be the only opportunity to comment as
there would be no time for the Council to make adjustments to the
proposed fishery closures at their regularly scheduled October 2010
meeting.
While no small task, the Council deliberated and unanimously passed
a motion that recommended NMFS consider less restrictive mackerel
fishery closures in the western and central Aleutians. The Council's
motion was crafted to meet SSL forage needs while preserving as much of
the commercial fishery as possible. To do so the Council relied heavily
upon the available scientific information to propose measures that
allowed fishing outside of critical habitat in the western Aleutians
and a geographically spread out fishery inside critical habitat in the
central Aleutians. The Council also relied on appropriate science to
allow fishing in a limited portion of SSL critical habitat where
research had shown relatively low commercial harvest rates of mackerel
and protected areas where it appeared harvest rates of the local
biomass were larger than they thought prudent given the status of SSL.
In most cases the Council's alternative used science that NMFS itself
had done (Alaska Fisheries Science Center has done ongoing studies to
examine local biomass and harvest rates in areas adjacent to SSL
sites). Unfortunately, NMFS largely ignored the Council's motion in the
final BiOp and instead of using science to make surgical changes to the
fisheries they made sweeping changes and largely ignored the Council's
recommendations and the most relevant scientific studies.
I'd also like to point out that the EA that NMFS prepared for this
action was woefully deficient. The agency should have completed an
Environmental Impact Statement (EIS) because the proposed major Federal
action has clearly significantly affected the quality of the human
environment (i.e., had a significant economic impact). An EIS is what
was prepared during an evaluation of SSL conservation measures in the
early 2000's. Given the significance of the proposed action and the
clear economic impacts, NMFS should have prepared an EIS, which would
have provided a more robust and rigorous assessment of the proposed
action and its impacts.
When we got locked out of the mackerel fishery it was assumed in
the EA that we would simply move to other fisheries to make up the lost
revenue. The EA hypothesized that we could make up the estimated 10
weeks of lost fishing time in the Aleutians by moving into the rock
sole fishery for 3 weeks and yellowfin sole for the remaining 7 weeks.
While a nice idea, it isn't that simple Mr. Chairman. The EA correctly
points out the size difference between mackerel boats and flatfish
boats--our boats are larger, we have more crew, and they are costlier
to operate. We also earned a different quota portfolio because of the
fisheries we historically participated in. Without sufficient
prohibited species and other necessary quota allowances, expansion into
the more multi-species target fisheries such as flatfish is nearly
impossible. If it were profitable for us to target rock sole and
yellowfin sole instead of mackerel we would have done so years ago, but
that is not the case and we do not have the flexibility to change. I'm
also quite certain that other members of our cooperative do not want us
crowding them out of their traditional fishing grounds when we should
be fishing mackerel and cod in the Aleutians.
As a final point, Mr. Chairman, I would like to call the
Committee's attention to some recent developments that may point to a
way forward, at least in part. In August, several industry leaders had
a meeting with Dr. Lubchenko, head of NOAA. In that meeting we
discussed NMFS plans for a scientific evaluation of the BiOp by the
Center for Independent Experts (CIE). We believe that NMFS is pursuing
a CIE review partly as a response to the scientific review recently
completed by the States of Washington and Alaska. Unfortunately, the
CIE process is not an open process like the one the States used, and
NMFS has up to now repeatedly refused to include the North Pacific
Fishery Management Council in the design and implementation of any
review of the SSL BiOp despite clear guidance in the Magnuson-Stevens
Act (MSA) that such peer reviews should be jointly conducted by NMFS
and the Council.
At the August meeting, Dr. Lubchenko agreed that the CIE review
should be transparent, and that the Council should be involved in its
design and implementation. At the Council's October meeting, they
accepted this apparent change of heart, adopted terms of reference for
the CIE review, and appointed a workgroup to work with NMFS to finalize
the process for review of the BiOp. We support this effort, and hope
the Committee will monitor this process as it unfolds. It is imperative
that any further review be conducted in as open and transparent a
manner as that employed by the States, and that all of the scientific
information regarding SSLs be evaluated as well as NMFS conclusions.
Following such an evaluation, there should be a complete review of the
fishery restrictions and revisions to them as appropriate. This should
be done through the MSA process, with full participation by the
Council, and not behind closed doors with artificial timelines as was
done with the current BiOp and fishery closures.
We also believe that it is time for a broader review of NMFS
scientific program for SSLs. Over the past decade or so, the United
States has spent roughly $180 million to better understand the factors
affecting SSL recovery. Yet, when it comes time to make decisions
regarding our fisheries, crucial data are lacking and we are left with
these ``precautionary measures''. Perhaps the National Science
Foundation or a similar high level scientific organization should audit
this program and make recommendations on how we can better use taxpayer
funds to get at the basic scientific questions about SSL population
status and factors affecting them.
In conclusion Mr. Chairman, I'd like to ask this committee to
embark on a mission to rein in NMFS and the broad latitude they have
displayed during the development of this BiOp to interpret the science
as they see fit and to eliminate economic activity under the guise of
being precautionary. Our company supports science and the use of
science in the decision making process, but we cannot support what has
been done here. If fisheries had been clearly implicated in the SSL
issue we would accept the need for fishery restrictions and adjust to
the necessary changes. But lacking that scientific proof and having
NMFS simply guessing at what needs to be done is not acceptable. NMFS
is supposed to be our Nation's premier scientific agency, but this
reckless disregard for science and the law is untenable. In our current
economic situation our government should not be undertaking this type
of devastating action.
______

Mr. Hastings. Mr. Loomis, thank you very much for your
testimony.
Next, we will go to Mr. Dave Little, who is President of
the Freezer Longline Coalition. You are recognized for five
minutes, Mr. Little.

STATEMENT OF DAVID LITTLE, PRESIDENT,
FREEZER LONGLINE COALITION

Mr. Little. Thank you, Chairman Hastings, Congressman
Young. My name is David Little. I am here today to testify as
the President of the Freezer Longline Coalition. I am also the
President of Clipper Seafoods.
The Freezer Longline Coalition would like to thank the
Committee on Natural Resources for holding this oversight
hearing. I believe it is particularly important for Congress to
address the questions of whether the science contained in the
Steller sea lion Biological Opinion supports the decisions by
NMFS to move forward with an interim final rule that imposes
vast closures on the Aleutian Islands, Pacific cod, and Atka
mackerel fisheries.
The Aleutian Islands cod fishery is important for the
Freezer Longline fleet. Many vessels in our fleet have
specialized in the high value fish that are caught in this
area. For some members, this makes up 50 percent of their
revenues.
As the interim final rule is still in its first year, the
full effect of the rule are not yet well known. However, the
anticipated economic impacts in the BiOp state that the losses
could be as high as 44 percent of gross revenue.
The loss of valuable Aleutian Islands cod will have long-
term unrecoverable damages to the Freezer Longline fleet.
This Committee has asked, does the science support the
decision? No, Mr. Chairman, it does not. The NMFS Biological
Opinion was not reviewed by any independent scientific panels,
despite NMFS' public statements that it would undergo such a
review. In fact, the only peer reviewed analysis was recently
conducted, as you heard this morning, by scientists
commissioned by Washington and Alaska States.
This review panel found, and we concur, that the
determination of jeopardy by National Marine Fisheries Service
is not supported by the best available science.
It is unbelievable to us that the scientific underpinnings
of the BiOp and the RPAs were never peer reviewed, even though
thousands of pages of public testimony directly criticized the
science. This is about bad science costing jobs and driving
well-managed, sustainable fisheries out of business. The
fishing fleet has been forced into litigation because the
Agency has made an irresponsible decision that, if allowed to
stand, will set a new legal precedent.
The Agency cannot be allowed to unlawfully regulate
sustainable American fisheries based upon bad science to
support a political agenda of a select few.
The single basis for the National Marine Fisheries
Service's jeopardy and adverse modification determination is
the hypothesis that fisheries compete with Steller sea lions
for food. This is otherwise known as the nutritional stress
theory. The Agency's stated position is that it does not know
whether nutritional stress is even occurring, and even if the
evidence showed that nutritional stress is occurring, NMFS does
not know whether the fisheries are the cause of such stress.
As acknowledged by the Agency, the Biological Opinion
findings and supporting information are equivocal at best.
NMFS's hypothesis that fisheries affect Steller sea lions
is contradicted by current studies that were ignored. A study
mandated and funded by Congress, Calkins 2008, found that there
is no correlation between the Freezer Longline cod fishery and
Steller sea lion population dynamics. Unfortunately, this study
receives essentially no attention in the Agency's Biological
Opinion.
Throughout the BiOp, the Agency ignored good science for no
other reason than science did not support the Agency's
preconceived conclusions.
Mr. Chairman, given the best scientific information
available, there is little factual basis to support the
restrictions on the fisheries. The scientific record does not
support NMFS' findings of jeopardy and adverse modification.
Those findings are flawed for several reasons. One, they are
based only a small subsection of the Western DPS, and not the
Western DPS as a whole. They are based on the Agency's
assessment of whether the DPS is meeting recovery criteria and
not ESA Section 7 standards. They are unsupported by any
determination that fisheries cause jeopardy in adverse
modification, and they are not consistent with the best
available science.
The BiOp focuses upon a foregone conclusion that is built
largely on advocacy rather than science. The authors of the
BiOp make selected use of data and scientific papers to support
their conclusion, while at the same time, ignoring or
dismissing any data that might not support the adopted
position.
Thank you again for the Committee's time and resources and
the opportunity to speak on behalf of the Freezer Longline
Coalition. That concludes my comments.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Little follows:]

Statement of David Little, President, Freezer Longline Coalition

Good afternoon Chairman Hastings, Congressman Young and other
Members of the Committee,
My name is David Little, I am here today testifying as the
President of the Freezer Longline Coalition. I am also the founder and
President of Clipper Seafoods, Ltd. I have served as a member of the
North Pacific Fishery Management Council's Steller Sea Lion Mitigation
Committee as well as a member of the Council's Advisory Panel and have
been involved for more than 15 years in following Steller sea lion
science.
The Freezer Longline Coalition would like to thank the Committee on
Natural Resources for holding this oversight hearing and especially for
this opportunity to provide comments on NOAA's Steller sea lion science
and fishery management restrictions. I believe it is particularly
important for Congress to address the question of whether the science
contained in the Steller Sea-Lion Biological Opinion supports the
decisions by NMFS to move forward with an ``interim'' final rule and
impose vast closures on the Aleutian Islands Pacific cod and Atka
mackerel fisheries.
The Freezer Longline Coalition represents a Washington and Alaska
based fleet that participates in the Aleutian Islands Pacific cod
longline fishery. The Aleutian Islands cod fishery is important for the
freezer-longline fleet as a whole, as well as for individual vessels;
many vessels in our fleet have specialized in the high value fish that
are caught in these areas. For some members, up to 50% of their
revenues have come from Aleutian Islands cod. Because the interim final
rule is still in the first year of its implementation, the full
financial effects of the rule are not yet well known. However, the
anticipated economic impacts of the rule, as evaluated by NMFS in the
BiOp state that resulting losses could be as high as 44% of gross
revenue. Certainly the loss of access for valuable Aleutian Islands cod
will have long-term, unrecoverable damages to the freezer longline
fleet.
This Committee has asked: Does the Science Support the Decisions?
No, Mr. Chairman, it does not. My testimony and documents we have
submitted for the record show how NMFS has used incomplete and
misleading science to impose sweeping and unnecessary restrictions on
the Freezer longline fleet.
Mr. Chairman, NMFS's biological opinion supporting the interim
final rule was not reviewed by any independent science panels or
independent individual experts before the rule's implementation,
despite NMFS's public statements that it would undergo such a review.
In fact, the only peer reviewed analysis of the science supporting
NMFS's decision was recently conducted by a panel of well-established
scientists commissioned by the states of Washington and Alaska. This
review panel found, and we concur, ``That the determination of jeopardy
by NMFS is not supported by the best available science.''
It is unbelievable to us that the scientific underpinnings of the
BiOp and RPA's were never peer reviewed, even though thousands of pages
of testimony were received by the agency much of it questioning and
directly criticizing the science. This is about bad science, costing
jobs and driving well-managed sustainable fisheries out of business.
The freezer longline fleet has been forced into litigation because the
agency has made an irresponsible decision that if allowed to stand,
will set a new legal precedent in a very fundamental respect. We have
also challenged the rule because we cannot idly sit by while the agency
proposes to unreasonably and unlawfully regulate sustainable American
fisheries based upon bad science to support the political agenda of a
select few.
As to the content of the biological opinion, the single basis for
NMFS's ``jeopardy and adverse modification'' determination is the
agency's hypothesis that fisheries compete with Steller sea lions for
food, otherwise known as the ``nutritional stress theory.'' However,
the agency's stated position in the biological opinion is that it
``does not know'' whether nutritional stress is even occurring in the
sea lion population. And, even if the evidence showed that nutritional
stress is occurring, NMFS states in the biological opinion that it does
not know whether the fisheries are the cause of any such stress. As
acknowledged by the agency the biological opinion's findings and
supporting information are at best ``equivocal''. Good science and the
legal requirements of the ESA do not permit the imposition of highly
burdensome regulations based on this type of speculation.
NMFS's statement that it does not have sufficient evidence to
determine whether fisheries affect Steller sea lions is contradicted by
current studies that were ignored by the agency. As an example, a study
mandated and specifically funded by Congress, (Calkins 2008), found
that there is no correlation between the freezer-longline cod fishery
and Steller sea lion population dynamics. Unfortunately this study
receives essentially no attention in the agency's biological opinion
and this is just one case. Throughout the BiOp the agency ignored good
science for no other reason than the science did not support the
agency's preconceived conclusion.
Additionally, the agency's conclusion that the entire Steller sea
lion Western Distinct Population Segment (WDPS) is ``jeopardized'' is
not consistent with the fact that the WDPS as a whole is experiencing a
robust increase in abundance. In fact, again according to NMFS, the pup
count in the WDPS has increased14% (from 2001-02 to 2009) and the non-
pup trend site count has increased 12% (from 2000-2008). The NMFS
population estimate of the WDPS as of 2009 is greater than 75,000 with
50,040 in the U.S. portion. Other estimates used in the past such as
(Trites and Larkin 1996) suggest a population of 56,712 for the U.S.
portion in 2009. For reference, the ESA downlisting criteria for the
U.S. portion is 53,100 by 2015. We do not understand how a DPS that is
increasing in abundance, and is indisputably in better condition than
it was a decade ago, can also be said to be ``jeopardized'' by a single
action that has been occurring over the course of the same decade.
Indeed, there is no legal or scientific support for such a conclusion.
The agency's decision is not consistent with the evidence and its
conclusions are illogical, arbitrary, and unreasoned.
Mr. Chairman, given the best scientific information available,
there is little factual basis to support the restrictions on the
fisheries in the Aleutian Islands. More generally, the scientific
record does not support NMFS's findings of jeopardy and adverse
modification, as set forth in the 2010 BiOp. Those findings are flawed
because, among other things:

they are based only on a small subsection of the WDPS
and not the WDPS as a whole;

they are based on the agency's assessment of whether
the DPS is meeting recovery criteria, and not ESA's Section 7
standards;

they are unsupported by any determination that any
fisheries cause ``jeopardy and adverse modification''; and

they are not consistent with the best available
science and were made without consideration of scientific data
and information that are directly relevant to the issues
addressed in the BiOp.
The BIOP failed to present a careful analysis of all relevant
factors and information and then failed to arrive at a reasoned
conclusion that is supported by factual evidence. The BiOp focuses upon
a foregone conclusion that is built largely on advocacy rather than
science. The authors of BiOp then make selective use of data and
scientific papers to support their conclusion while at the same time
ignoring or dismissing any data that might not support the adopted
position.
In closing I would like to quote Dr. Ian Boyd, a leading marine
mammal researcher. ``The document lacks a rigorous approach to the
assessment of `evidence' and fails to use evidence consistently;
information that has much associated uncertainty when first introduced
in the analysis gradually drifts to information of high certainty as
the document develops'' Dr. Boyd continues ``one should not condone the
twisting of data to achieve what is, in essence, a political
objective.'' This view was echoed by the North Pacific Fishery
Management Council's Scientific and Statistical Committee, which
concluded upon review of the draft biological opinion that ``. . .the
conclusion chapter has retained some tone of advocacy, stating in fact
as some conclusions that still have a great deal of uncertainty about
them.''
Thank you again for the Committee's time and resources and the
opportunity to speak on behalf of the FLC.
The Freezer Longline Coalition submitted for the record the
following documents:
1.)  Comments on SSL 2010 Biological Opinion submitted to the
Scientific Review Panel, June 2, 2011. These comments also
contain public comments to date submitted by the FLC to NMFS on
the draft and final BIOP.
2.)  Comments on SSL 2010 Biological Opinion submitted by the
to the Scientific Review Panel, August 22, 2011
3.)  State of Washington and Alaska Scientific Review Panel,
final report
4.)  Legal filings Freezer Longline Coalition v. Lubchenco et
al.
______

Mr. Hastings. Thank you very much, Mr. Little.
And next, we will call on Mr. Rudy Tsukada, President of
Aleut Enterprise, LLC. Mr. Tsukada, you are recognized.

STATEMENT OF RUDY TSUKADA, PRESIDENT,
ALEUT ENTERPRISE, LLC

Mr. Tsukada. Good morning, Mr. Chairman, Congressman Young.
My name is Rudy Tsukada appearing on behalf of Aleut
Enterprise, LLC, a wholly owned subsidiary of the Aleut
Corporation, and we operate a non-8A fuel distribution business
of Adak Island.
The Aleut Corporation was created pursuant to Alaska Native
Claim Settlement Act to represent the native people of the
Aleutian region by promoting economic development and social
welfare, and preserving their traditional ways of life. Our
shareholders are native Aleuts, their families, and their
descendants.
I am here today because I believe the National Marine
Fisheries' groundfish restrictions have severely undermined any
possibility of economic development on Adak Island, and
directly impacts the welfare of the Aleut people.
Adak Island sits on the Western edge of the Aleutian
Islands, 1,300 miles southwest of Anchorage. The island is the
25th largest in the United States, and according to the U.S.
Census Bureau, is currently home to 300 residents.
Nine thousand years ago, the Aleuts became the first
inhabitants of Adak Island. They hunted whales, seals, otters,
sea lions, and island birds, and fished in Adak's rich waters.
There is no better or stronger or more caring constituency than
my shareholders. They are not just sitting there dreaming about
sea lions; they actively utilize them, co-inhabit with them.
They are part of their culture.
In 1998, the Aleut Corporation acquired Adak and its
facilities in a land exchange with the U.S. Navy and the
Department of the Interior. In return for Adak, the Navy and
Interior Department received other lands held by the Aleut
Corporation elsewhere on the Aleutian Islands. We thought this
was a good deal. We wanted to make something happen to Adak and
to grow it.
Therefore, the Aleut Corporation invested large monies into
companies like mine, Aleut Enterprise, to promote economic
development and to try to create businesses in these far flung
regions in Western Alaska.
The NMFS fisheries and restrictions on the Aleutian Islands
is a severe concern to us. Much of my testimony written has
already been repeated, so I will go ahead and try to emphasize
some of the other aspects.
The decline that we saw in the first quarter of this year
was more than a 50 percent decline in my fuel sales. This was
100 percent related to the restrictions imposed by these
regulations--unfounded regulations. What is the impact of that?
Congressman Young, you understand the importance of heating
fuel prices in Alaska. In Adak, because of the fisheries, we
can sell heating fuel for $4.49. Those were the June, 2011
prices per gallon. Because of these restrictions and lower
volumes, what you will now see is us pricing fuel in volumes
similar to our neighbors. Our closest neighbor is Atka and St.
George. Atka at the time was paying $7.43 per gallon for
heating oil, St. George, $6.34. This is not just a matter of
lost opportunity, but it is a matter of ability to heat homes.
Realizing these impacts of the NMFS' rules that we believe
violates Magnuson-Stevens, NEPA. It goes directly contrary to
the Environmental Justice Proclamation by this current
Administration. We had to something to ensure that this would
not happen to our shareholders.
Several hundred years ago, the Russians came in and
enslaved the Aleut people. That was a tragedy. World War II,
both the Japanese and the U.S. Government sent my shareholders
to intern camps, a forced relocation. This is no different.
This is something that is completely avoidable, makes
absolutely no sense, and is certainly not justified by science.
But the impacts are being felt already, and will be felt
further on.
My previous job was with the Quinault Nation's Enterprise
Board in Taholah, Washington. While I was not a part of that
discussion of the marbled murrelet and the owls, I did see what
the impacts were. I will not allow that to happen within any of
the powers that I have while I work for Aleut Enterprise.
When you look at the graphs, I can show you another graph,
a graph that shows the number of shareholders in region. It
looks very much like the Steller sea lion graphs. How can I go
back to my shareholders and tell them that not only are they
second class citizens once again, they are now being placed
underneath the Steller sea lion, animals that they care about,
that they need, that they interact with?
And with my time up, I will end my testimony there.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Tsukada follows:]

Statement of Ryuichi Rudy Tsukada, President, Aleut Enterprise, LLC

Good morning, Mr. Chairman. My name is Rudy Tsukada, appearing on
behalf of Aleut Enterprise, LLC, a wholly-owned subsidiary of the Aleut
Corporation that operates a fuel distribution business on Adak Island.
The Aleut Corporation was created pursuant to the Alaska Native Claims
Settlement Act (``ANCSA'') to represent the Native people of the
Aleutian region of Alaska by promoting their economic and social
welfare and preserving their traditional ways of life. Its shareholders
are Native Aleuts, their families, and descendants. National Marine
Fisheries Service (NFMS) groundfish restrictions have severely
undermined the economic development of Adak Island and the welfare of
the Aleut people.
Adak Island sits on the western edge of the Aleutian Islands in
Alaska, 1300 miles (a three-hour jet ride) southwest of Anchorage. The
island, the 25th-largest in the United States, is currently home to
over 300 residents, all of whom live in the City of Adak. Nine-thousand
years ago, the Aleuts became the first inhabitants of Adak Island. They
hunted whales, seals, otters, sea lions, and islands birds and fished
Adak's freshwater streams and surrounding seas. Adak was later settled
by the Russians and eventually purchased by the United States. In the
early 1940s, Adak Island became the site of a military base operation
by the Army Air Corps for offensive action against Japanese military
forces occupying the Aleutian Islands of Attu and Kiska. By the spring
of 1944, an estimated 90,000 military personnel lived on Adak Island,
preparing for strikes against Axis forces in the Pacific arena. After
World War II, Adak continued to serve as a naval air station during the
Cold War, but its population slowly dwindled over the years. The naval
station formally closed in March 1997, and the EPA began performing
cleanup of the site, which had been polluted by hazardous substances
and explosives.
In 1998, the Aleut Corporation acquired Adak and its facilities in
a land exchange agreement with the U.S. Navy and Department of the
Interior. In return for Adak, the Navy and Interior Department received
other lands held by the Aleut Corporation elsewhere in the Aleutian
Islands. The Aleut Corporation pursued the exchange in part because the
island historically had been the location of an early Aleut community
and in part because it saw value in the island's existing facilities.
Since the Aleut Corporation acquired the land, numerous families have
relocated to Adak. The Aleut Corporation has taken a very active role
in the development of the city of Adak, taking action to bring new
business to the community. For example, it formed Aleut Enterprise, LLC
to encourage commerce on the island. Aleut Enterprise owns a Seafood
processing facility on the island that processes Pacific cod, Atka
mackerel, halibut, and other Bering Sea groundfish. Another of Aleut
Enterprise's primary businesses in Adak is refueling marine vessels,
many of which are fishing boats. In order to further promote economic
development on Adak, in 2004, Congress granted the Aleut Corporation
the exclusive right to the non-Community Development Quota (non-CDQ)
directed ollock fishery in the Aleutian Islands Subarea of the Bering
Sea-Aleutian Islands Management Area. The Aleuts have the right to
assign their harvest rights to others within the Aleutian Island
Subarea.
NMFS fisheries restrictions in the Aleutian Islands related to
concerns regarding Stellar sea lion populations threaten to destroy
Adak's economy and the well-being of its people. In November of 2010,
NMFS published its long-delayed biological opinion, or BiOp, on Stellar
sea lions. Based on conclusions made in the BiOp, NMFS published an
Interim Final Rule on December 13, 2010 that restricted fishing for
Pacific cod and Atka mackerel in Management Areas 541, 542, and 543 of
the western Aleutian Islands. These restrictions included broad fishing
prohibitions in areas near suspected sea lion rookeries, including many
areas directly offshore of the Aleutian Islands.
In the BiOp, NFMS concluded that two of the seven subregions within
the western distinct population segment (DPS) of Stellar sea lions were
not meeting recovery goals and suggested nutritional stress as the
cause. The fact is, however, that science does not back up this
assertion. First, the western distinct population segment of Steller
sea lions has increased in abundance over the past decade. According to
NMFS, pup production across the western distinct population segment has
increased 14 percent and non-pup production has increased 12 to 16
percent. Second, the available data does not support NFMS' claim that
sea lions aren't getting enough to eat. Of fourteen indicators of
nutritional stress, NMFS identified reduced natality as the sole
indicator to support its theory that chronic nutritional stress has
caused Steller sea lion declines in the western Aleutian islands. The
other thirteen indicators suggested that western distinct population
sea lions were not nutritionally stressed. Furthermore, NMFS found that
available groundfish forage inside critical habitat was actually higher
in the western Aleutian Islands, where NMFS restricted fishing, than
elsewhere, such as the Bering Sea and Gulf of Alaska. The NMFS
conclusion that sea lions are under nutritional stress is contrary to
the scientific evidence.
NMFS even questioned its science. In a November 2010 memorandum to
NMFS' Assistant Administrator for Fisheries, NMFS Alaska Region
Administrator Jim Balsiger identified that: ``The controversy around
this action centers on the lack of unequivocal evidence that groundfish
fisheries impact Steller sea lions. Failure to implement fishery
restrictions similar to the reasonable and prudent alternative in the
biological opinion is likely to result in litigation by environmental
organizations.'' Dr. Balsiger admitted that NMFS hastily forced
unfounded, ideologically-based fisheries restrictions down the throats
of rural Alaskans. Despite these facts, NMFS decided to completely shut
down fishing for Pacific cod and Atka mackerel in Management Area 543--
an area about half the size of Texas--in the Aleutian Islands. NMFS
also instated other, somewhat more limited closures, in central
Aleutian Islands management areas 541 and 542.
Realizing that the disastrous impacts of the NFMS rule--which
violates the Magnuson-Stevens Fishery Conservation Act (MSA), the
National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA), the Administrative Procedures
Act (APA) and the Endangered Species Act (ESA)--the State of Alaska
filed a lawsuit in U.S. District Court the next day against now-
departed Department of Commerce Secretary Gary Locke, National Oceanic
and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) Director Jane Lubchenco, and NMFS
Alaska Region. Alaska Governor Sean Parnell said that ``The agency's
conclusion that additional fishing restrictions are necessary is not
supported by the best available scientific information. The drastic
measures proposed by NMFS are simply not necessary given the overall
health of the Stellar sea lion population. This decision will have
immediate and significant impacts on local communities and fishermen in
the area.'' The Aleut Corporation joined the lawsuit as amicus curiae
because NMFS' restrictions on the fishing industry in the Aleutian
Islands have severe negative impacts on the Aleut Corporation, its
Native shareholders, and their communities, particularly the community
of Adak. The NMFS restrictions harm Adak's economy, interfere with
Aleuts' connection to their natural environment, and undermine the
ability of the Aleut Corporation to pass the intended benefits of its
pollock allocation along to the Aleut people.
NMFS' restrictions will greatly shrink Adak's economy, which relies
heavily on a vibrant fishing industry. Fishing vessels regularly visit
Adak to purchase fuel, provisions, food, lodging, and other goods and
services. The fisheries closures severely threaten Adak businesses,
many of which are subsidiaries of the Aleut Corporation. Numerous fish
processing facilities, including Aleut Enterprise subsidiary Aleut
Fisheries, LLC, are a critical part of the Adak economy, providing jobs
to the Aleut Community in and near Adak. Commercial fishing vessels
that target Atka mackerel and Pacific cod account for the majority of
Aleut Enterprise's total fuel sales. Based on my experience as the
President of Aleut Enterprise, I believe that marine fuel sales in Adak
are likely to drop by over 50 percent as a result of NMFS fisheries
closures and restrictions. Furthermore, the fishing restrictions will
result in a sharp decline in tax revenues to support Adak. Local taxes
paid by Aleut Corporation companies comprise nearly two-thirds of the
City of Adak's revenue base. The loss of business and subsequent loss
of tax revenue will severely cripple the City's ability to provide
municipal services to an already underserved community.
In addition to harming Adak's economy, NFMS fishing restrictions
adversely impact Native Aleut culture. The Aleuts have traditionally
been very closely tied to their environment, including oceans,
fisheries, and marine mammals. They have traditionally fished in the
waters now classified as ``Management Areas 541, 542, and 543'' for
thousands of years. Bureaucratic fishing restrictions in these areas
sever the Native Aleuts' connection to their natural environment.
NMFS restrictions on harvesting Pacific cod and Atka mackerel also
undermine the ability of the Aleut Corporation, its Native
shareholders, and the city of Adak to realize the economic benefit of
its statutorily directed Aleutian Islands Subarea pollock allocation.
The restrictions make it extremely impractical for vessels to fish for
pollock in the Aleutian Islands Subarea. It is financially impossible
for fishermen to fish for pollock in the Aleutians when fishing
restrictions have closed access to the very locations inhabited by
those pollock.
This spring, realizing that the Aleut Corporation was not going to
harvest its statutorily directed 2011 pollock allocation in the
Aleutian Islands Subarea, NMFS reallocated the majority of the
allocation to the Bering Sea Subarea. NMFS reallocated it to parties
other than the Aleut Corporation, without providing any compensation to
the Aleut Corporation for the value of the resource it was unilaterally
taking away. Because NMFS fishing restrictions make it difficult, if
not impossible, for the Aleut Corporation or their designees to harvest
the Aleut Corporation's pollock allocation within the Aleutian Islands
Subarea, the Aleut Corporation and its Native shareholders will
continue to be unable to reap the benefits of its pollock allocation.
In the future, when NMFS restrictions prevent the Aleut Corporation or
its designees from harvesting the Aleut Corporation's pollock
allocation, NFMS is likely to reallocate the Aleut Corporation's
pollock allocation outside the Aleutian Islands Subarea and away from
its intended beneficiaries. This will continue to prevent the Aleut
Corporation and its Native shareholders to realize the benefits of its
pollock allocation.
Hopefully, the unfounded fisheries restrictions in Management Areas
541, 542, and 543 of the Aleutian Islands will be reversed. While the
lawsuit against the Commerce Department, NOAA and NMFS plays out, the
Aleut Corporation asks the Committee to consider a provision that would
allow the voluntary transfer of the Aleut Corporation's pollock
allocation outside areas affected by the NFMS fisheries restrictions.
This option already exists for Community Development Quota (CDQ)
groups. According to existing law (16 U.S.C. Sec. 1855(i)(C)), CDQs may
be reassigned or reallocated to another management area or subarea
through a voluntary transfer. The option to voluntarily transfer its
pollock allocation outside the Aleutian Islands subarea would allow the
Aleut Corporation and its shareholders, many of whom live on Adak
Island, to realize the benefit from is pollock allocation. This would
be a small consolation for the Aleut people, whose economy and
connection to the environment have been devastated by unnecessary
government restrictions.
______

Mr. Hastings. Thank you very much, Mr. Tsukada.
And our last witness on this panel is Mr. Michael LeVine,
Pacific Senior Counsel with Oceana. You are recognized for five
minutes.

STATEMENT OF MICHAEL LeVINE,
PACIFIC SENIOR COUNSEL, OCEANA

Mr. LeVine. Thank you, Chairman Hastings and Representative
Young. Thank you for the opportunity to present testimony
today.
Oceana is an international non-profit organization
dedicated to using science, law, and policy to protect and
restore our oceans.
Our Pacific work is headquartered in Juneau, Alaska, and I
along with nine colleagues live and work there.
Mr. Chairman, we all depend on healthy oceans, and in
Alaska perhaps more than other places, ocean ecosystems are
central to our economic and cultural well-being. Healthy ocean
ecosystems include long-term sustainable fisheries that provide
jobs and support communities.
The conversation we are having here today is about how best
to achieve that shared goal. We are having that conversation in
the context of the Endangered Species Act because our
management choices have pushed us up against that backstop.
The ongoing decline and failure to recover of the Western
population of Steller sea lion has forced us to reconsider
fisheries' management decisions under very specific conditions.
Our shared goal should be to move out of this box, to listen to
the story being told by the Western population, and to work
together to ensure healthy ocean ecosystems, including
sustainable fisheries and vibrant communities.
To that end, I hope to leave you today with three main
points. First, the basic scientific information is clear. The
Western population of Steller sea lion is not meeting recovery
goals and continues to decline in some areas. Second, there is
a clear legal obligation to take action in light of that
information. Third, and most importantly, we can and should
make policy choices that move us toward sustainable management
by accounting for the needs of Steller sea lions and other Apex
predators.
Much of the scientific information about the Western
population of Steller sea lions is unequivocal. The population
in Alaska has declined by more than 80 percent. That decline
began as we shot the animals and coincided with the expansion
of commercial fishing. It also continued until new fishery
management measures were put in place in 2001. Those new
measures appear to be helping to stem the decline in most
areas, and the population overall appears to be holding steady
or growing slightly.
There are, however, still significant declines in some
areas, including a 45 percent decline in the Western Aleutians
between 2000 and 2008. In addition, birth rates appear to be
down across the population, which means that adult females are
having fewer pups, and the population is aging.
Steller sea lions live in and depend on an ocean that
supports some of the largest fisheries in the world. These
fisheries target important prey for Steller sea lions, and we
have reduced that prey, including Atka mackerel, Pacific cod,
and pollock, by 50 to 70 percent. We also fished Aleutian
Islands pollock, for example, to the point that it could no
longer support a fishery.
Much of the ongoing debate has been about how much and
whether these large fisheries are affecting Steller sea lions.
In this regard, the law is absolutely clear. Fisheries cannot
be authorized unless the National Marine Fisheries Service can
ensure that they are not likely to cause jeopardy to Steller
sea lions or adversely modify their critical habitat. This
standard requires the Agency to give the benefit of the doubt
to the species and requires that it allow for the species to
recover.
It is true that other factors may be affecting sea lions.
However, the fact that predation by killer whales or natural
variability in the ocean, for example, might also be
contributing to the decline or failure to recover in no way
lessens the obligation to reduce impacts from fisheries.
Given the continuing decline in the Western Aleutian
Islands and the population's overall failure to recover, the
National Marine Fisheries Service had no choice but to take
action. By reducing competition in the areas in which sea lion
are still declining most rapidly, the Agency did the bare
minimum needed. The new measures still allow for extensive
commercial fishing while closing areas only where the
population continues to decline and is at risk of being
extirpated from portions of its range. These measures are not
as restrictive as some scientists recommended and low birth
rates may warrant.
Ultimately, the fact that this conversation is happening in
the context of the Endangered Species Act should serve as a
wake-up call to rethink the way we make decisions about
fisheries. The most obvious place to start is by determining
how to allow for the needs of top predators, like Steller sea
lions, when fishing levels are set. We can do better than
single species stock assessment models, and should move toward
addressing ecosystem needs as fishing levels are set.
The Council has begun this process with the Aleutian
Islands Fishery Ecosystem Plan, and we should take the steps
toward ecosystem base management called for in that document
and others.
We can also find better ways to take fish from the ocean
and to favor more sustainable gear, such as long lines, pots,
and jigs.
Finally, rather than looking to find causes other than
fishing for Steller sea lions' continued decline and failure to
recover, we should dedicate funding to better understanding
ocean ecosystems and the impacts of fisheries on them.
In the end, we all support healthy ocean ecosystems,
including sustainable fisheries and vibrant communities. As we
toward that goal, we should make choices based on clear
scientific information, our basic obligations, and a policy
that moves us toward sustainable management.
Thank you again, and I am happy to answer any questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. LeVine follows:]

Statement of Michael LeVine, Pacific Senior Counsel, Oceana

Good morning, Mr. Chairman and Members of the Committee. Thank you
for the invitation to participate in today's hearing. My name is
Michael LeVine, and I am Pacific Senior Counsel for Oceana. Oceana is
an international marine conservation organization dedicated to using
science, law, and policy to protect the world's oceans. Our
headquarters are in Washington, DC, and we have offices in five states
as well as Belgium, Belize, Spain, Denmark, and Chile. Oceana has more
than 500,000 members and supporters from all 50 states and from 150
countries around the globe. Our Pacific work is headquartered in
Juneau, Alaska, and, together, our Pacific staff has more than 180
years of experience working and living in Alaska.
Oceana works toward healthy ocean ecosystems, sustainable
fisheries, and vibrant communities. We have been active in issues
surrounding the endangered Western Population of Steller sea lions
since our inception because the health of that population and the
management of the prey species on which it depends are an appropriate
lens through which to evaluate progress toward those goals. Despite the
contentious history and current controversy surrounding this issue, the
facts are clear: the western stock of Steller sea lions has declined by
more than 80% since the 1960s. Though management changes implemented in
2001 appear to have some beneficial effect, the population as a whole
is not meeting established recovery criteria and, irrespective of its
overall status, continues to decline sharply in the western Aleutian
Islands.
While there may be other factors contributing to the ongoing
decline and failure to recover, competition with fisheries for food is
the only one we have the ability--and obligation--to mitigate directly.
The best way to achieve this goal, while allowing for sustainable
fisheries and supporting communities, is to move toward ecosystem-based
management for our oceans. The North Pacific Fishery Management Council
and National Marine Fisheries Service (NMFS) have made important
strides in this direction, including preparing the Aleutian Islands
Fishery Ecosystem Plan (AIFEP) and protecting important seafloor
habitat from bottom trawling. The population of Steller sea lions,
however, is telling us clearly that more can and should be done.
Ultimately, this conversation is about our oceans and the way we
are managing large industrial fisheries. Accordingly, I will begin this
testimony by discussing the importance and health of the North Pacific
ocean ecosystems, with a particular focus on the Aleutian Islands, the
Western Population of Steller sea lions, and the impacts of large-scale
industrial fisheries. I will then outline the extensive process
undertaken by NMFS, including the role played by the Council, and the
justification and clear need for the management changes implemented by
NMFS pursuant to the recent Biological Opinion (BiOp). Finally, I will
discuss additional steps toward ecosystem-based management that should
be implemented.
I. The North Pacific Can Support and Maintain Healthy Ocean Ecosystems,
Sustainable Fisheries, and Vibrant Communities.
A. Oceans are Central to Our Well-Being, and the Aleutian Islands
Ecosystem, in Particular, is Unique and Important.
Covering more than 70% of the world's surface, oceans and seas are
our largest public domain, and good stewardship of our ocean resources
is vital to our lives and livelihoods. As the U.S. Commission on Ocean
Policy stated, ``the importance of our oceans, coasts, and Great Lakes
cannot be overstated; they are critical to the very existence and
wellbeing of the nation and its people.'' An Ocean Blueprint for the
21st Century 1 (Sept. 20, 2004); see also Exec. Order No. 13547 (2010)
(``America's stewardship of the ocean, our coasts, and the Great Lakes
is intrinsically linked to environmental sustainability, human health
and well-being, national prosperity, adaptation to climate and other
environmental changes, social justice, international diplomacy, and
national and homeland security.''). Thus, we must be careful not to
risk the long-term viability of our ocean resources by prioritizing
short-term economic gains or making poorly informed decisions that
could foreclose future opportunities to manage sustainably.
Nowhere are these statements and the management considerations they
engender more important than Alaska and, in particular, the vast,
productive expanses of the North Pacific Ocean. The North Pacific,
including the Bering Sea, Aleutian Islands, and the Gulf of Alaska,
contains some of the most productive waters on Earth and supports rich
and diverse marine life.
The Aleutian Islands ecosystem is one of the most vibrant, dynamic,
productive and rare ocean environments in the world. At more than 1,000
miles, the Aleutian Islands form the longest archipelago in the world.
These islands are stretched along a narrow shelf, and the bathymetry
changes dramatically, from greater than 7,000 meters deep in the depths
of the Aleutian Trench to the nearshore shallows, in a distance of less
than 150 km. This unique geological setting creates rich habitat that
draws millions of seabirds and hundreds of thousands of marine mammals
each year.
The Aleutian Islands support more than 450 species of fish and
shellfish, 260 species of migratory birds, and 25 species of marine
mammals. Whales--humpback, blue, minke, bowhead, and orca--as well as
sea lions, seals, and other marine mammals frequent these waters. More
than 38 million seabirds--including a wide variety of geese, gulls,
petrels, puffins, murres, auklets, and terns--flock to the islands to
nest. The ocean waters support salmon, halibut, rockfish, cod, and
crab, among other fish and shellfish.
The Aleutian Islands also harbor incredible aggregations of cold
water corals. The density and diversity of these Alaskan corals rival
tropical coral reefs, and there are deep-sea coral gardens that are
unique to the Aleutian Islands. This living seafloor forms habitat that
provides nurseries, places to feed, shelter from currents and
predators, and spawning areas for many marine species.
This bounty in the Aleutian Islands has been overexploited. After
the overhunting of sea otters and commercial whaling, early commercial
fisheries in the Aleutians were characterized by a boom-and-bust cycle.
See North Pacific Fishery Management Council, Aleutian Islands Fishery
Ecosystem Plan 9, 16-19 (December 2007) (hereinafter ``AIFEP'').
Currently, between 220 and 440 million pounds of groundfish, primarily
Atka mackerel, Pacific cod, and Pacific ocean perch, are removed
annually from the Aleutian Islands region. Much of this biomass is
removed from important feeding habitat for marine mammals, including
Steller sea lions.
B. The Decline and Continued Failure to Recover of the Western
Population of Steller Sea Lions Tell an Important Story About
the Health of North Pacific Ecosystems.
Despite its incredible productivity, not all is well in the North
Pacific. The past several decades have witnessed significant declines
in some marine mammal, bird, and fish populations. The continued
decline and failure to recover of the Western Population of Steller sea
lions, in particular, are telling an important story about the
conditions under which large-scale industrial fisheries are authorized.
The Steller sea lion's range extends around the North Pacific Ocean
rim from northern Japan through the Aleutian Islands and Bering Sea,
and south to California. Based on DNA analysis and other factors, the
U.S. population is divided into a Western Population, consisting of
animals in the Gulf of Alaska and the Bering Sea/Aleutian Islands, and
an Eastern Population, which is primarily in Southeast Alaska and along
the west coast of North America. Despite their expansive range, the
Steller sea lions breed at only a handful of discrete locations. The
Western Population now occupies only 48 breeding sites (or
``rookeries''), 38 of which are in Alaska. See National Marine
Fisheries Service, Endangered Species Act--Section 7 Consultation
Biological Opinion on the Authorization of Groundfish Fisheries under
the Fishery Management Plans for the Bering Sea and Aleutian Islands
Management Area and the Gulf of Alaska 80, 85-86(Nov. 24, 2010)
(hereinafter ``2010 BiOp''). As the Western Population has declined,
the centers of production for the population have contracted and
condensed. Now, twelve of the rookeries produce more than 60% of the
population's pups.
The worldwide abundance of Steller sea lions was estimated to be
approximately 240,000 to 300,000 animals from the 1950s through the
late 1970s; the vast majority of which were part of what is now
recognized as the Western Population. That population declined
precipitously, and it reached a low point in 2000, when it was
estimated at 42,500 individuals--a decline of more than 80%. Id. at 80,
332. Much of this significant decline likely was caused by a
combination of commercial and subsistence harvests and intentional
shooting of the animals. Id. at 343. Though this direct mortality was
largely ended in the early 1980s, the Western Population continued to
decline.
Prior to 2000, NMFS had implemented only very limited protections
for the Western Population. To address the continuing decline and its
obligations under the Endangered Species Act, NMFS put in place new
management measures in 2001. These new measures appear to have
beneficial effects, and, overall the Western Population grew by
approximately 3% annually from 2000 to 2004. According to NMFS, this
brief period from 2000 to 2004 is the ``the only increasing period
observed since trend information began to be collected in the 1970s.''
Id. at 287.
Unfortunately, this growth appears to have been temporary. From
2004-2008, the population was stable or slightly declining. Thus, as a
whole, it is estimated that the Western Population grew by
approximately 1.4 percent annually from 2000-2008. This growth,
however, is not statistically significant, which means that we cannot
tell whether it is actually increasing, decreasing, or staying steady.
Thus, the population can be most appropriately described, overall, as
stable.
Moreover, the population continues to experience significant
declines in some areas. The most severe decline was observed in the
western Aleutian Islands, where the already greatly diminished adult
population declined an additional 45% from 2000 to 2008. In the central
Aleutian Islands during the same period, the adult population declined
by 11%. Id. at 333.
In addition to the declines observed in the western and central
Aleutian Islands, the population of Steller sea lions is showing
another sign of stress--decreased natality. Data collected in the last
decade indicate that adult females are having many fewer pups than they
did historically. The current birth rate estimated to be about 30%
lower than it was before the population began to decline in the 1970s.
Id. at xxviii. Although natality is low in the western and central
Aleutian Islands--the areas in which population declines are ongoing--
it appears to be down across the rest of the population as well. A
female pup born ten years ago would be of prime breeding age, and she
should have produced 3 or 4 pups by now. The decrease in natality,
however, means that it is likely she has produced only 2 or fewer pups.
It is very likely that the small increase in the Western Population
was due to increased survivorship. Pups are more likely to survive into
adulthood than they were before the protection measures were put in
place. Without a concurrent increase in natality, however, the growth
of the population cannot be sustained. If pup production is not greater
than mortality, the population will not grow. Further, the population
will age as higher survival of adults and juveniles outpaces the lower
birthrates. A population with this structure is less resilient to
disturbance and cannot quickly recover from population fluctuations.
Thus, the risk of extinction for the Western Population increases as it
ages and birth rates stay low.
Significantly, in contrast to the Western Population, the once
relatively small Eastern Population of Steller sea lions has doubled
since the 1970s. The population has grown so substantially that NMFS
currently is considering petitions to remove the population from the
list of species protected by the Endangered Species Act. The Eastern
and Western populations share similar characteristics and depend on
some of the same prey species--including pollock and Pacific cod. The
most apparent difference between these two distinct populations is that
no high volume groundfish trawling occurs in Southeast Alaska.
C. Industrial Fishing in the North Pacific Has Significant Impacts on
the Ocean Ecosystem.
In addition to ecological riches, the North Pacific also supports
some of the largest fisheries in the world. Though these fisheries
began in the 1920s, they started to take their current form in the
1950s. Currently, the Bering Sea/Aleutian Islands and Gulf of Alaska
support fisheries that remove more than four billion pounds of
groundfish each year. This exploitation has expanded 7,500 percent
since 1950. See Greenpeace v. NMFS, 106 F. Supp. 2d 1066, 1070 (W.D.
Wash. 2000). Of this catch, between 220 and 440 million pounds of fish
are removed annually from the Aleutian Islands region.
The vast majority of the fish caught are groundfish, among them
Atka mackerel, Pacific cod, and walleye pollock. These same species are
important prey for top predators, including Steller sea lions.
Approximately 90% of these groundfish are caught by large trawl
vessels, most of which are owned by individuals and companies from
outside Alaska. These trawl vessels can remove huge quantities of fish
in a short time. One pass of a trawl can net 40 to 100 tons of fish.
Such intense fishing reduces fish populations significantly.
Projections for 2011 show that important prey stocks have been reduced
by between 50-70% from their historic, non-fished levels. Aleutian
Island Atka mackerel is expected to be at 56% of historic biomass;
Aleutian Island pollock at 30%; Gulf of Alaska pollock at 29%; Bering
Sea pollock at 48%; Bering Sea/Aleutian Islands Pacific cod at 37%; and
Gulf of Alaska Pacific cod at 48%. See NMFS, North Pacific Groundfish
Stock Assessment and Fishery Evaluation Reports for 2011, available at
http://www.afsc.noaa.gov/REFM/stocks/assessments.htm. These projections
will be updated with information from this year's stock assessments in
December.
Moreover, there have been significant local depletion of important
prey species. These depletions began when sea otters were hunted to
near extinction by fur traders, continued with several decades of
unsustainable commercial whaling, and led, in the 1960s, to the rise of
the first industrial fishery for Pacific Ocean perch, which were
overharvested within 15 years. See AIEP at 9, 16-19. Around the same
time, red king crabs were overexploited and have not yet recovered. In
the late 1980s through the mid-1990s, the stock of pollock in the
Aleutians was quickly depleted. See Barbeaux, S. et al., ``Assessment
of the Pollock stock in the Aleutian Islands'' 213 (Nov. 2009).
Similarly, the stock of Atka mackerel in the Gulf of Alaska was
overharvested in the late 1970s. See Lowe, S. et al., ``Assessment of
Gulf of Alaska Atka Mackerel'' 1166, Tbl 16.1 (Dec. 2009).
These fisheries are huge economic engines, and the companies that
run them are very powerful. Indeed, the value of the pollock fishery
alone is over $1 billion dollars annually. Certainly, these fisheries
provide economic benefit in Alaska, and Oceana supports commercial
fisheries that are managed sustainably. Neither the economic benefit,
nor the will of the companies receiving it, however, is a sufficient
justification for allowing unsustainable fishing practices.
II. NMFS Has Undertaken a Detailed and Extensive Process, and its
Actions are Clearly Justified.
A. Fisheries are Managed By the Secretary of Commerce to Achieve the
Greatest Benefit to the Nation.
The Magnuson-Stevens Fishery Conservation and Management Act
(``MSA''), 16 U.S.C. Sec. 1801 et seq., is the overarching statute
governing fisheries management in United States waters. The first
stated purpose of the statute is ``to conserve and manage [] fishery
resources,'' and it makes the Secretary of Commerce responsible for
fulfilling that obligation. The Secretary implements Fishery Management
Plans that provide the measures necessary for the conservation and
management of fisheries. These conservation and management measures are
``all of the rules, regulations, conditions, methods, and other
measures''
(A)  which are required to rebuild, restore, or maintain, and
which are useful in rebuilding, restoring, or maintaining, any
fishery resource and the marine environment; and
(B)  which are designed to assure that--
(i)  a supply of food and other products may be
taken, and that recreational benefits may be obtained,
on a continuing basis;
(ii)  irreversible or long-term adverse effects on
fishery resources and the marine environment are
avoided; and
(iii)  there will be a multiplicity of options
available with respect to future uses of these
resources.
Id. Sec. 1802(5). These measures define the fishery in terms of
amount of fish caught, the time of year when fishery may occur, the
gear types authorized, and other strictures. They are intended to
provide the ``optimum yield'' from a fishery, which is defined as ``the
amount of fish which. . .will provide the greatest overall benefit to
the Nation, particularly with respect to food production and
recreational opportunities, and taking into account the protection of
marine ecosystems.'' Id. Sec. 1802(33). Thus, protection of the fish
stocks and marine environment is a central consideration in making
decisions to authorize commercial fishing.
In determining how best to meet these obligations and others under
the statute, the Secretary of Commerce is advised by eight regional
councils comprised of certain state and federal government
representatives and other stakeholders that are nominated by the
governors of affected states and are generally representatives of the
commercial fishing industry. The North Pacific Fishery Management
Council is the regional body that advises the Secretary about
conservation and management of fisheries in Alaska.
The MSA, however, is not the only statute that affects fisheries.
In making final decisions about fisheries management, the Secretary of
Commerce must also ensure compliance with other substantive statutes--
including the Endangered Species Act (``ESA''), 16 U.S.C. Sec. 1531 et
seq. The ESA is designed ``to provide a means whereby the ecosystems
upon which endangered species and threatened species depend may be
conserved,'' and ``to provide a program for the conservation of such. .
.species.'' Tennessee Valley Auth. v. Hill, 437 U.S. 153, 180 (1978)
(quoting 16 U.S.C. Sec. 1531(b)). The statute reflects ``a conscious
decision by Congress to give endangered species priority over the
`primary missions' of federal agencies.'' Id. at 184.
To effectuate this purpose, the ESA places on all federal agencies
the substantive obligation to ``insure that any action. . .is not
likely to jeopardize the continued existence of any endangered species.
. .or result in the destruction or adverse modification of habitat for
such species.'' 16 U.S.C. Sec. 1536(a)(1). Agencies must engage in a
consultation process with the appropriate expert wildlife agency on the
impacts of any federal action to listed species. As it evaluates the
BSAI and GOA groundfish fisheries, NMFS is both ``action'' and
``expert'' agency: ``NMFS's Office of Sustainable Fisheries is the
`Action' Agency'' because it is responsible for authorizing the
fisheries, ``and NMFS's Office of Protected Resources is the `Expert'
Agency'' because it provides the opinion about whether those fisheries
comply with the ESA. See Greenpeace v. National Marine Fisheries Serv.,
237 F. Supp. 2d 1181, 1185 n.2 (W.D. Wash 2002). These consultation
processes are completed in NMFS's regional offices and are signed by
the Regional Administrator, who oversees the regional divisions of both
Protected Resources and Sustainable Fisheries. The agency, therefore,
must pay particular attention to its procedural obligations and must
take all necessary precautions to protect the scientific process within
the Office of Protected Resources, as expert agency, as it prepares a
BiOp.
NMFS's obligation to prevent jeopardy and adverse modification
includes not just ensuring survival of the species but also allowing
for recovery--an action can cause jeopardy or adverse modification when
it does not allow for the recovery of the listed species. See Gifford
Pinchot Task Force v. U.S. Fish and Wildlife Serv., 378 F.3d 1059,
1069-70 (9th Cir. 2004). Recovery means an ``improvement in the status
of listed species to the point at which'' the protections of the
statute are no longer necessary.
Thus, in determining whether to authorize fisheries and under what
conditions, the Secretary of Commerce and NMFS, as advised by the
Councils, must strive to ``provide the greatest overall benefit to the
Nation'' while ``taking into account the protection of marine
ecosystems'' and ensuring that the actions do not cause jeopardy to
species protected under the ESA or adversely modify critical habitat.
B. NMFS Has Undertaken a Detailed and Extensive Process To Ensure That
the Groundfish Fisheries Comply With the MSA and ESA.
Difficulty in balancing the complementary legal obligations for
management of the groundfish fisheries in Alaska and controversy about
competition with Steller sea lions are not new phenomena. In fact, this
hearing is another chapter in a conversation that goes back two
decades. The population declines explained above led the Western
Population to be listed under the ESA as a threatened species in 1990.
Critical habitat was designated for the species in 1993, and in 1997,
it was reclassified as endangered. At that time, NMFS had concluded
that the groundfish fisheries were not likely to cause jeopardy to
Steller sea lions or adversely modify their critical habitat. The
rationale for that conclusion was the subject of lengthy and often
contentious litigation beginning in 1998. See Greenpeace, 237 F. Supp.
2d at 1184. In the course of that litigation, the court repeatedly
rejected the agency's rationale and even enjoined all trawl fishing in
designated critical habitat from July through August 2000.
NMFS issued a revised BiOp in 2000 which concludes that the
groundfish fisheries, as managed under the Bering Sea/Aleutian Islands
and Gulf of Alaska FMPs are likely to jeopardize endangered Steller sea
lions and adversely modify their designated critical habitat by
competing with Steller sea lions for prey. It, therefore, proposed a
reasonable and prudent alternative (RPA), which was subsequently
amended. That Amended RPA includes measures designed to reduce
competition with Steller sea lions and was the subject of a 2001 BiOp.
The 2001 BiOp was supplemented in 2003 with additional analysis of the
RPA. The 2003 Supplement was not subject to court challenge and,
therefore, concluded that consultation process.
Those analyses all reached the same conclusion--the groundfish
fisheries compete with Steller sea lions for prey and that competition
may cause jeopardy to the species and adversely modify its critical
habitat. Accordingly, management measures are needed to address that
competition and ensure the viability and recovery of the population.
Further, NMFS worked to revise the recovery plan for the species
and, in 2008, issued a revised Recovery Plan for the Steller Sea Lion.
See http://www.fakr.noaa.gov/protectedresources/stellers/recovery/
sslrpfinalrev030408.pdf (hereinafter ``Recovery Plan''). That plan
establishes very clear demographic criteria for recovery of the Western
Population of Steller sea lions. To be considered for delisting, the
population must have ``increased (statistically significant) for 30
years (at an average annual growth rate of 3%), based on counts of non-
pups (i.e., juveniles and adults).'' Id. at V-21. In addition, the
population also must be stable or increasing ``in at least 5 of the 7
sub-regions. The population trend in any two adjacent sub-regions can
not be declining significantly[,] and the population trend in any sub-
region can not have declined by more than 50%.'' Id. At this time,
those criteria represent the best available scientific understanding
about the changes in the population that are necessary to ensure
recovery.
This plan was subject to extensive review. A draft was reviewed by
the public and peer reviewers in 2006, and it was subsequently revised
and updated. The Draft Revised Recovery Plan was again reviewed by the
public in 2007, underwent an independent scientific review by the
Center for Independent Experts and a North Pacific Fishery Management
Council Review (contracted to the North Pacific Research Board), and
was then revised and updated again.
Throughout this time, significant time and money was dedicated to
research about Steller sea lions and the causes of the continued
decline and failure to recover. All told, more than $100 million was
spent on research into these questions. Much of this research, however,
has been designed to look for causes other than commercial fishing for
the ongoing decline and failure to recover. Relatively little funding
was directed toward a better understanding of the effects on predators
of removing large volumes of prey.
In 2006, perhaps in response to encouraging signs in the population
trend, the Council encouraged the NMFS Office of Sustainable Fisheries
to request a re-initiation of ESA consultation. The Office of
Sustainable Fisheries did so, and the NMFS Office of Protected
Resources agreed to start a new consultation process to revisit the
conclusions in the 2000 BiOp, as amended in 2001 and 2003, about the
effects of the groundfish fisheries on Steller sea lions. In 2008, the
NMFS Office of Protected Resources agreed to delay the BiOp in order to
allow for consideration new survey data.
In August 2010, NMFS released a draft BiOp. That draft concluded
that the management measures put in place in 2001 were not sufficient
to prevent jeopardy to Steller sea lions or to prevent adverse
modification of their critical habitat. It, therefore, included an RPA
further restricting fishing in the far western Aleutian Islands, where
the significant population declines continued.
The release of a draft was unusual, as the ESA does not contemplate
public comment on draft BiOps. Nonetheless, public comment was accepted
on that by the agency until September 3, 2010. In addition, the Council
held a special meeting in August 2010 to discuss that draft. NMFS also
made a presentation regarding the BiOp process at the Council's normal
October meeting, and the agency stated that it would consider the
Council's input from that meeting.
The agency's actions should not have come as a surprise. As
explained above, there was clear population information showing the
continued decline and failure to recover; these data were publicly
available and were presented to the Council. Throughout this process,
the Council could have recommended changes to the groundfish fisheries
management in an effort to address the problems with the population.
See 18 U.S.C. Sec. 1853(c) (stating that a council may submit proposed
regulations it ``deems necessary or appropriate''). It, however, did
not do so.
NMFS completed the consultation process in December 2010 with
issuance of the final BiOp and interim final rule. See 75 Fed. Reg.
77535 (Dec. 13, 2010). The rule implements the proposed RPA with minor
changes; it puts in place badly needed protections for the portion of
the Western Population in the far western Aleutian Islands that is
still declining significantly. NMFS accepted public comment on the
interim final rule, and it will eventually be supplanted by a final
rule.
Currently, NMFS is beginning a review of the BiOp by the Center for
Independent Experts (CIE). That review is part of the agency's normal
process for scientific documents like this one. The CIE is equipped to
undertake a true scientific peer review, using reviewers who have the
requisite scientific expertise and who are independent of the various
stakeholders in the process. By contrast, the review panel organized by
the States of Washington and Alaska cannot be considered an independent
scientific review. Indeed, the State of Alaska has a clearly
established position with regards to the current status and trend of
the Steller sea lion and has made that position clear in its legal
challenge to the BiOp and interim final rule. See Alaska v. Lubchenco,
No. 3:10-cv-00271-TMB (D. Alaska, filed Dec. 14, 2010)
Oceana supports decisions based on sound science and encourages
agencies to gather and review basic information at all stages of the
decision-making process. We also support established processes, have
participated in those processes to the extent we are permitted or able,
and will continue to do so.
C. The Conclusions in the BiOp are Justified and the Management Changes
Clearly Are Necessary.
As explained above, the Western Population of Steller sea lions is
not recovering and, in fact, continues to decline significantly in the
far western Aleutian Islands. The population is not growing at a
statistically significant rate, and, whether stable or slightly
increasing, is not close to the 3% annual growth needed to meet the
delisting criteria established in the Recovery Plan. Moreover, since
2000, the population has declined by more than 45% in the far western
Aleutian Islands. Based on this information, NMFS concluded
appropriately that the management changes implemented in 2001 were not
sufficient to prevent jeopardy to Steller sea lions or to prevent
adverse modification of their critical habitat. As the law requires,
NMFS addressed that problem by increasing protections in the western
Aleutian Islands. The agency's conclusion and subsequent action clearly
are justified, and challenges to the cause of the decline or necessity
of the management changes implemented are not credible.
As it has in every analysis since 2000, NMFS based the 2010 BiOp
and interim final rule on its well-documented rationale that commercial
fisheries adversely affect sea lions by competing with them for food.
See 2010 BiOp at 197-202. The large-scale industrial fisheries
described above remove incredible quantities of fish that otherwise
would be available to Steller sea lions as prey. Much of this fishing
effort occurs in important areas for Steller sea lions, and a
significant amount of prey is removed from their designated critical
habitat. It is difficult to imagine that reducing the availability of
prey by 60 or 70 percent would not affect the population's ability to
grow.
Moreover, there is evidence that such interactions are occurring.
For example, sea lion populations have fared better in some regions
than others, and the areas of improvement coincide with areas where
conservation measures have been implemented. Conversely, the areas of
sharpest Steller sea lion declines coincide with areas where sea lion
protection measures are the fewest and fishing intensity within
critical habitat is the greatest. See 2010 BiOp at 389, 392. The most
likely mechanism for this correlation is nutritional stress resulting
from the competition and leading to low birth rates, or ``natality.''
As explained above, natality is down across the population. Further,
pup counts in the central Gulf of Alaska have not increased
significantly since 1998. Id. at Tbl 3.2. Rookery counts in the central
Gulf are possibly stable or declining, and pup counts are declining
rapidly in several major rookeries. Id. at Fig. 3.10. These declines
correspond with substantial fisheries in critical habitat for important
prey species.
It may very well be true that other factors, such as changing ocean
conditions, contribute to the ongoing decline and failure to recover.
The existence of those factors, whether or not they are contributing to
the decline or failure to recover, does not in any way affect our
obligation to manage the one--commercial fishing--that we can control.
The law requires it; in the face of scientific uncertainty, the ESA
requires federal agencies ``to provide the benefit of the doubt to the
species concerned with respect to such gaps in the information base.''
NMFS and US Fish and Wildlife Service, ``Consultation Handbook'' 1-7
(March 1998) (citing H.R. Conf. Rep. No. 697, 96th Cong., 2nd Sess. 12
(1979)). Scientific information supports it; other stresses on the
population may result in cumulative impacts that make it even more
important to ensure sufficient prey for sea lions. And, such action is
good policy; protection for top predators is one important step toward
better management and a healthy ecosystem.
Once NMFS found that the groundfish fisheries, as currently managed
did not adequately protect the Western Population of Steller sea lions,
the agency was required to take action to address that failing. In
light of the clear, continuing, and significant decline of the Steller
sea lion population in the western Aleutian Islands and the evidence
that nutritional stress may be contributing to it, the additional
closures in the far western Aleutian Islands clearly are warranted.
The new measures are not draconian. They are targeted only to that
portion of the Steller lions' range in which the most significant
declines are occurring and still allow for extensive commercial
fishing. There are new closures only in the westernmost portion of the
Aleutian Islands, and the total allowable catch is reduced only for the
Atka mackerel fishery. Even that reduction will not close the fishery;
the allowable Atka mackerel catch will be reduced in 2011 by only 23%
from 2010 levels. Moreover, the Pacific cod quota will not be reduced,
and the pollock fishery is not affected by the new measures at all.
Further, an earlier version of the BiOp required significant reductions
in pollock catch around Kodiak to address low natality there.
Ultimately, those protections were not implemented.
Contrary to the assertions that the management changes are
unnecessary, it is clear that more should be done to address the
ongoing failure to recover of the Western Population and to move toward
ecosystem-based management.
III. Additional Protections are Likely Warranted, and Additional Steps
are Needed to Move Toward Ecosystem-Based Management.
While the management changes in the far western Aleutian Islands
clearly are necessary, they are likely not sufficient. For example, and
as explained above, we have not addressed low natality in all regions.
There are several steps that could be taken to further move toward
ecosystem-based management.
The most obvious place to start is by determining how to allow for
the needs of top predators, like Steller sea lions, when fishing levels
are set. Currently, the stock-assessment models on which catch levels
are based simply assume a level of mortality for the fish species (for
Atka mackerel, for example, it is 30%) and then assume that all
consumers--other than the fisheries--can survive on that percent of the
population. As evidenced by the ongoing decline of the Steller sea lion
population, these assumptions are not sufficient.
Thus, we should implement the suggestion in the AIFEP to address
predator-prey interactions and work toward an integrated management
approach in which ecosystem considerations and the needs of predators,
such as Steller sea lions are considered as fishing levels are set. An
earlier version of the BiOp sought to implement such a process as part
of the new management regime. See Endangered Species Act--Section 7
Consultation Draft Biological Opinion Final PRD Version 375 (May 3,
2010) (requiring, as part of the RPA, a revision to ``the Harvest
Management Strategy (e.g., optimum yield, harvest control rules, tier
system) for exploited groundfish forage species (pollock, Atka
mackerel, and Pacific cod) that explicitly incorporates the needs of
non-exploited apex predators (e.g., marine birds, marine mammals), and
in particular, the needs of ESA listed species to meet their recovery
goals''). In addition to more effective management under the MSA, such
a process would help meet the ESA's policy of protecting ecosystems and
would be an important step toward implementing the AIFEP.
Further, we must move toward viable sustainable fisheries, that
could include fixed gear fisheries such as longline, pots, and jigs,
that can support local communities. Where tradeoffs are possible, NMFS
should favor these more sustainable alternatives. The agency cannot
simply weaken necessary protections to allow additional fishing for
Steller sea lion prey, but it can consider strengthening other
protections to allow these fisheries to continue and to continue to
develop in a sustainable manner. For example, NMFS could strengthen
protections by addressing overall harvest levels, further reducing the
biomass taken from the western Aleutian Islands by the cod and Atka
mackerel trawl fisheries.
It is important to note that current allocation of Atka mackerel
catches in the Aleutians do not allow for any of that catch to be
delivered and processed in Alaskan communities. Almost no Atka mackerel
quota is caught by Alaskan residents. Through Amendment 80 to the
Bering Sea/Aleutian Islands Fishery Management Plan, almost all of the
Atka mackerel quota has been allocated to a handful of factory trawl
vessels which catch and process Atka mackerel offshore. The Atka
mackerel quota does not provide processing opportunities for the fish
processing plant in Adak or elsewhere in the Aleutians.
In addition, the overfishing of Aleutian Islands pollock described
above ended a substantial portion of the large-scale commercial fishing
opportunities in the Aleutian Islands. In addition to sea lions, the
fish processing plant in Adak, which was built to rely on a
congressional allocation of fish from an Aleutian pollock stock that
can no longer support sustainable fisheries, is another victim of this
unsustainable management. While it may be unfortunate that the
remaining large-scale fisheries that target Steller sea lion prey must
bear the brunt of recovery efforts, that process is not the appropriate
mechanism through which to address the Adak processing plant. Oceana
supports efforts to maintain communities like Adak and to provide
sustainable Alaskan fisheries. Together, we can find a way to do that
without sacrificing our ocean resources.
Finally, as we move toward ecosystem-based management, all Alaskans
should insist on the best available science and process. We cannot let
political considerations--at the federal, state, or local level--get in
the way of decisions about our oceans, and we must let the experts
fulfil their obligations under the MSA and ESA.
IV. Conclusion
With an extensive coastline and many cultural, recreational,
subsistence, and commercial benefits inextricably linked to our oceans,
all Alaskans should support healthy ocean ecosystems, sustainable
fisheries, and vibrant communities. The Western Population of Steller
sea lions provides a lens through which we can evaluate our progress
toward those goals. The science is clear--the Western Population of
Steller sea lions is not recovering and continues to decline in some
areas. The law is clear--we cannot authorize fisheries that may cause
jeopardy to a listed species or adversely modify critical habitat. And,
the policy is clear--Steller sea lions are telling us that if we want
to manage oceans sustainably, we must change the way we manage
fisheries to account for the prey needs of apex predators.
______

Mr. Hastings. Thank you, Mr. LeVine, and thank all of you
for your testimony.
Mr. LeVine, this hearing today is on Steller sea lions, and
yet--I will not say and yet. But I note in your written
testimony, you say there are between 220 and 440 million pounds
of groundfish that have been removed annually from the Aleutian
Islands region.
I do not know what you are saying exactly there, but are
you suggesting that the North Pacific Fishery Management
Council has not been doing an adequate job in managing those
fisheries?
Mr. LeVine. Thank you, Chairman Hastings. No, that
statement in written testimony is no way intended to denigrate
the work of the North Pacific Fishery Management Council.
Oceana supports the work of the Council. We have been involved
there.
To begin with, that statement and the ones referencing the
4 billion pounds of fish that are removed from the North
Pacific ecosystem every year is intended to show what the real
issue here is. We are here talking about fishing, and the
decisions we are making to authorize large-scale commercial
fisheries in the ocean, and what impacts those fisheries might
have.
It is unfortunate that we have to have that conversation in
the context of the Endangered Species Act----
Mr. Hastings. In what context did you say it in? I mean, I
am hearing you saying yes, and I am hearing you saying no. I am
just asking for a clarification.
Mr. LeVine. Yeah. We have pushed against the backstop of
the Endangered Species Act. And with a better understanding of
what is in the ocean and a movement toward ecosystems----
Mr. Hastings. I asked you about the other side of the
equation, and I did hear you talk about the Endangered Species
Act.
Your last statement in your oral testimony was something
like we need to have clear scientific review or something to
that extent. I can go back and look exactly. And I assume you
believe that.
Do you believe that a ratio in part of studying 13 pups in
a population of 55,000 is adequate?
Mr. LeVine. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Oceana would support
additional studies and research, both----
Mr. Hastings. Well, I asked you if you thought that was
adequate.
Mr. LeVine. I run the risk of running afoul of
Representative Young by stating that it is the best science,
and that is the best science that we have. And the Agency is
charged----
Mr. Hastings. So, the best science is 13 out of 55,000.
Mr. LeVine. That is the science we have right now.
Mr. Hastings. Or is that the science that was chosen?
Mr. LeVine. My understanding is that is the science that we
have.
Mr. Hastings. I just find that hard to believe because I
think the testimony that has been referenced--well. Let me go
back to Mr. Loomis. Maybe you can shed some light because you
know that your company participated in the research. Can you
describe that research? Did it touch on this at all?
Mr. Loomis. Thank you, Mr. Chair. We were not part of the
research that tagged the sea lions, the juvenile males. But my
understanding is that I believe there were 13 males that were
tagged, and I think three of those males wandered around
outside of critical habitat. And juvenile males are the part of
the population that we are least concerned about. We are
concerned about adult females and what is happening to pups.
Mr. Hastings. Well, let me ask you this then. Do you think
a ratio of 13 or 10, if three of them--do you think that is
adequate to base decisions that are made?
Mr. Loomis. Mr. Chairman, I think what is adequate is to
take the science that you have and see if it passed the red
face test. And I think if you look at using information from
three juvenile males, which are known to wander.
Mr. Hastings. Are you suggesting that does not pass the red
face test?
Mr. Loomis. I am suggesting exactly that.
Mr. Hastings. I thought that was where you were going. I
just wanted to get a clarification.
Mr. Tsukada, one last point. You referenced the fuel costs.
Do you believe that the BiOp adequately took into account all
of the economic impacts?
Mr. Tsukada. I do not.
Mr. Hastings. Would you like to elaborate?
Mr. Tsukada. As Professor Knapp mentioned, a lot of the
economic analysis, the standard ones, were done fairly well,
fairly broad scope. But I did not receive a phone call. Nobody
at the Aleut Corporation received a phone call. Very little was
done on the impact. I do not see anywhere where our lost fuel
sales, which translates into salaries for the residents, were
included. So, no, I believe that the economic analysis, as
large as it is, is severely understated, and has a higher
proportion of direct impacts to the low income folks on the
Aleutian Islands.
Mr. Hastings. Thank you very much.
Mr. Young?
Mr. Young. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Looms, you note
that in 2008, your fleet developed a harvesting cooperative,
which changed the way you fished in the Bering Sea. Was this
change analyzed in the Biological Opinion? And if not, do you
think it would have made a difference in fishing restriction?
Mr. Loomis.--through the Chair, I do not recall
specifically. I do not believe it was analyzed in the BiOp, and
with those changes, we carry two observers on all of our
vessels that fish in the Aleutians. We have every hull sampled
by observers. They monitor for marine mammal interaction. So,
we have cameras that run 24/7 on most of our boats while we are
processing fish, so we are probably the most observed fleet out
there. But I do not believe----
Mr. Young. Did NOAA use any of that information? You do not
know.
Mr. Loomis. I do not.
Mr. Young. We should have asked that question. We will find
out again. We will ask it in writing.
NOAA has complained that it is hard to observe the Western
Aleutian Islands, and I happen to agree. I have been out there.
I have been all the way out to Kiska and Adak, by the way, Mr.
Tsukada, and had a great time. Great potential out there. But
you are being robbed right now by a Federal agency. You are
absolutely correct.
If I had any suggestions, probably do not follow them; it
will get you in trouble. Go catch the fish. Let the darn Navy
come out and try to take you down, or NMFS, because that is
right, what you said the history of the Aleuts has been one of
a tragedy. And you established a situation out there and gave
them hope and a chance, and they are eliminating that. They do
not care. They live in Silver Spring or someplace like that,
you know. They got their heating oil at probably $3 a gallon, I
will say that. But they took that away from you.
Let me see what else I have here. Again, I will ask the
same thing of Mr. Little. Did they use your fleet? Did they ask
to use your fleet, both of you, Mr. Loomis, that they can do
any research at all?
I have not found out what research they have done. They
never answered that question. I want you to comment on it.
Mr. Loomis. Through the Chair, as far as the research goes,
our company has been actively working with a number of
institutions to try and fill in the gaps. We have gone as far
as training crew to collect samples. We have spent hundreds of
thousands of dollars of our own money through a private
foundation to do research to try and fill in some of these
gaps. And the issue, Dr. Trites alluded to one of the issues,
funding. I would like to see Oceana and their members instead
of putting money into lawsuits, I would like to see them fund
some active research.
Mr. Young. Hallelujah. Go ahead.
Mr. Loomis. I would also like to see some relief in the
permitting process. We cannot get permits to work in the
Western Aleutians to go study the fishery interactions.
Mr. Young. Now, who gives the permits, NOAA and NMFS?
Mr. Loomis. They come out of the permitting office in
Silver Spring, I believe.
Mr. Young. Silver Spring. So, it means if you wanted to go
out and observe pups and actions of the sea lions, you have to
get a permit?
Mr. Loomis. That is correct.
Mr. Young. Do they go out there?
Mr. Loomis. The particular research I am referencing was to
be conducted by the National Marine Fisheries Service. We had
funding in place through the North Pacific Research Board. We
had a match from----
Mr. Young. Speed it up. I mean, did they go out there?
Mr. Loomis. They did not because they could not get the
permit to do it.
Mr. Young. You mean, from their own operation, or you could
not get it?
Mr. Loomis. They could not get it. National Marine
Fisheries Service would not issue themselves a permit to do the
work.
Mr. Young. Oh, boy. Does that sound like our great
government? I am going to ask that question, too. I mean, the
idea they could not issue a permit to themselves, yet they will
come down and stop a fisheries, and they are going to make
decisions?
You guys got to support my new bill, Mr. Chairman. I am
going to eliminate all regulations from every Agency from '91
to 2011 until they can justify it. To me, that makes sense.
There is no justification for this. This is driven inside.
Dr. LeVine, you do believe in science, do you not?
Mr. LeVine. Yes, I do.
Mr. Young. You do? But you file lawsuits against scientific
findings many times in your organization. Supposing they clean
the seas up. Now, where are you cleaning the seas up? What does
the sea lion got to do with it?
Mr. LeVine. Representative Young, in this situation with
regard to the sea lions, the litigation has been brought by the
State of Alaska and the fishing industry. Oceana has gotten
involved to defend what we believe were scientifically
necessary----
Mr. Young. On what grounds? In fact, every testimony I have
had here, science is flawed. Everybody's testimony, other NMFS
themselves, who did not issue themselves a permit to go out and
do the studying.
The fact is, Mr. Chairman, I think that is probably a sign
of total incompetency. You could not issue yourself a permit? I
can get a permit to go to the bathroom in a heartbeat, and they
could not issue themselves a permit? I mean, where is the
science behind that?
Mr. LeVine. Representative Young, I am not in the position
to comment on the Agency's internal process about permits or
otherwise.
Mr. Young. But you joined the lawsuit against the State and
against the State of Washington, correct?
Mr. LeVine. In this situation, Representative Young, the
Steller sea lions in the far Western Aleutians continue to
decline, and Oceana is involved in litigation and other efforts
in order to further----
Mr. Young. What basis? There is no science to back that up.
It does not decline. In fact, we got reports that the pup
population is increasing. In fact, after the year 2000, yes,
from 60 then, they may have declined, but they are actually
increasing. The species is healthy and the biomass is strong to
feed the--so what does Oceana. You are going get me like Sierra
Club pretty quick, buddy, because you do it to gain on the side
without looking at the science.
So, what is the science you joined that lawsuit?
Mr. LeVine. Representative Young, overall, the population
is either holding steady or growing slightly.
Mr. Young. Holding steady and growing slightly, yet you are
part of that lawsuit to back up the non-scientific NMFS/NOAA
findings.
Mr. LeVine. In the Western Aleutian Islands, the population
has declined by 45 percent between 2000 and 2011.
Mr. Young. And it increased where?
Mr. LeVine. I am sorry, I did not understand----
Mr. Young. Where did it increase?
Mr. LeVine. It increased to the east of that population.
Mr. Young. And is that DNA of those sea lions exactly the
same thing?
Mr. LeVine. The Agency has treated that population as one
stock, yes.
Mr. Young. As one stock. But is the DNA the same?
Mr. LeVine. My understanding is that it is.
Mr. Young. That is right. So, they just went where they
thought they could do--maybe they wanted to visit their aunt
and uncles. You ever think about that? When you filed that
lawsuit, the people in Adak and the Aleuts, did you take them
into consideration?
Mr. LeVine. Yes, we did, Representative Young.
Mr. Young. You did? And you contribute to them? You helped
them make up that fuel price? I know I am running out of time.
Mr. LeVine. It is unfortunate that the large scale
fisheries have to bear the brunt of the situation that we found
ourselves in. And we support long-term sustainable fisheries
that will help provide for communities. And that is our job as
an ocean conservation organization.
Mr. Hastings. Will the gentleman yield?
Mr. Young. Yes, gladly. I know you got to go.
Mr. Hastings. That graph over there shows the Aleutian
Islands from West to East. And you can see the green line there
shows an increase, and there are a few places there admittedly
going down. But on the whole, it is an increase. I just think
that is--one can pick out any individual part and base a whole
lot of conclusions, I guess, like sampling 13 out of 55 and
come up with a conclusion. But that graph there, which is
NOAA's data, by the way, I think is somewhat significant. So, I
will yield back to the gentleman.
Mr. Young. It goes back to I get very frustrated, and then
everybody else should be frustrated. There is no science to
back up what was done by NOAA/NMFS. And, Mr. LeVine, my problem
is you are supposed to be a reputable group of people, but you
are falling into that trap of not following science. Again, Mr.
Chairman, available science. We should have best science.
What NMFS did is not the best science. What NMFS is an
agenda, and you should not be part of an agenda unless you
really believe the fact that people do not count. There are
groups of people in the United States that believe people are
the evil thing. Everything is bad we create. Everything we
create. That is nonsense. You ought to think about that.
You are a legal man. There is no law that says that they
could not have taken and considered this and the other options.
That is in the law. I want a few people to know a little bit
about the law. I did not read everything, but I know a little
bit about it. And what you have to think as an organization is
maybe we ought to analyze this a little more and not back up an
agency that has gone rogue. That is what they have done. It is
not the first time. But they have collectively got worse as
time goes by.
And, Mr. Chairman, again, I will tell you our Congress with
its oversight ability ought to look at the funding pots of
these agencies. And maybe understand that maybe there is
another side of this coin. And I will tell you right now, there
is a big side.
So, Mr. Chairman, I am tired of raving, but I can do more
of it. But go ahead.
Mr. Hastings. Well, listen, the gentleman is--many of his
constituents are directly impacted by this, so I can understand
his passion. And frankly I think it is very well placed. And
the mere fact that we are out here having a hearing in areas
that are impacted shows the seriousness that this Committee and
this Chairman takes with this issue. But I want to thank you
very much for coming down.
And I want to thank this panel for your testimony. There
may be some follow-up questions to you. Certainly there is
going to be a follow-up question to other panels that came from
this panel, and I appreciate very much your making that
suggestion. But if there are follow-up questions to you, I
would hope that you would respond in a timely manner.
And with that, I will dismiss the panel. And, again, I want
to thank everybody, all three panels, members of the panel, for
being here, and those that came.
And with that, no further business before the Committee,
the Committee stands adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 11:44 a.m., the Committee was adjourned.]


