- OVERSIGHT HEARING ON ``SPENDING FOR THE NATIONAL OCEANIC AND ATMOSPHERIC ADMINISTRATION AND THE NATIONAL MARINE FISHERIES SERVICE, AND THE PRESIDENT'S FISCAL YEAR 2012 BUDGET REQUEST FOR THESE AGENCIES.''

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

SPENDING FOR NOAA AND NMFS AND THE PRESIDENT'S FISCAL YEAR 2012 BUDGET
REQUEST FOR THESE AGENCIES

=======================================================================

OVERSIGHT HEARING

before the

SUBCOMMITTEE ON FISHERIES, WILDLIFE,
OCEANS AND INSULAR AFFAIRS

of the

COMMITTEE ON NATURAL RESOURCES
U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

Thursday, March 31, 2011

__________

Serial No. 112-15

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Natural Resources

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.fdsys.gov
or
Committee address: http://naturalresources.house.gov

U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
65-462 PDF               WASHINGTON : 2011
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800; DC
area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104  Mail: Stop IDCC, Washington, DC
20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON NATURAL RESOURCES

DOC HASTINGS, WA, Chairman
EDWARD J. MARKEY, MA, Ranking Democrat Member

Don Young, AK                        Dale E. Kildee, MI
John J. Duncan, Jr., TN              Peter A. DeFazio, OR
Louie Gohmert, TX                    Eni F.H. Faleomavaega, AS
Rob Bishop, UT                       Frank Pallone, Jr., NJ
Doug Lamborn, CO                     Grace F. Napolitano, CA
Robert J. Wittman, VA                Rush D. Holt, NJ
Paul C. Broun, GA                    Raul M. Grijalva, AZ
John Fleming, LA                     Madeleine Z. Bordallo, GU
Mike Coffman, CO                     Jim Costa, CA
Tom McClintock, CA                   Dan Boren, OK
Glenn Thompson, PA                   Gregorio Kilili Camacho Sablan,
Jeff Denham, CA                          CNMI
Dan Benishek, MI                     Martin Heinrich, NM
David Rivera, FL                     Ben Ray Lujan, NM
Jeff Duncan, SC                      John P. Sarbanes, MD
Scott R. Tipton, CO                  Betty Sutton, OH
Paul A. Gosar, AZ                    Niki Tsongas, MA
Raul R. Labrador, ID                 Pedro R. Pierluisi, PR
Kristi L. Noem, SD                   John Garamendi, CA
Steve Southerland II, FL             Colleen W. Hanabusa, HI
Bill Flores, TX                      Vacancy
Andy Harris, MD
Jeffrey M. Landry, LA
Charles J. ``Chuck'' Fleischmann,
TN
Jon Runyan, NJ
Bill Johnson, OH

Todd Young, Chief of Staff
Lisa Pittman, Chief Counsel
Jeffrey Duncan, Democrat Staff Director
David Watkins, Democrat Chief Counsel
------

SUBCOMMITTEE ON FISHERIES, WILDLIFE, OCEANS
AND INSULAR AFFAIRS

JOHN FLEMING, LA, Chairman
GREGORIO KILILI CAMACHO SABLAN, CNMI, Ranking Democrat Member

Don Young, AK                        Eni F.H. Faleomavaega, AS
Robert J. Wittman, VA                Frank Pallone, Jr., NJ
Jeff Duncan, SC                      Madeleine Z. Bordallo, GU
Steve Southerland, II, FL            Pedro R. Pierluisi, PR
Bill Flores, TX                      Colleen W. Hanabusa, HI
Andy Harris, MD                      Vacancy
Jeffrey M. Landry, LA                Edward J. Markey, MA, ex officio
Jon Runyan, NJ
Doc Hastings, WA, ex officio

------

CONTENTS

----------
Page

Hearing held on Thursday, March 31, 2011.........................     1

Statement of Members:
Fleming, Hon. John, a Representative in Congress from the
State of Louisiana.........................................     1
Prepared statement of....................................     1
Hastings, Hon. Doc, a Representative in Congress from the
State of Washington........................................     6
Prepared statement of....................................     7
Markey, Hon. Edward J., a Representative in Congress from the
State of Massachusetts, Prepared statement of..............    43
Sablan, Hon. Gregorio, a Delegate in Congress from the
Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands...............     3
Prepared statement of....................................     5

Statement of Witnesses:
Lubchenco, Jane, Ph.D., Under Secretary of Commerce for
Oceans and Atmosphere, and Administrator, National Oceanic
and Atmospheric Administration, U.S. Department of Commerce     9
Prepared statement of....................................    11

Additional materials supplied:
Crockett, Lee R., Director of Federal Fisheries Policy, Pew
Environment, Statement submitted for the record............    44

OVERSIGHT HEARING ON ``SPENDING FOR THE NATIONAL OCEANIC AND
ATMOSPHERIC ADMINISTRATION AND THE NATIONAL MARINE FISHERIES SERVICE,
AND THE PRESIDENT'S FISCAL YEAR 2012 BUDGET REQUEST FOR THESE
AGENCIES.''

----------

Thursday, March 31, 2011

U.S. House of Representatives

Subcommittee on Fisheries, Wildlife, Oceans and Insular Affairs

Committee on Natural Resources

Washington, D.C.

----------

The Subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 2:02 p.m. in
Room 1334, Longworth House Office Building, John C. Fleming,
[Chairman of the Subcommittee] presiding.
Present: Representatives Fleming, Hastings, Young, Duncan,
Wittman, Southerland, Harris, Runyan, Markey, Pallone,
Bordallo, Sablan, Pierluisi, and Hanabusa.

STATEMENT OF HON. JOHN FLEMING, A REPRESENTATIVE IN CONGRESS
FROM THE STATE OF LOUISIANA

Dr. Fleming. The Subcommittee will come to order. The
Chairman notes the presence of a quorum, which under Committee
Rule 3[e] is two Members. The Subcommittee on Fisheries,
Wildlife, Oceans and Insular Affairs is meeting today to hear
testimony on the President's Fiscal Year 2012 budget request
for the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, and
the National Marine Fisheries Service.
Under Committee Rule 4[f], opening statements are limited
to the Chairman and the Ranking Member of the Subcommittee so
that we can hear from our witnesses more quickly.
However, I will recognize the Chairman and Ranking Member
if he is here, and there he is, for any statement that he may
have following the statement of the Subcommittee Ranking
Member.
I will also ask for unanimous consent to include any other
Members' opening statements in the hearing record if submitted
to the Clerk by close of business today. Hearing no objections,
so ordered.
[The prepared statement of Chairman Fleming follows:]

Statement by The Honorable John Fleming, Chairman,
Subcommittee on Fisheries, Wildlife, Oceans and Insular Affairs

As I am sure you are aware, we are hearing from a lot of fishermen
about reduced harvest levels and fishery closures. In many cases,
fishermen are frustrated either because the data which is being used to
close fisheries is old or because the reason for the closure is not
being adequately explained. I am sympathetic to both concerns. And
while this budget proposal does add some new funding for stock
assessments, if new information from new stock surveys is not included,
you will be using much of the same old data in the assessments.
Old data means your scientists and fishery managers include
multiple layers of precaution when running their models. More
precaution means lower harvest levels. Lower harvest levels mean
fishery closures or restrictions which means less jobs and more
economic harm to coastal communities. No funding for new information
means NOAA can continue to use old data, hiding behind the ``best
scientific information available'' argument. This is not acceptable.
NOAA prides itself on being a scientific agency yet it continues to
use old data when making management decisions--not just for fisheries
management but also for Endangered Species Act decisions. You can
imagine the frustration of fishermen whose livelihoods are threatened
by an agency using ten-year old data at the same time the agency is
cutting the ship time available to do stock surveys. You can imaging
the frustration of fishermen who are told that recreational catch data
is unavailable by an agency that wants to spend $2 billion on satellite
programs but cuts observer coverage. You can imagine the frustration of
our Full Committee Chairman when NOAA closes a valuable fishery based
on little or no reliable data on Steller sea lions and their feeding
habits at the same time NOAA is not funding any research to get the
necessary answers. And you need to understand my frustration of seeing
an agency grow 41% since 2008 but not addressing these issues. That has
to change.
While I understand that NOAA is more than a fisheries management
agency, it often seems that NOAA is more interested in new technology
than it is in getting basic information on how many fish are out there
and available to fishermen. There is also a perception that the
conservation aspects of NOAA's missions overshadow the missions to
utilize the fishery resources of this Nation. I'm afraid this budget
request will not change this perception or the minds of those facing
fishery closures and fishery restrictions.
Safe seafood is also a priority for our country, and certainly for
the Gulf of Mexico. A recent nationwide survey by the Louisiana Seafood
Promotion and Marketing Board found 70 percent of people are still
concerned about eating Gulf seafood. For many this is troubling because
Gulf seafood already undergoes some of the most intensive testing in
the world--and test results that show Gulf seafood is safe to eat.
I, along with many others, am concerned that until the public has a
better understanding of the federal government's seafood safety work in
the Gulf, consumer confidence will remain low, Americans will avoid
healthful seafood, and the Gulf Coast economy will struggle to rebuild.
I recently joined my colleagues in writing to the administration and
strongly recommend that the Administration develop a robust, top-down
approach to communicate to the American people that Gulf seafood is
safe and healthy. I would urge you, consistent with your agency's
mission to ``conserve and manage coastal and marine resources to meet
our Nation's economic, social and environmental needs'' to be a part of
the development of this approach and where appropriate, to work closely
with the Gulf states and BP to effectively communicate your work and
testing results on the safety of Gulf seafood to the American public.
Having said all of that, I encourage you today to address these
challenges with the Subcommittee as you present the President's FY 2012
budget for NOAA. I would also like to thank Eric Schwaab, Assistant
Administrator for Fisheries, for being here to answer questions
specific to the National Marine Fisheries Service portion of the NOAA
budget.
______

Dr. Fleming. I would also like to note that this is the
first hearing that the Subcommittee has held since the
appointment of our new Subcommittee Ranking Member, Mr. Sablan,
and I would like to congratulate him on his appointment, and
welcome, sir.
Mr. Sablan. Thank you.
Dr. Fleming. Just a note here about time. The latest update
was that we are going to be having two votes at 2:30. So we are
going to try to get opening statements out of the way at least,
and then we can reconvene.
As I am sure that you are aware, we are hearing from a lot
of fishermen about reduced harvest levels and fishery closures.
In many cases, fishermen are frustrated either because of the
data which is being used to close fisheries is old, or because
the reason for the closure is not being adequately explained.
I am sympathetic to both concerns, and while the budget
proposal does add some new funding for stock assessments, if
new information from new stock surveys is not included, you
will be using much of the same old data in the assessments.
Old data means that your scientists and fisher managers
include multiple layers of precaution when running their
models. More precaution means lower harvest levels. Lower
harvest levels means fishery closures or restrictions, which
means fewer jobs and more economic harm to coastal communities.
No funding for new information means NOAA can continue to
use old data, hiding behind the ``best scientific information
available'' argument. This is not acceptable. I know that Mr.
Young has raised the issue of ``best scientific information
available'' at many hearings in the past, and I suspect now
that I have brought it up that he will have something to say on
the issue.
NOAA prides itself on being a scientific agency, yet it
continues to use old data when making management decisions--not
just for fisheries management, but also for Endangered Species
Act decisions.
You can imagine the frustration of fishermen whose
livelihoods are threatened by an agency using 10-year-old data
at the same time the agency is cutting the ship time available
to do stock surveys.
You can imagine the frustration of fishermen who are told
that recreational catch data is unavailable by an agency that
wants to spend $2 billion on satellite programs, but cuts
observer coverage.
You can imagine the frustration of our Full Committee
Chairman when NOAA closes a valuable fishery based on little or
no reliable data on Stellar sea lions and their feeding habits
at the same time that NOAA is not funding any research to get
the necessary answers.
And you need to understand my frustration of seeing the
agency grow 41 percent since 2008, but not addressing these
issues. That has to change. While I understand that NOAA is
more than a fisheries management agency, it often seems that
NOAA is more interested in new technology than it is in getting
basic information on how many fish are out there and available
to fishermen.
There is also a perception that the conservation aspects of
NOAA's mission overshadow the missions to utilize the fishery
resources of this nation. I am afraid that this budget request
will not change this perception or the minds of those facing
fishery closures and fishery restrictions.
Having said all of that, I encourage you today to address
these challenges with the Subcommittee as you present the
President's Fiscal Year 2012 budget for NOAA. I would also like
to thank Eric Schwaab, Assistant Administrator for Fisheries,
for being here to answer questions specific to the National
Marine Fisheries Service portion of the NOAA budget.
I will now recognize the Ranking Member for five minutes
for any statement that he may have.

STATEMENT OF HON. GREGORIO SABLAN, A DELEGATE IN CONGRESS FROM
THE COMMONWEALTH OF THE NORTHERN MARIANA ISLANDS

Mr. Sablan. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, and good
afternoon everyone. Mr. Chairman, I would like to ask for your
indulgence to diverge for a moment from today's agenda, because
there is a matter that I want to bring to your attention.
Last December, Homeland Security Secretary Napolitano wrote
to Natural Resources Chairman, Nick Rahall, Senators Bingaman
and Akaka, and myself, saying that she expected to publish a
transitional worker rule implementing Public Law 110-229 in the
first quarter of 2011.
Today is the last day of the first quarter and the rule has
not been published. Respectfully, I would like to request an
oversight hearing on this and other issues regarding the
transition to Federal control of immigration in the Northern
Mariana Islands as soon as possible.
I will tell you that, without this, businesses are hurting.
They cannot sign contracts without knowing whether their
workers will be available. We have to end this uncertainty.
Anything that you can do to place a hearing on the
Subcommittee's schedule would be most appreciated.
Dr. Fleming. Will the gentleman yield?
Mr. Sablan. Yes, of course, Mr. Chairman.
Dr. Fleming. You and I have talked about the implementation
of Public Law 110-229, the Consolidated Natural Resources Act,
which applied Federal immigration laws to the Commonwealth of
the Northern Mariana Islands.
The Department of Homeland Security has been remiss in
meeting its deadlines to publish any of the implementing
regulations. The lack of regulations has created uncertainty in
the region and has had an adverse impact on job creation and
the local economy.
It is my intent to consult with Chairman Hastings and see
when we can have such a hearing. The Department of Homeland
Security and other witnesses would be invited to testify on the
implementation of the Act to allow the Subcommittee an
opportunity to have a broad discussion on what I recognize as
an important matter for your constituents.
Mr. Sablan. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. Mr.
Chairman, both you and I come from districts where our
constituents benefit from services that the National Oceanic
and Atmospheric Administration provides.
During the Deepwater Horizon spill, and in the wake of
Hurricane Katrina, the North Office of Response and Restoration
was there on the front lines providing scientific information
to aid in the response and recovery efforts in Louisiana and
collecting data to understand the scope of the damage to
fisheries and other natural resources in the Gulf of Mexico.
Just this month there were real time measurements and
modern technologies developed by NOAA's Pacific Marine
Environmental Laboratory, and installed NOAA tsunami warning
centers that accurately predicted when the Japanese tsunami
would hit the Northern Mariana Islands.
This allowed the people who I represent to get away from
the danger on the shore, and in Hawaii, and all along the West
Coast of our nation, and in the Territory of Guam, people were
prepared because of NOAA's warning system.
So the United States was relatively unscathed by this
massive natural disaster, and only a few American lives were
lost. These are the kinds of public services that most of us do
not think about until the day that we need them.
And when that day comes, when that unexpected emergency is
suddenly upon us, then we are very glad indeed that our nation
has made the investments and that we are prepared.
Now the Administration has requested $5.5 billion for NOAA
for Fiscal Year 2012. That is an increase of $749.3 million
from the enacted level for Fiscal Year 2010. In contrast, the
majority's Contining Resolution, H.R. 1, cuts almost $400
million from the 2010 enacted level. So there is a significant
divergence.
But we know that NOAA provides a range of products and
services that private citizens and businesses need, not just in
emergencies, but on a daily basis, and especially in coastal
communities where people's livelihoods depend on the health of
the oceans, whether for casting, knowing how to manage
fisheries so that they will keep producing, and giving advanced
warnings for natural disasters.
So we will have to continue to determine in a very
difficult fiscal situation our country faces which of those
services we cannot afford, and that we will have to get by
without, and which of those services NOAA provides that are
simply too important, and that we simply cannot afford to go
without.
With that, I look forward to hearing from our witnesses
today, and learning more about what America is getting for its
money, and I thank you, Mr. Chairman.

[The prepared statement of Mr. Sablan follows:]

Statement of The Honorable Gregorio Kilili Camacho Sablan, Ranking
Member, Subcommittee on Fisheries, Wildlife, Oceans and Insular Affairs

Mr. Chairman, you and I both come from districts where our
constituents benefit from services that the National Oceanic and
Atmospheric Administration provides. During the Deepwater Horizon oil
spill and in the wake of Hurricane Katrina, NOAA's Office of Response
and Restoration was there, on the front lines, providing scientific
information to aid response and recovery efforts in Louisiana, and
collecting data to understand the scope of the damage to fisheries and
other natural resources in the Gulf of Mexico.
Just this month it was the real-time measurements and modeling
technologies developed by NOAA's Pacific Marine Environmental
Laboratory and installed at NOAA's Tsunami Warning Centers that
accurately predicted when the Japanese tsunami would hit the Northern
Mariana Islands. This allowed the people I represent to get away from
the danger on the shore. And in Hawaii and all along the West Coast of
our nation, people were prepared because of NOAA's warning system. So
the United States was relatively unscathed by this massive natural
disaster and only a few American lives were lost.
These are the kinds of public services that most of us don't think
about--until the day we need them. And when that day comes, when that
unexpected emergency is suddenly upon us, then we are very glad indeed
that our nation has made the investment and that we are prepared.
Now the Administration has requested $5.5 billion for NOAA for
Fiscal Year 2012. That's an increase of $749.3 million from the enacted
level for Fiscal Year 2010. In contrast, the Majority's continuing
resolution, H.R. 1, cuts almost $400 million from the 2010 enacted
level. So there is a significant divergence.
But we know that NOAA provides a range of products and services
that private citizens and businesses need--not just in emergencies, but
on a daily basis--and especially in coastal communities where people's
livelihoods depend on health of the oceans. Weather forecasting,
knowing how to manage fisheries so they'll keep producing, giving
advance warning for natural disasters. . .
So, we will have to determine--in the very difficult fiscal
situation our country faces--which of those services we cannot afford
and will have get by without, and which of those services NOAA provides
that are simply too important and that we simply cannot afford to be
without.
With that, I look forward to hearing from our witness today and
learning more about what America is getting for its money.
______

Dr. Fleming. I thank the gentleman. Next, I now recognize
the Chairman of the Full Committee, Mr. Hastings, for any
statement that he may have.

STATEMENT OF HON. DOC HASTINGS, A REPRESENTATIVE IN CONGRESS
FROM THE STATE OF WASHINGTON

Mr. Hastings. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I
appreciate as always the courtesy that I am being shown here.
This hearing is very important for my constituents in Central
Washington, as well as for the American people nationwide.
As NOAA comes to testify in support of a sizable budget
increase over current funding levels, many of the millions of
people who live on the land and in coastal areas that NOAA
regulates are struggling economically.
For the past 20 years, NOAA has expanded its management
responsibilities over Endangered Species Act-listed salmon to
include 28 separate populations, resulting in severe economic
impacts to vast portions of Washington, Oregon, Idaho, and
California.
These listings have resulted in policies that require
Federal approval of literally every human activity involving
water and salmon. Over the past decade, increased lawsuits
against agriculture, irrigation, forestry, transportation,
operators of clean hydropower-producing dams, and other
developments, have taken a huge bite out of our Nation's
economy.
These lawsuits have even blocked efforts to stop sea lions
from eating more and more endangered salmon. Despite several
recent years of record and near-record salmon runs, not one
population of salmon has been removed from the ESA list.
NOAA has finalized only a handful of salmon recovery plans
and NOAA has even suggested in a recent decision that more ESA-
listed salmon species will be needed to feed another listed
species under its jurisdiction, the orca whale.
President Obama in his State of the Union Address referred
to the duplicative Federal endangered salmon management in
oceans and rivers as an example of how the government needs to
be more efficient and competent.
I agree that the Federal Government can and must be more
efficient in these areas. Unfortunately, this latest NOAA
budget request falls far short in my mind.
This budget request represents an increase of more than
$700 million over current funding levels, a nearly 16 percent
increase, largely for expensive new satellite programs and to
create a whole new bureaucracy, the NOAA Climate Service,
including plans for a ``customer engagement and education
division.''
And in exchange for that huge increase, NOAA seeks to wrap
up law enforcement against fishermen in the midst of recent
media reports that NOAA shredded documents and imposed
unjustified fines, and shut down fisheries.
NOAA also seeks a $37 million increase for a ``national
catch share program and, in the process, moving money out of a
more productive cooperative research program. While I
understand the need to fund existing catch share programs, I am
concerned that the Administration seems intent on imposing
catch shares in fisheries where they are not wanted.
I am concerned with the adequacy of NOAA's data collection
activities. This budget request significantly cuts ship time
for fishery research vessels and heightens concerns about
whether NOAA will have reliable science to guide its fishery
regulations.
This data concern is particularly apparent in the science
used by the agency to regulate activities, like ocean-based
fishing, that might affect species. Even though NOAA has spent
more than $150 million since 2001 for Steller sea lion
research, significant questions remain unanswered.
This is especially true in the Western Aleutian Islands
where NOAA-imposed restrictions could result in up to $61
million in losses per year based on the actions of only three
tagged animals. Such decisions made without adequate scientific
information are simply unacceptable.
NOAA also increases new funds to implement the
controversial Coastal and Marine Spatial Planning initiative
and the National Ocean Council activities, which is constructed
to lead to sweeping new regulations on coastal and inland
waterways across the Nation.
I am troubled that these Executive Branch actions are
moving forward without Congressional or statutory approval. In
the coming months, I look forward to a robust oversight of
NOAA's programs and activities to ensure that species, coastal
areas, and American jobs, are protected for generations to
come, and that NOAA's decisions are based on sound science and
only move forward under proper statutory authority.
And with that, Mr. Chairman, thank you again. I yield back
my time.
[The prepared statement of Chairman Hastings follows:]

Statement of The Honorable Doc Hastings, a Representative
in Congress from the State of Washington

This hearing is very important for my constituents in central
Washington--as well as for Americans nationwide. As NOAA comes to
testify in support of a sizable budget increase over current funding
levels, many of the millions of people that live on the land and
coastal areas NOAA regulates, are struggling economically.
For the past 20 years, NOAA has expanded its management
responsibilities over Endangered Species Act-listed salmon to include
28 separate populations, resulting in severe economic impacts to vast
portions of Washington, Oregon, Idaho and California.
These listings have resulted in policies that require federal
approval of literally every human activity involving water and salmon.
Over the past decade, increased lawsuits against agriculture,
irrigation, forestry, transportation, operators of clean hydropower-
producing dams, and other development, have taken a huge bite out of
our nation's economy. These lawsuits have even blocked efforts to stop
sea lions from eating more and more endangered salmon.
Despite several recent years of record and near-record salmon
returns, not one population of salmon has been removed from the ESA
list. NOAA has finalized only a handful of salmon recovery plans. NOAA
has even suggested in a recent decision that more ESA-listed salmon
species will be needed to feed another listed species under its
jurisdiction--the orca whale.
President Obama, in his State of the Union address, referred to the
duplicative federal endangered salmon management in the ocean and in
rivers as an example of how the government needs to be more efficient
and competent. I agree the federal government can and must be more
efficient in these areas. Unfortunately, this latest NOAA budget
request falls far short.
This budget request represents an increase of more than $700
million over current funding levels--a 15.8% increase--largely for
expensive new satellite programs and to create a whole new
bureaucracy--the NOAA Climate Service, including plans for a ``customer
engagement and education division.''
In exchange for that huge increase, NOAA seeks to ramp up law
enforcement against fishermen in the midst of recent media reports that
NOAA officials shredded documents, imposed unjustified fines and shut
down fisheries.
NOAA also seeks a $37 million increase for a ``national catch share
program''--in the process, moving money out of a more productive
cooperative research program. While I understand the need to fund
existing catch share programs, I am concerned that the Administration
seems intent on imposing catch shares in fisheries where they are not
wanted.
I am concerned with the adequacy of NOAA's data collection
activities. This budget request significantly cuts ship time for
fishery research vessels and heightens concerns about whether NOAA will
have reliable science to guide its fishery regulations.
This data concern is particularly apparent in the science used by
the agency to regulate activities--like ocean-based fishing--that might
affect listed species.
Even though NOAA has spent more than $150 million since 2001 for
Steller sea lion research, significant questions remain unanswered.
This is especially true in the western Aleutian Islands where NOAA-
imposed restrictions could result in up to $61 million in losses per
year based on the actions of only three tagged animals. Such decisions
made without adequate scientific information are unacceptable.
NOAA also seeks new funds to implement the controversial Coastal
and Marine Spatial Planning initiative and National Ocean Council
activities, which is constructed to lead to sweeping new regulations on
coastal and inland waterways across the nation. I am troubled that
these executive branch actions are moving forward without Congressional
or statutory approval.
In the coming months, I look forward to a robust oversight of
NOAA's programs and activities to ensure that species, coastal areas--
and American jobs--are protected for generations to come, and that
NOAA's decisions are based on sound science and only move forward under
proper statutory authority.
______

Dr. Fleming. Thank you, Chairman Hastings, for that. We
also offer the same courtesy to the Ranking Member of the Full
Committee. However, he is not in attendance today. So next up
will be our witness, and I would like to introduce her.
Our witness today is Dr. Jane Lubchenco, Under Secretary of
Commerce for Oceans and Atmosphere, and NOAA Administrator.
Like all witnesses, your written testimony will appear in the
full hearing record.
So I ask that you keep your oral statements to five
minutes. As outlined in our invitation letter to you, and under
Committee Rule 4[a]. Our microphones are not automatic, and so
please push the button when you are ready to begin.
While you have testified before this Subcommittee in the
past, I will give a quick reminder on our timing lights, and
how they work. Basically, it remains green four minutes, and
then yellow for one minute, and then red.
Obviously, you don't have to stop in mid-sentence, but try
to wrap up in another sentence or two at that point. When you
begin to speak our clerk will begin the timer as I indicated,
and then you may complete the sentence at the end of that.
And then one final footnote that I just learned is that Dr.
Lubchenco is a new grandmother. So we want to congratulate you
for that. I think a two week old is my understanding?
Dr. Lubchenco. That is correct.
Dr. Fleming. And speaking as a two time grandfather, you
have quite an enjoyable journey ahead of you. So I want to
thank you for that. So your five minutes is beginning, and Dr.
Lubchenco, go forward.

STATEMENTS OF DR. JANE LUBCHENCO, UNDER SECRETARY OF COMMERCE
FOR OCEANS AND ATMOSPHERE AND ADMINISTRATOR, NATIONAL OCEANIC
AND ATMOSPHERIC ADMINISTRATION; AND ERIC SCHWAAB, ASSISTANT
ADMINISTRATOR, NATIONAL MARINE FISHERIES SERVICE

Dr. Lubchenco. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you Members
of the Committee. I appreciate this opportunity to present to
you the President's Budget Request for NOAA for 2012. I want to
begin by thanking you for your leadership and your support for
NOAA.
As you know, we are one of the Nation's premier
environmental science and stewardship agencies. The vital role
that we play in the protection of life and property has been
exemplified by NOAA's actions in the wake of the tragic events
in Japan earlier this month.
The Japan earthquake and the resulting tsunami had far-
reaching effects, and many of NOAA's programs played a critical
role in issuing lifesaving information to emergency officials
and the public in the United States and around the world as
Delegate Sablan has noted.
I am honored to be here to discuss the President's Fiscal
Year 2012 budget request, which recognizes the central role
that science and technology play in creating new jobs,
improving the health and security of Americans.
I wish to highlight four linchpins of our Fiscal Year 2012
request: key savings, satellites, fisheries, and protected
resource management, and coastal and ocean services.
As part of the Administration's administrative efficiency
initiative, NOAA analyzed its administrative costs and reduced
non-essential spending by $67.7 million. We conducted a
rigorous review of our programs and activities, and identified
additional savings.
The Fiscal Year 2012 request is $5.5 billion, a decrease
from the Fiscal year 2011 request, and an increase above Fiscal
Year 2010 enacted, due primarily to our requirements to execute
the restructured civil polar satellite program.
NOAA's satellites provide the data and information for
forecasts that enables safe transportation, early response to
severe weather, smart construction and emergency rescue
missions.
The Fiscal Year 2012 budget request for the satellite
service is $2 billion, which we will invest in multiple
satellite acquisition programs. This includes an increase of
$687.8 million for the joint polar satellite system.
This program is essential if we are to maintain the quality
of our severe storm warnings, provide long term forecasts, and
receive emergency distress signals in timely fashion.
Rebuilding our Nation's fisheries is essential to
preserving the livelihoods of fishermen and related industries.
In 2008, United States commercial and salt water recreational
fisheries supported 1.9 million full and part-time jobs, and
generated $163 million in sales impacts.
In 2012, NOAA requests $1.1001 billion to support fisheries
and protected resource management. NOAA will invest $67 million
to expand annual stock assessments.
This investment is essential for setting annual catch
limits at the most optimal level so that the return to
fishermen is maximized, while maintaining the health of the
resource.
NOAA will also invest three million to improve the
timeliness and quality of catch monitoring and recreational
fisheries to ensure that they are not unnecessarily restricted
due a lack of data.
This is part of a broader effort to work more closely with
the recreational fishing community. We will also continue to
support the national catch share policy and the consideration
of catch share management by councils.
Catch shares are difficult and sometimes controversial to
implement, but when well designed, they have yielded
significant financial and ecological benefits, as well as
improved safety for fishermen.
Numerous coastal communities along our coast are being
impacted by the loss of fishing opportunities. The Fiscal Year
2012 budget requests eight million to support the National
Working Waterfronts Grant Program to assist fishing dependent
coastal communities.
These grants will provide resources to such communities for
planning activities that support economic diversity, resource
conversation, and economic capital growth. It is expected that
the Nation's coastal population will grow by more than 11
million by 2015.
Also, this budget includes $559 million to enable NOAA to
continue delivering a dynamic range of services promoting safe,
healthy, and productive ocean coasts and great lakes. A pivotal
event in 2010 was the explosion of the Deepwater Horizon oil
rig on April 20. NOAA responded within minutes, within hours,
providing targeted weather forecasts and trajectory maps,
mobilizing personnel to respond to it, because of the largest
oil spill in United States history.
Oil spills remain a significant concern and this budget
requests $2.9 million to develop an oil spill research and
development program. NOAA also requests $5 million to implement
the United States Integrated Ocean Observing System Surface
Current Mapping Plan.
The system uses high frequency radar surface current
measurements, which are vital to oil spill response, national
defense, search and rescue, as well as water quality monitoring
and research.
And in closing I would like to note that I have a nickel in
my hand. This nickel represents what I believe is one of the
best bargains for the American public. It costs each American
less than five cents a day to operate NOAA, and this nickel
gives you the best weather information in the world.
It allows us to save lives and property when severe storms
strike. This nickel means that our coasts are more healthy and
vibrant, and in-turn our coastal communities are more
prosperous.
This nickel helps American businesses succeed, from the
fishermen on the coast, to the farmer in the heartland, and
everything in between. This nickel helps keep our homeland
secure.
At NOAA our work is everyone's business. We take our work
seriously because we know that citizens and businesses depend
on us each and every day. I look forward to working with the
Members of the Committee and our constituents to achieve this
goal. I am happy to respond to questions that the Committee
might have. Thank you very much.
[The prepared statements of Dr. Lubchenco and Mr. Schwaab
follow:]

Statement of Jane Lubchenco, Ph.D., Under Secretary of Commerce for
Oceans and Atmosphere and NOAA Administrator, National Oceanic and
Atmospheric Administration, U.S. Department of Commerce

Chairman Fleming and members of the committee, before I begin my
testimony I would like to thank you for your leadership and the support
you have shown the Department of Commerce's National Oceanic and
Atmospheric Administration (NOAA), one of the Nation's premier
environmental science and stewardship agencies. Your continued support
for our programs is appreciated as we work to improve the products and
services that are vital to supporting America's businesses,
communities, and people. I am honored to be here as the Under Secretary
of Commerce for Oceans and Atmosphere at NOAA to discuss the
President's FY 2012 budget.
Secretary Locke is singularly focused on how the Department of
Commerce can help American businesses compete for the jobs of the
future. As part of the Commerce Department, NOAA generates value for
the Nation by providing the information and services that communities,
managers, businesses, and individuals rely on every day to make
decisions about their lives and businesses. NOAA touches the lives of
every single American; we work 24/7 to keep families safe, property
protected, living marine resources vibrant, communities thriving, and
businesses strong. NOAA works everywhere, in every state, and from the
surface of the sun to the depths of the ocean. Our research informs our
many services and science guides our stewardship of the oceans, coasts,
and Great Lakes.
The vital role NOAA plays in the protection of life and property
has recently been exemplified by NOAA's action in the wake of the
earthquake and resulting tsunami in Japan last month. NOAA played a
critical role in issuing life-saving information to emergency officials
and the public in the U.S and around the world. I'm sure I echo the
sentiments of many when I say that our hearts, thoughts and best wishes
are with the people of Japan and the survivors of the cataclysmic
earthquake and tsunami that, in a matter of minutes, took the lives of
thousands and forever changed the lives of millions. NOAA will continue
to provide whatever support we can as those affected recover and
rebuild from this tragedy.
The President's FY 2012 budget request promotes innovation and
American competitiveness and lays the foundation for long-term economic
growth, while making responsible reductions. In particular, the budget
recognizes the central role that science and technology play in
stimulating the economy, creating new jobs, and improving the health
and security of Americans.
FY 2012 BUDGET REQUEST AND FY 2010 HIGHLIGHTS
Secretary Locke has brought a dedicated focus on efficiency and
good management to the Department of Commerce. As part of the
Administration's Administrative Efficiency Initiative, an aggressive
government-wide effort to curb non-essential administrative spending,
NOAA analyzed its administrative costs and reduced non-essential
spending by $67.7 million. Beyond administrative savings, NOAA engaged
in a rigorous review of its programs and activities and identified
additional savings that were achievable. For example, we were able to
reduce the cost of operating our current satellite programs, and we
restructured our international portfolio of climate research. Further,
as a member of the newly established Gulf Coast Ecosystem Restoration
Task Force we are working with federal and state agencies to find
efficiencies, improve coordination and accountability in restoring Gulf
Coast ecosystems.
In short, the FY 2012 budget for NOAA reflects our efforts to focus
on program needs, identify efficiencies, and ensure accountability. It
sustains core functions and services, and proposes increases for only
the most critical programs, projects, or activities necessary to
address the growing demand for NOAA's science, services, and
stewardship. The FY 2012 request is $5.5 billion, which is a decrease
from the FY 2011 request. The FY 2012 request is an increase above FY
2010 enacted due primarily to our requirements to execute the
restructured civil polar satellite program. As I will discuss later,
this new generation of satellites is needed to replace satellites that
will go out of service in the years to come. They are essential for
both routine weather forecasts on which the private weather industry
depends, and for storm warnings and watches that only the government
can issue. The expenditures on satellites are mission critical for
NOAA. People's lives and property depend on them. This year 21 people
have been rescued because of NOAA satellite tracking, and 91 have been
rescued since last October. Beyond weather forecasts, fishermen and
recreational boaters count on NOAA satellites to keep them safe in the
event of an emergency at sea.
The FY 2012 NOAA budget recognizes that environmental and economic
sustainability go hand in hand. We learned through the BP Deepwater
Horizon oil spill and other events that we cannot have healthy
economies without healthy communities and healthy ecosystems and that
good science and stewardship is good business. NOAA's 2012 budget makes
the investments needed to save lives and livelihoods, to understand
these critical connections, and to ensure sustainable communities,
economies, and ecosystems.
Now I will turn to the details of the FY 2012 budget request and
outline areas of significant investment.
Climate Service
The FY 2012 budget request includes a proposed budget-neutral
reorganization that brings together NOAA's existing widely dispersed
climate capabilities under a single line office management structure
called the Climate Service. The proposed organization mirrors the
structure recommended by the National Academy of Public Administration
expert panel that, at Congress' request, completed a study on options
for a climate service in NOAA. The principal goal of this budget-
neutral reorganization is to better align NOAA's existing assets under
a unified leadership to more efficiently and effectively respond to the
rapidly increasing public demand for climate services. The Climate
Service would provide reliable and authoritative climate data,
information, and decision-support services, and to more effectively
coordinate with other agencies, partners, and the private sector. And--
important to this committee and to me--the proposed structure would
strengthen the world-class science for which NOAA is justly known.
Without continued advances in the science that supports our mission,
the utility of services will degrade with time. Hence, the success of
this organization requires attention to strengthening our core science
capacity, strengthening the service-provision capacity and
strengthening the connections between the two.
NOAA is continually improving our scientific and technological
capacity to develop and deliver a range of science and services. For
example, NOAA's improved maximum precipitation predictions have been
used to develop new standards for dam design that are being implemented
around the Nation to improve dam safety and reliability. Similarly,
through collaboration with the National Association of Home Builders
and the Department of Housing and Urban Development, NOAA developed an
Air Freezing Index that the home building industry estimates saves $300
million annually in construction costs and the equivalent of 9 million
gallons of gasoline.
The budget-neutral realignment of resources within the current NOAA
budget would not change staffing levels, would not require employee
relocations, physical relocation of programs or labs, any new
facilities, and would not increase the size of NOAA's overhead. The
Climate Service headquarters would be located in Silver Spring,
Maryland.
The NOAA Climate Service, if approved by Congress, would have a
budget of $346.2 million. Of this amount, NOAA proposes $3.0 million to
support the Regional Climate Centers (RCC) in FY 2012. This funding
will maintain support for RCCs as critical NOAA partners in the
development and delivery of regional climate services. The RCCs will be
aligned with the six NOAA Climate Service Regions and fully integrated
as core components of NOAA's regional climate services partnership.
Each center will function as a source of expertise in the region,
working to identify stakeholder needs and matching these needs with the
emerging science and decision support services flowing from the Climate
Service's core capabilities. For example, this work could improve
products for farmers, who already rely on NOAA climate data,
particularly in El Nino/Southern Oscillation years, to make smart
decisions about what variety of seed to plant and the amount of
fertilizer to use. These types of forecasts can potentially provide a
$500-$960 million per year benefit to the U.S. agriculture industry.
National Weather Service (NWS)
NOAA's National Weather Service (NWS) is the Nation's first line of
defense against severe weather. NOAA provides weather, hydrologic, and
climate forecasts and warnings for the United States, its territories,
and adjacent waters for the protection of life and property and the
enhancement of the national economy. More sectors of the U.S. economy
are recognizing the impacts of weather, water, and climate on their
operations and are becoming more sophisticated at using weather-related
information to make better decisions. The NWS provides critical
information to communities and emergency managers. In 2010, the United
States experienced a number of extreme weather events including the
historic winter blizzards in the Northeast early in the year, historic
flooding in the Midwest and Tennessee, and the third most active
Atlantic hurricane season on record. The tragedy of the March 2011
tsunami in Japan, which had far reaching effects including the U.S.
West Coast, reinforces the very real threat of severe weather events,
and underscores the value of comprehensive warning systems and a
prepared public.
The FY 2012 request for NWS is $988 million. The request envisions
using cost-cutting and cutting-edge technologies to better support the
programs necessary to achieve NOAA's vision of delivering more reliable
forecasts, reducing weather-related fatalities, and improving the
economic value of weather, water, and climate information.
Weather-related air traffic delays cost the U.S. economy over $41
billion in 2007, according to the Congressional Joint Economic
Committee. Two thirds of these delays could be avoided with more
accurate and better-integrated weather information for decision-making.
To meet the rising demands of the air transportation industry, NOAA is
involved in a collaborative partnership with the Federal Aviation
Administration (FAA) and other Federal agencies to create the Next
Generation Air Transportation System (NextGen). NOAA requests a $26.9
million increase to modernize our aviation weather forecasts and
warnings. This funding supports NextGen development activities,
allowing for better integration of weather information into decision-
making solutions for the FAA--potentially reducing the number of air
delays.
Wind shear is hazardous to aviation and critical to hurricane
formation and intensity. The Nation's upper air (UA) network enables
unmatched ability to detect this wind shear and enables much improved
ability to define the jet stream core by providing approximately 78,000
atmospheric profiles (wind, humidity, temperature, pressure and
altitude) per year from ground level to up to 60,000 feet. To improve
the UA network, NOAA requests a $5 million increase for new GPS
radiosondes to provide a 50 percent improvement in wind measurement
accuracy and a 6-fold improvement in vertical resolution. With this
investment, NOAA will fully fund the purchase of GPS radiosondes for
all 102 UA observing stations, ensuring improvements to weather models.
Large maritime data voids exist where no meteorological or
oceanographic data are routinely sampled due to poorly maintained
buoys. This lack of data makes it difficult for forecasters to make
accurate and timely marine warnings and forecasts and to measure the
accuracy of their forecasts. NOAA currently operates 101 moored,
weather observation buoys and 49 coastal, marine automated network
stations. However, over the last eight years, system performance has
trended downward to the current low of 67 percent data availability as
of February 2011. This trend will continue downward to 65 percent data
availability by 2011 without increased support. NOAA requests a $4
million increase to provide operations and maintenance funding for
damaged and destroyed buoys and to comply with new international
regulations. Funds will also be used to begin reducing the backlog of
deferred maintenance by employing charter vessels to supplement the
diminishing availability of U.S. Coast Guard ship time for servicing
the weather buoy network.
In FY 2012 NOAA requests a total of $41 million, including $10.2
million from mandatory funds provided by the Deficit Reduction Act of
2005, to support our tsunami warnings and research activities. Within
minutes after the March 11th earthquake struck, NOAA issued its first
tsunami warning for Japan, Russia, Marcus Islands, and Northern Mariana
Islands as part of the coordinated global response to this tragic
natural disaster. Shortly thereafter, timely watches, advisories, and
warnings were extended to vulnerable coastal areas of Alaska, British
Columbia, California, Washington, Oregon, and Hawaii well ahead of the
arrival of the first waves. To maintain the effectiveness of these
services, NOAA's Tsunami Program will use the FY 2012 funding to
continue operations of NOAA's Deep-ocean Assessment and Reporting of
Tsunami (DART) buoy network, maintenance of its 164 sea-level
stations, and funding of its two Tsunami Warning Centers (TWC). NOAA
will continue to expand community preparedness and finalize the balance
of the tsunami hazard mitigation models (to cover all US coastal
areas). NOAA will also continue research to improve its tsunami warning
and forecast capabilities, and the completion of high resolution models
for tsunami inundation forecasts for tsunami threatened local
communities.
Although NOAA's Tsunami Warning Centers and DART stations are
operated by NWS, NOAA drew from the capabilities of all our line
offices to provide a comprehensive response to the March 2011 tsunami.
The following are examples of the contributions from other parts of
NOAA:

NOAA's DART stations, a result of research performed
at NOAA's Office of Oceanic and Atmospheric Research, detected
and tracked the tsunami as it traveled from Japan across the
Pacific Basin.

National Ocean Service tide gauges, which help detect
the presence of a tsunami wave, use GOES satellites operated by
NOAA's Satellite Service to relay data to the tsunami warning
centers.

NOAA response teams from the National Ocean Service
are in California to assist with detection of submerged debris
resulting from the tsunami in marine transportation arteries
along the coast.
Finally, the underpinning of NOAA's products and services mentioned
previously is the model-based guidance of NOAA's operational high
performance computing (HPC). HPC provides models and model-based
estimates of both current and future states of the Earth's environment,
which are a key component of modern weather forecasts. NOAA requests an
$11 million increase towards transitioning NOAA's HPC to a new
contract, as well as continuing regular improvements to our numerical
weather prediction modeling.
National Environmental Satellite Service (NESS)
NOAA's satellites provide the data and information for forecasts
that are vital to every citizen in our Nation. From safe air, land, and
marine transportation to construction and emergency rescue missions, we
all use satellite products in our everyday lives. In FY 2010, our
satellite program saw a major milestone accomplished with the launch of
Geostationary Orbiting Environmental Satellite (GOES)--15, the final
spacecraft in the latest series. GOES-15 joined three other GOES
spacecraft in assisting the Agency's forecasters to more accurately
track life-threatening weather from tornadoes, floods, and hurricanes
to solar activity that can impact satellite-based electronics,
communications, and power industries. In FY 2010, NOAA satellites also
provided key support in the rescue of 281 people throughout and near
the United States by providing their location to emergency responders.
The proposed reorganization would also affect some programs within
the National Environmental Satellite, Data, and Information Service
(NESDIS), which would be renamed the National Environmental Satellite
Service (NESS), as all three of its Data Centers would be transferred
to the Climate Service. The FY 2012 budget request for NESS is $2
billion, which we will invest in multiple satellite acquisition
programs for the continuity of critical weather, climate, and
oceanographic data. NOAA requests an increase of $687.8M for the Joint
Polar Satellite System (JPSS), which is NOAA's responsibility under the
former National Polar-orbiting Operational Environmental Satellite
System (NPOESS) program. Polar satellites provide critical weather
forecasting for the $700 billion maritime commerce sector and provide a
value of hundreds of millions of dollars to the fishing industry. The
satellites save approximately $200 million each year for the aviation
industry in ash forecasting alone and provide drought forecasts worth
$6-8 billion to farming, transportation, tourism and energy sectors.
Both civilian and military users will use JPSS data and products, which
will continue to fulfill NOAA's requirements to provide global
environmental data used in numerical weather prediction models for
forecasts. On behalf of NOAA, the National Aeronautics and Space
Administration (NASA) will serve as the lead acquisition agent for
JPSS, which supports the afternoon mission requirements. The Department
of Defense will continue the acquisition of early morning orbit assets.
NOAA is committed to working with our partners to complete the
transition from the NPOESS program and to assure the continuity of
Earth observations from space.
The GOES-R series satellites will provide critical weather
observations for severe weather events, such as hurricanes, and also
provide key enhancements in observational capabilities for climate,
oceans and coasts, and the space environment. This program is the next-
generation of geostationary satellites and provides mission continuity
through 2036. NOAA continues to support the GOES-R program with a re-
phasing, taking us from a two-satellite program to a four-satellite
program with the addition of two optional satellites (GOES-T&U), while
still providing continued satellite engineering development and
production activities for GOES-R and GOES-S.
An uninterrupted climate record is critical to understanding global
sea level rise, which directly threatens coastal communities and
ecosystems through increased exposure and erosion, more intense storm-
surge and tidal flooding, and loss of natural habitat due to drowned
wetlands. Therefore, NOAA is requesting an additional $33.0 million to
continue development of the Jason-3 satellite, which will provide
continuity of sea surface height measurements, ensuring an
uninterrupted climate record of over 20 years. The Jason-3 mission is a
joint U.S.--European funded partnership. NOAA requests an $11.3 million
increase to partner with the Taiwan National Space Organization for the
launch of 12 satellites to replenish and upgrade the Constellation
Observing System for Meteorology, Ionosphere, and Climate (COSMIC)
satellite constellation. This program is a cost effective means of
obtaining information about temperature and moisture in the atmosphere
around the globe, which will improve forecasting accuracy.
In addition, a requested increase of $47.3 million will support, in
cooperation with NASA, refurbishing the existing NASA Deep Space
Climate Observatory (DSCOVR) satellite and its solar wind sensors and
developing a Coronal Mass Ejection Imager. The data and information
provided by DSCOVR will support the operations of the Space Weather
Prediction Center, which generates accurate and timely 1 to 4 day space
weather forecasts and warnings. Space observations of geomagnetic
storms are vital to reduce negative effects to power grids, GPS,
telecommunications, the health and safety of astronauts, and the
viability of satellite systems.
Oceanic and Atmospheric Research (OAR)
The major change as a result of the proposed reorganization to
create a Climate Service (described above) is that NOAA would also
strategically realign its existing core research line office, the
Office of Oceanic and Atmospheric Research (OAR), to strengthen the
agency's overall science enterprise and advance the atmospheric and
ocean, coastal, and Great Lakes research and applied science goals
expressed in the America COMPETES Reauthorization Act of 2010. OAR will
refocus its work to serve as an innovator and incubator of new science,
technologies, and applications, and an integrator of science and
technology across all of NOAA.
NOAA is committed to strengthening and integrating NOAA's science
enterprise consistent with the President's call for science and
innovation. NOAA's request includes $212 million for OAR to continue
strengthening core capabilities, such as improving our understanding of
ocean acidification and its impacts, and promoting conservation and use
of America's coastal resources through our renowned Sea Grant Program,
one of our many direct links to universities, citizens, and communities
around the Nation. NOAA will also invest in the future by supporting
innovation in weather forecasting science that can inform clean,
renewable energy generation, which is related to an MOU with the
Department of Energy. In FY 2012, NOAA requests $2 million to support
research in targeted wind resource regions across the Nation. Funding
will advance weather forecast accuracy and quality to allow for more
efficient implementation of wind power usage in the United States.
Another core capability at NOAA is exploration. The NOAA Ship
Okeanos Explorer is among the most technologically advanced research
vessels and platforms for ocean exploration in the United States. In FY
2012, NOAA is requesting an additional $1.5 million to advance the
operations of the Okeanos Explorer with the operation of telepresence
technology, which enables scientists, educators, and others to
participate and lead ocean exploration missions from remote shore-based
Exploration Command Centers; to operate and upgrade the ship's
autonomous and remotely-operated vehicles; provide additional
scientific days at sea; and reduce our huge knowledge gap of what lies
in the deep ocean.
National Marine Fisheries Service (NMFS)
NMFS conserves, protects, and manages living marine resources to
sustain marine ecosystems, afford economic opportunities, and enhance
the public's quality of life. Rebuilding our Nation's fisheries is
essential to preserving the livelihoods of fishermen and related
industries. In 2008, U.S. commercial and saltwater recreational
fisheries supported 1.9 million full- and part-time jobs and generated
$163 billion in sales impacts.\1\ In FY 2012, NOAA requests $1.001
billion to support fisheries and protected resource management to
ensure an optimal balance between conservation objectives and economic
opportunities.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Fisheries Economics of the United States, 2008: http://
www.st.nmfs.noaa.gov/st5/publication/fisheries_economics_2008.html
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
NOAA is making important strides to end overfishing, improve
fishery management, and put fisheries on a path to sustainability.
Working with the Regional Fishery Management Councils, in FY 2010, five
fisheries stocks were rebuilt. Based on estimates, rebuilding U.S.
fisheries would increase the current dockside value by an estimated
$2.2 billion (54 percent) annually from $4.1 billion to $6.3 billion
annually. In FY 2012, NOAA will continue to maximize the potential of
the Nation's most economically important fish stocks through sound
science and management. NOAA will invest $67 million to expand annual
stock assessments to continue to ensure Annual Catch Limits (ACL) are
based on the best available science. ACLs and accountability measures
(AM) are required under the 2007 reauthorization of the Magnuson-
Stevens Fishery Conservation and Management Act for all non-exempt fish
stocks, including overfished stocks, by the end of 2011 to end
overfishing. This investment will help verify that NOAA successfully
ended overfishing ensuring ACLs are set at the most optimal level
possible so that the return for fishermen is maximized while
maintaining the health of the resource.
NOAA will invest $3 million to improve the timeliness and quality
of catch monitoring in recreational fisheries to ensure recreational
fisheries are not unnecessarily restricted due to a lack of data. This
is part of a broader effort to work more closely with the recreational
fishing community.
In addition to sound science, robust management strategies are
vital to sustainable fisheries. In 2010, NOAA released the National
Catch Share Policy, and we will continue to support consideration of
catch share management by the Councils. Catch share programs, which
include limited access privilege programs and individual fishing
quotas, dedicate a secure share of fish to individual fishermen,
cooperatives, or fishing communities. In the United States, catch
shares are currently successfully implemented in 15 fisheries from
Alaska to Florida, and local Fisheries Management Councils are in the
process of developing them in several additional fisheries. Catch share
programs are difficult and sometimes controversial to implement, and we
recognize that some in Congress are concerned about them. But they have
yielded significant financial and ecological benefits to the fisheries
that utilize this system. Both here and in other countries, catch
shares help to eliminate overfishing and achieve annual catch limits,
improve fishermen's safety and profits, and reduce the negative
biological and economic effects of the traditional ``race for fish.''
This budget includes $54 million to support the voluntary establishment
of catch share programs by those Councils that want to utilize this
tool to achieve the Magnuson-Stevens Act requirements. We want to
support those Councils that believe that catch shares are the way to
better manage their fisheries but need assistance in designing and
implementing them.
In addition to fisheries, NOAA manages protected resources, such as
marine mammals and turtles. This requires balancing conservation
objectives and economic opportunities, including commercial fishing
activities and energy development. Investments in priority research in
recovery actions are required to mitigate harm and maximize economic
potential. In FY 2012, NOAA will invest an additional $2.5 million
dollars to increase NOAA's capacity for protected species stock
assessments that provide the foundation of information for decision
makers. We will continue supporting the Species Recovery Grants Program
with a requested $8.0 million increase to provide grants to states and
tribes to conduct priority recovery actions for threatened and
endangered species, including restoring habitat, monitoring population
trends, developing conservation plans, and educating the public.
Managing fisheries and protected species to their full biological
and economic potential requires additional efforts focused on
maintaining habitat and ecosystem functioning. NOAA requests $24
million for the Community Based Restoration Program, including a new $5
million effort to address larger restoration projects. NOAA plans to
increase fish passage, spawning, and rearing habitat by implementing
large-scale ecological restoration in targeted areas such as wetlands.
To support the restoration and protection of the Chesapeake Bay, we
request a $5 million increase for regional studies in the Bay. NOAA
supports the President's Executive Order to restore the Chesapeake Bay
by providing enhanced understanding of the relationships between the
Bay's living resources and habitat, coordinating protection and
restoration of key species and habitats across jurisdictional lines,
and supporting a coordinated system of monitoring platforms distributed
across the Bay.
National Ocean Service (NOS)
In July 2010, President Obama signed Executive Order Number 13547
that adopted the Final Recommendations of the Interagency Ocean Policy
Task Force and established the National Policy for the Stewardship of
the Oceans, Coasts, and the Great Lakes--reinforcing the notion that
``healthy oceans matter.'' NOS supports this policy by translating
science, tools, and services into action to address coastal threats
such as climate change, population growth, port congestion, and
contaminants in the environment. A pivotal event in 2010 was the
explosion of the BP Deepwater Horizon oil rig on April 20. Within
hours, NOAA responded, providing targeted weather forecasts and oil
spill trajectory maps and mobilizing personnel and assets to respond to
what evolved into the largest oil spill in U.S. history. The Office of
Response and Restoration (OR&R) played a critical role in our response
and is leading our efforts to assess damage caused by the event. Over
half of the U.S. Gross Domestic Product is generated in coastal
counties,\2\ and it is expected that the Nation's coastal population
will grow by more than 11 million by 2015 so NOS' services will become
more vital to the coastal environment and economy.\3\Increasing
population density, growing economies, and increased vulnerability to
damages from hazards such as sea level rise or storms, habitat loss,
and other threats makes the task of managing coastal resources more
difficult. The President's FY 2012 Budget includes $559.6 million to
enable NOAA to continue delivering a dynamic range of nationwide
coastal and Great Lakes scientific, technical, and resource management
services to meet the vision of being a Nation with safe, healthy,
resilient, and productive oceans and coasts.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ Kildow, J. T., C. S. Colgan, and J. Scorse. 2009. State of the
U.S. Ocean and Coastal Economies 2009. National Ocean Economic Program.
\3\ Population Trends Along the Coastal United States: 1980-2008,
NOAA 2004.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Human uses of ocean resources (e.g., ocean-based energy, marine
aquaculture, commercial and recreational fishery products, shipping and
navigation services, and other activities) need to be managed
holistically. In FY 2012, NOAA requests $6.8 million to develop an
agency-wide capability to conduct and support Coastal and Marine
Spatial Planning (CMSP) in U.S. waters. CMSP will help us manage ocean
resources in a systematic way by evaluating competing ocean uses,
assessing opportunities and potential cumulative impacts, and working
with industry, state and local decision makers and other stakeholders,
to explicitly make trade-off decisions. CMSP is designed to focus on up
front planning. There are no regulations involved. It does not add
another layer of government but is designed to be more efficient,
effective, and reduce redundancies in decision making. With the new
Ocean Policy we are already witnessing efficiencies in our mapping and
data collection across the Federal government, with data and
information from the Departments of Defense and the Interior, and from
Coast Guard, being integrated into a common database, which will be
available to the public in the future.
The Final Recommendations of the Interagency Ocean Policy Task
Force include a framework for implementing CMSP across the United
States in a manner that respects regional variation of issues and
priorities. This initiative will significantly advance the Nation's
capability to effectively and transparently match competing human uses
to appropriate ocean areas. To further support CMSP and regional ocean
governance, NOAA requests $20 million to establish a competitive grants
program that will support regional ocean partnerships, such as the Gulf
of Mexico Alliance, South Atlantic Governor's Alliance, and the West
Coast Governor's Agreement on Ocean Health that are vital for advancing
effective ocean management. In addition, a proposed increase of $1
million in our mapping program will significantly improve the
accessibility of integrated ocean and coastal mapping data.
The BP Deepwater Horizon oil spill is a stark reminder that spills
of national significance can occur despite the many safeguards and
improvements that have been put into place since the Oil Pollution Act
of 1990 was enacted. The risk of oil spills remains a concern given
increases in marine transportation, pressures to develop domestic areas
for drilling offshore, aging infrastructure susceptible to sea level
rise and violent storms in U.S. coastal areas, and opening the Arctic
to both shipping and oil development. NOAA's OR&R is the lead trustee
for the public's coastal natural resources and an international
scientific leader for oil spill response, assessment, and restoration.
NOAA requests $2.9 million to develop an oil spill research and
development program within OR&R to advance response technologies and
capabilities, especially in deep water and Arctic environments. With
this funding, NOAA will support external grants for essential research
to provide useful information, methods, and tools for planners, oil
spill responders, and assessment practitioners. Also in support of oil
spill response, NOAA requests a $5.0 million increase to implement the
U.S. Integrated Ocean Observing System (IOOS) Surface Current Mapping
Plan using high frequency (HF) radar surface current measurements. HF
radar provides information vital to oil spill response, national
defense, homeland security, search and rescue operations, safe marine
transportation, water quality and pollutant tracking, and harmful algal
bloom forecasting.
The BP Deepwater Horizon oil spill made it apparent that the
economic and social well being of our coastal communities depends on
the environmental suitability of our coastal resources. Numerous
coastal communities, not only in the Gulf but all along our coasts, are
being impacted by the loss of fishing opportunities. In FY 2012, NOAA
requests $8 million to create a National Working Waterfronts grant
program to assist fishing-dependent coastal communities. These grants
will assist distressed or at-risk fishing communities by providing
resources for planning, capacity building, and other activities to
support economic diversity, resource conservation, and economic capital
growth.
Program Support
To deliver sound science and services, NOAA must continue to invest
in its information technology (IT) infrastructure, the maintenance and
construction of NOAA facilities, and the specialized aircraft and ships
that complete NOAA's environmental and scientific missions. A requested
$9.1 million increase will reduce the risk of cyber attacks by
enhancing security monitoring and response capabilities and consolidate
our IT infrastructure into a single enterprise network. This budget
includes an additional $10 million to support major restoration and
modernization projects to address critical facility condition
deficiencies and to improve safety and operating conditions in support
of NOAA's mission. The FY 2012 request ensures that NOAA's fleet of
vessels is able to provide reliable, compliant, and high-quality ship
support to NOAA programs through several increases. For example, $3.4
million is requested to support environmental compliance costs,
including ensuring that NOAA ships are not contributing to water
quality degradation. Efforts to extend and maintain the life of the
NOAA ships will be supported through an $11.6 million increase for
repair periods.
Also critical to the execution of NOAA's mission is our investment
in the future. Students in K-12 we support today become our workforce
of the future; undergraduate and graduate fellowship recipients provide
immediate dividends; and each and every citizen touched by our literacy
and outreach efforts become stewards of our natural resources. These
down payments help to fulfill the President's commitment to education.
The FY 2012 budget includes $20.8 million for NOAA's Office of
Education to implement and manage scholarship programs aimed at
fostering competitiveness in science, technology, engineering and math
by providing quality educational opportunities.
Conclusion
Overall, NOAA's FY 2012 budget request reflects the commitment that
Secretary of Commerce Gary Locke and I have made to the President to
out-educate, out-build, and out-innovate our competitors in support of
robust economic job growth. We have made tough choices to cut lower
priorities and identify cost-savings measures. The resources that are
requested in this budget are critical to the future success of meeting
our needs in climate, fisheries, coasts, and oceans. I look forward to
working with you, the Members of this committee, and our constituents
to achieve the goals I have laid out here through the implementation of
the FY 2012 budget. Thank you for the opportunity to present NOAA's FY
2012 budget request. I am happy to respond to any questions the
committee might have.
______

Dr. Fleming. I thank the witness. Next, I would like to
entertain a motion from Mr. Young.
Mr. Young. Mr. Chairman, I would just like to ask for
unanimous consent to submit questions to the witnesses to
answer. I will be unable to return at three o'clock. I have
another engagement.
Dr. Fleming. Thank you, sir. Without objection. We have
another motion?
Ms. Bordallo. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I am also the
Ranking Member on an Armed Forces Subcommittee, and the meeting
starts at 3:00, and so I would like also to submit my questions
as they are important, and I have talked with the Ranking
Member of this Committee if they could be submitted into the
record.
Dr. Fleming. Without objection. OK.
What we will try to do is to get through another couple of
sets of questions or first set of questions here, and then we
will probably break, and come back. We may have a span of about
15 or 20 minutes. So certainly stay tight for that.
I thank you for your testimony, and I will now recognize
Members for questions, and first, I shall recognize myself for
five minutes. As I review your budget request, it strikes me
that approximately 61 percent of the NOAA budget is for
satellites, weather, and climate programs.
And while I realize that your agency has more than one
mission, it begs the question do you believe that you are doing
an adequate job of managing the Nation's natural resources with
less than half of your budget spent on both science and
management of those natural resources.
Dr. Lubchenco. Mr. Chairman, one thing that I think is
important to recognize is that even though the budget is laid
out by line offices, weather satellites, fisheries, et cetera,
what we do is actually quite integrated.
Weather information depends on satellites, search and
rescue operations for mariners depend on that weather
information, that satellite information. Managing the
fisheries' resources depend very much on that information as
well.
So it is possible to do the partitioning and the
calculations the way that you did it, but it is also important
to recognize that those different pieces reinforce one another
and integrate.
I believe that the satellite--obviously the largest portion
of our program is in satellites, and those satellites are
vitally important to saving lives, protecting property,
enabling American businesses, and they directly support a lot
of information about oceans that enable better resource
management, whether it is harmful algal blooms, or
understanding whether it is an El Nino or La Nina year, that
kind of information is vitally important to managing the
resources.
Dr. Fleming. Madam Secretary, I certainly appreciate what
you are saying on that. However, satellites are darn expensive.
I think that we lost a couple of them in the oceans here not
too long ago. They were not yours I don't believe.
But still there is a lot of risk to that, and one of the
things that we are seeing is day to day important aspects of
calculating, and surveying the fish population. We are getting
further and further behind on that, while we are spending more
and more money on very expensive technology, the majority of
the budget as you can see.
And we are looking at long term trends. Of course, I am
sure that there are some day-to-day priorities in there, too,
but it really is concerning, I think, more and more folks over
are we really being penny wise and pound foolish by spending so
much money on things that have a very vague and maybe long term
aspect, while we are ignoring some things.
So I will go into the second question real quick before I
run out of time. While I don't mean to minimize the importance
of other NOAA activities, Mr. Schwaab's testimony, written
testimony, cites commercial and recreational fisheries
supporting 1.9 million jobs, and generating $163 billion in
sales impact in 2008.
That is a huge economic driver and yet all of that is
predicated on having good data on which to make management
decisions. I wanted to note that your budget request includes
an increase of $16 million to expand annual stock assessments.
While updating stock assessments is important, without
having recent survey information, the updated assessments will
still be flawed unless the new survey data is included. And
what of course that means is garbage in and garbage out. If we
are using 10-year-old data, and then putting in the computers
and spitting something out that is an updated number, it does
not mean that it is accurate obviously, and back to my original
statement, we have to be more and more conservative over time,
which limits the commercial fishing opportunities.
So my question is this. How much funding have you allocated
for increasing and updating fishing surveys?
Mr. Schwaab. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. While the specific
increase that is mentioned speaks to the stock assessment line,
there is significant research that is ongoing on an annual
basis that does provide the important data on an updated basis
to feed into those stock assessments.
In fact, one of the things that we have done in recent
years, particularly in the Southeast, is expand survey data
associated with some of the data-poor stocks in the Southeast
and in the Gulf Coast to help to inform those stock assessment
deliberations.
I don't have it at my fingertips the actual total dollars
associated with that full assessment work, but I will pull that
out here momentarily for you.
Dr. Fleming. OK. Well, I thank you for that, and my time is
up. We are down to close to five minutes to the end of our
first vote, and so we are going to go ahead and temporarily
adjourn, and return in about 15 minutes. We only have two
votes, and we will begin with Mr. Sablan, the Ranking Member of
the Subcommittee.
[Recess.]
We are back in session, and I thank the witnesses for
hanging around, and being prompt, and we have Members filtering
in, but right now we have the most important Member, and that
is the Ranking Member of the Subcommittee, who is next up for
questions, and with that I will yield to the gentleman.
Mr. Sablan. Well, thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, and
thank you for your kind words. Dr. Lubchenco, the Deep Ocean
Assessment and Reporting of Tsunami System, or DART, is a
network of what, 39 buoys, that provide tsunami warnings to the
United States Coast by satellite communication.
And as we saw this month with the Japan earthquake and
tsunami, the DART system can save lives and property. But I
understand that a single DART buoy in the Gulf of Mexico, and a
DART buoy closest to the Northern Mariana Islands, are both out
of commission.
The Marianas have the DART buoys that provide some warning,
but there is only one buoy in the Gulf. We had that big
earthquake in Haiti last year, and no tsunamis. But I would
like to know how serious the threat of a tidal wave is to the
Gulf States.
And I would like to know what kind of funding we need to
make sure that our warning system does not have holes in it
like it does now.
Dr. Lubchenco. Delegate Sablan, thank you for that
question. It is true that 32 of our 39 DART buoys are currently
operational, which means that seven are not. Often times those
DART buoys become detached, or have instruments that are not
functioning.
It is vitally important that we maintain them in an
operational state, and normally there is a plan to do that by
serving them periodically and repairing whatever is not
functional.
However, those buoys are important for the whole tsunami
warning effort, but the original--the initial warning is based
primarily on the seismic information that comes from knowledge
about where an earthquake happens, how deep it is, where its
position is, and how strong it is.
And based on that information--for example, in the case of
the Japan earthquake, nine minutes after the earthquake
happened, our first tsunami warning was issued. So the initial
warning does not depend on the DART buoys, but as a tsunami,
and in this case, is traveling across the Pacific, those buoys
detect the passage of the tsunami, confirm that it is there,
and also provide additional information via satellites to
enable the models to be updated, and the warnings to be
refreshed.
So it is either coming faster, or slower, or stronger, or
weaker. So those DART buoys are critically important to the
overall effort, but they alone are not responsible for the
initial warning.
It is important that those buoys remain in operational
state. Our research operation in our Seattle lab has developed
some new tsunami buoys that are smaller and easier to deploy,
and that is an opportunity for the future to add additional
buoys at less cost.
Mr. Sablan. Thank you very much. I have a question for Mr.
Schwaab, please. Some stocks requiring annual catch limits and
accountability measures are considered data poor, including
stocks in the Western Pacific.
Is the agency going to provide guidance to the regional
fishery management councils on setting annual catch limits for
species with little known information? And what would it take
to get us information needed to set annual catch limits for
data poor fisheries, and does NOAA's budget reflect that cost?
Mr. Schwaab. Yes, sir. Thank you, Delegate Sablan. There
are a couple of components to the answer to your question. The
first is how we deal with those stocks today for which we have
inadequate assessments.
There are a number of techniques that are utilized to
essentially provide proxies for setting appropriate annual
catch limits where the status of stocks is currently unknown.
One example that I would identify for you is the ability,
for example, to look at recent historical catches, recent
historical landings, and set catch limits that are based upon
those recent historical landings, and that is based upon the
inherent assumption that catches have been stable over time,
and that stocks have been stable over time.
And we have been continuing to work with the councils
around the country in providing that kind of assistance as it
relates to data for stocks. The second part of your question
which speaks to bringing all of the stocks up to some standard
level of assessment on a regular basis, and let me if I could
just use this as an opportunity to go back and clarify the
Chairman's question of a few moments ago.
And that is that the current budget, the Fiscal Year 2012
budget proposal, includes $228 million, which captures all of
the assessment and monitoring efforts that go into setting and
undertaking appropriate assessments now.
Under the current proposed budget, which does include that
$15 million increase, which includes both the paperwork side of
stock assessment, as well as some increases for surveys on the
water, if we stay on that track, achieve that level of budget
appropriations and stay on that track, that would give us the
ability to by our estimate provide adequate stock assessments
for 167 of the 230 priority stocks by 2016.
Obviously there are a number of other stocks beyond that,
and it would take considerably more money than is currently
proposed.
Mr. Sablan. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. My time is up. Thank
you.
Dr. Fleming. OK. I thank the gentleman for his questions.
Next we have Mr. Runyan. You have five minutes, sir.
Mr. Runyan. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. My first question is
for Dr. Lubchenco. We have discussed that we are asking for a
$36.6 million increase in the catch shares program.
But the President's budget request also calls for a
transfer of $1.4 million from the fisheries research management
program into catch shares, and also six million from the
cooperative research to the national catch shares.
And we have only had three new catch shares programs that
have been implemented since 2009. What is the intent of
flooding the catch shares program with all this money?
Mr. Schwaab. If you don't mind, Mr. Runyan, I will answer
that.
Mr. Runyan. That would be fine, yes.
Mr. Schwaab. Thank you. So just to provide some background
on the catch share line item. As you indicated one of the
benefits of catch share base program are significant new
observer collection of data, observer-based collection of data
at sea.
So it certainly is--there was a shift when this line was
first created of cooperative research dollars into that catch
share line of approximately $4 million. It did not necessarily
reflect, or it did not reflect a change in the purpose of that
funding.
It did reflect the premise that observer based data and
dock side monitored data associated with the catch shares
program does feed into the kind of data needed to set
appropriate catch limits and update those catch limits over
time.
Mr. Runyan. My issue though is that we start implementing
catch shares, and I actually sat down with a group of fishermen
out of Long Beach Island, New Jersey, last week when I was back
in the district, and they expressed concern that a lot of catch
shares enforcement on people are going to push the small people
out, and in essence making your ability to monitor that easier
by not allowing the little guy to go out, or the recreational
fisher, let alone to go out and fish.
Mr. Schwaab. So, thank you. First of all, I think one of
the--just a couple of comments in response. One of the key
elements or benefits of catch shares is that regardless of the
type of fisherman, it provides for that fisherman more
opportunity and flexibility to fish a dedicated share of an
annual quota.
There are and have been concerns in a number of fisheries
that as catch share programs are designed, they be designed in
such a way as to protect the interests of small communities,
remote communities, and in the case of a number of fisheries,
small boat fishermen.
We have expressed a preference to have councils when they
develop their management programs to look at catch shares as a
potential option to be utilized. We have not at all mandated
catch share implementation, nor have we necessarily expressed
catch shares as a panacea to address all of our fishery
management challenges.
But in the place where catch shares have been implemented,
including some of the programs that you mentioned over the last
few years, they have been designed by fishery management
councils that include the engagement of fishermen at the local
level, and appropriate provisions are designed in to protect
against the kind of concerns that you articulated.
Mr. Runyan. It is just alarming with the amount of money be
moved into those types of programs that many people in my
district disagree with, but to touch on--well, doctor, you have
been familiar with ICCAT, and you have been involved with that
for many years.
And specifically we have a lot of issues with our
swordfish, and we may lose our share to a lot of European
countries because we have our regulations in place kind of
restricting us because of bycatch, and different things.
How are we going to be able to protect our fishermen and
enable them to actually fish for swordfish, but if we lose our
share to Europe, they are not so concerned about the bycatch
issue. So how are we going to address this?
Dr. Lubchenco. Congressman, we worked very diligently this
year at ICCAT to protect the interests of our fishermen, and to
have other nations who fish, and in this case in the Atlantic,
abide by similar kinds of bycatch reduction strategies.
And we were successful in accomplishing some of that. There
is more work to be done. I think that it is important to also
note that we did preclude some bad things from happening to our
fishermen.
There were some attempts to take away some of our quota,
which did not happen, and I think that that--I just want to
emphasize that we were working together with and on behalf of
our fishermen at the ICCAT meetings.
Mr. Runyan. Well, thank you, because it they lose that
quota, it is even harder to get it back. So my time is expired.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Dr. Fleming. I thank the gentleman. Next is the gentlelady
from Hawaii.
Ms. Hanabusa. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. First of all, Dr.
Lubchenco, I would like to congratulate you and to thank NOAA
on your great work. As you know, the Pacific tsunami warning
center did an extraordinary job for those of us in Hawaii.
We did not suffer any loss of lives, but more importantly
than that, they were spot on in their predictions of what would
happen. And I was watching it from here, and it was very
interesting to see that even CNN and any other newscasts,
including the Japanese one, were quoting the Pacific Tsunami
Warning Center.
However, having said that, we all know that the Pacific
tsunami, since its inception, I believe, has been an earmark,
and therefore it will not appear in the budget in the form that
we have seen it in the past.
Because of its importance, I would like to know what you
will do, and how it appearing within the budget, whether we are
going to suffer any loss as far as the funding for the Pacific
Tsunami Warning Center, especially when we feel that its
importance has proven more so as a result of the recent tsunami
and earthquake in Japan.
Dr. Lubchenco. Thank you for that question and thank you
for the compliments to our team. They really did a spectacular
job. The current tsunami warning program has benefitted
significantly from funds that were received from the digital
television spectrum auction proceeds.
That has been used to do a number of different things to
update, and to enhance the tsunami community preparedness
through grants, and to do research to improve our tsunami
forecast inundation models, and to enhance the communication
and information technology infrastructure at the warning
centers.
So some of those funds have already been awarded. Others
are yet to come, and we were instructed to use a balance of
those for some of those different functions, and we are on
track with that right balance.
So I think that that part is very much to the benefit of
the overall program. There does remain some concern about our
ability to continue to maintain the DART buoys, and the tide
gauges that need constant maintenance, in addition to the
actual Tsunami Warning Centers themselves.
And we will continue to include all of those to the best of
our ability as we make very tough funding decisions, not just
this year, but down the road.
Ms. Hanabusa. If we are suffering the budget cuts that you
saw, for example, in H.R. 1, would the buoys and DART, and the
various monitoring devices that are necessary, would they also
be affected?
Dr. Lubchenco. You know, I think that it is probably
impossible to say exactly what the impacts of funding at that
level will be. I would say that cuts that are that deep, and
especially ones that come so late in the year, would
undoubtedly have to impact almost every one of our programs.
But to be more specific than that, and specify how, so much
of it depends on when we know for sure what the Fiscal Year
2011 budget is, and what instructions come along with that.
Currently, we are not issuing the contracts to go out and
service the tsunami DART buoys because of the CR. So those
buoys that are not functional are not being serviced. So there
is--we can still issue warnings. The rest of the buoys are
functional. They provide some redundancy.
But the more that we go into this year and the deeper the
cuts are, the more seriously they will affect every single
program, and I am sure that that one will be affected, as will
all the others.
Ms. Hanabusa. Thank you. Mr. Chairman, I am out of time,
but I do have some questions for Mr. Schwaab that I would like
to submit in writing with your permission.
Dr. Fleming. Without objection.
Ms. Hanabusa. Thank you.
Dr. Fleming. OK. Our next questioner is the gentleman from
Florida, Mr. Southerland.
Mr. Southerland. Doctor, thank you for appearing today. I
wanted to ask some questions regarding the catch limits. How
many fishery closures have been implemented as a result of the
new annual catch limits and accountability measure provisions
of the 2006 Magnuson Act reauthorization?
Dr. Lubchenco. Congressman, I am going to ask Eric Schwaab,
as the Director of NOAA Fisheries, to respond, please.
Mr. Southerland. Sure.
Mr. Schwaab. Congressman Southerland, thank you. So, there
are obviously as a result of the Magnuson Act reauthorization a
number of different constraints that have been imposed upon
fisheries.
So I am not sure what the currency would be to count them,
but let me just provide a quick summary of what has transpired
and a few examples. So there is a requirement that we set under
the reauthorized Magnuson Act catch limits and accountability
measures for all stocks that were undergoing over-fishing in
2010, and for all stocks at the conclusion of 2011.
There are also requirements that are associated with
rebuilding so that those stocks for which a rebuilding was a
requirement, there was essentially a number of fish that was
below some historical value.
Catch limits have to be set in a way to allow a rebuilding
trajectory, in addition to maintaining some sustainable
production of the stock at its current level. So there have
been a number of tools that have been put in place to achieve
those kinds of restrictions, and a number of those relate
specifically to, for example, constrained catch limits, thereby
allowing seasons to continue.
Mr. Southerland. Let me ask you this, because I don't have
as much time as you do.
Mr. Schwaab. Yes.
Mr. Southerland. The science--I know that the stock surveys
and the assessments that have been done--and I live in Panama
City, Florida, and so I am along the Gulf Coast--regarding the
red snapper in the Gulf of Mexico. Do you believe that the red
snapper are overfished?
Mr. Schwaab. So, red snapper in the Gulf are not overfished
now. Overfishing is not occurring. There is a rebuilding plan
that is well underway, and that rebuilding process does lead to
constrained season lengths.
Mr. Southerland. Sure.
Mr. Schwaab. That has been the problem that has been most
acutely felt by fishermen.
Mr. Southerland. But as far as the shrinking of the season,
and it is a 60-day season now, and obviously where we are in
our geography with storms, and hurricanes, and tropical weather
patterns, clearly boats for hire, they are not going to carry a
group out 40 or 50 miles with four to five foot seas.
So they have a very small window to be able to make a
living in that 60-day period. So if red snapper are not
overfished, and if red snapper are 10 or 15 years and older,
and you can get your hook to the bottom without hooking up, why
would we then not make the necessary movements so that we can
give these individuals an opportunity to make a living and
perpetuate a family business?
Mr. Schwaab. So overfishing has ended. The rate of
exploitation has been brought under control. There is a goal of
achieving a certain, and maintaining a certain, abundance
level, that without careful management, we could slide back
into a situation where either overfishing was occurring, or we
were not achieving the abundance.
Mr. Southerland. But we clearly have a healthy fishery when
it comes to red snapper in the Gulf of Mexico, and so my point
is that just because what could happen--and we need to manage,
and don't get me wrong, but when are we also equally concerned
about the healthy numbers of businesses that are trying to
survive?
And I will not even bring in the moratorium due to the oil
spill. I mean, is there any good news for these guys who are
about to go under and who are not getting 15 percent increases
to their budget?
Mr. Schwaab. So there was good news last year, and we
worked very closely with the council of the----
Mr. Southerland. The good news last year was that we had an
oil spill, and the fishery was closed down due to that. So that
was not really good news along our coast.
Mr. Schwaab. So what we did do was work closely--I am
sorry, but the good news was certainly not the oil spill, but
what we did do is work closely with the council to open up days
in the fall, where I think were very much appreciated by
fishermen.
Mr. Southerland. And how many days was that?
Mr. Schwaab. There were a series of, I believe, seven or
eight consecutive weekends.
Mr. Southerland. Right, and let me tell you just from being
there, OK? When school starts in Alabama, Georgia, Tennessee,
Mississippi, there is nobody coming down to fish. I mean, I
appreciate that, but that was too little, too late, for many of
the people.
And these are very dear friends of mine, and families that
I have known for an awful long time. My last question. In light
of the economic situation that we find ourselves in this
country, and the incredible unemployment numbers around the
country, the American family budgets and small business budgets
are hurting the way they are, how can we justify a 15 percent
increase in a budget when the American family is not enjoying
that, and has not over the last three or four years?
Dr. Lubchenco. Congressman, I think the answer is pretty
simple, and that is that the services that we provide at NOAA
are vitally important to those businesses, to recovering jobs,
and to recovering the economy, and to helping communities.
For example, a number of people have highlighted satellites
as being a great big huge part of our budget, which they are,
but it is those satellites that provide the information that
give the Panama City folks hurricane warnings. So those----
Mr. Southerland. Well, quite honestly, Madam, nobody along
our coast should die from a hurricane. You know when it comes
off the Coast of Africa, you have three weeks to prepare.
So it does not just sneak up on you, but when they are
going to foreclose on your house, and your car, and you can't
send your kids to college because you closed your family
business, and so I appreciate the dollars in the additional
satellites, but right now, we are talking about urgent matters
for the men and women, hardworking men and women, that cannot
make their living in the Gulf.
And I just find that to ask for more money that continues
to happen here, and totally be disconnected from the reality of
the American hardworking people that are suffering, I think is
irresponsible.
Mr. Chairman, I am out of time, and so I cannot even yield
you back time because I don't have any.
Dr. Fleming. I am sorry, but I sort of expected her
response.
Dr. Lubchenco. I am happy to respond, although I am not
sure there really is a response.
Dr. Fleming. I don't think there is.
Mr. Southerland. I release her from having to answer that.
Dr. Fleming. OK. I thank the gentleman for his questions,
and next is Mr. Pierluisi from Puerto Rico.
Mr. Pierluisi. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would like to
address my remarks to Dr. Lubchenco. Specifically, I echo the
appeal that NOAA reinstate the funding through the Center for
Sponsored Coastal Ocean Research in 2012 for the four external
coral reef research institutes.
The Caribbean Institute is housed at the University of
Puerto Rico, and the research that it sponsors is integral to
local management of coral reef resources in the Caribbean.
Without this funding reefs would be placed at unacceptable
risks, and the local governments would be without the science
needed to make sound scientifically based management decisions.
So I echo that.
I am also troubled by the proposed reductions in funding
for the coastal zone management grants, and for the National
Estuarine Research Reserves, one of which is Jobos Bay located
in Puerto Rico.
But my main concern has to do with the tsunami warning
centers, and let me explain what I am talking about. NOAA has
determined that Puerto Rico and the United States Virgin
Islands, along with the four Pacific Coast States, face the
greatest tsunami hazard in the United States.
And I am troubled that right now that we only have two
tsunami warning centers, and I immediately, with what we have
seen in Japan, the first thing that anybody with common sense
would think about is what if there is an event like that in the
Caribbean.
We have had two events in the past in the Caribbean with
terrible loss of life, and the centers that cover us are five
thousand miles away. They are the closest one, the one in
Alaska.
And so you wonder, and I am not an expert, but you wonder
what if something happens in Alaska, and that center is
compromised, and then what happens with us? It would be
terrible, apart from everything else that a center does.
So my question to you is that I introduced legislation by
the way, a bill recently, and it was supported by the Ranking
Member Markey to direct NOAA to set up a center in the
Caribbean located in Mia West, and minimize the expense. The
local government of Puerto Rico would match whatever Federal
funding is involved for that purpose.
But I ask you are we--I mean, are you comfortable that we
are taken care of the way that this is set up right now? Isn't
it justified to have a third center for the Caribbean, where
four million American citizens reside?
Dr. Lubchenco. The two existing tsunami warning centers
operate and provides some redundancy to one another. They also
are capable of doing tsunami warnings and models for anyplace,
and they don't need to be located in close proximity to where
an event happens to do the modeling and to issue a warning.
The critical things are for people in the area to
understand what to do when a warning happens, and to have buoys
and tide gauges, but especially tide gauges, in an area to give
real-time information about the changes that are underway, to
complement the seismic information, the earthquake information
that goes into the initial modeling.
And so I believe that our current system does serve the
people of the Caribbean, Puerto Rico, the Virgin Islands,
adequately. It would be the resources--I think that the higher
priority is to make sure that as many communities are as what
we call tsunami ready.
That they understand what to do when a warning happens, and
that they are prepared, and that there are good communication
mechanisms, and that is as important, and that can happen
without having a physical center in a particular place.
So there are obviously many different elements to having a
community be adequately protected, and I think that the
priority for the communities that you are concerned about is to
make sure that they understand what to do, and that there is
good information with tide gauges so that we can understand
what is happening.
Mr. Pierluisi. Thank you. My time is up.
Dr. Fleming. OK. Thank you. I next recognize Mr. Wittman
from Virginia.
Mr. Wittman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and Dr. Lubchenco,
and Mr. Schwaab, thank you so much for joining us today. Dr.
Lubchenco, I wanted to begin with you, and start by saying how
much I appreciate NOAA's efforts on the Chesapeake Bay
restoration.
I think that it is critical that efforts on the Chesapeake
Bay are focused on results, and that there is accountability
with that particular program, and that we know exactly how many
dollars are being spent on that effort across all the different
agencies.
I think that is absolutely critical. We talk about jobs and
the economy. The Chesapeake Bay is a job engine. It is an
economic engine. It has to improve as far as water quality.
We see what that bay produced economically back in the
1950s. I think it is very, very achievable to get it back to
that particular state. If you look at the production of seafood
in that basin, just seafood, just that production, and not the
recreational element, a tremendous economic impact. We need to
be back there.
And I wanted to ask you that in NOAA's Fiscal Year 2012
budget projections, can you tell me what in that budget will
emphasize the restoration of the Chesapeake Bay, and what
elements of that budget will put in place the goals and
objectives of Executive Order 13508?
Dr. Lubchenco. Congressman, thank you for recognizing those
efforts. As you obviously know well, this is an interagency
effort, and NOAA plays a supporting, but not a leading, role in
this.
There is $5 million in our Fiscal Year 2012 request in
support of the Chesapeake Bay, and that research would go to
improving the quality of the research, new technologies and
infrastructure, field and lab equipment, for example, to enable
us to better measure and track what is happening.
There is support for the proposed oyster restorations,
which is vitally important, and those are anticipated down the
road. We have a key role in providing information to decide
where, and how, and exactly when that will happen.
So that is what is in our budget this year, our budget
request, and I am very hopeful that we can deliver on that
because it is vitally important for all the reasons that you
articulate.
Mr. Wittman. Absolutely. Well, I want to make sure that
there is accountability there. My concern in the past is on
tsunami projects, and I will give you an example. In the oyster
restoration program, oysters were put down, and Cownose Rays
came and ate them up like potato chips.
We spent a lot of money there, and I want to make sure that
we don't repeat those mistakes of the past, and that was a
joint project with the Corps of Engineers. I want to make sure
that again there is accountability there.
Resource restoration has a direct economic impact, but for
our waterman, and then if you look at resources, as far as fin
fish, and what that helps commercially, also recreationally.
Those, I think, need to be the emphasis of the dollars that
are spent. We today can't afford to do the niceties. We have to
do the necessities, and the necessities are to get that by to
be a more productive body of water to make sure that it has an
increased economic impact.
So I appreciate what you represent there. Mr. Schwaab, I
want to move to you and something directly associated with
that, is Atlantic sturgeon. We all know the potential that
comes up with the evaluation for an Endangered Species listing
for Atlantic sturgeon.
Anybody that fishes in the bay knows that potentially that
could be catastrophic across the entire bay as far as the
harvest of all kinds of other fin fish. We all know that the
sturgeon come up the by, and they spawn, but they also can be
incidental catch on any gear that is out there.
So I appreciate you extending the public comment period for
the potential listing of Atlantic sturgeon, but I also wanted
to encourage you that through that evaluation process that you
take the time to carefully consider every comment that you will
get from folks up and down the bay, because we all know that is
absolutely critical.
We know that we ought to be protecting all of our species,
but we have to look, too, with interspecies relationships, and
then also be realistic. As you have heard Mr. Southerland say,
there is an economic impact with all these fishery management
decisions.
We want to make sure that the agency is mindful of that,
and that that is reflected in those decisions. So I would like
to get your comment on where we are with the Atlantic sturgeon
evaluation of the ESA listing?
Mr. Schwaab. Yes, sir, Mr. Wittman. Thank you. We were
pleased to work with you, and to honor your request to extend
the comment period. I do know that during that comment period
that we did receive additional comment from Natural Resources
officials in Virginia.
That comment period is now closed. Those comments will be
given full and absolute consideration. We are on a track that
would result in a listing recommendation by the fall, later on
in the fall of this year, at which point obviously there will
be additional opportunities for discussion.
Mr. Wittman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Dr. Fleming. The gentleman's time is up. I next recognize
Mr. Markey.
Mr. Markey. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, very much. Thank you
for being here. I very much appreciate it. If I were to stop
one of my constituents in Medford Square and ask them what is
the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, I would
probably get blank stares.
NOAA is an agency that few in the public could correctly
identify, but that is critical to keeping them safe and our
economy running smoothly. Just this morning, they issued an
alert for a massive storm barreling in to Boston later on
tonight.
This warning will allow people and businesses to prepare
for an unbelievably huge storm here in April, and one that
might push Boston's winter snowfall this year above Shaq
O'Neal, and we are using him as a Shaq-O-Meter this winter.
So we will use his height, and we are about to break the
all time record. So I want to start with a question about
satellites, which I understand has been a point of discussion
here today.
The Administration has requested about $1 billion in Fiscal
Year 2012 to fund the joint polar satellite system to replace
our aging weather and climate satellites.
The National Weather Service recently reran the weather
predictions for the 2010 Snowmageddon event without using NOAA
polar satellite data, and found the impact to the accuracy of
the weather forecasts was substantial, including forecasting
less snow by at least 10 inches.
Can you please describe the consequences if these funding
levels for satellites are not met?
Dr. Lubchenco. Congressman Markey, thank you for focusing
on an area that is vitally important not only to NOAA, but to
the country. The weather information that that we receive that
is provided by the National Weather Service comes from two
types of satellites; one of the geostationary satellites that
sits way high above the earth, and stay in one place, and the
others--and that provides our short term weather information.
The longer term forecasts, the severe storm warnings, are
provided by a different type of satellite, the polar orbiting
satellites, and this program, the joint polar satellite system,
is vitally important to replace the current satellite that is
up there now, and the one that we intend to launch in the fall.
Each of those has a finite life span, and it is very
important that this year we continue to construct the
instrument and the satellites for launch in a number of years
to minimize the gap in coverage.
Currently, because of the continuing resolution for Fiscal
Year 2011, we are already likely to experience a gap of between
12 and 18 months at the minimum, where we will not have the
ability to do the severe storm warnings at the quality that we
do today.
Mr. Markey. Thank you, and we have to make sure that
funding is there. Two weeks ago, I, along with my colleagues,
Congressmen Frank, Keating and Tierney, sent a letter to
Secretary Locke urging him to coordinate with the Departments
of Treasury, Labor, Housing, and Urban Development, and the
Small Business Administration, to assess and evaluate all
options to provide assistance to Massachusetts' fishing
communities negatively impacted by the transition to a new
fisheries management plan.
Can you update us on what steps have been taken to address
our request?
Dr. Lubchenco. Congressman, if I may, Eric, would you
comment on that, please.
Mr. Schwaab. Yes, thank you, Congressman. Yesterday, the
Secretary announced the deployment of economic assessment teams
under the leadership of the Economic Development Administration
into six ports across New England, including New Bedford and
Gloucester.
Those teams will work very closely with local officials to
address some of the transition challenges associated with not
only current fishing regulation, but some of the ancillary
challenges that they face in trying to maintain working
waterfronts in current economies.
Mr. Markey. Thank you. I have one final question here.
Senators Kennedy and Saltonstall in 1954 authored legislation
to use money from tariffs on imported seafood products to fund
programs to promote the health of domestic fisheries.
Currently the majority of that fund are transferred to
NOAA's operations, research, and facilities account, reducing
the funds available for fishing industry projects. Could you
give me an update on what programs are using the Saltonstall
and Kennedy funds, and how they are promoting the health of
domestic fisheries?
Mr. Schwaab. Yes, sir, and just by way of additional
background, beginning in 1979, and through 1985, Congress
enacted a transfer from the promote and development account to
the operations, research, and facilities account within NOAA.
Beginning in Fiscal Year 1986, the Administration also
began to include that transfer to that same account as a part
of its budget request. These funds essentially come off of the
top of that account, and so they support a wide range of
programs within NOAA fisheries that are supporting that.
Mr. Markey. Could you give a report to the Committee on
what that funding is used for in writing?
Mr. Schwaab. Yes, sir, we can.
Mr. Markey. Thank you, and thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Dr. Fleming. I thank the gentleman, as his time has
expired. Dr. Harris is recognized.
Dr. Harris. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. Dr.
Lubchenco, good to see you again. The last time I saw you, it
was at Science and Technology, and since we spoke with you
then, and asked you some questions, I actually have had a
chance--and one nice thing about our schedule is that we
actually get to go out once a month, and get outside the
Beltway for a week and actually talk to people.
I could not convince them of the popularity of catch
shares. I just could not convince my local recreational
fishermen or my commercial fishermen. So maybe you have
different folks that you all talk to.
Mr. Chairman, I would like to enter into the record the
vote from the amendment to the continuing resolution that dealt
with catch shares, and if we could include that just to show
that it may be popular somewhere, but it is not even popular on
the Floor of the House apparently, the catch share program.
And let me just ask a couple of questions. One is about the
sea bass, the Black sea bass in the Mid-Atlantic. Now, my
understanding is that--and, Mr. Schwaab, maybe you are the one
to ask, but it is currently not overfished, but yet it is
facing a closure.
Is this because we are awaiting new data, and is it true
that the data that we are basing that on is not 9-year-old
data?
Mr. Schwaab. Dr. Harris, the situation with respect to
Black sea bass is not dissimilar to the one that we discussed
in the Gulf with respect to red snapper. Overfishing has ended
and there is a rebuilding plan that is underway, and
requirements to manage the fishing rates, and to essentially
maintain a certain stock size over time.
And the fishing effort has the potential to substantially
outstrip the productive capacity of that stock. So while we
have a substantially healthier Black sea bass population in the
Mid-Atlantic than we have had for a long time, the ability of
the fishermen to essentially fish that stock so hard to lead to
backsliding does lead to continued requirements to manage
seasons, and to put into place accountability measures that
should those catch rates exceed articulated catch limit levels,
or established catch limit levels, that seasons can then be
modified to bring that into account.
I do not believe as I sit here that that is based on a 9-
year-old assessment, but I would have to get back to you with
the specific data with respect to that.
Dr. Harris. All right. I would appreciate that, because
obviously as you know, our experience with the blue crab
population is that it can fluctuate greatly, and if we are
dealing even with 3-year-old blue crab data in the bay, we
would have had a lot of fishermen out of jobs.
And we are supposed to care about jobs, and the
recreational fishing industry is a huge job creator in the bay
as it is for my colleague here from Florida, I am sure. Let me
just ask about the scallops.
The catch share for the scallops, as some of my commercial
fishermen have said, that when you initiate these catch shares,
what happens is that kind of the big guys then with all the big
boats end up buying the licenses, because that is really what
they are, and can in fact because of those techniques actually
strip the bottoms in fairly large areas, because these are
large boats fishing over small areas.
So it really does change the nature of the fishery. Is that
true, Dr. Lubchenco? Are they telling me the truth there, that
it does change when you change a fishery from one with a group
of large boats, to one with a lot of small boats, and it
changes the fishery, like the scallops?
Dr. Lubchenco. Congressman, I will let Eric respond to
scallops specifically, but just as general comment, let me say
two things. One is that NOAA does not impose catch share
programs on anybody.
The fishery management councils choose if a catch share is
an appropriate management tool for them for a particular
fishery. So just to clarify that, and a catch share program
needs to be well designed, and you can design it so that the
big guys cannot buy out all the little guys.
That is a design element that we believe should be included
in the design part of the program.
Dr. Harris. All right. Thank you. Let me just follow up a
little bit about that with these catch shares, because
obviously NOAA must have something to do with it, because that
is where we went into the budget to try to stop it.
What happens when a fisherman retires, and when they decide
that they don't want to do it anymore? My understanding is that
license, that catch share, is kind of for sale. They can sell
it to someone; is that correct?
So the government is creating something that in the end
that you can really never take away, because that fisherman
will feel that that is their possession. So what is the rush,
because my understanding is that with increased funding that
there would be a whole lot of new catch share programs probably
initiated.
So what is the rush to create a program that is so hard to
reverse, if it could be reversed ever because of the value that
you create when you give someone--I mean, it is like the
ultimate license. I am an anesthesiologist, and if I had a
license to anesthetize a certain number of people in a year,
and I could sell that to someone, or conversely if I take a few
years off and don't anesthetize as many people as I am doing
right now, when I go back to do it, I would have to buy a
license from someone to anesthetize people.
But that is the equivalent of what we are doing. So what is
the rush since we are creating something that is of permanent
value that would be so hard to take away if like the plan did
not work out?
Mr. Schwaab. Thank you, Dr. Harris. I think that it is
important to recognize that expressly by statute these are not
permanent rights. These are privileges that are conveyed.
The only distinction between the privileges that are
conveyed in the case of catch shares versus those that are
conveyed through some other management system, is that they are
more narrowly a share of an annual catch limit, the privilege
to catch a share of an annual catch limit is conveyed to an
individual, or groups of individuals.
So the privilege is to fish in other fisheries under other
systems, like a days at sea system, that exist in a number of
these fisheries prior to the imposition of catch shares, is
transferrable as a license in the same way that a permit, or a
privilege, under a catch share system would be transferrable.
Dr. Harris. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman. I am out of
time, but I will be submitting additional questions. Thank you.
Dr. Fleming. The gentleman's time is up. Let us see. Mr.
Duncan from South Carolina, you are now recognized.
Mr. Duncan. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Schwaab,
thanks for being here today. As you may or may not know, no
Shortnose sturgeon have been detected in the upper Watery River
in South Carolina at least since 1896.
1896, which was before the Catawba Waterway Dams were
actually built, which was in 1904. Yet, as a part of the hydro
relicensing process, the NMFS has indicated that the dams are
actually impinging the ability of the shortnose sturgeon to
move up the river, and is looking to require the licensee to
either construct fish passages on all the dams, or remove them
entirely.
This is unfortunate, because it seems that all the
stakeholders were working together to reach a satisfactory and
sustainable agreement on relicensing issues, and then suddenly
the regional office of NMFS backtracks, and overrules the local
NMFS office.
And instead of a balanced and pragmatic decision on
resource allocation, we have a stalemate that could include
environmental litigation if recommendations are not put into
the final relicensing permit.
And this is a total 180-degree shift from what FERC
included in its environmental impact statement for the project,
which has an agreement from the local NMFS office, and the
relevant State, local, and industrial, and environmental
stakeholders.
FERC's recommendation was to reserve its right to reopen
the license if and when a shortnose sturgeon were detected in
the river, and everyone, including the licensee, agreed to that
as the best solution.
The fact is that NMFS wants to increase the cost of the
project to protect a fish that has not been within 70 miles of
the dams in over 100 years. So my question is simple. What new
data are you using to justify this decision that anything short
of fish passages or total dam removal are unacceptable?
And am I correct, but didn't NMFS issue a draft report on
shortnose sturgeon last year for another project in South
Carolina where RDR, as well as FERC, took exception to some of
the conclusions, and basically said it lacked credibility?
From what I understand the fish are actually around that
dam, and so I will just let you address that, please, shortly.
Mr. Schwaab. Yes, sir, Mr. Duncan. Thank you. I do know
that we have issued preliminary and modified prescriptions for
fish passage under the Federal Power Act. So there is
essentially a draft biological opinion that has been issued.
There has not yet at this point been a final biological
opinion that has been issued to FERC under this project
proposal. I do know that FERC is anxious to have that final
biological opinion expeditiously so that they can move forward
with the process.
As to some of your references as to the historical reports,
honestly, I can't speak to them as I sit here today.
Mr. Duncan. If you want to take a historical approach, I
can go back over a hundred years and tell you that there has
not been a sturgeon seen in that river, and I think it is
ludicrous.
And this is what the American people get frustrated with
our government when it is very obvious to the common man out
there that shortnose sturgeon aren't anywhere near this
project, but you are going to hold it up in costs, and rate
payers in South Carolina and North Carolina that benefit from
the hydroelectric project, you are going to cost them money
because it is going to trickle down through costs of
litigation, and it is just wrong.
So I will just leave it there, and I want to ask Ms.
Lubchenco this. NOAA has prided itself on the work that they
do, and the budget increase that they have requested, and I
hate to be the bearer of bad news to you, Ma'am, but we are $14
trillion in debt, and we are running a $1.6 trillion deficit
this year.
Unemployment remains far too high in this country, and
definitely in South Carolina, where I come from. We cannot
accommodate your budget request, especially when these requests
will be used to prove that global warming is going to kill us
all, polar bears included.
This request comes despite the fact that the so-called man-
made global warming alarmists have been thoroughly discredited
with the e-mails scandal, fake data, and yet here we are at a
budget hearing, where you are asking for more money.
The Nation is broke. We cannot afford to be wasting money
on improperly orders of priorities like global warming studies.
You really want us to out-educate, out-build, out-innovate our
competitors when we are imposing these kinds of restrictions on
them through the global warming criteria? I don't think you do.
So if you really wanted to create jobs, you would have
abandoned these global warming fairy tales and shifted your
efforts to ending the drilling moratorium in the Gulf of
Mexico. Our economy is in the tank, Madam, instead of gasoline
in our tanks.
So let us focus here on actually putting Americans back to
work. It is time to get serious, Mr. Chairman, and I appreciate
them coming for their budget request, but the American people
expect better of us. Thank you.
Dr. Fleming. The gentleman yields back his time. I now
recognize Mr. Pallone from New Jersey.
Mr. Pallone. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I apologize for
coming in so late and missing everything, but I did want to be
here because I am very concerned about this catch share
program.
And I noticed when I came in and there were some other
Members asking about it, and so I hope that is not repetitive,
but I wanted to ask Dr. Lubchenco, and also Mr. Schwaab, with
regard to NOAA's Fiscal Year 2012 budget request, it
reallocates more than $6 million from cooperative research, and
$11.4 million from the fisheries research and management
program to the national catch share program.
I am confident that work for the Partnership for Mid-
Atlantic Fishery Statistics that is occurring in my district
and along the Mid-Atlantic is a glowing example of the success
of cooperative research.
However, NMFS does not support the Partnership for Mid-
Atlantic Fishery Statistics. It was funded through an earmark,
which we know how is no longer possible unfortunately.
So I wanted to know how does NOAA intend to ensure that
cooperative research continues to continue to improving
fisheries management when it is being cut by more than $6
million? I would ask each of you.
Dr. Lubchenco. Congressman, I would like Eric to respond to
that if I may, please. Thank you.
Mr. Pallone. Sure.
Mr. Schwaab. Congressman, thank you. We did speak a little
to this point earlier. The shift that occurred from the
cooperative research line into the catch share line reflects
less a change in the function or purpose of that money, and
more the fact that with catch share systems there are at-sea
observers and dockside monitor costs that do generate
cooperative related data that feed into the management systems.
Mr. Pallone. But my problem is that NOAA's national catch
share policies explicitly states that NOAA does not advocate
the use of individual private anglers or catch shares. Now, my
district has thousands of private anglers, and attracts
individual anglers from all over the Nation.
And these anglers support local small businesses, and
drives the coastal economy. By placing cooperative research
funds under catch shares, which my understanding by your own
policy is not recommended for my district, I think you are
putting pressure on the Mid-Atlantic Regional Fisheries
Management Council and other regional management councils, to
adopt catch shares to get at that funding.
And, of course, I have said this over and over again, and
it is not just me that is saying it. My fishermen are saying it
as well. So how do you propose that we help the recreational
fishing communities gain confidence in the data collection of
fisheries management when you are moving essentially one
confidence builder out of their reach?
I mean, you understand that they have very little faith in
the management programs--I was going to say schemes, but I
guess I should watch my language--because they just think that
the data is not accurate.
And they have been spending their own money literally to
try to get more accurate data. So I just don't know how you are
going to gain their confidence in the data collection of
fisheries management when you are making this move that you are
saying. That is my problem.
Mr. Schwaab. Thank you, Mr. Pallone. Let me make a couple
of other additional comments. One, that this budget also
reflects a proposed increase for the marine recreational
information program that gets much more directly at some of the
catch and effort data associated with recreational fisheries.
Second, I would just note that while--that the
preponderance--most of the catch here, if not all of the catch
here, are in programs that have been implemented, and have been
implemented for the commercial side of fisheries.
So in the case where you have a mixed sector fishery with
recreational fishermen catching a share of the quota, and
commercial fishermen catching a separate share of the quota,
placing commercial fishermen under a catch share system has
been shown to yield benefits in accountability to total
allowable catches, and invest them in----
Mr. Pallone. Well, let me ask you this. What about what I
said? I will let you respond, and I know that I am almost out
of time, but they all tell me, and I think that you are putting
pressure on the Mid-Atlantic Council, to adopt catch shares to
get at this funding that you now say that has been moved over
for cooperative research. So what is your response to that?
Mr. Schwaab. So the bulk of this funding, that is, this
increase, is actually proposed to support the Pacific troll
individual quota program, which was developed after seven years
of work by the Pacific Fishery Management Council.
Mr. Pallone. So they are not going to get the money anyway
in the Mid-Atlantic; is that what you are saying?
Mr. Schwaab. No, what I am saying is--what I am trying to
say is that we are not creating an economic incentive whereby
the only place to go to secure appropriate funding is in the
catch share programs.
There are catch share funds to support programs that have
been adopted. There are opportunities for additional programs,
but there are also significant other opportunities in there.
Mr. Pallone. But it seems to me that they have been
severely limited then by switching this over and cutting it,
and you are going to limit the opportunities. But thank you
anyway. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Dr. Fleming. Thank you, sir. The gentleman's time is up.
Thank you. Well, we have had such an enjoyable time that we
have decided that we would like to stay for another round. Are
you up for it today, witnesses?
Dr. Lubchenco. We are here at your pleasure, sir.
Dr. Fleming. OK. Thank you. I will recognize myself for
five minutes, and I want to come back to something that I
brought up earlier about this idea of surveys and assessments.
Is it fair to say that if stock surveys and assessments are
not done in a timely manner by your agency, fishermen pay the
price because of the scientists and managers having to build
several layers of precaution into the models in order to set
harvest levels?
Mr. Schwaab. Yes, sir, it is fair to say that if stock
assessments are not done in a timely fashion, there is
additional precaution that is built into the management.
Dr. Fleming. And would you acknowledge that that has an
economic impact, certainly to the commercial fishermen out
there who have a smaller and smaller window if you will of
fishing opportunities?
Mr. Schwaab. So certainly that can have, and in many cases
does have, an economic impact, yes, sir.
Dr. Fleming. OK. Thank you. Is it fair to say that multiple
layers of precaution may be built into a single fisheries
harvest level?
Mr. Schwaab. The two general types of precaution that are
built into most of these catch limits and accountability
measures are management uncertainty, which is generally a small
part of whatever precaution buffer might be included, and then
scientific uncertainty, which is based on the best advice of
the collection of scientists that contribute to the stock
assessment.
Dr. Fleming. OK. Now, I understand that the NOAA fleet will
be able to spend about half of the amount of time in Fiscal
year 2011 as it did in Fiscal Year 2010 for fisheries stock
assessments.
Now, I heard you earlier testify--and I forget the numbers
exactly--that you have plans by, I think, Fiscal Year 2016 or
2015, to close significantly the gap. So, explain this to me,
because we are actually seeing that there will be less time for
the fleet, and yet we are going to do more surveys or do catch
up of surveys?
Mr. Schwaab. Yes, sir. So there are reductions in fleet
days available to us as result of a variety of budget and
operational circumstances. The Fisheries Service does
contribute additional funds to essentially purchase back some
additional days at sea.
Further, the fleet, at least as it supports the Fisheries
Service, provides a platform for a number of surveys and work
that goes beyond those specific to the support of stock
assessment.
And as an agency, we do, as we look ahead, prioritize
meeting some of those basic stock assessment requirements above
some of those other surveys that will be experiencing even
deeper cuts as a result.
Dr. Fleming. What I am trying to understand though is that
if you have less fleet days, and yet you feel that you are
going to actually catch up on the surveys, how do you recognize
that?
It would seem to me that it would go just the other
direction. What compensates for those fewer days at sea?
Mr. Schwaab. Well, first of all, just to emphasize what I
said a moment ago, which is that the proportional shift
downward associated with fisheries stock assessment related
surveys, is less than that which is reflected across the fleet.
In addition, I would say that we also work from a number of
other platforms through cooperative research, and through
contract of commercial vessels, to provide important survey
platforms that have helped us to maintain as close as we can
the trajectory that we are on.
Dr. Fleming. How do you set that priority in terms of
fisheries? Who gets the attention first?
Mr. Schwaab. Well, there are a number of factors that we
employ there, but obviously some of those relate to the
importance to fisheries around the country, and their relative
value.
There are other factors that do come into play there, such
as volatility, and other biological judgments made primarily by
our scientists.
Dr. Fleming. Some of the data is as old as 10 years, and so
are you putting that at a priority as well, going back to those
that are maybe the most overdue?
Mr. Schwaab. Yes, sir. Within the--well, obviously there
are some stocks for which we lack any kind of significant data,
and its relative importance that has placed them in that
position.
So clearly length of time since the last assessment is a
factor, but it is not necessarily the--it certainly is not the
only, and not even necessarily the dominant factor.
Dr. Fleming. OK. My time is up. I now recognize Mr. Sablan,
the Ranking Member.
Mr. Sablan. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. Mr.
Chairman, I would like to ask for unanimous consent to enter
into the record a statement supporting the Fiscal Year 2012
request for fisheries data collection and monitoring submitted
by the Pure Environmental Group.
Dr. Fleming. Without objection, so ordered.
Mr. Sablan. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Schwaab,
what are the economic benefits of rebuilding fisheries in
Fiscal Year 2012 and beyond?
Mr. Schwaab. Thank you, sir. So we estimate that if we
rebuild currently the estimated dockside value of domestic
fisheries to be about $4.1 billion.
Our economists estimate that if we rebuild all stocks to
the desired level that we could increase that number by
approximately 50 percent, up over $6 billion in dockside value,
and obviously spinoff values associated with economic
productivity and jobs.
Mr. Sablan. And you have also recently said that we are
turning the corner with regard to measures in place for
overfishing in United States waters in 2011. So would we be at
this point if Congress had decided not to fund the key
fisheries programs, including stock assessments, of service
cooperative research, and surveying and monitoring projects?
And what would the impact on ending overfishing be if
funding levels in H.R. 1 were enacted?
Mr. Schwaab. So the corner that we are turning--and thank
you, sir--is that by the end of 2011, under requirements
prescribed by the Magnuson Act, we will have in place catch
limits and accountability measures to assure that overfishing
is not occurring in Federally managed stocks.
That obviously also then include placing us on the
trajectory to rebuilding to the kind of benefits that I
described moments ago. If we are in a position where over time
we lack the ability to conduct appropriate science to maintain
that course, there is, of course, the prospect of backsliding.
There is, of course, also the other eventuality that we
spoke of a few moments ago, and that is increased scientific
uncertainty buffers that would undermine total quotas.
Mr. Sablan. All right. Thank you. Dr. Lubchenco, six of the
nine regions identified in the National Oceanic policy have
established regional ocean partnerships. The remaining three,
including the Pacific Territories, do not have such
partnerships. Are there plans to extend these regional
partnerships to the Pacific Territories?
Dr. Lubchenco. I believe that it is appropriate to have a
dialogue with the Pacific region to identify what would be in
the best interests, and would be supported by that region.
One of the principles of the regional planning program is
to enable a bottom up approach, and to really empower local
communities, States, and territories, to participate actively
in comprehensive planning for their regions.
And the model that was envisioned works appropriately for
States that have Governors alliances in place already, but
where those don't, I think that a dialogue with the region is
certain appropriate to see how to best meet those needs.
Mr. Sablan. All right. And so how does NOAA funding
requests for regional ocean partnerships and coastal and marine
spatial planning represent an effective and efficient use of
yearly budgeted funds?
Dr. Lubchenco. The Fiscal Year 2012 budget includes
requests for $20 million for regional planning grants that
would be awarded on a competitive basis to different regions,
and I can tell you that there is keen interest on the part of
many, many regions in having that assistance, and in doing that
planning.
The additional $6.7 million, I believe it is, is in support
of providing information, including integration of data, which
will benefit all regions so that there is information that is
available to do planning.
Mr. Sablan. Thank you very much, and my time is up.
Dr. Fleming. OK. I thank you. Mr. Southerland, you have
five minutes.
Mr. Southerland. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Schwaab, I
want to ask you that if many fisheries may not have updated
stock assessments for up to five years, is it fair to assume
that the measures to stop overfishing are not successful until
the new stock assessments are completed?
Mr. Schwaab. So we would have catch limits and
accountability measures in place, but we would not actually be
able to verify the end of overfishing until the next stock
assessment.
Mr. Southerland. And the reason that I asked that question,
and I think you may have touched on that on a previous
questioner, but I think you stated, and I just wanted to get a
verification that obviously if that is the case, and we won't
know for five years if we don't have the data, that it unfairly
penalizes fishermen.
It could unfairly penalize those fishermen for that year
period while we are waiting for new data.
Mr. Southerland. So clearly more frequent and more accurate
data is to everybody's benefit?
Mr. Schwaab. Absolutely. I mean, we are in agreement there.
Mr. Southerland. OK. Where in the budget are you addressing
NOAA's current inability to give management councils this
socioeconomic data that they are statutorily obligated to
consider when making fisheries management decisions?
Mr. Schwaab. So we do have within our regions economists
and socioscientists that do support the councils in pursuit of
that data, and those would be reflected in the overall sort of
management and assessment portion of the budget.
Mr. Southerland. Well, it seems to me, and again I am just
learning this process, but it seems to me that obviously the
fisheries have to have this data that they get from you, and
they have a statutory obligation.
And yet I see in the budget that we are shifting, and there
is the increase--and Dr. Lubchenco, you can even address this
as well, but the increase in the satellite that was about $700
million, and where you want that to go.
And then of course the climate services. So if we have the
pressure that the fisheries have the statutory requirement to
have good data in order to make their management decisions, and
there is a problem because we don't have the data, and we all
agree that we don't have the current data that would be best,
then why are we diverting monies into other areas, and moving
in other areas, when there is a statutory violation because
they don't have the data that is needed?
I mean, what is the justification to continue pushing money
in areas when there is statutory violations being incurred
because they can't make good decisions because they don't have
the data that you provide?
Dr. Lubchenco. Congressman Southerland, the current process
involves providing councils with economic information when they
are in the process of putting together a fishery management
plan.
That is part of the routine process. We do that and we will
continue to do that. The request in the budget for an increase
of $15 million for stock assessments is to go out and get
additional information about many of those stocks for which we
would all like to have more current information.
So we are not doing the trade-off that you are suggesting.
I think that there is interest in having more money in every
part of our budget, and we have done the best balancing and
juggling that we can, which is why you see a strong emphasis on
more money for stock assessments, because that is a bottleneck
that is a critically important aspect to being able to know how
well we are doing, and to be able to manage appropriately.
Mr. Southerland. Well, since this focuses on--I mean, since
this affects so many jobs, why would we not take--when you say
that you have that request of $15 million, why would we not
take that $15 million out of that $346 million that you want to
use to create a new line item under climate services?
I mean, there is money there, and why would we not--we know
that awe have an issue, and we know that we have a problem with
data. Why would you not take $15 million that you have already
got, or that clearly has been in the budget in other line
areas, and address that need?
Dr. Lubchenco. Congressman, let me clarify that the
proposal to create the climate services budget neutral, and so
we are taking individuals, and labs that are currently in one
place and just putting them together in another place.
Not physically, but in terms of the organization. So that
does not incur additional funds. The request for additional
money for stock assessments is in fact a reflection of its
importance.
Mr. Southerland. When you do--and this is kind of a
different direction, but when you do this and you create a
climate services whole another division, does that require
Congressional authority?
Dr. Lubchenco. It does require congressional approval, but
not necessarily legislation. But the budget request is included
in the President's budget request to Congress as part of our
package, and is to do this budget neutral reorganization.
We currently provide climate services. We provide long term
weather forecasts. I should clarify that anything that is
longer than about four--I am sorry, two weeks, is considered
climate in the way that we typically think of it.
And so information about what is happening a few months
down the road, or next year, is climate information, whether it
is an El Nino year, or La Nina year. So we currently provide
climate services, which is information about the future for
planning purposes for farmers, for fishery managers, for
others.
And the climate service reorganization is intended to make
it possible to do that more effectively and more efficiently.
Mr. Southerland. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Dr. Fleming. I thank the gentleman. Let us see. Ms.
Hanabusa from Hawaii. Five minutes.
Ms. Hanabusa. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. My questions are for
Mr. Schwaab. Mr. Schwaab, as I understood your testimony, you
said that the actual catch shares are established by the
various regional fisheries, but it is based on information or
data that you provide. Am I understanding that correctly?
Mr. Schwaab. Thank you, Congresswoman. So the catch limits
are set based upon science that is provided from surveys that
come from a variety of different sources, and then those data
come together in a stock assessment process for again
scientists to review that data, and make assessments around the
status of the stock, and its capacity to produce a certain
number of fish sustainable.
And so those are catch limits that are then adopted by the
councils as a part of the fishery management planning process.
The concept of catch shares is a management system which is a
particular type of management system separate from the setting
of catch limits and quotas.
Ms. Hanabusa. So do you participate in any one of those
processes, whether it is the catch share or the catch limits?
Mr. Schwaab. So we in each of our regions have science
centers, and regional offices, that work very closely with the
fishery management councils, both in collecting and analyzing
the science on which catch limits are set.
And then we also work with the management programs that are
recommended by the councils in a rulemaking process that the
agency develops and adopts them.
Ms. Hanabusa. Is the reason why we are seeing the transfer
of funds is because your science needs to be augmented or
updated?
Mr. Schwaab. OK. So catch shares and the funds that have
been the subject of a number of questions here, is a particular
type of management approach. Traditionally, most of the
fisheries are managed based upon essentially input controls;
how many days at sea a fisherman can spend, and things like
that.
And they are generally applied in aggregate to a fishery.
So all of the fishermen go out and fish against a common quota
under certain umbrella rules. That leads to a number of
sometimes unfortunate outcomes, like derby fishing, where all
the fishermen go out together, and catch as many fish as they
can, and as quickly as they can, and bring them back to dock,
lessening their market value through increasing capture costs,
and increasing risk of bad weather implications and that sort
of thing.
What a catch share based program does is that based upon a
total allowable catch, assigns the privileges to catch a
portion of that catch to a specific fisherman or group of
fishermen.
And there they are given more freedom to go out and catch
the fish when and how they want. It provides them increased
market opportunity, and it provides them increased business
flexibility.
And it also provides them the opportunity, for example,
pursue fishing practices that minimize the catch of unwanted
catch by catch and those kinds of things. There are a lot of
positives to catch share based programs in the management
system.
Ms. Hanabusa. But does that also permit them to transfer
those rights? In other words, can they then sell those rights?
Mr. Schwaab. So as with many of the management programs,
catch share or a days at sea permit, or anything like that,
there are provisions that allow for the transfer of permits.
Now, these permits all have underlying them only privileges
and not perpetual rights to catch a certain amount of fish, and
that is the same for the catch share program as it is for any
of another commercial management----
Ms. Hanabusa. But for a given year, for example, would one
entity be able to then transfer their rights, or sell their
rights, to another for that specific season, or that specific--
whatever that right is good for?
Mr. Schwaab. Yes. Most of the programs, and they are all
designed differently because they are designed by the councils
based upon the needs of the local fishery, but most of them
provide for some kind of a transfer of quota system.
Ms. Hanabusa. Thank you very much.
Mr. Schwaab. Thank you.
Dr. Fleming. Well, that completes two complete rounds, and
so I would like to say today thank you, and congratulations to
Dr. Lubchenco, and Mr. Schwaab, for your testimony today.
It has been very informative, and very responsive, and we
do thank you for that. The Subcommittee may have additional
questions for the witnesses, and we ask you to respond to these
in writing.
The hearing record will be open for 10 days to receive
these responses. If there is no further business, without
objection, the Subcommittee stands adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 4:40 p.m., the Subcommittee was adjourned.]

[Additional material submitted for the record follows:]

[The prepared statement of Mr. Markey follows:]

Statement of The Honorable Edward J. Markey, a Representative
in Congress from the State of Massachusetts

Thank you, Mr. Chairman. If I were to stop one of my constituents
in Medford Square and ask them what is the National Oceanic and
Atmospheric Administration (NOAA), I would probably get blank stares.
NOAA is an agency that few in the public could correctly identify but
that is critical to keeping them safe and our economy running smoothly.
Just this morning they issued an alert for a massive storm barreling
its way to New England. This warning will allow people and business to
prepare for another severe storm and one that may push Boston's winter
snow fall this year above Shaq on the Shaq-O-Meter.
Recognizing the critical role that NOAA plays across our economy,
the Administration has requested $5.5 billion for 2012, an increase of
$749.3 million from the enacted level for Fiscal Year 2010. Despite
these fiscally austere times, NOAA has proposed $43 million for
Fisheries Research and Management to provide accurate and timely
information and analysis on fish stocks; $27 million for regional ocean
partnership grants and coastal and marine spatial planning to decrease
costs and delays and provide planning certainty for ocean-related
industries; and a budget-neutral reorganization to stand-up a Climate
Service to provide relevant, reliable, and timely information for
managers, businesses, and all citizens to make decisions in the face of
climate change.
These forward-looking initiatives stand in stark contrast to H.R.
1, which recklessly cut almost $400 million from the 2010 enacted level
for NOAA and would prevent the reorganization to create a Climate
Service. From tsunamis to hurricanes to oil spills, NOAA has been on
the front lines of disaster response, and slashing funding will cut the
life-saving services that this agency provides to every congressional
district. I commend the Administration for proposing a budget that
makes strategic choices to support our ability to prepare for
disasters, to protect our coastal resources and communities, and to
provide necessary climate products and services needed by all
Americans.
______

[A statement submitted for the record by Lee R. Crockett,
Director of Federal Fisheries Policy, Pew Environment,
follows:]

Statement submitted for the record by Lee R. Crockett,
Director of Federal Fisheries Policy, Pew Environment Group

The Pew Environment Group (PEG) appreciates the opportunity to
provide a statement for the record on the National Oceanic and
Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) FY 2012 budget request, particularly
as it relates to the implementation of the Magnuson-Stevens Fishery
Conservation and Management Act (MSA), the law that has governed
management of America's ocean fish since 1976.
The Pew Environment Group (PEG) offers qualified support for the
President's FY 2012 budget request of $346.3 million for data
collection and analysis programs at the National Marine Fisheries
Service (NMFS). We are concerned that this request does not provide the
long-term funding needed to maintain sustainable fisheries. Therefore,
we consider it the minimum necessary to keep our fisheries on the road
to recovery.
In the nearly 35 years since the MSA was enacted, it has enjoyed
strong bipartisan support, including the most recent 2006
reauthorization, which was sponsored by the late Senator Ted Stevens
and signed into law by President George W. Bush. The MSA provides the
tools to sustainably manage ocean fish, one of America's most valuable
natural resources. Healthy fish populations are the backbone of
America's commercial and recreational saltwater fishing industries,
which according to NMFS generated $163 billion in sales impacts and
supported nearly 1.9 million full and part-time jobs in 2008 alone. \1\
Ocean fish conservation is good for fishermen, America's economy and
the environment. For this reason, diverse stakeholders including
commercial fishermen, recreational anglers and environmental groups are
united in advocating for data collection and analysis appropriations.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ National Marine Fisheries Service (NMFS), 2010, ``Fisheries
Economics of the United States, 2008,''
.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Relatively modest federal investments in fisheries data and
analysis in FY 2012 will help deliver over time billions of dollars in
economic benefits and hundreds of thousands of jobs for U.S. taxpayers.
PEG urges you to continue the bipartisan tradition of support for the
MSA and provide adequate resources for data collection and analysis for
the benefit of our fishing industries and ocean fish populations.
The MSA--Ending Overfishing in the United States
Fish have been a staple in our diet and an important part of our
nation's economic health since the time of the early settlers. George
Washington himself managed a shad fishery at Mount Vernon, and Atlantic
cod were critical to the survival and development of the early
colonies. Unfortunately, overfishing (taking fish faster than they can
reproduce) has diminished the economic potential of our nation's ocean
fish populations, particularly in recent decades. Today, nearly a
quarter of our commercially and recreationally important ocean fish
populations--including some tuna, cod, flounder, snapper and grouper
species--are severely depleted. \2\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ NMFS, ``2010 Status of U.S. Fisheries: Fourth Quarter Update,''
December 30, 2010.
.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Congress first attempted to address this problem in 1976 when it
passed the Fishery Conservation and Management Act, the precursor to
the MSA, to ``Americanize'' our fisheries by eliminating foreign
fishing off the U.S. coast and promoting the domestic fishing industry.
However, over the course of the next two decades, policies focusing on
expanding fishing, as well as dramatic improvements in technologies to
locate and catch fish, resulted in overfishing becoming a national
problem. Historic overfishing led to the collapse of many important
fish populations around the country, most notably in New England, where
severe declines in catch of such staples as cod wrought tremendous
damage to fishing communities.
A bipartisan group of lawmakers crafted the Sustainable Fisheries
Act in 1996, which changed the focus of the MSA from promoting fishing
to conserving fish, because they recognized the toll that overfishing
was taking on fishermen and fishing communities across the country in
the form of lost jobs, reduced catch and idle boats. Unfortunately,
these changes did to not put an end to overfishing, and in 2006
Congress overwhelmingly supported amendments to the MSA to end
overfishing once and for all. Specifically, Congress required the
establishment of science-based annual catch limits (ACLs) that do not
allow overfishing and rebuild depleted fish populations and
accountability measures to ensure success. President George W. Bush
signed these amendments into law on January 12, 2007.
Thanks to these bipartisan reforms, today we are witnessing
rebounding fish populations and increased fishing opportunities for
commercial fishermen and recreational anglers across the country. For
example, overfishing is no longer occurring in the Mid-Atlantic region;
and summer flounder, which supports a valuable commercial and
recreational fishery, is nearly fully rebuilt because managers finally
reduced fishing pressure to sustainable levels. Just over twenty years
ago, summer flounder had declined to less than 15 percent of healthy
levels as a result of overfishing. \3\ Now, the population has
rebounded to 89 percent of a healthy level, enabling managers to
increase the 2011 quota by 7.35 million pounds to 29.48 million pounds,
an 86.9 percent increase in just over three years from a low of 15.77
million pounds in 2008. In 2009, we commissioned an economic study that
found rebuilding all Mid-Atlantic fish populations to healthy levels
would generate $570 million in annual economic benefits. \4\ Sound
fisheries management is clearly a good economic investment.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ Supra note i.
\4\ J. M. Gates, ``Investing in Our Future: The Economic Case for
Rebuilding Mid-Atlantic Fish Populations,'' Pew Environment Group
(2009),
.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
In the Gulf of Mexico, conservation measures put in place by
managers to finally end decades of overfishing on Gulf red snapper have
allowed red snapper populations to increase, enabling managers to raise
the allowable catch by 39 percent in 2010 to 6.945 million pounds. \5\
In 10 years, the red snapper catch is expected to increase from current
levels to more than 10 million pounds annually, providing enduring
economic benefits for fishermen and coastal communities hit hard by
hurricanes and the recent Deepwater Horizon oil spill. \6\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\ National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA)
Southeast Regional Office, 2010. ``Southeast Fishery Bulletin FB10-
027.''

\6\ Gulf of Mexico Fishery Management Council, 2007. ``Final
Amendment 27 to the Reef Fish Fishery Management Plan and Amendment 14
to the Shrimp Fishery Management Plan.''
.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
In New England, the Fishery Management Council is reforming the
important groundfish fishery by adopting for the first time science-
based annual catch limits and creating the voluntary ``sector''
management system that enables fishermen to form cooperatives that
allow them greater flexibility in when they fish and control over how
they fish. Preliminary data from NMFS show that these reforms are
working: in the first eight months of the fishing year, revenues were
up 8 percent over the same time period in 2009, and the number of fish
landed was down 12 percent. \7\ When the fishing year ends in April, we
will join Congress in carefully evaluating the economic and
environmental performance of this new management system. However, if
early reports are any indication, we can expect an end to overfishing,
which in time will lead to growing fish populations, healthier ocean
ecosystems and greater profits in New England.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\7\ NOAA Northeast Regional Office, 2011. ``Sector Vessel Landings
& Revenue, 2009 & 2010.''
Accessed 3/2/2011.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Return on Investment
As described above, America's investment in the MSA is providing
tangible returns to fishermen, coastal communities and the Nation.
America's fish are almost certain to become more valuable over time.
While there are many factors that impact the market value of our ocean
fish, the U.S. Department of Agriculture predicts that the price of
fish and seafood in the U.S. is expected to increase significantly over
time, faster than any other food through 2019. \8\ Protecting and
expanding the U.S. wild fish supply is increasingly important because
America has developed a seafood deficit, with over 80% of seafood
consumed in the U.S. being imported in recent years. \9\ The relatively
modest Congressional investment of $346.3 million for data collection
and analysis programs that we recommend for FY 2012 is critical to
begin reversing that trade deficit. NMFS estimates that rebuilding all
of our depleted fish populations will deliver U.S. taxpayers an
additional $31 billion in annual sales every year and support for
500,000 new American jobs. \10\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\8\ United States Department of Agriculture (2010), ``USDA
Agricultural Projections to 2019,'' See Table 39, page 99.
.
\9\ NMFS, 2011, ``Fisheries Economics of the United States, 2009'',

.
\10\ Testimony of Eric Schwaab on Implementation of the Magnuson-
Stevens Conservation and Management Act before the U.S. Senate
Committee on Commerce, Science and Transportation Subcommittee on
Oceans, Atmosphere, Fisheries and the Coast Guard, p. 3, March 8, 2011:

.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Supporting the Transition to Long Term Sustainability
Though we are beginning to see early returns on our investments as
the MSA is implemented around the country, we recognize that the
transition to sustainability has resulted in challenges for some
fishermen. Decades of overfishing have reduced many fish populations to
very low levels, increasing the difficulty and cost of their recovery.
Management measures such as significantly reducing catch in the near-
term or closing areas to fishing for a limited period of time are
sometimes necessary to end overfishing and restore these fish
populations.
Unfortunately, some fishermen are calling on Congress to weaken the
MSA's conservation requirements to address these short-term economic
challenges. This would be a mistake, because it was the loopholes in
the law prior to the 1996 and 2006 amendments that allowed fishery
managers to put short-term economics ahead of long-term conservation,
resulting in overfishing and depleted fish populations. Rather than
repeating the failed policies of the past, Congress should look for
ways to help fishermen transition to sustainability while allowing
federal managers to fulfill the promise of the MSA's conservation
provisions. For example, regional permit banks in New England are a
possible solution for fishermen in the groundfish fishery who need a
low cost way to obtain more quota. NMFS has already provided $6 million
to date to help New England states establish public permit banks to
enhance fishing opportunities for small-scale groundfish fishermen.
\11\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\11\ NOAA Northeast Regional Office. September 13, 2010. ``NOAA and
Rhode Island Department of Environmental Management Announce $1 Million
Initiative to Establish Rhode Island Groundfish Permit Bank.''

---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Another challenge we face in the transition to sustainable
fisheries management is setting science-based catch limits for fish
populations that lack recent stock assessments, a situation that is
most pressing in the South Atlantic, Gulf and Caribbean regions. Some
assert that managers are making decisions based on inadequate science
and advocate for weakening or eliminating the requirement to set ACLs
for these so called ``data poor'' species. Decades of experience have
proven that failing to establish ACLs creates demonstratively negative
consequences for many important fisheries across the country. For
example, managers did not set hard fishing quotas for South Atlantic
black sea bass for over twenty years despite multiple assessments
indicating the dire status of this fish. Now, twenty years later,
managers must take difficult steps to restore South Atlantic black sea
bass, including most recently closing the commercial and recreational
season five months early. This example shows that eliminating the
requirement to set ACLs for data poor species in the short-term can
have severe long-term costs.
It is important to note that there are no fish species managed
under the MSA for which there are no data. Information is available on
basic biology, life history characteristics or commercial and
recreational catch numbers that can be used to set catch limits even
for fish without complete assessments. For these fish populations,
there are tools available for managers to set annual catch limits, some
as simple as locking in current catch levels until more complete
scientific evidence indicates that the population can support more
fishing. These short-term measures will avoid the long-term costs
incurred from unwittingly allowing overfishing.
FY 2012 Appropriations--Investing in Data Collection, Analysis and
Monitoring Programs
The end of overfishing in the storied New England groundfish
fishery and the rebound of recreationally and commercially important
fish populations like summer flounder in the Mid-Atlantic illustrate
that the MSA is working. In order to build on this success, we must
give managers the tools to fully implement the MSA. Data collection
programs in particular are the lifeblood of good fisheries management,
generating information that helps managers make informed decisions, and
fishermen and other fishery-related businesses plan their investments
and business actions. Congress should support these programs because
they are critical for maintaining healthy fish populations that support
stable and productive fisheries.
As such, PEG supports the President's FY 2012 request of $346.3
million for the following core data collection, analysis and monitoring
programs, an increase of $1.4 million over FY 2010 enacted funding
levels. We note that proposed reductions made by the Administration
(described below) from FY 2010 levels will negatively impact programs
that are important for monitoring, building bridges with fishermen and
collecting important biological and socioeconomic data. PEG recognizes
the difficult fiscal climate in the U.S., and we would like to follow-
up with the Committee to discuss the long-term investment levels needed
to support productive fish populations and fisheries. With regard to FY
2012, we support the following specific line-item requests:

Expand Annual Stock Assessments: $67.1 million as
requested, an increase of $16.2 million over the FY 2010 enacted level.
Fish stock assessments are critical for setting science-based ACLs that
prevent overfishing and maintain productive fisheries over time. This
funding would provide NMFS greater capability to assess the 230
commercially and recreationally important fish stocks managed by the
federal government. Timely, updated stock assessments reduce the
scientific uncertainty associated with ACL-setting and can help fishery
managers to increase commercial and recreational fishing opportunities
while minimizing the risk of overfishing. We strongly support this
critical increase in funding.

Fisheries Statistics: $24.4 million as requested, an
increase of $3.4 million over the FY 2010 enacted level. This budget
line item supports programs that provide advice, coordination and
guidance on matters related to the collection, analysis and
dissemination of statistics in both commercial and recreational
saltwater fisheries. The Marine Recreational Information Program,
created to improve the quality and accuracy of recreational fishing
data per the 2006 MSA amendments, is funded primarily through this
budget line-item. Higher quality data on marine recreational fishing,
which contributes $59 billion in sales impacts to the U.S. economy and
supports 384,000 jobs, will allow scientists to better estimate fishing
mortality and set ACLs more accurately, thus reducing the risk of
overfishing. \12\ At a time when recreational fishermen and scientists
agree that better data are critical for both restoring fish populations
and increasing recreational fishing opportunities, we urge Congress to
support this increase in funding.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\12\ NMFS, 2010, ``Fisheries Economics of the United States,
2008'',
.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

Survey and Monitoring Projects: $24.2 million as
requested, an increase of $.5 million over the FY 2010 enacted level.
NOAA has stated that ``many fisheries lack adequate and timely
monitoring of catch and fishing effort.'' \13\ Survey and monitoring
projects provide critical support for implementation of the new ACL
requirement. Increased funding will improve the accuracy of ACLs and
increase the percentage of stocks with assessments. \14\ Additional
funding for fishery-independent surveys, monitoring and research will
improve estimates of ecosystem change, fishing mortality and population
size.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\13\ NOAA, ``Budget Estimates, Fiscal Year 2009, Congressional
Submission,'' p. 166. Available at: http://
www.corporateservices.noaa.gov/nbo/fy09_rollout_materials/
NOAA_FY09_Final_CJ.pdf.
\14\ NOAA, ``Technical Memorandum NMFS-F/SPO-56: Marine Fisheries
Stock Assessment Improvement Plan: Report of the National Marine
Fisheries Service National Task Force for Improving Fish Stock
Assessments,'' October 2001. Available at: http://www.nmfs.noaa.gov/pr/
sars/improvement/pdfs/marine_fisheries_saip.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

Observers/Training: $39.1 million as requested, a
decrease of $1.9 million from the FY 2010 enacted level. Trained
fisheries observers provide essential data on the amount and type of
fish caught by fishermen, which is used for compliance monitoring and
scientific stock assessments. \15\ NOAA considers at-sea observers the
most reliable source of information about fishing catch and bycatch
(i.e., incidental catch of non-target ocean wildlife). \16\ We feel
that this request does not reflect the annual investment needed for
observer programs.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\15\ NOAA, ``NOAA FY 2012 President's Budget'', Chapter 2: National
Marine Fisheries Service, p. 315-19. Available at: http://
www.corporateservices.noaa.gov/ nbo/fy12_presidents_budget/
National_Marine_Fisheries_Service_FY12.pdf.
\16\ NOAA/NMFS, Evaluating Bycatch: A National Approach to
Standardized Bycatch Monitoring Programs, NOAA Technical Memorandum
NMFS-F/SPO-66, October 2004. 108 p.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

Cooperative Research: $7.2 million as requested by the
President, a decrease of $10.3 million from the FY 2010 enacted level.
Cooperative research programs pay fishermen, working under the
direction of federal scientists, to collect fisheries data and test new
sustainable fishing gear and practices. These programs provide jobs for
fishermen and also enable managers to tap into their on-the-water
knowledge and expertise. In 2003, NMFS estimated that it would need
$25.5 million for cooperative research by FY 2009. \17\ We are
concerned about the effect of the proposed reduction on fishermen and
would suggest that cooperative research should be funded at this level.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\17\ NMFS' 2003 five year assessment estimated the need for
cooperative research to be $22.8 million above FY 2003 levels by FY
2009, for a total of $25.5 million.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
In addition, the President's FY 2012 budget request transfers $6
million out of the cooperative research line item and into the National
Catch Share Program line item. We believe that any increases for catch
share programs should be made with new money, not transferred from
existing general research programs that should be available for all
fisheries. Although NMFS asserts that the $6 million will be used for
cooperative research in catch share fisheries, there is no guarantee
that it will continue to be used for cooperative research in the
future. Taking funding from general cooperative research, where it
would be available for all fisheries, and restricting it to only catch
share fisheries, short changes the vast majority of fisheries, which
are not catch share fisheries.

Fisheries Research and Management Programs: total of
$184.3 million as requested, a $6.5 million decrease from the FY 2010
enacted level. Fisheries research and management programs provide
accurate and timely information and analysis of the biology and
population status of managed fish, as well as the socioeconomics of the
fisheries that depend on those populations. Such information is
critical for the development of management measures to ensure that they
end overfishing, and we have concerns regarding the reduction from FY
2010 levels. Because of their vital role, Fisheries Research and
Management Programs should be funded at no less than the FY 2012
request of $184.3 million. In NOAA's FY 2012 budget request, $11.4
million is transferred from the Fisheries Research and Management
Programs line item into the National Catch Share Program line item. As
with Cooperative Research, no funds from this line item should be
transferred to the National Catch Share Program because those funds
would become permanently unavailable to support research and management
of the vast majority of federally managed fisheries that are not
currently in a catch share program, and may not be included in one in
the future.
Conclusion
Good fisheries management leads to healthy fish populations, a
stable and productive fishing industry and robust recreational
fisheries--a win-win for conservation, anglers and marine-related
businesses. Today, because of the MSA, fishery managers are using
science-based catch limits that do not allow overfishing and rebuild
depleted fish populations to healthy levels. These requirements are
working, providing economic benefits to fishing communities and the
nation as a whole, and promise to provide even greater returns in the
future. We cannot afford to leave the job of bringing all fish
populations to healthy levels unfinished--our nation's fishermen and
our fish resources depend on it. The relatively modest investments that
we are requesting today will lead to tremendous yield in the future.
According to NMFS, rebuilding all U.S. fish populations will lead to
a$31 billion increase in annual sales and support for half a million
new U.S. jobs. \18\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\18\ Testimony of Eric Schwaab on Implementation of the Magnuson-
Stevens Conservation and Management Act before the U.S. Senate
Committee on Commerce, Science and Transportation Subcommittee on
Oceans, Atmosphere, Fisheries and the Coast Guard, p. 3, March 8, 2011:

.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
We ask the Subcommittee to continue its support of the MSA and
invest at least $346.3 million in FY 2012 in one of America's most
valuable natural resources, our ocean fish populations, so that they
can continue to provide significant and growing benefits for U.S.
taxpayers through fishing jobs, healthy oceans, local seafood and
vibrant coastal communities.


