- OVERSIGHT FIELD HEARING ENTITLED ``LOGS IN THE ROAD: ELIMINATING FEDERAL RED TAPE AND EXCESSIVE LITIGATION TO CREATE HEALTHY FORESTS, JOBS AND ABUNDANT WATER AND POWER SUPPLIES.''

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

LOGS IN THE ROAD: ELIMINATING FEDERAL RED TAPE AND EXCESSIVE
LITIGATION TO CREATE HEALTHY FORESTS, JOBS AND ABUNDANT WATER AND
POWER SUPPLIES

=======================================================================

JOINT OVERSIGHT FIELD HEARING

before the

SUBCOMMITTEE ON WATER AND POWER

joint with the

SUBCOMMITTEE ON NATIONAL PARKS,
FORESTS AND PUBLIC LANDS

of the

COMMITTEE ON NATURAL RESOURCES
U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

Monday, May 14, 2012, in Montrose, Colorado

__________

Serial No. 112-111

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Natural Resources

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.fdsys.gov
or
Committee address: http://naturalresources.house.gov

_____

U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE

74-271 PDF                WASHINGTON : 2012
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800; DC
area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104  Mail: Stop IDCC, Washington, DC
20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON NATURAL RESOURCES

DOC HASTINGS, WA, Chairman
EDWARD J. MARKEY, MA, Ranking Democratic Member

Don Young, AK                        Dale E. Kildee, MI
John J. Duncan, Jr., TN              Peter A. DeFazio, OR
Louie Gohmert, TX                    Eni F.H. Faleomavaega, AS
Rob Bishop, UT                       Frank Pallone, Jr., NJ
Doug Lamborn, CO                     Grace F. Napolitano, CA
Robert J. Wittman, VA                Rush D. Holt, NJ
Paul C. Broun, GA                    Raul M. Grijalva, AZ
John Fleming, LA                     Madeleine Z. Bordallo, GU
Mike Coffman, CO                     Jim Costa, CA
Tom McClintock, CA                   Dan Boren, OK
Glenn Thompson, PA                   Gregorio Kilili Camacho Sablan,
Jeff Denham, CA                          CNMI
Dan Benishek, MI                     Martin Heinrich, NM
David Rivera, FL                     Ben Ray Lujan, NM
Jeff Duncan, SC                      Betty Sutton, OH
Scott R. Tipton, CO                  Niki Tsongas, MA
Paul A. Gosar, AZ                    Pedro R. Pierluisi, PR
Raul R. Labrador, ID                 John Garamendi, CA
Kristi L. Noem, SD                   Colleen W. Hanabusa, HI
Steve Southerland II, FL             Paul Tonko, NY
Bill Flores, TX                      Vacancy
Andy Harris, MD
Jeffrey M. Landry, LA
Jon Runyan, NJ
Bill Johnson, OH
Mark Amodei, NV

Todd Young, Chief of Staff
Lisa Pittman, Chief Counsel
Jeffrey Duncan, Democratic Staff Director
David Watkins, Democratic Chief Counsel
------

SUBCOMMITTEE ON WATER AND POWER

TOM McCLINTOCK, CA, Chairman
GRACE F. NAPOLITANO, CA, Ranking Democratic Member

Louie Gohmert, TX                    Raul M. Grijalva, AZ
Jeff Denham, CA                      Jim Costa, CA
Scott R. Tipton, CO                  Ben Ray Lujan, NM
Paul A. Gosar, AZ                    John Garamendi, CA
Raul R. Labrador, ID                 Edward J. Markey, MA, ex officio
Kristi L. Noem, SD
Doc Hastings, WA, ex officio

------

SUBCOMMITTEE ON NATIONAL PARKS, FORESTS AND PUBLIC LANDS

ROB BISHOP, UT, Chairman
RAUL M. GRIJALVA, AZ, Ranking Democratic Member

Don Young, AK                        Dale E. Kildee, MI
John J. Duncan, Jr., TN              Peter A. DeFazio, OR
Doug Lamborn, CO                     Rush D. Holt, NJ
Paul C. Broun, GA                    Martin Heinrich, NM
Mike Coffman, CO                     Betty Sutton, OH
Tom McClintock, CA                   Niki Tsongas, MA
David Rivera, FL                     John Garamendi, CA
Scott R. Tipton, CO                  Vacancy
Raul R. Labrador, ID                 Edward J. Markey, MA, ex officio
Kristi L. Noem, SD
Mark Amodei, NV
Doc Hastings, WA, ex officio

------

CONTENTS

----------
Page

Hearing held on Month Day 2012...................................     1

Statement of Members:
Bishop, Hon. Rob, a Representative in Congress from the State
of Utah....................................................     4
Prepared statement of....................................     5
McClintock, Hon. Tom, a Representative in Congress from the
State of California........................................     1
Prepared statement of....................................     3
Tipton, Hon. Scott R., a Representative in Congress from the
State of Colorado..........................................     6
Prepared statement of....................................     7

Statement of Witnesses:
Dodd, David, Enviro Land Management, LLC, Whitewater,
Colorado...................................................    50
Prepared statement of....................................    52
Downie, James S., Director, Vegetation Management and
Ancillary Programs, Xcel Energy, Denver, Colorado..........    46
Prepared statement of....................................    48
Fishering, Nancy, Vice President, Colorado Timber Industry
Association, Montrose, Colorado............................     8
Prepared statement of....................................    11
Ford, J.R., President, Pagosa Cattle Company, Inc., Pagosa
Springs, Colorado..........................................    15
Prepared statement of....................................    17
Georg, Clint, Partner, The Alden Group, LLC, Englewood,
Colorado...................................................    20
Prepared statement of....................................    22
Jiron, Daniel, Regional Forester, Rocky Mountain Region, U.S.
Forest Service, U.S. Department of Agriculture, Golden,
Colorado...................................................    31
Prepared statement of....................................    32
Robertson, Leigh, Grantwriter, Education/Outreach
Coordinator, Uncompahgre Partnership, Ridgway, Colorado....    43
Prepared statement of....................................    44
Shoemaker, Sloan, Executive Director, Wilderness Workshop,
Carbondale, Colorado.......................................    35
Prepared statement of....................................    37
Wilkinson, Gary, President, San Juan Trail Riders
Association, Durango, Colorado.............................    53
Prepared statement of....................................    55

Additional materials supplied:
Bavin, Brian, Montrose, Colorado, Comments submitted for the
record.....................................................    71
Emory, Ken, Montrose, Colorado, Comments submitted for the
record.....................................................    72
Frantz, Richard, Montrose, Colorado, Comments submitted for
the record.................................................    72
Ward, Bruce, Founder, Choose Outdoors, Statement submitted
for the record.............................................    57
White, David, Montrose, Colorado, Comments submitted for the
record.....................................................    72

OVERSIGHT FIELD HEARING ENTITLED ``LOGS IN THE ROAD: ELIMINATING
FEDERAL RED TAPE AND EXCESSIVE LITIGATION TO CREATE HEALTHY FORESTS,
JOBS AND ABUNDANT WATER AND POWER SUPPLIES.''

----------

Monday, May 14, 2012

U.S. House of Representatives

Subcommittees on Water and Power, joint with the

Subcommittee on National Parks, Forests and Public Lands

Committee on Natural Resources

Montrose, Colorado

----------

The Subcommittees met, pursuant to call, at 9:00 a.m., in
Montrose Elks Civil Building, 107 South Cascade Avenue,
Montrose, Colorado, Hon. Rob Bishop and Hon. Tom McClintock
[Chairmen of the Subcommittee on Water and Power] presiding.
Present: Representatives Bishop, McClintock, and Tipton.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. TOM McCLINTOCK, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA

Mr. McClintock. The Subcommittee on Water and Power, and
National Parks, Forests and Public Lands, will come to order. I
want to welcome all of you to today's hearing. I am Congressman
Tom McClintock from Northern California. I am Chairman of the
Water and Power Subcommittee. I am joined here today by
Congressman Rob Bishop from Utah, the Chairman of the National
Parks, Forests and Public Lands Subcommittee, and we are here
today at the request--in fact, I might say the insistence--of
Congressman Scott Tipton, who is also with us today.
[Applause.]
Mr. McClintock. We are here today to take testimony on a
hearing entitled ``Logs in the Road: Eliminating Federal Red
Tape and Excessive Litigation to Create Healthy Forests, Jobs,
and Abundant Water and Power Supplies.''
To begin today's hearing, I would like to defer to our
distinguished colleague, Congressman Tipton, for a few
introductions.
Congressman Tipton?
Mr. Tipton. Thank you, Chairman McClintock. And I would
also like to recognize and thank Chairman Bishop from Utah for
being here as well. This is an important topic, I think, for
all of us out of the Western states.
Mr. Chairman, today we are privileged to have the Montrose
High School ROTC, led by Cadet Lieutenant Zach Gibson, and they
will be posting the colors and lead us in the Pledge of
Allegiance.
Gentlemen and ladies?
[Pledge of Allegiance.]
Mr. McClintock. Thank you, Congressman Tipton.
We will now begin with 5-minute opening statements,
beginning with mine.
Today's hearing has a ponderous title, but it is a national
policy imperative. Eliminating Federal red tape and excessive
litigation is, indeed, the only path to create healthy forests,
jobs, and abundant water and power supplies.
I again want to thank Congressman Scott Tipton for his
leadership on these issues and for pressing to have this field
hearing conducted today here in Montrose, a community that
bears the wounds of the ``greens gone wild'' policies of recent
years.
An old forester----
[Applause.]
Mr. McClintock. An old forester in my district summed up
the problem we are here to assess very well when he said, ``The
excess timber is going to come out of the forest one way or the
other. Either it is going to be carried out or it will be
burned out, but it will come out.''
A generation ago, we carried it out, and the result was a
thriving economy and a healthy forest. But then a radical and
retrograde ideology was introduced into our public policy,
transforming sound forest management practices into what can
only be described as benign neglect. The result is now clear
and undeniable: economically devastated communities, closed
timber mills, unemployed families, overgrown forests, overdrawn
watersheds, jeopardized transmission lines, rampant disease and
pestilence, and increasingly intense and frequent forest fires.
That is the story of Montrose, Colorado and Saratoga, Wyoming,
and of Quincy and Camino and Sonora, little towns in my
district in California's Sierra Nevada Mountains, all once
thriving and prosperous communities that have been devastated
by these policies.
When the mills in my district closed in 2009, the owner
made it very clear that although the economic downturn was a
catalyst, the underlying cause was the fact that two-thirds of
the timber they depended upon was being held up by
environmental litigation. Despite the recession, they still had
enough business to keep the mills open and to keep those
families employed if the environmental left had not cut off the
timber that those mills depended upon.
This is not environmentalism. True environmentalists
recognize the damage that is done by over-growth and over-
population, and they recognize the role of sound, sustainable
forest management practices in maintaining healthy forests. No
picture I have seen paints a more vivid case for returning to
these sound and proven forest management practices than an
aerial photo of the Fraser Experimental Forest in Colorado a
few years ago that is often called the Red Hand of Death.
The areas of that forest consigned to benign neglect forms
a dead zone that looks like a red hand. Overgrown and
unmanaged, bark beetles found it easy pickings. That is what
the so-called environmental movement has done to our forests.
It is surrounded by green, thriving, healthy forest in which
excess timber was properly harvested, and the remaining trees
had enough room to grow strong enough to easily resist the
infestation all around it.
Now, we are told there is not enough money for forest
thinning, and yet we used to have no problems keeping our
forests thinned and healthy when we sold commercially viable
timber. The problem is that if they take place at all, timber
harvests today are restricted to small-diameter trees. I mean,
can you imagine a fishery or wildlife policy limited to taking
only the smallest juveniles of the species?
Meanwhile, we know that of the $53 million of so-called
stimulus funds allocated to the Forest Service in Colorado,
only $16 million was allocated to address the bark beetle
infestation, while the remainder went to such dubious projects
as a bird tour road and solar panels. Fortunately, from what I
have seen, the American public has awakened to the
ramifications of these policies and has had a bellyful of them,
and it is in the process of replacing the politicians
responsible for them. I believe we are on the verge of a new
era when proven practices and common sense will replace the
ideological extremism that has dominated our forest policy for
the past generation.
I am particularly interested today in suggestions of what
needs to be done legislatively and administratively to unravel
the paralyzing tangle of litigation, over-regulation, and
endless deliberation that have misguided our Federal agencies
so far away from their public trust.
I want again to thank Scott Tipton for his indefatigable
leadership on this issue, and Rob Bishop, Chairman of the
Subcommittee with direct oversight over our forests, for his
efforts over many years to combat and correct these policies. I
think that because of his steady leadership, we are now on the
verge of being able to change those policies and produce a new
era of healthy and thriving forests, as well as prosperous and
secure forest communities.
And with that, it is my honor to yield to the gentleman
from Utah, Chairman of the Subcommittee on Forests, Mr. Bishop.
[Applause.]
[The prepared statement of Mr. McClintock follows:]

Statement of The Honorable Tom McClintock, Chairman,
Subcommittee on Water and Power

Today's hearing has a ponderous title but it is a national policy
imperative: ``Eliminating Federal Red Tape and Excessive Litigation''
is indeed the only path to ``Create Healthy Forests, Jobs and Abundant
Water and Power Supplies.''
I want to thank Congressman Scott Tipton for his leadership on
these issues and for pressing to have this field hearing conducted here
in Montrose, a community that bears the wounds of the ``Greens Gone
Wild'' policies of recent years.
An old forester in my district summed up the problem we are here to
assess when he said, ``The excess timber is going to come out of the
forest one way or another. Either it will be carried out or it will be
burned out. But it will come out.''
A generation ago, we carried it out and the result was a thriving
economy and a healthy forest. But then a radical and retrograde
ideology was introduced into our public policy transforming sound
forest management practices into what can only be described as benign
neglect.
The result is now clear and undeniable: economically devastated
communities, closed timber mills, unemployed families, overgrown
forests, overdrawn watersheds, jeopardized transmission lines, rampant
disease and pestilence and increasingly intense and frequent forest
fires.
That is the story of Montrose, Colorado and Saratoga, Wyoming, of
Quincy and Camino and Sonora (little towns in my district in
California's Sierra-Nevada)--once thriving and prosperous communities
that have been devastated by these policies.
When the mills in my district closed in 2009 the owner made it very
clear that although the economic downturn was a catalyst, the
underlying cause was the fact that 2/3 of the timber they depended upon
was held up by environmental litigation.
Despite the recession, they still had enough business to keep the
mills open--- and to keep these families employed--if the environmental
Left had not cut off the timber, those mills depended upon.
This is not environmentalism. True environmentalists recognize the
damage done by overgrowth and overpopulation and recognize the role of
sound, sustainable forest management practices in maintaining healthy
forests.
No picture I've seen paints a more vivid case for returning to
these sound and proven forest management practices than an aerial photo
of the Fraser Experimental Forest in Colorado a few years ago that is
often called the ``Red Hand of Death.'' The areas of that forest
consigned to benign neglect forms a dead-zone that looks like a ``Red
Hand.'' Overgrown and unmanaged, bark beetles found it easy pickings.
That's what the so-called environmental movement has done to our
forests.
It is surrounded by green, thriving, healthy forest in which excess
timber was properly harvested and the remaining trees had enough room
to grow strong enough to resist the infestation around it.
We're told that there isn't enough money for forest thinning, and
yet we used to have no problems keeping our forests thinned and healthy
when we sold commercially viable timber. The problem is that if they
take place at all, timber harvests are restricted to small diameter
trees. Can you imagine a fishery or wildlife policy limited to taking
only the small, juvenile of the species?
Meanwhile, we know that of $53 million of so-called ``stimulus
funds'' allocated to the Forest Service in Colorado, only $16 million
was allocated to address the bark beetle infestation, while the
remainder went to such dubious projects as a ``bird tour road'' and
solar panels.
Fortunately, from what I have seen, the American public has
awakened to the ramification of these policies and has had a belly-full
of them--and it is in the process of replacing the politicians
responsible for them. I believe we are on the verge of a new era when
proven practices and common sense will replace the ideological
extremism that has dominated our forest policy for the past generation.
I am particularly interested today in suggestions of what needs to
be done legislatively and administratively to unravel the paralyzing
tangle of litigation, over-regulation, and endless deliberation that
have misguided our federal agencies so far from their public trust.
I again want to thank Scott Tipton for his indefatigable leadership
on this issue, and Rob Bishop, Chairman of the sub-Subcommittee with
direct oversight over our forests for his efforts over many years to
combat and correct these policies. I think that because of his steady
leadership we are now on the verge of being able to change those
policies and produce a new era of healthy and thriving forests as well
as prosperous and secure forest communities.
______

STATEMENT OF THE HON. ROB BISHOP, A REPRESENTATIVE IN CONGRESS
FROM THE STATE OF UTAH

Mr. Bishop. I thank you. Thank you, Congressman McClintock
and Congressman Tipton. Thank you for the invitation to come
here. I had a unique way of getting here last night, but thank
you for the invitation anyway. It is great to be with you here
in this historic building and see how you have renovated it to
a very useful purpose. I thank you for having that opportunity.
We all know that the Mountain Pine Beetle has turned much
of Colorado, not to mention forests throughout the entire West,
into simply a sea of dead and dying trees. We are almost on the
20-year anniversary of this problem, and we are also on the
anniversary of 20 years of the government's failed forest
policies that have allowed this native insect to reach epidemic
proportions. It has impacted what is now 40 million acres
nationwide. That is almost 20 percent of our national forest
system that is affected by it.
A sharp decline in forest management--and I should say
because of aesthetic, not scientific reasons--has left these
forests in an extremely unnatural and unhealthy state, the
result of which has been a feeding frenzy for the beetle, but
also dead trees for the rest of us. This is not a unique
problem. We have had hearings this year in South Dakota and
California. We have visited in Montana and Oregon, my home
state of Utah. The causes are all the same, and the solutions
are all the same. You have to thin the trees.
The problem involves the danger of falling trees that stop
recreation, utility right-of-ways. They threaten our power
grid. They threaten our water quality. They have catastrophic
impacts on the communities. In this state they have led to
fire, which has caused loss of property and, unfortunately,
loss of lives, and left a landscape that is, bluntly, ugly.
We can change courses, but if we do so, it will require
that we are not impeded by inflexible regulations, impeded by
frivolous lawsuits and appeals, and we have to have access to
the areas, road access to our forest areas. There is also a
unique and specific economic impact from all these decisions we
have to make.
In sum, as I am sure we are going to hear from the
witnesses that we have here today, active management is better
for the forests, and it is better for the taxpayer, and
especially given the billions we are now spending on fire
suppression, it is better for our Western communities that are
forced to play host to this Federal Estate.
I want to thank Representative Tipton for his leadership on
this issue, inviting us and our Subcommittees to Montrose to
see firsthand the impacts of this issue and the paths toward
addressing it. I look forward to hearing from our witnesses
today, and I thank them for showing up.
With that, Mr. McClintock, I turn it back to you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Bishop follows:]

Statement of The Honorable Rob Bishop, Chairman,
Subcommittee on National Parks, Forests and Public Lands

As many of you are witness to each day, the Mountain Pine Beetle
has turned most of Colorado, not to mention pine forests throughout the
West, into a sea of dead and dying trees. Sadly, decades of the federal
government's failed forest policies have in part allowed this native
insect to reach epidemic proportions that have impacted over three
million acres in Colorado alone. Bark beetles have so far claimed over
40 million acres nationwide--equal to nearly 20% of the National Forest
System.
A sharp decline in forest management has left these forests in an
extremely unnatural and unhealthy state, the result of which has been a
feeding frenzy for the beetles but only dead trees for the rest of us.
These forest conditions present a multitude of challenges to
beneficial use of our national forests. The danger of falling trees
threatens access both for management and recreation, utility right-of-
ways, and correspondingly the integrity of the power grid, as well as
water quality and supply. These forests also impose an overwhelming
risk of catastrophic to mountain communities in addition to compounding
the aforementioned threat to multiple-use.
Finally, and to be blunt, the sight of a dead landscape is simply
unappealing to many who come to enjoy their public lands across the
Rocky Mountain West.
Fortunately, we are in a position to change course on this issue.
Active, scientific forest management--when not impeded by inflexible
regulations and frivolous appeals and lawsuits--can begin the process
of restoring our forests. This epidemic was decades in the making and
will not be curbed overnight, but it is important to ensure that our
federal land managers have the flexibility to implement forest
management projects and utilize our partners to maintain infrastructure
that is necessary to ensure the long term health and productivity of
the land and natural resources that have been entrusted to their care.
In sum, and as I'm sure we'll hear from some of our witnesses, active
management is better for the forests, better for the taxpayer--
especially given the billions now spent annually on fire suppression--
and better for our western communities that are forced to play host to
this federal estate.
I thank Representative Tipton for his leadership on this issue and
for inviting our subcommittees to Montrose to see firsthand the impacts
of this issue and the path towards addressing it. I look forward to
hearing from our witnesses.
______

Mr. McClintock. Thank you, Mr. Bishop.
And now I am pleased to recognize our host today,
Congressman Tipton.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. SCOTT TIPTON, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF COLORADO

Mr. Tipton. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
If I may, I would like to extend our thanks to the City of
Montrose staff, which has been able to put this room together
for us: Lisa DelPiccolo, the City Clerk; David Spear, the
Records and Communication Manager; Jeff Sheets, the Information
Technology Manager; Carolyn Bellavance, the Executive
Assistant; and Bill Bell, the City Manager. I certainly thank
you all for helping us put this together.
[Applause.]
Mr. Tipton. Chairman McClintock and Chairman Bishop, I
would like to thank you for convening today's hearing and
taking the time to be able to come to Montrose to hear from the
constituents of the 3rd Congressional District and across the
West on this critical issue.
Properly managing our national forests is critical to
Western economies and to our livelihoods; a healthy, natural
environment; and affordable, reliable power and water supplies.
Many of our Western national forests are currently threatened
by unhealthy conditions, the bark beetle infestation that
increases susceptibility to wildfire and damage wildlife
habitat. These problems threaten lives and impact valuable jobs
in the timber, energy and recreation industries, as well as
countless indirect jobs in related industries. Increased fire
risk also threatens Western water quantity and quality, and the
generation and transmission of electricity. Through prudent
forest management and the ability to access and actively manage
timber resources, communities can support jobs that depend on
valuable and viable timber industries.
Effective forest management fosters healthy forests,
protects against wildfires, and safeguards the natural beauty
and tourism draw the Western states provide, while maintaining
dependable water and power supplies.
In 2010, Senator Mark Udall wrote the USDA Secretary
Vilsack requesting that the Forest Service conduct a full
review of the Mountain Pine Beetle outbreak to be able to
determine what more can be done and what additional tools may
be needed to be able to respond to the 2010 outbreak, and
future outbreaks as well.
I would like to thank Senator Udall for his continued
attention and commitment to this matter.
In the report produced in response to the Senator's
request, the Forest Service cites routine litigation of Forest
Service action approving timber harvesting and active
management, drought, lack of allocation of resources to timber
management, limited access to areas due to the inability to
provide access roads and Federal land designations such as
wilderness which precludes forest treatment, as the primary
contributing factors to the rampant bark beetle outbreak. The
report also highlights the commercial thinning to reduce stand
density in advance of the outbreak did not keep pace with the
rate of the bark beetle infestation spread.
In Region 2 of the Forest Service, the timber industry has
declined by 63 percent since 1986, according to the Forest
Service report. It is time that we take active steps to be able
to address the bark beetle epidemic and to partner with
responsible stewards of our natural resources in the private
sector who are willing to solve it. This will put people back
to work.
For far too long, short-term solutions have been put
forward which fall far short of addressing the long-term
problem and remedies are being applied to broad, sweeping
infestations. The 2002 Hayman fire, the largest in Colorado
history, burned over 138,000 acres, costing nearly $40 million
in fire-fighting costs, destroying 133 homes and forcing the
evacuation of better than 5,300 individuals. This catastrophic
event could very well happen again if our forests are left to
burn; and, in fact, we are recently reminded of the dangerous
risk of wildfire that Colorado faces.
As the summer season approaches, the probability of
wildfire increases even further. It is my hope that this
hearing on the interconnected issues of forest management will
help highlight the problems that led to these conditions and
lead to solutions that will reverse some of the damage that has
been done, and help avoid similar catastrophes in the future.
Thank you, and I yield back.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Tipton follows:]

Statement of The Honorable Scott R. Tipton, a Representative
in Congress from the State of Colorado

Thank you Chairman McClintock and Chairman Bishop for convening
today's hearing and taking the time to come to Montrose to hear from
constituents of the 3rd Congressional District and across the West on
this critical issue.
Properly managing our national forests is critical to western
economies and livelihoods, a healthy natural environment, and
affordable, reliable water and power supplies. Many of our western
national forests are currently threatened by unhealthy conditions and
bark beetle infestation that increase susceptibility to wildfire and
damage wildlife habitat. These problems threaten lives and impact
valuable jobs in the timber, energy, and recreation industries as well
as countless indirect jobs in related industries. Increased fire risk
also threatens western water quantity and quality and the generation
and transmission of electricity.
Through prudent forest management and the ability to access and
actively manage timber resources, communities can support jobs that
depend on a viable timber industry. Effective forest management fosters
healthy forests, protects against wildfires, and safeguards the natural
beauty and tourism draw that western states provide while maintaining
dependable water and power supplies.
In 2010, Senator Mark Udall wrote to USDA Secretary Vilsack
requesting that the Forest Service conduct a full review of the
mountain pine beetle outbreak to determine what more can be done and
what additional tools may be needed to respond to the 2010 outbreak and
future outbreaks as well. I want to thank Senator Udall for his
continued attention and commitment to this matter. In the report
produced in response to the Senator's request, the Forest Service cites
routine litigation of Forest Service action approving timber harvesting
and active management, drought, lack of allocation of resources to
timber management, limited access to areas due to the inability to
provide access roads, and federal land designations such as Wilderness
which precludes forest treatment, as the primary contributing factors
to the rampant bark beetle outbreak. The report also highlights that
commercial thinning to reduce stand density in advance of the outbreak
did not keep pace with the rate of the bark beetle infestation spread.
In Region 2 of the Forest Service, the timber industry has declined
by 63% since 1986 according to the Forest Service report. It is time
that we take active steps to address the bark beetle epidemic and
partner with the responsible stewards of our natural resources in the
private sector who are willing to solve it, while putting people back
to work. For too long, short term solutions have been put forward which
fall short of addressing a long term problem, and small scale remedies
applied to broad sweeping infestation.
The 2002 Hayman Fire, the largest in the Colorado's history, burned
over 138,000 acres, cost nearly $40 million in firefighting costs,
destroyed 133 homes and forced the evacuation of 5,340 people. This
catastrophic event could very well happen again if our forests are left
to burn and, in fact, we were very recently reminded of the dangerous
risk of wildfire that Colorado faces. As the summer season approaches,
the probability of wildfire increases even further. It is my hope that
this hearing on the interconnected issues of forest management will
help highlight the problems that led to these conditions and lead to
solutions that reverse some of the damage that has been done, and help
avoid similar catastrophes in the future.
______

Mr. McClintock. Thank you, Congressman.
[Applause.]
Mr. McClintock. Before I recognize today's witnesses, I
would like to urge those in attendance to submit their own
testimony for the record, since we are obviously limited in how
many witnesses we can hear today. You can do so by filling out
your thoughts on the paper at the table, or please see one of
our staff members on how to submit comments electronically.
Could you guys raise your hands so people can see where you
are?
They are staff members. Oh, they are right over here.
We will now hear from our panel of witnesses. Each witness'
written testimony will appear in full in the hearing record, so
I would ask that witnesses keep their oral statement to 5
minutes, as outlined in our invitation letter to you and under
Committee Rule 4(a).
I also want to explain how our timing lights work. When you
begin to speak, our clerk will start the timer, sort of like
driving. When there is a green light, you have all the time in
the world. When you have 1 minute left, there will be a yellow
light, which means talk very, very fast. And when it turns red,
for God's sake, stop.
[Laughter.]
Mr. McClintock. I would now like to recognize Ms. Nancy
Fishering, the Vice President of the Colorado Timber Industry
Association from Montrose, Colorado to testify.

STATEMENT OF NANCY FISHERING, VICE PRESIDENT, COLORADO TIMBER
INDUSTRY ASSOCIATION, MONTROSE, COLORADO

Ms. Fishering. Thank you, Chairman Bishop and McClintock,
and Subcommittee members. Thanks also for the support of
Colorado Representatives Scott Tipton and Mike Coffman and our
senators who have devoted time to our issues.
My name is Nancy Fishering. I am an officer and board
member of Colorado Timber Industry Association and have served
since 1996.
Mr. Bishop. Is your mic turned on, ma'am?
Ms. Fishering. Is it on now?
Mr. Bishop. That is better.
Ms. Fishering. There you go. It said green. It still says
green. Sorry.
I am also a contracted timber project manager for the
Montrose Economic Development Corporation, who recognizes the
jobs that are at stake here in Montrose in the timber industry.
I have worked in all seven of the national forests in
Colorado, and as some of the comments of----
Mr. Bishop. Ma'am, I am sorry. They are still having a hard
time hearing. Can you pull that right up to your mouth? Now try
it.
Ms. Fishering. Now?
Mr. Bishop. There you go.
Mr. McClintock. I think we have it now.
Ms. Fishering. Can I get my green light to start all over?
[Laughter.]
Mr. McClintock. Yes, we will do that.
Ms. Fishering. Five minutes is not very long.
[Applause.]
Ms. Fishering. Thank you. OK.
I have worked in all seven Colorado national forests on
behalf of or with the timber industry in Colorado. We have lost
an estimated 6 million acres of trees. Out of that 40 million,
6 million in Colorado have died in the past 10 years. Current
insect flights right around the Montrose area are at some
unprecedented levels. We have been partners, however, with the
Forest Service to strategically try to tackle these issues.
The good news from my point of view is we have had strong
bipartisan support to keep a stable forest products budget line
item. Thanks to you all for your support on that item. However,
it is flat, and flat, as you know in today's rising diesel
costs and other employment costs, means we are actually going
downhill in terms of having the allocation of funds that we
need to do the work on the ground.
We give credit to this region. We have been working very
hard on the issues you all have raised. This region had the
highest accomplishment in 2011 of all the regions in the United
States, and this success occurred in spite of having the
lowest, one of the lowest budget allocations for regions in the
United States.
We embrace some of the new authorities that have been given
to us, such as stewardship contracting, the Collaborative
Forest Landscape Restoration Project. We participate as members
in the collaborative network throughout Colorado. And while
supporting all these new initiatives, I worry about this hodge-
podge of laws that the Forest Service has to work under, which
I believe affects their effectiveness.
We believe the existence of mills is very important to keep
the costs down and to get more acreage treated. We need you to
know that the Montrose Sawmill has been out of work for the
past four weeks due to a timber supply, not because it is not
out there, but we have spring break-up problems where you don't
actually access the wood for certain times of the year.
It is currently in receivership also due to the economy. It
isn't all because of Forest Service issues and the litigation
that you spoke to, but we are ready and poised to re-open the
mill as these legal issues wind through the system.
But we need to keep this mill and the other mills in
Colorado, and to do that we need the skills of our loggers, and
we need to find the efficient projects. We need a predictable,
even supply of sawlogs. You would think with all the forest
health issues there would be plenty, but actually right now we
are looking at a potential not enough sawlogs to keep the mills
open in Colorado.
So for that reason, we have some suggestions. We would like
to see an increase nationally on a Forest Service target for
timber sales from 2.6 billion board feet to 3 billion board
feet. This would allow to get us more of a--you need a budget,
and then get the supply that the mills and the loggers need. 3
billion board feet sounds like a lot, but we have to keep in
mind that there are 22 billion board feet growing every single
year in our national forests. So we don't begin to put a dent
in the problem.
We also need to salvage dead trees, but we can't forget the
green trees. The viability of an industry is when these trees
stand dead for too many years, you need some green, good saw
timber to mix in with the dead, or we don't have an economical
plan to go forward and to keep up with our investments.
Regionally, we look at allocations. We need an equitable
allocation across the United States and across the states, and
within our states, because a mill can't pick up and go every
time a forest health bug goes in a different direction. The
mill is in Montrose. It is fixed in one place. The mill in
Delta is fixed in one place. We need to keep in mind the
economics of how to keep the timber industry alive.
Last, we have a whole list of small efficiencies that we
know that could get us more timber tomorrow for not a lot more
dollars spent, and would reduce the cost for the Forest
Service. We have many non-essential projects that we do in a
timber sale project. We have road packages and we have extra
side work that we do, and that is good when there is an economy
that can afford to support that. But right now, we need to be
boots on the ground. Loggers need to take all obstacles away
because we have too many acres that we need to cover.
We need to use more of the Healthy Forest Restoration Act
where they have streamlined judicial review, which helps us not
get bogged down in appeals that take the timber off the table.
There is a newly authorized pre-decisional administrative
objection process that got passed through the appropriations
bill this year. However, it needs to be implemented yesterday
if we are going to, again, cut into some of the obstacles that
we have to getting timber projects up on the ground.
We would like to see each--if you took every single timber
project that has already been through collaboration, that has
already been through the NEPA analysis, you would find more
timber available tomorrow if you maximized every single one of
those projects.
I see my red light went on, so I just have to say thank you
for the honor of being able to testify. A lot of details you
just can't get into in 5 minutes.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Fishering follows:]

Statement of Nancy Fishering, Vice President,
Colorado Timber Industry Association

Thank you Chairmen Bishop and McClintock and subcommittee members.
Thanks also for the support of Colorado Representatives Scott Tipton
and Mike Coffman and our Senators who have devoted time to our issues.
My name is Nancy Fishering. I am an officer and board member of
Colorado Timber Industry Association and have served since 1996. I have
also contracted to serve as the Timber Project Manager for the Montrose
Economic Development Corporation which is a proactive community
response to the Montrose sawmill receivership status. My background
includes: 15 years working for the local sawmill currently in
receivership, and two years working with my local governments to
monitor the status and prospective purchase of the Montrose mill. My
focus has been the retention of the jobs that have been held by many
friends and former co-workers. I also have been a member of the various
Colorado Forest Health Advisory boards and was honored to be appointed
by three different Governors since 2001; and I have spent years working
one-on-one with loggers and mills while problem solving on timber
management issues on every National Forest in Colorado as well as
collaborating with other public land agencies.
Today's hearing is important to our local community, our State of
Colorado and to all who value the beauty and grandeur of the American
West and the forested mountains that comprise our high country
watersheds. Colorado forests provide abundant water through our
headwater rivers which drain fully 1/3 of the landmass of the lower 48
states. We are sitting on the Western Slope of Colorado where 80% of
the precipitation falls for the rivers in Colorado. This is truly an
appropriate location for todays' discussion, and we welcome you.
Colorado's forests have experienced incredible and unprecedented
scale forest health issues over the past 10 years. Over 6 million acres
of trees have died during this relatively short time.
The numbers bear repeating since this state has been under siege
since 2002:

2002 over \1/2\ million acres burned--the most in any
year of Colorado's recorded history;

2002-present over 50% of pinyon killed in SW
Colorado, and \1/4\ million acres of subalpine fir died;

1996 to 2011 cumulative insect damages including over
4 million acres of trees killed by MPB in CO and Southern
Wyoming; over 1.1 million acres of aspen died, over \1/2\
million acres of spruce killed by the Spruce bark beetle and
another 600,000 acres of spruce defoliated by the Western
Spruce Budworm.
I would purport that no other single state has tackled so many
different forest health issues in such a condensed period of time.
I represent the folks who work in the woods, who process the wood,
and who have the primary role of performing forest health projects as
designed by our public land agencies. Public land agencies control
management on 68% of the forestland in Colorado. Our forest products
companies log burned trees, dead trees, and green trees, we thin trees,
grind and remove woody biomass and protect public health and safety by
removing hazard trees. We are pleased to be partners with the United
state Forest Service and Bureau of Land Management, and our Colorado
State Forest Service. We also recognize the important role played by
our many collaboratives throughout the state who study, discuss and
support the management efforts required by these forest health events.
I personally have devoted untold hours working side by side with local
officials, ranchers, miners, water boards, public utilities, local
environmental groups, academia, and concerned citizens who care deeply
that the issues are addressed. Our industry performs the work with
diligence and stewardship of the land as a primary concern. For
example, in 1994 this county was a sponsor and driving force to create
the Public Lands Partnership which is nationally recognized and one of
the oldest collaboratives still working on public land issues.
After the forest health issues are discussed and defined, my
priority is the ACTION. Today's hearing is focused on ACTION because
never before have we had so many management needs under such
challenging budget and credit conditions. Fellow forest products
companies have said to me that Colorado is the canary in the mine. The
most important lessons that I have learned boil down to two essential
concepts: economics of supply and efficiencies.
Economics: Within Colorado we have a small but diversified forest
products infrastructure. The mill in Montrose is the largest capacity
mill in the state although operating under receivership poses
operational challenges that have compromised operating at maximum
efficiency and scale. The Montrose mill and other family owned Colorado
mills are primary processors of timber and have the capacity to create
products that pay for logging thus reducing the costs of forest
management. We also now have secondary processors such as our pellet
mills and restoration forestry professionals who create value from
older and smaller timber and biomass that must also be removed from the
forests to mitigate risk of wildfire.
The processors in turn purchase materials from the loggers who buy
timber from federal projects and perform tasks under service contracts
where public land agencies pay to for services such as hazard tree
removal along roads, trails, and campgrounds. I am sincerely concerned
about the trajectory of timber supply outputs since processors are
ultimately dependent upon a steady, predictable supply of sawlog-
quality timber that can be economically processed into marketable
finished products.
First, the good news. I am encouraged that the United States Forest
Service (USFS) Forest Products budget line item has received strong bi-
partisan support and has avoided cuts that would be devastating to our
efforts.
We give a quick kudos to Region 2 who had the highest
accomplishment of all Regions within the USFS for 2011. This Region 2
success occurs in spite of having one of lowest overall budget
allocations among all the regions in the US.
I am encouraged that new authorities such as stewardship
contracting and Collaborative Forest Landscape Restoration have been
added to the Forest Service toolbox. The strong collaborative network
throughout Colorado has used these tools to design and add new
management projects while avoiding costly appeals. I have supported the
creation of each of these tools while simultaneously having concerns
about the patchwork of laws that we continue to weave which may
ultimately undermine effective agency response. Collaboratives have an
outstanding track record, however the process is time consuming,
compromise is often at play which reduces pace and scale and effects
product mix, and many will never truly understand the urgency of action
that is felt by our membership who have hard earned money at risk and
`skin in the game.'
As we further pursue the USFS emphasis on collaboration,
stewardship and Integrated Resource Restoration (IRR) budgeting we
request specific requirements for efficiency and sawlog outputs. The
collective tool box must still be implemented in light of the need to
offer economical timber sales within reach of existing mills which make
wood available on a competitive basis (i.e.--don't tie everything up in
one Stewardship contract). Colorado remains uniquely at risk if this
provision is not followed since so much of the Colorado forestland is
under the jurisdiction of the USFS and essentially the only source of
sawtimber.
These attainments are important to the timber industry. We know
that the existence of robust processing capacity is the best, most
cost-effective tool for forest health and removal of the fiber. Why?
Because the primary and secondary processors can purchase the timber,
pay the loggers a living wage, add value, and then market lumber,
pellets or energy at a profit. Without both profitable timber
processing, the presence of skilled loggers, timber management options
to dispose of the millions of dead trees are much more limited and
expensive.
The nearby Montrose sawmill is the largest capacity mill in the
state and the mill that has processed the vast majority of conifer over
the past 10 years is in receivership due to the devastating effects of
the recession on the housing sector. In 2008 Intermountain Resources
had processed 90% of the beetle killed timber in Colorado according to
USFS records. In order to maintain this vital element of the limited
infrastructure left in Colorado, and to retain the skills of my
colleagues, we need to be very aware of the economics of the myriad
decisions and projects chosen to address forest health. We must find
that `sweet spot' of efficient projects, a predictable and even supply
of sawlogs, correct costs, and profitable return in order to `close the
sale' and entice the investment to keep this mill and the jobs it
supports, and strengthen all Colorado companies that work in the
forest.
The industry constantly monitors project level issues that can
overcome a timber contract purchaser. Our goal is to stay profitable
and keep working so each and every issue must be addressed as we
partner in the day to day operations to address forest health.
A quick summary of issues we face include:

Need to maximize sawlog-quality material in every
timber project from conventional timber sale contracts, to
stewardship contracts, to service contracts, to Indefinite
Duration Indefinite Quality (IDIQ) contracts. With adequate
sawlog supply the various processors will complement each other
rather than cannibalize each other.

Need road packages and stumpage fees that are
designed at a scale affordable in today's forest product
markets. The following chart shows the recent history of lumber
markets which is a fundamental challenge as we treat forest
health projects.

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Steadily increasing acreage in roadless,
wilderness, or wildlife habitat restricted areas such lynx
management units decreases the acreage available for timber
harvest or mitigation for the risks of catastrophic fires. In
the case of the Southern Rockies Lynx Amendment there are
implications that may restrict long term management of young
regenerated stands that should be thinned to maintain vigor and
health.

The Forest Service Appraisal system has shown
increasing flaws and needs to receive a major adjustment to be
accurate in today's economy. A national team is currently being
formed to study this important issue on viable pricing.

Many contracts continue to contain restrictive
clauses that severely affect the economics of logging

The Forest Service lacks tools to quickly and
efficiently make and implement decisions in response to bark
beetle epidemics. Timing is critical since insects are moving
at unprecedented rates. Fire funding and personnel are
immediately available, but a similar mechanism is lacking for
insect epidemics.

Expectations for industry to participate in forest
planning takes an unconscionable length of time as in the case
of the Grand Mesa, Uncompahgre, Gunnison National Forest plan
which first began in 1999 and has no closure as of this date.

Last a recent court case has essentially determined
that forest logging roads are `point sources' of pollution and
must now comply with highly bureaucratic and costly processes
that could seriously disrupt all timber forest health projects.
Each of these issues receive attention and are works in progress
with the Forest Service, but the patchwork of old laws and new laws and
shifting priorities create a huge challenge and uncertainty for Forest
Service staff as well as our industry. Since the early 2000's, the
Colorado Congressional delegation has been actively engaged on many of
these fronts and have supported numerous pieces of legislation to
assist this unwieldy system. We have not successfully passed many good
ideas. We all want a system that is rational, environmentally sound and
one that is economically viable and sustainable. We fear the patchwork
approach that adds laws while not removing antiquated processes
designed for a different time.
We are thankful that we have investors willing to build and operate
in such challenging and often uncertain conditions.
Within our industry we see several overriding disturbing trends at
this vulnerable time in the recovery of forest products sector:
The flat Forest Service budget and cuts in mutually dependent line
items has resulted in a declining trajectory of outputs or sawlog
supply for Colorado companies. This is a trend that can and should be
addressed immediately.
Our solution would be to rely on the historic tools of requiring
definitive timber outputs. With the underlying bi-partisan support on
timber management we can and should monitor timber outputs.
Nationally, we ask for an immediate increase in Forest Service
targets from 2.8 to 3.00 BBFT.
Keep in mind that 3 BBFT is a small target compared to the
estimated 22 BBFT of annual growth on national forest timberlands. We
are losing the battle of thinning the forests to reduce fuels. In a
recent biomass conference we learned that for every ton of material
removed from the forest, another 18.2 tons of material is
simultaneously being regenerated. If one factors in the acres affected
each year by insect and disease and this ratio goes up even further.
Colorado was mentioned as the state with the highest ratios in any
western state.

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

In our view, immediately raising the timber targets is both
logical and long overdue.
As we add the restoration initiative as a Forest Service management
priority, (but add no new funds) we need to identify sawlog outputs as
a mandatory component. All contracts need to collectively contribute to
a supply of merchantable timber. Even when forest health projects are
targeted to remove hazard trees, small diameter, dead or dying trees
and the unending supply of slash, we request a conscious decision to
add a merchantable sawlog component. More sawtimber equals additional
supply for mills, lower costs resulting in more acres of management.
We further believe that sawlog outputs need to include both the
salvage of dead trees AND the proactive management of our still green
forests. Good forestry demands attention to both and the long term
viability of industry will depend on it.
Regionally we ask for a budget and resulting timber supply that
will allow the Forest Service to address health issues equitably across
the states.
The mill in Montrose was purchasing logs from every national forest
in Colorado while processing right here in Montrose. For this mill and
the other mills in Colorado to survive for the long-term, supply must
be balanced geographically. If we lose the projects nearest each mill
infrastructure, in order to chase the newest forest health issue, then
the cost-effective processing will disappear. These investments are
fixed in bricks and mortar, and the mill owners have limited margins to
purchase wood further and further afield. As their costs of timber
management rise, fewer acres will be treated. Recently mill owners have
asked the Forest Service to add green timber to the forthcoming supply
since standing dead timber slowly deteriorates and a green program will
be essential to keep a sustainable industry--long term--in Colorado.
Importantly we ask for efficiencies. We seek increased management
opportunities when we maximize Forest Service authorities to operate
more efficiently.

Suggestions here Suggestions here include:

improve streamlined project planning/
analysis;

seek timber outputs that match the supply
needs of infrastructure;

reduce non-essential costs on many of our
projects.

use HFRA in order to benefit from streamlined
judicial review;

implement the newly authorized pre-decisional
administrative objections process as soon as possible;

implement each project to the maximum extent
permitted under the NEPA analysis--several more trees
per acre multiplied by the numerous projects within the
state adds up to significant additional sawtimber and
return per project;
Quickly tapping into simple solutions such as these and others
appearing in the recent FS report on ``Increasing the Pace and Scale of
Restoration'' will allow instant results. We can increase management
through economically rational, and ecologically sustainable projects
that meet the needs of industry and the needs on the ground.
I am very committed to the timber entrepreneurs who have put their
valuable investment dollars on the line in order to operate in an
extremely challenging economy. I don't want to see one more job lost,
or more shrinkage in a small but important industry.
I am honored to testify, and I would be delighted to work with you
to give additional detail to quickly enhance an efficient,
environmentally sound forest health strategy.
______

Mr. McClintock. I understand, Ms. Fishering. Thank you for
your testimony.
[Applause.]
Mr. McClintock. And I apologize. I didn't see a yellow
light go off there.
Ms. Fishering. I didn't either. Can I talk another 5
minutes?
Mr. McClintock. It is going to go from green to red, so hit
the brakes.
I would like to now recognize Mr. J.R. Ford, President of
the Pagosa Cattle Company from Pagosa Springs, Colorado, to
testify.
Welcome.

STATEMENT OF J.R. FORD, PRESIDENT,
PAGOSA CATTLE COMPANY, PAGOSA SPRINGS, COLORADO

Mr. Ford. Thank you for inviting me here today.
I am a small businessman in Pagosa Springs that manages
large ranch holdings throughout the state owners. We have had
the same problems that you guys all talked about in the forest
on our own private land. In working on this for the last few
years, we have come up with a solution using information that
we took from a feasibility study from McNeil Technology that
they did for us on timber supply and new upcoming technologies
that are coming out to get rid of the biomass that had no
market.
We have also been working with the renewable energy lab on
the ideas. We put together a group called Mixed-Conifer Working
Group in Pagosa Springs that is made up of the environmental
community in the Four Corners, industry, the government, local
and state and Federal, and have come up with a description of
our forests in which we think we can make them healthy.
All of our mills are gone. The land has been stripped of
any mills that were there in our county. So we are 6 or 7 hours
away from any site to be able to take sawlogs.
So what we plan on doing, if we can get going forward with
overcoming some of our log problems, is that we would like to
be able to take everything that is 12 inches and smaller that
needs to be thinned to make for a healthy forest and take that
to wood chips at the point of harvest, chip that material, haul
it off in hook-lip boxes to a site in which we would treat it
from there.
We would take larger material, the sawlog, the saw timber
material that was 12 inches and larger. We would haul that to a
small band mill sitting on the same site that the wood chips
would be on, and take the slabs off the outside of it so that
we could send off the cans and the squares, wholesale them out
to whoever could actually take them to the next step of use.
We would take all those wood chips, convert them into
synthetic gas through an energy technology called gasification
using technology out of Canada, and that synthetic gas we would
convert to--we would take that synthetic gas, run it through an
internal combustion engine, and we would make one-third the
power for our small community. We use about 15 megawatts of
power in Archuleta County. Thinning between 1,500 and 2,000
acres a year to a description that has been put together by the
Forest Service or by government agencies, and with the
environmental community in our neighborhood, we can take that
material and produce 5 megawatts of power in our community.
But we do have some log problems. We have our logs that we
have to get out of the way also, and one of them is timber
supply. We need a long-term supply. If you expect private
enterprise to step up and come up with some of this new
technology, they have to know that they are going to have a
long-term supply to be able to invest the large amount of
capital that we are going to.
So these stewardship contracts need to be spread out. They
need to be longer than 10 years, some of them into 15, 20 and
25 years, so that a person who is getting ready to sign a long-
term stewardship contract, or a long-term power purchase
agreement like we are with our local coop, which they have
stepped up to come to the table with a 15-year power purchase
agreement, we know we need a 15-year supply from the Forest
Service in which we can take those wood chips from the Forest
Service and from the private and make this project work.
The public support, we have broad public support in
Archuleta County because what we have done is we have sized our
project to our community. We are going to thin the forest and
make it healthy within a 50-mile radius, and we are going to
use those wood chips to make electricity and sell it in the
same 50-mile radius. We don't have the haul issues that a lot
of other projects might have, and I think that is key. When you
start getting over a 50-mile radius and you are hauling
products other than logs, it is not profitable.
Cancellation clauses are a big problem. We are getting
ready to invest $22 million in our project, and the Forest
Service wants to put a $250,000 cancellation cost. Our problem
is, what happens when you cancel? We are sitting there with a
$20 million project with no supply.
Two options that we see happening there is we see either
going to the USDA, and on the USDA loan guarantees on the
government side of that equation, there would be 100 percent
non-recourse loan. So if the government does not supply the
material, does not supply our acreage, then we turn around and
we are not liable for the rest of that loan. On the producer
side, it would be set up just like any other USDA loan
guarantee. So that would be one side, or a universal
cancellation clause at the Washington level at which you could
have multiple, multiple, lots of stewardship contracts, and
then they could turn around then and draw off of one large
bonding issue up in Washington, instead of putting that burden
on each independent district and the forest.
Product other than logs. It needs to be totally removed. We
are leaving too much of this material sitting on our forest
floor and creating other health issues and other fire issues.
If you can remove that and use it into the gasification
technology that we are looking at, you broaden out your
business plan and you are getting multiple uses from that.
I am going to run out of my time. So stewardship contracts
are something that I think need to be moved along. Right now,
too much evidence is put on large landscape stewardship
contracts, and there needs to be a pot of money put into these
small, community-scale projects that have been designed by the
local community.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Ford follows:]

Statement of J.R. Ford, President, Pagosa Cattle Company, Inc.,
Member, The Mixed-Conifer Working Group

Hello, I am J.R. Ford and this is a great opportunity for me to
speak to a joint oversight field hearing, thank you for the invitation.
Today I am here representing a few organizations, as one often does in
a rural community. These organizations are: Pagosa Cattle Company, Inc;
Renewable Forest Energy, LLC and The Mixed-Conifer Working Group. It is
from my involvement with these organizations that I am here today to
offer my insight (which hopefully will help).
Pagosa Cattle Company, Inc: I have owned for over 21 years
providing ranch management dealing with forest health, forest fuel
reductions, river restoration, land restoration management, forest
restoration and rangeland management. These management experiences have
brought me to the task of starting up a company; Renewable Forest
Energy, LLC which plans to build a 5Mwe gasification power plant run on
woody biomass. The process for removal of biomass from the forest is at
its prime. New European equipment options provide point of harvest
mobile tree chipping at a fraction of traditional costs. However for
both companies to be successful, securing a long term supply of
material must be secured. Included with my written testimony is a
presentation of the project(s) overview labeled as Exhibit A.
Below is an outline of some of the stepping stones these
organizations have taken. I will begin with the project concept and
progress to the hearing today.

2003--2009: The concept for forest thinning, locating
the correct type of forest equipment as well as solidifying
what would be done with the biomass removed. In our case the
biomass will be used for a 5MWe gasification power plant.

August 2009--RFQ AG-82X9-S-09-0275 on Turkey Springs
Biofuels Demonstration (TSBD) 288 acres. A test project was in
order to determine if the forest health objectives were on
track as well what are the cost estimates to perform the forest
thinning. The designations and descriptions were met and the
``pre-settlement'' look could be achieved well within budgetary
goals. The ground compaction studies were within the normal
disturbance parameters.

October 2009--TSBD awarded to Pagosa Cattle
Company

Fall 2009--Forestry equipment ordered from
Sweden

June 2010--Notice to Proceed on TSBD from
Forest Service

November 2010--Public Tour of TSBD

This test project, along with all of
our contracts, has been open to the educational
impact studies, students, professors and
industry professionals. All have visited and
collected data to test the impact of likewise
projects.

August 2011--TSBD complete--field data
conclusive that project objectives could be met.

June 2010--Forestry equipment delivered--first Bruks
mobile whole tree chipper in the U.S.A. from Sweden

June 2010--Private land contract on 1400 acres with
the objective of forest health and biomass removal.

September 2010--Mixed-Conifer Working Group
officially forms

``This second meeting of the Mixed-Conifer
Working Group focused on the purpose of the working
group and an understanding of USFS planning and NEPA
related to timber sales and fuels projects.'' http://
ocs.fortlewis.edu/mixedconifer/meetings.htm

For over 21 months local citizens,
environmental groups, government & tribal agencies and
various other vested parties have been meeting to
present a collaborative presentation for the future
health of the San Juan forest. People from all across
the state have met with this group. Their educational
website can be found at: http://ocs.fortlewis.edu/
mixedconifer. This group helped design a sustainable
sized community project(s) focused on ponderosa pine
and mixed-use conifer forests health.

March 2011--Our interest in a long term stewardship
contract is expressed directly to the Forest Service based on
the TSBD outcomes along with the collaborative Mixed-Used
Conifer Working group.

August 2011--RFP on Pagosa Long Term Stewardship
Contract AG-82X9-S-11-9002

The PLTS contract not only allows the
original vision of taking biomass to energy but also
will help reestablish the logging industry in Southwest
Colorado where it has been dormant for many years.

November 2011--Request for 60 day extension
on all bid proposals for PLTS

January 2012--Request for 60 day extension on
all bid proposals for PLTS

March 2012--extension deadline for PLTS

September 2011-2012 Hired Mountain Studies Institute
to research: pine beetle reduction through the wood chipping
process; increase in ground water supply due to additional
infiltration; increase in tree hydration due to reduced trees
stems per acre.

TODAY--a joint oversight field hearing entitled
``Logs in the Road: Eliminating Federal Red Tape and Excessive
Litigation to Create Health Forests, Jobs and Abundant Water
and Power Supplies''
The other organization that I am here representing is The Mixed-
Conifer Working Group of which I am a charter member. The mission
statement for the working group as taken from their website http://
ocs.fortlewis.edu/mixedconifer is: ``The Upper San Juan Mixed Conifer
Workgroup is committed to collaborative approaches to improving the
health and long-term resilience of mixed-conifer forests and the
communities located near them in southwest Colorado. The Workgroup will
focus on strengthening understanding, sharing knowledge and lessons
learned, developing management approaches, initiating high priority
projects, and monitoring results using an adaptive framework.'' The
Mixed-Conifer Working Group resource documents are listed here with
links to the webpage: Working Definitions; Study of forest
fragmentation on the Pagosa District by McGarigal and Romme; National
Forest Foundation Grant for the Upper San Juan Mixed Conifer Working
Group; Historical Range of Variability and Current Landscape Condition
Analysis: South Central Highlands Section; Southwestern Colorado &
Northwestern New Mexico; Mixed-Conifer Forests in Southwest Colorado: A
Summary of Existing Knowledge and Considerations for Restoration and
Management; All Vegetation Map; All Vegetation Map/w Roads; 2010 Forest
Health Report--Colorado State Forest Service; Report from the October
2010 Mixed Conifer Workshop, report by the CFRI. The Mixed-Conifer
Working Group is a volunteer group comprised of 25% environmentalists,
25% conservationists & local citizens; 25% industry professionals and
25% state and federal employees. Here are only a few of the
participants; Colo. Div of Parks and Wildlife, Mountain Studies
Institute, San Juan Citizens Alliance, Renewable Forest Energy,
Colorado State Forest Service, Pagosa Ranger District (USFS) and the
Archuleta Office of Emergency Mgmt. Exhibit C to this written testimony
is a briefing paper regarding this work group.
Having the support of your community is a key factor for success
with any project and the collaborative efforts of the organizations I
represent here today are essential to public education on forest health
in Southwest, Colorado. Gaining public support is important. All of
these organizations enjoy the working relationships and are confident
that the locals of the areas support the forest health interest. It is
my recommendation that any intermountain west community that is
interested in the health of their forest to create a similar working
group.
After two years participating with The Mixed-Conifer Working Group
and over 21 years experience managing large ranches; time has shown me
that there is work to be done to get over the barriers that keep
community sized forest health project streamlined and viable. The top
nine obstacles with corresponding recommended solutions; as seen
through my experiences with: the bidding process as contractor for
Pagosa Cattle Company on USDA's RFP (request for proposals) and the
collaborative and educational processes of the Mixed-Conifer Working
Group are listed below.
1.  GUARANTEE LONG TERM SUPPLY: Aligning the biomass supply
with a local electrical cooperative and a sound business plan
for private sector investors. Investors return on investment
for our project requires a 15 year minimum alignment.

The current law should be amended to allow
for stewardship contract time parameters to increase
the span to up to 25 years.
2.  PUBLIC SUPPORT: There is a large need to educate the public
as well as hold open meetings in order to gain the necessary
support to understand and accept all that is needed to be
performed in order to achieve a health forest. We describe the
forest look as ``pre-settlement'' reducing the tree stems per
acre in order to obtain many benefits.

From 21 months of meetings through The Mixed-
Conifer Working Group which is made up of volunteer
group comprised of 25% environmentalists, 25%
conservationists & local citizens; 25% industry
professionals and 25% State and Federal employees the
public support has increased and become focused on a
main goal of getting the forest healthy.

It is my recommendation that any
intermountain west community that is interested in
developing a sustainable solution to their forest
health problems, create a similar working group.
3.  CANCELLATION CEILING/GOV. BONDING REQUIREMENTS: This is a
crucial step in order to protect the contractor however the
current bonding requirements inflate costs to unappealing
levels. To protect contractors investment.

Establish a universal stewardship contract
cancellation ceiling fund at the Federal level to help
alleviate the regional bonding burden.

Contractors can look to the USDA loan
guarantee program. If their program had 100% guarantee
on the government side of contract default.
4.  POL: Total removal and utilization of all POL (products
other than logs) within a Forest Service contract. Reduce fuels
loading in order to protect WUI (Wildland Urban Interface).

Whole tree chipping at point of harvesting.

New gasification technology is available.
Gasifying all woody biomass by chipping all POL for
gasification in a power plant to produce electricity.
5.  IMPLEMENTATION: It has been our experience that the Forest
Service regularly shares information regarding the
opportunities for grants to initiate studies, or education
research tied to biomass utilization.

It has been our experience that the Forest
Service has not set aside funds for actual
implementation of biomass utilization contracts.

If the Forest Service has a heightened
concern in the unknown biomass market then it would be
my recommendations that smaller community scaled forest
health projects are funded. This will created awareness
and field data results to quantify future biomass
contracts.
6.  HAUL DISTANCE: The Forest Service does not appear to take
into account the significance of the cost transportation of
forest products, like biomass for product from source to
plants. This is contrary to knowledge that hauling of
conventional forest products, like sawtimber, is typically the
most expensive aspect of converting standing trees to products.

Reduce the haul distance of forest products.
It is our recommendation to limit the distance to
approximately 50 miles or less from contract area.
7.  VALUATION OF FOREST PRODUCTS. Currently, the Forest Service
assumes trees in the small sawtimber range (beginning at 8''dbh
up to 12'' dbh) have substantial value in the market place.
Current market conditions do not reflect this assumption.

We feel that the best economic way to restore
local forests around WUI (Wildland Urban Interface) is
for stewardship contracts to contain a price for the
POL (products other than logs) removal service and the
12'' dbh and larger should be sold as sawtimber by the
ton at market rates.

Basically stating that 8-12'' dbh material
should be considered POL.
8.  BALANCE: We have found that the Forest Service prefers to
fund large scaled ``landscaped'' projects instead of community
scaled forest health projects.

Finding a balance to both large and community
scaled projects is our recommendation. Bigger
landscaped projects do not always mean better value.
Creating and implementing community scaled forest
health contracts will help build sustainable
communities and contract completion.
9.  TIME VALUE: Amount of time and investment that a contractor
spends working on a Forest Service stewardship contract all the
while not knowing if the Forest Service has the capability to
fund the project.

Secure and reserve funds for community scaled
forest health projects.
In closing it is my intent to create a commercial viable business
in which total forest product removal (sawtimber and POL) is achieved,
leaving no residual fuels on the forest floor--as currently too much
biomass (all) is left on the forest floor increasing fire risk. This
business plan has been modified to ensure that all the Forest Service
needs to create a health forest with minimal ground disturbance is
achieved while creating industry in a rural community. This last bid
process with the Forest Service has proved a little frustrating as a
private sector business holding financial investors interests while
working out all the contractual details has proven difficult, but that
is why we are all here today at this hearing. I hope that we will leave
the hearing today with concrete ways to change the current laws
surrounding the USDA FS stewardship contracting process.
______

Mr. McClintock. I would now like to recognize Mr. Clint
Georg, Partner of the Alden Group from Englewood, Colorado to
testify.

STATEMENT OF CLINT GEORG, PARTNER,
THE ALDEN GROUP, ENGLEWOOD, COLORADO

Mr. Georg. Chairman McClintock, Chairman Bishop,
Congressman Tipton, thank you for inviting me to be here today.
I have the same issue as Ms. Fishering. Can you hear me
now?
Mr. McClintock. Yes.
Mr. Georg. I'm a member of a group of investors who own a
sawmill property in Saratoga, Wyoming. The Saratoga Mill has
been idle since 2002 and is one of the only two large sawmills
left in this region, the sawmill here in Montrose being the
second one. Our group intends to reopen the Saratoga sawmill,
but the success of this venture will be dependent on reversing
the impact of policies and regulations that have decimated the
Colorado sawmill industry in the past few decades.
Having viable sawmills is beneficial to the region in many
ways. First, these two sawmills provide the forests in Colorado
with the only large, commercially viable means to help
alleviate the impact of the massive insect infestations and
reduce the potential for massive wildfires.
Second, operating sawmills are necessary for the long-term
health of Colorado's uninfected forests as a means active
forest management required to enhance the forests' future
resilience to fire as well as numerous types of insects and
diseases.
And third, these sawmill operations provide a meaningful
economic driver for the area. Simply put, operating these
sawmills uses the free market forces to help remedy a pressing
need in Colorado and Wyoming, as well as provides support for
the long-term health of the vast forests in this region.
A viable sawmill industry in Colorado will require three
things: first, a stable supply of timber sales from the United
States Forest Service. The supply must be geographically close
to the sawmills, in sufficient quantity to support the needs of
those mills, and it must be sustained at those levels on an
ongoing basis beyond the current need of removing infected
trees. This is largely a matter of resource allocation. For
example, we believe doubling the volume of timber sold from the
Northern Colorado area is necessary to support the Saratoga
Mill at efficient production levels.
It is my understanding that doubling the timber sales in
this area requires adding just 11 people to the current staff.
The U.S. Forest Service should prioritize timber contract
processing to achieve this staffing level. The payback would be
revenues from direct payments for the timber sold, the reduced
costs of stewardship contracts, and the potential savings from
reduced wildfire risks.
The commitment for long-term access to this timber is
necessary to justify the long-term nature of these investments
and additional investments such as those that hold great
promise using bio-mass and other means. But those investments
are not justified without a stable, long-term supply of timber.
Second, the timber sales must be economically viable.
Viability is determined by the composition of the timber being
sold and the performance requirements under those contracts.
Lodgepole pine, the type of tree most widely infested, has
relatively low commercial appeal, so the timber contracts must
be written in a way that harvesting is not cost prohibitive.
And third, the industry must comply with current
environmental regulations, but it needs protection from
malicious environmentalist actions such as those that destroyed
the timber industry in other parts of this country.
To understand this, we need look no further than Arizona
where, in 1996, an environmental group won a court injunction
that temporarily shut down logging on all national forests in
Arizona and New Mexico. As a result, the Arizona timber
industry is now largely extinct. Since then, Arizona has had
the five largest forest fires in its history. For more than a
decade, that state's government has desperately been trying to
find financial incentive and other means to reestablish the
Arizona timber industry but has been unsuccessful. It simply is
not economically feasible to replace what was lost.
In Colorado, what remains of the timber industry must be
viewed as a precious resource for the state. It needs to be
protected, because if this industry, and in particular if these
two mills are lost, like in Arizona, they will not be replaced.
There is an opportunity for the last two large sawmills in
this region, using effective private enterprise, to aid in the
near and long-term timber management needs of Colorado and
Wyoming. For this to happen, it is essential for the U.S.
Forest Service to provide an adequate, long-term, stable supply
of timber under economically viable terms. It is also essential
that the timber industry be provided protection from an
unreasonable use of environmental laws and regulations such as
those which has destroyed other regional timber industries.
Thank you for your invitation to speak at this hearing.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Georg follows:]

Statement of Clint Georg, Partner, The Alden Group, LLC

Dear Chairmen McClintock and Bishop and Members of the Committee,
thank you for prioritizing your time to learn about the needs of the
remaining timber industry in this region. Thank you for inviting me to
be a part of this hearing.
I am a member of a group of investors who own the sawmill property
in Saratoga, WY. The Saratoga mill has been idle since 2002 and is one
of only two large sawmills left in this region--the mill in Montrose is
the other one. Our group intends to reopen the Saratoga sawmill, but
the success of this venture will be dependent on reversing the impact
of policies and regulations that have decimated the Colorado sawmill
industry in the past few decades.
Having viable sawmills is beneficial to the region in many ways:
1.  These two sawmills provide the forests in Colorado with the
only large, commercially viable means to help alleviate the
impact of the massive insect infestations and reduce the
potential for devastating wildfires.
2.  Operating sawmills are necessary for the long-term health
of Colorado's uninfected forests as a means of active forest
management required to enhance the forests' future resilience
to fire as well as numerous types of insects and diseases.
3.  These sawmill operations provide a meaningful economic
driver for the region. This can be measured in the value of
products produced from the timber, the hundreds of jobs for
sawmill employees, loggers and truck drivers, and the positive
impact to all the small businesses and communities that
directly and indirectly benefit from the economic activity of
the timber industry. To the extent that fires are reduced,
there is also an economic benefit to the public--for instance
the combined costs of just three of the large fires in Colorado
since 2002 has exceeded $500 million.
Simply put, operating these sawmills uses the free market forces to
help remedy a pressing need in Colorado and Wyoming as well as provides
support for the long-term health of the vast forests in this region.
A viable sawmill industry in Colorado will require three things:
1.  A stable supply of timber sales from the USFS. The supply must
be geographically close to the sawmills, in sufficient quantity to
support the needs of those mills and it must be sustained at those
levels on an ongoing basis beyond the current need of removing infected
trees. This is largely a matter of resource allocation. For example, we
believe doubling the volume of timber sold from the Northern Colorado
area is necessary to support the Saratoga mill at efficient production
levels. It is my understanding that doubling the timber sales in this
area requires adding just 11 people to the current staff. The USFS
should prioritize timber contract processing to achieve this staffing
level. The payback would be revenues from direct payments for the
timber sold, the reduced costs of stewardship contracts, and the
potential savings from reduced wildfire risks. The commitment for long-
term access to this timber is necessary to justify the long-term nature
of these investments and additional investments such as those which
hold great promise for using bio-mass from the forest for generating
clean-renewable energy. But those investments are not justified without
a stable, long-term supply of timber.
2.  The timber sales must be economically viable. Viability is
determined by the composition of the timber being sold and the
performance requirement under those contracts. Lodgepole pine, the type
of tree most widely infested, has relatively low commercial appeal, so
the timber contracts must be written in a way that harvesting is not
cost prohibitive.
3.  The industry must comply with current environmental
regulations, but it needs protection from malicious environmentalist
actions such as those that destroyed the timber industry in other parts
of the country. To understand this, we need look no further than
Arizona where in 1996 an environmental group won a court injunction
that temporarily shut down logging on all national forests in Arizona
and New Mexico. As a result, the Arizona timber industry is now largely
extinct. Since then, Arizona has had the five largest forest fires in
its history. For more than a decade, that state's government has
desperately been trying with financial incentive and other means, to
reestablish an Arizona timber industry but has been unsuccessful--it
simply is not economically feasible to replace what was lost. In
Colorado, what remains of the timber industry must be viewed as a
precious resource for the state. It needs to be protected, because if
the industry, and in particular if these two mills, are lost, like in
Arizona, they will not be rebuilt.
There is an opportunity for the last two large sawmills in this
region, using effective private enterprise, to aid in the near and
long-term timber management needs of Colorado and Wyoming. For this to
happen, it is essential for the U.S. Forest service to provide an
adequate, long-term stable supply of timber, under economically viable
terms. It is also essential that the timber industry be provided
protection from an unreasonable use of environmental regulations such
as that which has destroyed other regional timber industries.
Thank you for your invitation to speak at this hearing. Your
leadership is a critical component in the future of this industry. I
would be happy to answer any questions.
FOLLOWING IS INFORMATION SUPPORTING THE STATEMENTS ABOVE:
HISTORY OF THE COLORADO TIMBER INDUSTRY
A once vibrant industry, built up over a century, has been decimated
due to the lack of access to Colorado's abundant timber
resources.
To understand the current crisis facing the forests in Colorado, it
is helpful to review the history of the Colorado timber industry. The
Colorado timber industry began in the 1860s when vast tracts of virgin
forests were harvested to support mining, railroads and housing
development in the state. Following World War II, with strong housing
markets and public policy encouraging timber production on National
Forests, timber harvests for industrial products in the Four Corners
States increased from about 700 million board feet (MMBF, Scribner log
scale) annually during the early 1950s to a peak of approximately 1,000
MMBF in the late 1960s.
During the 1970s and 1980s, harvest volumes dropped somewhat with
harvests during the late 1980s averaging about 850 MMBF annually.
Timber harvests from the region dramatically declined during the 1990s,
caused largely by decreases in the harvests from National Forests
caused by litigation related to threatened and endangered species and
reduced Federal budget levels.

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

This litigation caused the USFS to dramatically reduce the
volume of timber sold in the Colorado from the high in the 1960s down
to an average of just 40--45MMBF per year from 2003-2007. The reduced
supply of timber could no longer support the needs of the timber
industry and the effect in Colorado was dramatic; two oriented strand
board mills closed, one in Olathe and the other in Kremmling; a large
sawmill in Walden closed in 1994; three of Colorado's largest multi-
national mills closed in 2001 and 2002; a large independently-owned
mill at South Fork closed in 2001 (after 50 years of operation); and
nine other medium-sized mills and dozens of small mills have closed
their doors since 1982.
Unfortunately, timber management in the Colorado forests is
dependent upon an active timber industry for timber stand improvements
using treatments that harvest wood products. With the majority of local
mills closing, the industry has reduced capacity to harvest timber
(logs can only be economically shipped short distances). Consequently,
over the years, the Colorado forests have experienced increased stand
density and an accumulation of ladder-fuels; conditions that have
directly led to the large-scale wildfires and insect epidemics now
facing the state.
Today, if we do not count the two dozen very small operators with
10 or fewer employees, there are just two medium sized and one large
operating mills in Colorado. Moreover, the large sawmill in Montrose is
financially troubled and operating under receivership. A second large
sawmill in Saratoga, WY is well located to service the northern
Colorado forests (where the heaviest concentration of beetle killed
pine is located), but has been idle since 2002 when it was shut down
due to a lack of logs.
THE ROLE OF THE USFS IN THE COLORADO TIMBER INDUSTRY
The United States Forest Service manages the vast majority of timber in
Colorado and controls the destiny of the Colorado sawmill
industry.
Any discussion of the Colorado timber industry requires a
discussion of the USFS. Nearly 68 percent of Colorado's forests are in
federal ownership and nearly three-quarters of the state's high-
elevation, commercially attractive species such as spruce-fir,
lodgepole pine and aspen are located on USFS lands. In contrast, the
majority of the Colorado forests controlled by private lands are low
elevation species. This creates a situation where even modest size
lumber operations in the state cannot survive without purchasing timber
directly or indirectly from the USFS. Of course, this was conclusively
demonstrated by the failure of so many Colorado timber operations
discussed above over the years when the USFS dramatically reduce the
amount of timber sales. The 40-45 MMBF of timber sold annually in 2003-
2007 was clearly inadequate to support a healthy timber industry as the
single remaining large sawmill in Colorado, and the one just north in
Saratoga, Wyoming, both require 40 MMBF annually to operate even a
single shift (and to operate efficiently, should run multiple shifts).
Currently the restrictions on timber sales in this area appear to
be primarily an issue of funding and resource allocation. With a
tightening federal budget, fiscal allocations to the region are
projected to fall and the volume of timber projected to be sold in this
region in the coming years is expected to be only a fraction of the
timber that could be sold, as identified by the USFS in its internal
forecasts.
Fortunately, the amount of funding necessary to spur the Colorado
timber industry appears to be fairly modest, particularly in light of
the benefits. To understand the funds needed, it is helpful to
understand the process the USFS has to go through to prepare a timber
sale.
PROCESS TO PREPARE USFS TIMBER SALES
An understanding of the process and resources required by the USFS to
prepare a tract of timber for sale.
Before committing to a timber sale at a particular site, the Forest
Service is required to analyze virtually every environmental impact
that might result from making that sale and to document in detail the
results of those analyses. The process requires compliance with the
National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA), and in the case of
programmatic Land and Resource Management Plans, the National Forest
Management Act (NFMA). Several of the key documents developed for a
typical timber sale are the environmental assessment, biological
evaluation, decision notice, and ``Finding of No Significant Impact.''
The process involves the work of trained foresters, wildlife experts,
hydrologists and archeologists and can take 1.5 to 3 years to complete.
Historically once this work was done and the decision to go forward
with the sale was made, the process entered an appeal phase where the
public could enter an appeal of the decision. Recently, this has been
changed to an objection phase which is intended to streamline the
process, but historically this phase has taken 1 to 5 years when caught
up in litigation.
Once the objection process is over, the Forest Service identifies
the particular stand(s) of timber for the sale, puts a boundary around
the unit, marks the trees if required, measures the trees, notes
defects and other characteristics that help define the volume and other
specifics of the sale. This field process takes about six months to a
year. The rest of the process is office work that can be done in a
matter of weeks. All told, the process typically takes about 3 to 3.5
years to complete.
The primary limiting factor of increasing the amount of timber
sales, in light of the process required to prepare the timber sales,
appears to be an issue of resource allocation or funding levels. The
resources are primarily the staff required to prepare the timber sales.
In the northern region of Colorado, the USFS employs six foresters, two
wildlife experts, an archeologist and a hydrologist and perhaps one
other individual in preparing the current level of timber sales. The
Saratoga sawmill could process nearly double the annual amount of
timber in the sales that are projected to be prepared by this team for
the Medicine Bow--Routt, Arapahoe--Roosevelt and White River Forests
over the next several years. Doubling the level of timber contracts
would require doubling, or adding eleven people, to the staff to
prepare those sales. The cost of this increased staff could be offset
by the revenue generated from those contracts, the reduced cost of
stewardship contracts as well as the potential cost reductions from the
reduced risk of fire in the logged areas.
The second factor influencing an assured timber supply to the
industry is the current inability of the USFS to make long-term
commitments on the volume of timber sold in out years. The USFS service
develops a five year forecast of timber sales in the region. Execution
of this plan is dependent on a number of factors, but the primary
factor is the allocation of resources which is an annual event. The
annual nature of the funding helps to discourage any investment in the
industry in this region because meaningful investments typically
require multi-year paybacks. The USFS and industry need to find a means
of a multi-year commitment for the timber supply in order to
incentivize addition investments.
POINT NO. 1: A MINIMUM REQUIREMENT FOR AN ACTIVE AND HEALTHY TIMBER
INDUSTRY IN COLORADO IS THE ALLOCATION OF ENOUGH FUNDING FOR
THE USFS TO OFFER A SUFFICIENT NUMBER OF TIMBER CONTRACTS TO
SUPPORT SAWMILL OPERATIONS IN THE REGION.
BENEFITS OF THE SAWMILL INDUSTRY TO COLORADO
And active sawmill industry in Colorado benefits the people, economy
and environment.
An active timber industry in Colorado, supported by an
appropriately increased volume of USFS timber sales, provides a number
of benefits to Colorado and the forests in the area. First is the
economic impact to the state.
Today Colorado, a state rich in timber supply, imports more than 90
percent of the wood products consumed in the state from other states
and countries. Increasing timber harvests in the state can be used to
spur economic growth measured in the products produced from those
timber harvests, the hundreds of jobs for sawmill workers, loggers and
truck drivers and all the direct and indirect benefits to the
communities and small businesses supporting the economic activity of
the timber industry.
As an example, I recently spoke with the mayor of a small town that
previously had a small operating sawmill. After that sawmill closed in
2009, families left town to find work and there was a 40% drop in the
number students attending the local school. Without a means to replace
those jobs, the mayor expects that the town will need to close the
school. If that happens, the mayor has told me that it will be hard to
get young families to move there--effectively a death sentence for the
town. This is a scenario that has been repeated across the country
since sawmills represent an industry often better suited to rural areas
rather than to big cities.
Point No. 2: Colorado and the region have an opportunity to spur
economic growth with a resurgence of the timber industry in the
state.
In addition to providing economic advantages, the timber industry
is essential to maintaining a healthy forest. Today, increased public
support for the timber industry in our area is largely the result of
the widespread devastation caused by the mountain pine beetle.
Mountain Pine Beetle Devastation
Mountain pine beetles have been part of the natural cycle in
Colorado forests for eons, however the extent of the current
infestation and the amount of destruction it has wrought is
unprecedented. The scope of the infestation was due in large part to
the high density and lack of age diversity of the forests. In Colorado,
mountain pine beetles attack mature ponderosa and lodgepole pine. In
nature, periodic fires and other devastating events thin forests and
create an age diversity that limits the impact of a pine beetle
outbreak. Where fire is suppressed, timber harvesting creates the same
advantageous environment. However in Colorado, years of fire
suppression and years without a vibrant sawmill industry produced a
situation in many of the high country forests of dense, mature, eight
inches in diameter or larger lodgepole pine; precisely the habitat in
which mountain pine beetles thrive. When the epidemic started, there
were not the natural age barriers to slow it and the high density of
the forests meant the beetles could quickly spread.
The impact on the state of the pine bark beetle should not be
understated:
There is an economic impact to the state in reduced recreational
activities such as hiking, camping and skiing due to: scenery changes;
reduced wind protection; and safety hazards from falling dead trees.
For individual landowners with affected trees on their properties,
the financial impact includes: property value reductions; erosion
issues from increased water yields; and wood and tree branch disposal
challenges.
And of course, the impact of mountain pine beetle killed trees
results in an increased potential for wildfire which may result in:
loss of life and property; reduced real estate values; changes to
tourism-based economies; long-term costs of water supply and reservoir
clean-up; and safety hazards from falling dead trees.
Wildfires
Two notable Colorado fires are the Fourmile Canyon fire in 2010 and
the Hayman fire in 2002. The Fourmile Canyon fire burned 167 homes,
cost $10 million dollars to fight and resulted in $217 million in
property damage. The Hayman fire was the largest fire in Colorado
history and burned 138,000-acres.
The costs of these fires are large by any standard but, according
to The Western Forestry Leadership Coalition, a State and Federal
government partnership, an accounting of costs should include:
suppression costs; other direct costs (private property losses, damage
to utility lines, damage to recreation facilities, etc.);
rehabilitation costs, indirect costs (lost tax revenues, business
revenue and property losses that accumulate over the longer term); and
additional costs (these included hard to quantify cost such as
extensive loss of ecosystem services, aesthetic and scenic beauty,
wildlife existence value, the economic cost of the loss of human life
are included here).
With this full accounting, the economic cost to the state for the
2002 Hayman fire was $208 million, the 2002 Missionary Ridge fire was
$153 million and, of course the total cost of the 2010 Fourmile fire
canyon fire greatly exceeded the $227 million of direct costs.
It is widely accepted that the lack of forest management has
resulted in a heighten danger of these massive fires and that more can
be expected. Unfortunately, fire danger increases again in
approximately 15 to 20 years when the trees killed by the pine bark
beetle rot and fall down, adding woody material to the young trees and
other fine fuels growing on the forest floor. A fire in this
arrangement is difficult to suppress and will pose additional safety
hazards to firefighters. Severe wildfires of this type burn at higher
intensities and for longer durations which can be very detrimental to
plant communities, soils, and watersheds.
There is no practical way to stop a large scale mountain pine
beetle epidemic once it has begun and to lessen wildfire hazard it is
critical to reduce the number of dead, dry trees as well as infected
trees that will eventually die. Removing these trees has often meant
that the property owner (including the USFS) has paid to have the trees
removed.
The most cost effective removal of these trees, and the only
practical method on a large scale, is to have a commercially viable
means of harvesting and selling the timber. There have been a number of
articles in the media highlighting various companies trying to make use
of the beetle killed timber including companies making wood flooring,
furniture, log cabins and heating fuel. There has also been, in one
case, $76 million of federal grant money invested in trying to use wood
chips from beetle killed trees as a source for cellulosic ethanol that
would break America's ``addiction to oil''. Unfortunately the ethanol
experiment failed without solving the issue of how to operate on a
commercially viable scale and all the other commercial efforts in the
state for timber usage only equal a fraction of the capacity of either
the Montrose or Saratoga sawmills.
The USFS, facing a dwindling commercial timber industry and needing
to remove vegetation and perform other activities to promote healthy
forest stands, reduce fire hazards, or achieve other land management
objectives, was granted authority in 2003 to issue Stewardship
contracts for forest management. This authority, which expires in 2013,
is being used by the USFS in Colorado and Wyoming to pay private
companies to provide forest management and remove infected trees from
critical areas.
One of the benefits of stewardship contracting is that some of the
cost of treatment is offset with the value of the logs removed in the
course of the work. Having an outlet for these logs increases the value
of the logs and will ultimately reduce the USFS Stewardship contracting
costs. Currently, the largest insect infestations are in Northern
Colorado, a relatively long distance from the sawmill in Montrose. Once
the Saratoga sawmill is operating, the value of the logs in this area
will increase and the USFS will be able to pay less for Stewardship
contracts.
The Montrose mill and the Saratoga mill are each capable of
processing 40 MMBF of timber annually on a single shift. Operating at
multiple shifts, these two large sawmills will only harvest a small
portion of the Colorado forests--even operating on two shifts, a
sawmill of this size would take more than a thousand years to treat all
the timber in Colorado--but these sawmills offer the only large scale
method of processing timber and they do so while paying for the timber.
This benefits the USFS both directly through revenues from timber sales
and indirectly through the reduced cost of stewardship contracts in the
area. In all, these sawmills provide a cost effective means of removing
infected trees in the Colorado and Wyoming region.
Colorado Spruce and Ponderosa Pine Forests
It must be noted that although the mountain pine beetle continues
to be Colorado's most damaging forest pest, this is not the only
significant threat to Colorado's forests. The same beetle is also
attacking an increasing amount of ponderosa pine forests; 275,000 acres
in 2011 alone. Also, the spruce bark beetle, the second greatest insect
threat to the state, is causing extensive mortality in Colorado's
spruce forests and as of 2011 had already infested 262,000 acres of
Engleman Spruce. Controlling the impact of these infestations, similar
to lodgepole pine infestations, requires removal of the timber and
emphasizes the importance of an active sawmill industry servicing the
state.
Point No. 3: Large sawmill operations provide a cost effective means of
timber management that is not matched by other commercially
viable options.
Long-term Forest Management
When faced with widespread infestations now prevalent in Colorado,
there is a clear and pressing need for removal of as much infected
timber as possible. However, ongoing timber harvests in sustainable
quantities are also necessary for the long-term health of the forest.
Forests, left completely without human intervention, are subject to
a pattern of natural disturbances resulting from wildfires and
windstorms and have adapted to these periodic cycles. Lodgepole pine is
an example of one species adapted to this cycle. High-severity fire is
the primary type of disturbance shaping the structure of lodgepole
pine. The fires clear large areas of tree cover and help control
disease and insect pests, and expose mineral soil seedbeds. The
lodgepole pine cones open as a result of the high heat from these fires
and release their seeds to grow and regenerate the forests in the now-
cleared area. Natural wildfires typically burn sections of the forests
and help maintain varying age distributions that also control the
spread of invasive insects and disease.
Although wildfire is a key part of the ecology of many forest
species, the control of wildfire that is necessary to protect human
life, communities, watersheds, and fish and wildlife resources means
that these forest types must now be maintained by other measures. The
Society of American Foresters recommends that clear cutting be used in
the development and care of these types of forests since clear cutting
closely resembles the natural process and is the preferred means of
assuring of prompt (or successful) regeneration. Clear cutting is also
the preferred method of harvesting lodgepole pine for commercial uses
as lodgepole pine has low commercial appeal and other types of
harvesting are cost prohibitive. In the past, and perhaps still today,
there has been much public confusion about clear cutting and its
effects on the environment. The purely visual impact of a clear cut
commonly leads to negative perceptions that manifest an array of
misconceptions about sustainability, impacts to soil, water and
wildlife, and the compatibility of timber management with recreation.
Good forest management requires different types of timber harvests;
in uninfested, healthy spruce forests, thinning is the preferred
approach while in healthy lodge pole pine forests, clear cutting
remains one of the best methods to create conditions conducive to
regeneration.
While today the focus for helping keep Colorado's remaining timber
industry alive is understandably because of the very visible impact of
the mountain pine beetle, there should be equal concern about
encouraging this industry to harvest timber from our green forests as a
means of maintaining the health of those forests for the future.
Conversely, if those forests are left to rely only on natural
processes, we can expect insects, diseases and fire to return in the
future and have negative impacts on our forests.
POINT NO. 4: Healthy forests require an active timber industry and
should be encouraged even in areas not currently affected by
the mountain pine beetle.
Basics of operating a sawmill in today's economic environment
For sawmills to be financial feasible, timber must be available in a
commercially reasonable manner.
The sawmill industry in general is facing significant economic
challenges. In the ten years from 2000 to 2010, the number of operating
sawmills in the western United States dropped from 287 mills to just
170, a 40% reduction. The decline was due to many factors including a
dramatic decrease in lumber prices following the housing burst and
escalating fuel prices which have a major cost on hauling the logs to
the sawmills.
The economics of operating sawmills is also greatly affected by the
timber characteristics. Both of the large sawmills, in Montrose and
Saratoga, are stud mills meaning they primarily produce 2X4 studs for
framing timber. Studs can be produced from lodgepole pine or Engelmann
spruce, with lodgepole pine being the predominate species now available
because of the insect infestations. Unfortunately, lodgepole pine is
also a species with relatively low economic value. It is typically a
smaller diameter tree and that results in relatively more waste when
processed into lumber. Spruce, on the other hand, is typically a larger
diameter tree and generates relatively more lumber for the volume of
timber used.
In Colorado, the value of both lodgepole pine and spruce will
diminished as they die and the longer they remain dead in the forest. A
tree killed by the pine bark beetle starts drying out and as it does,
the sun and other factors cause it to dry out unevenly. This creates
cracking (or ``checking'') and twisting (``spiraling''). Both these
conditions reduce the amount of lumber that can be recovered from a
particular volume of timber. The longer a tree remains in the forest,
the more deterioration can be expected. Finally, after a period of
time, (the actual timeframe depends on various factors, but could be
about 5 to 7 years) the trees will be too deteriorated to be of
economic value for the sawmills. Furthermore, if the weakened stand of
trees are blown down by high winds, the timber cannot be economically
recovered. The mountain pine beetle is infecting nearly all the
lodgepole pine in the state, so there is a limited window of years
where the sawmills will be processing dead timber. In the long-run, the
sawmills will need to operate using predominantly green sources of
timber.
A further complication is the lack of universal acceptance of
beetle kill lumber. Although the mountain pine beetle does not affect
the structural integrity of the timber, beetle-killed pine has a
distinctive blue stain that can affect its acceptance. As an example,
in 2009, Big Horn Lumber, a midsized sawmill operating in Laramie, WY
closed citing a lack of market for blue stained pine. In another
example, Lowes and Home Depot, have declined to carry beetle killed
lumber in their stores.
The USFS, in preparing the timber in this region for sale will have
a great impact on the sustainability of the sawmills. The USFS can make
these timber sales more attractive to the sawmill operators by
including a higher percentage of spruce or not-yet-dead lodgepole pine,
or larger diameter trees. Other factors affecting the value of the sale
include the cost of the timber (the ``stumpage''), the costs for road
maintenance, slash deposits and the requirement to remove trees that
are not large enough to meet minimum logging size (Product Other than
saw Logs--POL).
POL is a major concern for the future of the sawmill industry. The
method specified for removing POL will impact the value of the sale
particularly if the terms of the sale require the loggers to remove
this product from the forest. In some cases, there are economic uses
for the POL, such as pellets and fence posts, but material to be
removed and processed is expensive to transport relative to the value
of the product and in Colorado there is simply not enough demand for
the POL and it becomes a liability for the sawmill. As an example, for
one recent sale that we analyzed, the cost of removing the POL was
several times more expensive than the actual cost of timber and this
made that contract uneconomical to bid (we were not the only ones to
reach this conclusion, that contract received no bids).
It is important to note that there appears to be a clear push by
the forest service and others to find a use for POL. In some cases this
push has led to a hope that new technologies will use bio-mass such as
POL to help manage forests. In fact there are technologies such as co-
generation and biomass gasification that have the promise of using a
significant amount forest material such as the POL or sawmill by-
products to produce clean energy. However, these processes only operate
profitably in conjunction with sawmills, not independent of sawmills.
We believe there is an economically viable possibility of building a
biomass gasification or co-generation operation that is supported by
the sawmill operations, but only after the sawmill operations are back
running profitably and only after a long-term source of timber is
assured.
Finally, it is also important to understand that the chance of
bringing either one of these two sawmills up and operating efficiently
is not without substantial risk to the investors. Before the Saratoga
sawmill can be restarted, and perhaps before the Montrose sawmill is
transferred out or receivership, the investors will need to have a
sufficient supply of timber, on economically viable terms under
contract from the USFS.
POINT No. 5: For the timber industry to survive in Colorado, the USFS
contracts must be prepared in a way that is financially
feasible for the sawmills.
ENVIRONMENTALIST THREATS TO THE COLORADO TIMBER INDUSTRY.
While environmental laws have effectively helped protect the
environment from abusive practices, they have also been used to
decimate the timber industry to the detriment of the very
forests they were intended to save.
Undoubtedly the greatest single cause for the demise of the timber
industry in the Rocky Mountains has been the impact of the
environmentalist movement. The environmentalist movement of the late
1960's began when a controversy developed over the practice of clear
cutting and terracing on steep slopes. The final result of the
controversy was passage of the National Forest Management Act of 1976
(NFMA) which set guidelines for clear cutting.
The seventies also saw passage of The National Environmental Policy
Act of 1969, signed into law January 1, 1970, which mandated that the
environmental impacts of proposed Federal projects be comprehensively
analyzed and The Endangered Species Act of 1973 which provided for
protection of rare, threatened, and endangered animal and plant
species. A watershed event occurred on August 7, 1986, when the U.S.
Forest Service acted to protect the northern spotted owl from decline
and extinction by limiting timber sales in mature portions of National
Forests where the animals live.
Combined, a long series of governmental actions and court decisions
stemming from these environmental policies resulted in a reduction of
more than 75 percent of the timber harvested annually from public
lands. Perhaps the clearest example of the impact of the environmental
movement, and a warning of what could yet happen in Colorado, is the
case of the Arizona timber industry.
The Arizona Timber Industry
For much of the 20th century, a variety of factors combined to
interrupt the historic fire cycles over much of Arizona's native
forests. This resulted in forests overstocked with small diameter
trees, creating a ``ladder fuel'' situation, which placed millions of
acres of Arizona forestland at risk for catastrophic fires. Similar to
what is now happening in Colorado, the increasingly destructive cycle
of insects, diseases, and wildfire in Arizona's ponderosa pine and
pinyon-juniper forest ecosystems poses a significant risk to personal
health, animals, watersheds, and property.
In the 1980s, Arizona had an active timber industry that helped
maintain the heath of the forest and the industry harvested an average
of 400 million board feet of timber annually. However beginning in the
1980s, a Tucson-based environmental group, the Center for Biological
Diversity, charged that the U.S. population of Mexican spotted owls had
shrunk to just a few thousand because of logging in the old-growth
ponderosa pines. The group ultimately won a 1996 court injunction that
temporarily shut down logging on all national forests in Arizona and
New Mexico. Within a few years, applying more legal pressure on behalf
of all affected species, it forced the Forest Service to reduce logging
by 70 percent and limit the harvest to trees less than 16 inches in
diameter. Years of legal battles had greatly diminished the Arizona
timber industry and by 1996 it was largely extinct and the amount of
timber harvested from Arizona forests was almost exclusively fuel wood.
``We squashed the timber industry and the Forest Service, and
dictated the terms of surrender'' in the Southwest, said Kieran
Suckling, the director of the Center for Biological Diversity.
But environmentalists' celebrations were cut short by a 2002
conflagration: The Rodeo-Chediski fire burned 467,000 acres (732 square
miles), destroyed 400 homes and cost more than $43 million to fight.
This was the largest fire in Arizona history until 2011, when the
Wallow fire consumed 538,000 acres in eastern Arizona, destroying 32
homes and costing more than $79 million to suppress.
Three more of the largest Arizona fires, the Cave Creek Complex
(2005)--244,000 acres, Horseshoe Two (2011)--222,954 acres, and Willow
(2004)--120,000 acres have all occurred subsequent to the demise of the
Arizona Forest Industry. In total, those five fires consumed nearly ten
percent of all of Arizona's forests (equivalent to more than 2 million
acres if in Colorado). Decades of reduced logging coupled with active
fire suppression had made Arizona's famous 2.4-million-acre ponderosa
pine belt the most overgrown and flammable thickets in the West.
According to the Arizona's governor office, the Rodeo-Chediski fire
in 2002 (along with a smaller fire in 2003), elevated awareness about
forest ecosystem conditions and wildfire risks in Arizona. However, by
that time it was also recognized by the Arizona agencies that the only
cost effective management technique was to involve the timber
industry--an option no longer available to the state. Even Kieran
Suckling, the director of the Center for Biological Diversity, the very
person and organization that had done so much to destroy the timber
industry, recognized the need for harvesting timber and in 2009 signed
a deal with entrepreneur Pascal Berlioux to try and restart a timber
industry in Arizona.
Berlioux's company, Arizona Forest Restoration Products, hoped to
do restoration work on at least 600,000 acres over 20 years, cutting
only trees that are smaller than 16 inches. In turn, the Center for
Biological Diversity promised not to file lawsuits against this work,
and to defend the effort in court if other groups sued. Unfortunately,
despite collaborative efforts by the State of Arizona, the USFS and
others, reestablishing a timber industry has thus far proven to be too
great a challenge. Berlioux has since shied away from making the $250
million investment that he estimated would be required to establish a
timber operation in Arizona and no new mills are being built in this
area.
Without the prospect of reestablishing an active sawmill industry
and in an effort to ``create a viable, sustainable industry that is an
effective tool in restoring and maintaining healthy forests'', the
state sought to use government and financial incentives to create a
new, different kind of timber industry using new technology and new
products that lacked legitimate markets. Perhaps predictably, these
efforts have failed and instead the USFS in Arizona is paying for
forest management under stewardship contracts at a rate of about $420,
on average (and sometimes as much as $1,000) for each acre treated.
The obvious lesson from Arizona is that under the existing laws,
the public, and specifically environmentalist groups, can use
litigation and other methods to destroy the timber industry. Once lost,
the industry cannot be expected to be reintroduced into a region, even
with coordinated support and financial incentives from the USFS and
state and local governments. To this point, the sawmill equipment in
Saratoga was idled and left in place; something that is fairly unusual.
If this equipment had been liquidated (as was the equipment in the Big
Horn mill in Laramie) and had to be replaced, there would be no
conceivable economic justification for restarting the mill.
At this time, the USFS is operating timber sales in Colorado with
what it calls ``social license''. This means the public generally
supports efforts to harvest trees that have been insect infested. The
Colorado public has a high degree of awareness of the impact of beetle
killed pine because, among other reasons, a) the dead trees are very
visible around highly trafficked areas such as the I-70 corridor and
around ski areas such as Steamboat Springs and others, b) there have
been many news articles in print and on television regarding beetle-
killed pine, and; c) the increasing frequency and severity of large
forest fires in the state over the past few years has heightened the
awareness of the danger of large tracts of dead trees.
As a result of this awareness, the USFS generally has social
license to conduct timber sales in the areas where structures and other
human development meet or intermingle with undeveloped wildland;
wildland-urban interface (WUI) areas. What is less certain is the USFS'
social license to operate timber sales in non-WUI areas.
It will be important to have timber sales in the non-WUI. First,
nearly 20% of Coloradoans live close to nature, surrounded by that
wilderness high-risk space and the state's population is projected to
blossom in the next 30 years--with much of the growth expected to occur
in those woodsy areas. Moreover, active timber sales in non-WUI areas
are required to maintain the forest health in those areas. In
particular, the spread of insect infestation of the Colorado spruce
forests cannot be stymied without the ability to harvest infected
timber in non-WUI areas. In addition, essential water supplies are at
risk from falling trees because of the damage wildfires can cause to
watersheds. Within the heart of the outbreak in Colorado and Wyoming,
in non-WUI areas, are the headwaters for some of the rivers supplying
water to 13 western states.
Dead timber that is not harvested is subject to massive blow downs
in the coming years. At the very least, this will impede the rate of
regeneration in those forests. What is more, for those blow downs that
catch fire, the conflagrations will burn hotter than fires in standing
timber and will destroy nutrients in the soil necessary for
regeneration.
There is a great deal that is unknown about the long-term impact of
the massive kill-off of the forests in Colorado, but there is much to
be concerned about in untreated areas. The long-term consequences of
the outbreak will be most dramatic in untreated areas where the shift
in tree species composition will influence timber and water production,
wildfire behavior, wildlife habitat and other forest attributes.
The ability of environmental groups to limit timber harvest to WUI
areas, to the detriment to the long-term health of the forests, is a
situation that, if unchecked, can easily destroy the remaining timber
industry in this region. Political leadership will be required to find
a solution allowing sawmills long-term access to timber harvests from
national forests in Colorado, both in WUI area and in non-WUI areas.
Point No. 6: Environmental activism has been a significant influencer
on the decline of the timber industry, ultimately to the
detriment of the FORESTS.
Point No. 7: A regional timber industry should be viewed as a highly
beneficial asset that once lost, is unlikely to be
reestablished due to the high cost of investment and the
uncertainty of long-term returns.
______

Mr. McClintock. Thank you, Mr. Georg.
I would now like to recognize Mr. Dan Jiron, a regional
forester of the Rocky Mountain Region for the U.S. Forest
Service from Golden, Colorado to testify.

STATEMENT OF DAN JIRON, REGIONAL DIRECTOR, ROCKY MOUNTAIN
REGION, U.S. FOREST SERVICE, GOLDEN, COLORADO

Mr. Jiron. Good morning, Mr. Chairman. Thank you both for
the opportunity to come, and thank you, Mr. Tipton, for
convening this hearing.
The Forest Service recognizes the need for a strong forest
industry to help accomplish forest restoration work. A vibrant
industry can provide both workforce and the know-how to
undertake mechanical treatments and other restoration
activities. Maintaining a viable industry is vital to Colorado.
A loss of this industry would significantly impact our ability
to accomplish forest health and reduce safety and health issues
associated with dead and dying trees.
There have been some successes. We have two CFLR projects
here in Colorado. One is right in our backyard, on the Western
Slope. The Uncompahgre Plateau Collaborative Forest Restoration
Project in 2011 provided 63 direct jobs and 124 total jobs. In
this project, we have treated over 10,000 acres and produced
6.5 million board feet.
As members of the Subcommittee are well aware, the West is
experiencing a beetle epidemic, and that is occurring all over
the Rocky Mountain region in Region 2. Bark beetles have killed
over 40 million acres of conifers in the western U.S. since
2000.
The Chief of the Forest Service has committed to spending
$101 million on bark beetle work throughout the western regions
for Fiscal Year 2012. The Rocky Mountain Region's share is $33
million. Regionally, we have prioritized our forest health
efforts focusing on safety, resiliency and recovery. In 2012,
we expect to accomplish nearly 16,000 acres of fuel reduction,
hazard tree removal, and noxious weed work.
Timber volume to sell in 2012 within the region is slightly
up from last year. We are at approximately 193 million board
feet for Fiscal Year 2012, and that compares to 189 million
board feet in 2011. This year we plan to sell 91 million board
feet in Colorado, compared to 82 million board feet in 2011.
Stewardship contracting is one tool that helps us to
acquire restoration services by offsetting the value of the
services received with the value of products removed with a
single contractor agreement.
In addition, we have a front range long-term stewardship
contract over on the other side that was awarded in 2009, and
it was one of only three such contracts in the nation. This is
a new way of doing business for the Forest Service, which will
reduce treatment costs and facilitate the utilization of low-
value products. We are currently exploring additional
opportunities for long-term stewardship contracts within the
region.
The region continues to work with partners and permittees
to address threats to infrastructure, including power lines,
roads and communities. In an effort to streamline our NEPA, the
region developed a large-scale power line EIS that covered the
three forests that were most heavily impacted by beetle
mortality. We are committed to working closely with power line
companies where they are interested in more aggressively
treating the transmission corridors.
I would also mention in South Dakota we have taken several
steps in NEPA to assist us to move faster and more efficiently,
and the Black Hills has been a leader in helping us to carry
out work related to restoration.
Here on the West Slope, the last two large sawmills in
Colorado, Intermountain Resources and Delta Timber, are here.
Market declines in the last five years and a regional focus on
mountain pine beetle had left the timber industry with some
high-priced contracts sold prior to the market decline. The
region has worked diligently over the last several years to
provide forest industry relief where possible, and to promote
healthy forests through active management.
In August of 2011, Forest Service Chief Tidwell authorized
that contracts awarded prior to July 1, 2008, meeting certain
conditions, could be mutually canceled. In total, nine
purchasers benefitted from this authority regionally, and seven
benefitted within Colorado.
The Forest Service will continue to strive to adapt and
improve our ability to meet our mission of sustaining the
health, diversity and productivity of the nation's forests and
grasslands for present and future generations. Our goal is to
employ existing industry, expand local business opportunities,
and create jobs. Doing so will require working closely with our
partners, including Congress and local governments.
I thank you for your time and availability and look forward
to answering your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Jiron follows:]

Statement of Daniel (Dan) Jiron, Regional Forester, Rocky Mountain
Region, U.S. Forest Service, U.S. Department of Agriculture

Mr. Chairman, Congressman McClintock, Mr. Chairman, Congressman
Bishop, and Members, thank you for the opportunity to come before these
subcommittees. I would also like to specifically thank Colorado
Congressman Tipton and Colorado Congressman Coffman for requesting this
field hearing. I am the Regional Forester for the Rocky Mountain
Region, consisting of Colorado, Wyoming, South Dakota, Nebraska and
Kansas. Thank you for inviting us here today.
Nationally
Today, people understand that forests provide a broad range of
values and benefits, including biodiversity, recreation, clean air and
water, forest products, erosion control and soil renewal, and more. We
have national forests in 42 states and Puerto Rico that comprise a land
area of nearly 193 million acres. Our mission is to sustain the health,
diversity, and productivity of the Nation's forests and grasslands for
present and future generations. The Forest Service does this through
working with numerous federal, state, tribal, and local partners,
citizens, and industry.
The Forest Service also recognizes the need for a strong forest
industry to help accomplish forest restoration work. A vibrant industry
can provide both the manpower and the know-how to undertake mechanical
treatments and other restoration activities. Forest industry also
lowers the cost of restoration to the taxpayer by recovering value from
forest products. The Forest Service is committed to increasing the
number of acres being mechanically treated by 20% over the next three
years. This increase would allow the Forest Service to increase the
number of acres and watersheds restored across the system, while
supporting jobs and increasing annual forest product sales to 3 billion
board feet of timber. A critical part of this effort is building public
support for forest restoration and management activities.
In January 2012 the Chief announced the Accelerated Restoration
Initiative to increase the pace and scale of restoration and improve
both the ecological health of our forests and the economic health of
forest-dependent communities. An additional benefit of this restoration
work is job creation. For example, through implementation of the
Collaborative Forest Landscape Restoration Program (including the use
of stewardship contracts), the proponents of projects on national
forest lands anticipate creating or maintaining 1,550 jobs. The
benefits of maintaining a robust forest industry flows not only to
local communities but also to our public lands because the agency
relies on local forest contractors and mills to provide the work force
to undertake a variety of restoration activities. In addition, a study
has shown that for every 1 million dollars spent on activities like
stream restoration or road decommissioning 12 to 28 jobs are generated.
Two CFLR projects are here in Colorado. The Uncompahgre Plateau
Collaborative Forest Restoration Project was estimated to have provided
63 direct jobs and 124 total jobs in FY 2011. In FY 2012, it is
anticipated to leverage funds in the amount of $430,300 to complete
more resource management. As a result of implementing this project,
2,218 acres were restored, 893 acres were reforested, 1,828 acres of
forest vegetation were improved, 2,871 acres of wildland-urban
interface hazardous fuels acres were treated, 3,065 acres of non-
wildland-urban interface hazardous fuels acres were treated, and 6.57
million board feet (MMBF) were sold.
In addition, restoring the health and resilience of our forests
generates important amenity values. Healthy, resilient forests and
grasslands are magnets for outdoor recreation, with more than 170
million visits per year to the National Forest System. These visits
lead to jobs and economic opportunity.
In order to accomplish the hundreds of thousands of acres of
natural resource projects we do across the country each year, we
continuously strive to increase efficiency in our National
Environmental Policy Act (NEPA) process. The Agency has initiated a
NEPA learning networks project to learn from and share the lessons of
successful implementation of streamlined NEPA analyses. The goal of
this effort is to ensure that the Agency's NEPA compliance is as
efficient, cost-effective, and up-to-date as possible. Specifically we
are looking at expanding the use of focused environmental assessments
(EAs) and iterative environmental impact statements (EISs), expanding
categories of actions that may be excluded from documentation in an
environmental assessment or an environmental impact statement, and
applying an adaptive management framework to NEPA. Our landscape-scale
NEPA projects will also increase efficiencies by analyzing across broad
swaths of land, avoiding repetitive NEPA analysis.
Beetle Epidemic
As the members of the Subcommittees are well aware, the West is
experiencing a beetle epidemic, and this infestation is changing the
way our forests will look in the future. Susceptible tree and stand
conditions combined with recent droughts and rising temperatures have
contributed to significant forest mortality. Bark beetles have killed
over 40 million acres of forests in the western United States since
2000.
The beetles causing most of this mortality are native insects,
including mountain pine beetle, western balsam bark beetle, fir
engraver, spruce beetle, and Douglas-fir beetle. The mountain pine
beetle outbreak in the central Rocky Mountains is larger than any
previously recorded outbreak in the Region, affecting over 6.6 million
acres in Colorado and Wyoming. Damage was most widespread and dramatic
in dense, aging, homogeneous lodgepole pine forests that dominate many
mountainous areas of Colorado, Wyoming, Montana, Idaho, and Utah. Some
of these outbreaks are occurring at higher elevations than in the past.
Most notably, high-elevation whitebark pines have been killed on sites
previously thought to be too cold for serious beetle outbreaks. These
changes in beetle activity are related to warmer winter temperatures
that have led to quicker development and higher survival rates for
over-wintering insects. In Colorado, we are experiencing an epidemic of
high beetle populations and susceptible hosts because:

Warming results in higher beetle numbers and
survival.

A lack of two weeks at minus 40 degree C in winter
means more beetles survive the winter.

Warming allows for beetles to move up the hill and
attack higher elevation lodgepole pine and other species of
pines like whitebark.

Warming and drought cause trees to be less resilient.
The Chief of the Forest Service has committed to spending $101.4
million on bark beetle work throughout the western regions in FY 2012.
The Rocky Mountain Region's share is $33 million.
The Region has focused initial efforts on most heavily impacted
areas around the White River, Routt and Arapaho Roosevelt National
Forests. We are now prioritizing our forest health efforts across the
entire region focusing on safety, resiliency and recovery.
Within the bark beetle area, the Region has worked with partners to
address threats to the infrastructure, including powerlines, roads and
communities. For example, the Forest Service developed the large-scale
powerline EIS that covers the 3 national forests most heavily impacted
by beetle mortality. The Region remains committed to working closely
with the powerline companies where they are interested in more
aggressively treating the transmission corridors.
Forest Management and Restoration Program including Stewardship
Contracting
Timber volume that the Forest Service anticipates offering in 2012
within the Region is comparable to previous years--approximately 193
million board feet (MMBF) in FY2012 compared to 189 MMBF in FY2011. The
amount of timber sold in the last five years within Colorado averaged
98.5 MMBF annually.
Stewardship contracting has increased greatly in Region 2 over the
last 12 years, and it is an integral part of the forest management
program, particularly for the treatment of low-value dead or dying
vegetation caused by insect epidemics, or other low-value hazardous
fuels. This tool helps the Forest Service to acquire additional
restoration services. Stewardship contracting allows the Forest Service
to offset the value of the services received with the value of forest
products removed pursuant to a single contract or agreement.
In FY2011, Region 2 awarded 44 stewardship contracts for the
treatment of 13,100 acres. Since the authority was originally enacted
in 1999, the Region has awarded more than 196 stewardship contracts and
task orders treating more than 70,500 acres.
Through stewardship contracts, Region 2 has been incorporating more
biomass into sales to encourage utilization in pellets, bioenergy,
biochar or other nontraditional products. For example, the Front Range
Long-Term Stewardship Contract was awarded in 2009, and includes
biomass utilization through pellets, decorative bark, horse bedding,
and other forest products. We are entering into the fourth program year
of the 10-year contract. This is a new way of doing business for the
Forest Service, which will reduce treatment costs and facilitate the
utilization of low-value products.
Mills and the Economy
In its efforts to restore the health and resilience of our national
forests, the Forest Service faces some obstacles--the lack of
industrial capacity, the economic downturn, high transportation costs,
and low product values. These are the main factors that contribute to
high treatment costs, which limit the use of stewardship contracts and
affect the economics of timber sales within the Region.
Delta and Montrose are home to the last two large sawmills in
Colorado--Intermountain Resources and Delta Timber.
Market declines in the late 2000's and a regional focus on mountain
pine beetle treatments have left the timber industry holding high
priced contracts sold in the early to mid 2000's. Many of the remaining
contracts were ineligible for relief measures afforded to the industry
in the 2008 Farm Bill. Any loss of the timber industry negatively
impacts the Forest Service's ability to battle the beetle epidemic and
reduce fire risks associated with this epidemic.
Commercial harvest utilizing a viable timber industry is the most
efficient means to economically treat stands and restore landscapes,
while supporting local economies. The Colorado forest industry provides
the ability to actively manage vegetation and fuels on National Forest
System lands, including salvage of dead and dying timber, and proactive
treatments to maintain forest health and resilience, with the bonus of
treating more acres at a lower cost. Employing existing industry,
expanding local businesses, and creating local jobs maintains and
increases capacity for managing the many acres of treatment identified
in landscape restoration plans and Community Wildfire Protection Plans
through a sustained workforce and stewardship capacity in loggers,
foresters, saw millers, and truck drivers. Unfortunately, these
critical land management partners and tools have greatly diminished in
other regions and states.
The Region has worked diligently over the past several years to
provide timber industry relief where possible and to promote healthy
forests through active management. We have had challenges of course,
and I am well aware that the largest mill in the state is still in
receivership.
On August 2, 2011, Forest Service Chief Tidwell authorized the
mutual cancellation of certain contracts awarded prior to July 1, 2008.
The timber prices paid by purchasers prior to the forest products
economic decline were higher than the market could bear in recent
years. This authority allowed purchasers to mutually cancel sales that
were no longer economically viable, and provide for continued operation
of more economically viable timber sales. In total, nine purchasers
benefitted from this authority regionally and seven benefitted within
Colorado. The result is a more financially viable industry and
maintenance of local jobs, to allow forest management to continue into
the future when the market recovers. The Region is evaluating the
reoffer potential and developing timelines to reoffer this volume as
quickly as possible, where viable.
In summary, the Forest Service will continue to strive to adopt and
improve our ability to meet our mission of sustaining the health,
diversity and productivity of the Nation's forests and grasslands for
present and future generations. Doing so will require working closely
with our partners, including Congress and local governments.
It is my hope that the information that I have provided covers the
interests of the Subcommittees with regard to the Forest Service. I
thank you for your time and availability, and I look forward to
answering your questions.
That concludes my prepared statement.
______

Mr. McClintock. Thank you, Mr. Jiron.
At this point I am pleased to turn the gavel over to the
distinguished Chairman of the National Parks, Forests and
Public Lands Subcommittee, Mr. Bishop, who will conduct the
remainder of the hearing.
Congressman Bishop.
Mr. Bishop. [Presiding.] Thank you.
That is not in the script.
[Laughter.]
Mr. McClintock. Yes, it is right here.
[Laughter.]
Mr. Bishop. But we have other testimony to hear.
Let me go back to our next witness. Mr. Shoemaker, I would
like to recognize you, the Executive Director of the Wilderness
Workshop for Carbondale, Colorado, to testify. The same rules,
5 minutes, please.

STATEMENT OF SLOAN SHOEMAKER, EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR, WILDERNESS
WORKSHOP, CARBONDALE, COLORADO

Mr. Shoemaker. Thank you. Thank you, Chairman Bishop,
Chairman McClintock, Representative Tipton. I appreciate the
opportunity to present to you today.
I am the director of a local grassroots, community-based,
non-profit conservation organization over in Carbondale,
Colorado, over the hill from here, and I think today, though, I
will speak mostly from my experience as the vice-chair of the
Colorado Bark Beetle Cooperative, which is really most relevant
to the issues today.
I have been with the Colorado Bark Beetle Cooperative,
which is a broad, diverse, multi-stakeholder collaborative
effort that is based in the bark beetle theater over in the 10
counties of Northern Colorado, and it has been self-charged
with raising awareness about the bark beetle issue starting
back in 2006, 2005, when there is a famous story about a state
legislator who took a bark beetle down to the State Legislature
in a little vial and he said, ``I'm here today to talk about
beetles,'' and the response was ``I don't understand what a
band from England in the '70s has to do with anything in
Colorado.''
The point is that there wasn't a lot of awareness about the
scale and the intensiveness of the bark beetle epidemic.
The Bark Beetle Cooperative has done a great job of raising
awareness about the scale and the impact that the beetle
epidemic has had on Northern Colorado, and we have done a great
job of hammering out agreement across a broad set of
stakeholders in terms of what the priorities are for addressing
those impacts. The priorities we identified were protecting
life, property, critical community infrastructure, communities,
and water supplies.
We took that broad agreement, which was full spectrum--
Nancy was at the table, other representatives of the timber
industry, and some very conservative county commissioners from
Grant and Jackson County--and we all came to agreement, and we
took that agreement to Washington, D.C. and were successful in
getting a whole bunch of money and attention focused on
Colorado and addressing impacts to beetles. Something on the
order of $70 million has resulted from our efforts to build
agreement and focus attention on mitigating the impacts to
Colorado.
Fortunately, all that agreement has created a bunch of
NEPA-ready projects that are on the shelf, but only about a
quarter of those NEPA-ready projects have actually been
accomplished. In other words, the hold-up there is not
agreement, it is not litigation or appeals. It is funding to
get the projects done. As we heard, the lodgepole pine has
little market value, and that is a challenge because somehow we
have to get these priority life-safety mitigations
accomplished, but it is hard to do without any funds, and I
think we would like to see more funds flow to the Forest
Service to enable this mitigation work to get done.
One thing we are focused on also is building what is called
a zone of agreement. The Governor's Forest Health Advisory
Council chartered a group called the Lodgepole Pine Zone of
Agreement Group to come up with a broad set of principles that
outline where the agreement is, where the consensus is on how
to address lodgepole pine. Principally, the purpose of the
study was to agree on a set of forest management goals and
objectives and means of achieving them that could be mapped,
and wood volume and type can be quantified, laying the basis
for wood supply certainty. That is a quote from the Governor's
Forest Health Advisory Council's charter to the Lodgepole Pine
Zone of Agreement Working Group.
The point is we recognize that you need a certainty of wood
supply in order to make an investment decision and to scale up
for the capital investments, and our contention is that the
best way to do that is to pull together local collaborative
processes, like the Colorado Bark Beetle Cooperative or the
Ponderosa Pine group down in Southwest Colorado, or what we
will hear from the Uncompahgre Partnership group up next, to
hammer out what that agreement is, and within that zone of
agreement you can actually map, then, where the wood is, what
kind of wood it is, and what kind of value it is. That, then,
can lay the road map for providing the certainty in wood supply
over a long period of time.
I think, in short, collaboration is the grease that can get
things going. Collaboration is the grease that can get wood
products out of the wood, into the market, and creating jobs
and feeding our economies.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Shoemaker follows:]

Statement of Sloan Shoemaker, Executive Director, Wilderness Workshop

Chairman McClintock and Chairman Bishop, thank you for the
opportunity to testify on this important issue.
My name is Sloan Shoemaker and I am the Executive Director of the
Wilderness Workshop based in Carbondale, CO, just over the pass from
where we sit today. Wilderness Workshop was founded immediately after
the passage of the Wilderness Act of 1964 and has since successfully
advocated for Congressional designation of nearly 500,000 acres on
Colorado's Western Slope.
But because ecosystems don't stop at wilderness boundaries, the
Wilderness Workshop actively engages in the discussion about how the
matrix of public lands beyond wilderness areas are managed. Our
interest is simple--protect the ecological integrity of public lands so
that the innumerable benefits and ecosystem services that flow off of
them will continue to undergird the healthy communities and strong
economies of Colorado's central mountains.
That's why I've been engaged with the Colorado Bark Beetle
Cooperative since 2006. I am currently the President of the CBBC non-
profit corporation and vice-chair of the Steering Committee. CBBC is a
policy level collaborative addressing the ecological, social, and
economic impacts of the mountain pine beetle outbreak. CBBC is
comprised of a broad spectrum of stakeholders including the timber
industry, forest energy industry, conservation organizations, local
government, emergency management, USFS, BLM, Colorado State Forest
Service, utilities, private property owners, water managers, wildlife
managers, interested citizens and more.
Collaboration is the grease
CBBC has worked hard to hammer out agreement on priorities for
treating the affects of the bark beetle epidemic. Those priorities
include the protection of life, property, communities, critical
community infrastructure and water supplies. This broad, diverse
stakeholder agreement unified the Colorado Congressional Delegation
behind these mitigation priorities and effectively leveraged agency
attention and new resources to the state of Colorado. Below is a
summary of increased funding resulting from CBBC and partners efforts
from 2006 to 2010:

$12,000,000, Department of Defense via Senate
Interior Appropriations Committee

$44,550,000, Department of Agriculture via FS

$10,000,000, ARRA funding

$42,882, National Forest Foundation

$50,000, Donations from CBBC members

$5,000,000, State of Colorado through passed
legislation

$300,000, County cost sharing grants

$50,000, Colorado State Forest Service revolving loan
fund
CBBC is proud to have raised public, congressional and agency
awareness of the significant impact that bark beetles are having on our
mountain communities. And, CBBC is proud that this awareness has
translated into chainsaws running in the woods to mitigate those
impacts. The hard work we've done to build consensus has leveraged
nearly $70,000,000 worth of on-the-ground work that has reduced the
hazards facing our communities, created jobs, and supplied wood to the
wood products industry. Yet, there's still a long way to go--as of the
end of 2011, less than a quarter of the NEPA ready mitigation work has
been accomplished.

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

This point bears emphasis. This mitigation work--215,380 WUI
acres, 3700 miles of roads, 1300 miles of trails, and 460 recreation
sites--has cleared NEPA with no appeals or litigation. So after three
years of an all-hands-on-deck effort, why does 75-79% of this urgent
mitigation work remain unfinished? There's not enough money to get it
done.
What about the market?
The best and brightest minds in Colorado have been struggling for
years to figure out how to get this wood to pay its way out of the
forest. But, as a 2011 report \1\ states:
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Review of the Forest Service Response: The Bark Beetle Outbreak
in Northern Colorado and Southern Wyoming. A report by USDA Forest
Service Rocky Mountain Region and Rocky Mountain Research Station at
the request of Senator Mark Udall, September 2011
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Dead standing trees and most green standing trees in the
Colorado and Wyoming outbreak area have little or no commercial
value due to size, condition, accessibility or marketability.
In fact, they have negative value because they must be removed
at a cost. p. 10
The economic recession and downturn in the housing market have
killed demand for structural wood products. And, the longer the beetle
killed lodge pole pine stands, the more defective it becomes, even
further reducing its already marginal value. These issues are
exacerbated by trade agreement issues with Canada which has been
dumping its wood products on U.S. markets. Several pellet mills have
sprung up to seize the opportunity this vast wood supply seemingly
presents. But, they have limited capacity and...
...utilization of large quantities of biomass material is still
years away. The benefit/cost ratio for converting
municipalities to biomass-fueled heat or power does not favor
use of biomass when compared to natural gas because natural gas
costs less at this time. p. 12 \2\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ Ibid.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The bottom line: there isn't a market solution for mitigating
beetle kill hazards in a timely manner. It must be paid for with public
funds. There's more NEPA ready work on the shelves, indeed several
years worth, than there is money to pay for it. These means that even
the triaged, highest priority human health and safety related tree
removal isn't getting done at the necessary pace due to lack of funds.
It's ironic that this hearing is titled ``Logs in the Road.'' The
CBBC's collaborative efforts to build consensus around mitigation
priorities cleared the road for the USFS to launch a vast hazard tree
mitigation effort across the three national forests in the beetle
theater. The USFS calculates 25 acres of tree mitigation per road mile
making this a 92,500 acre linear clearcut. In a previous day,
clearcutting 92,500 acres across 3 national forests would be tangled up
in appeals and litigation for years. But this NEPA sailed through.
Unfortunately, only 600 miles have been treated to date and the agency
is struggling to find the funds to keep moving forward. Given that an
estimated 100,000 trees are falling per day in Northern Colorado and
Southern Wyoming, there will literally be logs in the roads...not as a
result of excessive litigation or red tape...but due to lack of
funding. Downsized government has come home to roost.
Industry and Zones of Agreement
Though today's economics work against a robust timber and wood
products industry in Colorado, it is critical that industry remain
viable and at the table as it will play a key role in on-going forest
management. Colorado will never be a major timber production state. Our
growing seasons are too short and our wood quality is too poor to ever
support a massive timber program. However, there is room for
appropriately scaled industry. In fact, industry is essential to
helping meet mitigation and restoration goals. But, how much industry
is enough?
One promising way to answer that is to work within the
collaborative framework to identify a zone of agreement (ZOA). Industry
needs certainty upon which to build a business plan. The ZOA can
provide that certainty. If all stakeholders can agree on a set of
forest management goals and objectives and the means of achieving them,
that agreement can be mapped and wood volume/type can be quantified,
laying the basis for wood supply certainty. Industry can then scale and
invest appropriate to this supply over the long term.
The recently disbanded Colorado Governor's Forest Health Advisory
Council chartered the Lodgepole Pine Zone of Agreement Working Group in
April 2010. ``The underlying purpose...is to help the FHAC better
understand what wood supply would be available to sustain wood
industries in the LPP zone over the long-term, not just during the
period of salvaging standing dead trees.'' \3\ Due to time and resource
limitations, the LPP ZOA group stopped short of a fine filter
quantification of wood supply across the LPP zone. However, it did
develop a process framework for converting the philosophical ZOA into
an operational ZOA using Summit County as a case study.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ Colorado Governor's Forest Health Advisory Council, Lodgepole
Pine Zone of Agreement Working Group Report. April, 2010. Colorado
Forest Restoration Institute.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
While this approach may seem time intensive and unwieldy, sometimes
we have to go slow to go fast. The most valuable lesson learned from
the numerous collaboratives around the state is that time invested
upfront to build trust, deepen communication, explore differences and
hammer out agreements expedites projects to the ground and creates the
climate of certainty necessary to sustain a robust but appropriately
scaled industry. Effective collaboration can improve the rate of
implementation more effectively than trying to reduce environmental
reviews and public involvement. The formula is simple; develop locally-
relevant science within a solid collaborative process thoroughly
supported by local agency and community leadership to arrive at a
strategy that does not result in appeals or litigation--science,
collaboration, and leadership.
Protecting water supplies
Millions of people rely on water from watersheds now dominated by
beetle killed lodgepole pine trees. Given how vast the epidemic is and
how few resources are available to address its impacts, a strategically
targeted approach to protecting water supplies is imperative. The first
order of business is to treat hazard trees that threaten to fall on or
block water delivery infrastructure. This infrastructure is readily
locatable and hazardous trees that threaten it can be readily
identifiable and treated. Hazard tree removal also reduces fuel loading
around infrastructure to reduce or eliminate direct impacts from
wildfire.
A larger and more worrisome threat is posed by the risk of massive
post-fire debris flows. This threat isn't restricted to beetle killed
forests. Any fire dependent forest will eventually burn, posing the
same debris flow hazard to reservoirs and the water supply system.
Again, because of the scale of the potential problem and the fact that
predicting where the next fire will be is impossible, a targeted and
strategic approach that will give the most bang for the buck is
warranted.
A group of scientists, land managers and water suppliers was
convened in the fall of 2007 to examine ways to protect Front Range
water supplies. The Data Refinement Work Group was formed with the
purpose to ``identify and prioritize those watersheds that provide or
convey water used by communities and municipalities. This
identification of watersheds will, in turn, assist in prioritizing
watersheds for hazard reduction treatments or other watershed
protection measures.'' \4\ Four components were identified to assess
watershed risks. They are:
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\ Front Range Watershed Protection, Data Refinement Work Group.
Protecting Critical Watersheds In Colorado From Wildfire: A Technical
Approach To Watershed Assessment And Prioritization, Executive Summary,
February 2009, p. 2.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

wildfire hazard

flooding or debris flow hazard

soil erodibility

water uses ranking
These layers are then overlain to develop a composite hazard
ranking.
This watershed assessment methodology identifies and prioritizes
sixth-level watersheds based upon risks to water supplies posed by
debris flows and increased sediment yields following wildfires that
could have impacts and is intended to be the first phase of the
process. It results in the identification of Zones of Concern that
warrant a closer look. Because the data is too coarse at the 6th level
watershed scale, the next step is convening local stakeholders with
expert knowledge of the watershed to focus at a finer scale on these
Zones of Concern. This will result in identification of specific
treatment areas, methods and priorities for on-the-ground projects.
Having been fairly widely vetted, there's general consensus and comfort
that this strategic approach to water supply protection has great
merit, especially in time when resources are few and priorities must be
identified to yield the most efficient use of the very limited
resources available. Because this methodology is scientifically sound
and enjoys broad support, resulting projects are likely to be
uncontroversial and the biggest barrier to implementation is likely to
be funding.
How did we get here and what happens next?
No discussion of the bark beetle epidemic is complete without
reflecting on how we got here and looking forward at what future
forests might look like.
Across vast acres in the West, even-aged stands of pine forests
have formed as a result of years of fire suppression and large-
scale, intense logging at the turn of the century. Many of
these tree species life histories are fire-adapted, and
lodgepole pine, for example, naturally regenerates in the
presence of fire. These homogeneous and overly dense forests
have provided an extensive food source for beetles, and they
have responded with large population build-ups. In addition,
climate change has resulted in warmer winters that have not
been cold enough to reduce beetle populations. This phenomenon,
combined with multi-year drought, has allowed beetles to
proliferate at higher elevations and latitudes and has resulted
in more beetle generations per year in some areas.\5\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\ Western Bark Beetle Strategy--Human Safety, Recovery and
Resiliency, U.S. Forest Service, July 11, 2011, p. 4
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
This intersection of macro-scale factors has allowed the beetle
outbreak to cross a threshold, blooming into an epidemic at a scale
impossible to stop. It seems each successive generation must relearn
this lesson.
Forest managers threw everything they had at the spruce bark beetle
outbreak on the Flattops in the 1940-50s to no avail. The mountain pine
beetle got a head of steam in the 1970s and managers tried to cut their
way ahead of it, again to no avail. Some long time Forest Service
personnel relate that they've been fighting the beetle and losing their
entire careers. When the public first started becoming aware of the
current epidemic, the cry went up to fight the beetle and do everything
in our power to stop it. ``Six or eight years ago, we were under a lot
of public pressure to stop the beetles from spreading further,'' says
Steve Currey, director of bark beetle operations on the Medicine Bow-
Routt National Forests in Colorado and Wyoming. ``Now people understand
that this thing is too big, and really impossible to stop.'' \6\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\6\ Ibid. p.4
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The beetle killed LPP forests are routinely referred to as
devastated but this characterization misunderstands what is actually
happening. While the millions of acres of dead LPP are visually
arresting, this isn't an ecological disaster. LPP is an early
successional species that co-evolved with this sort of disturbance and
consequently regenerates quite well. The beetle attacked the larger,
overstory trees killing many but not all. Mortality has been
heterogeneous, with isolated pure LPP stands showing 100% mortality
while others retain a significant amount of surviving large canopy
trees. These survivors lay the foundation for a structurally diverse,
mixed age class future forest.
The beetles have selectively killed the larger trees, whereas
most smaller trees and saplings have survived. Often obscured
by the red crowns of the larger dead or dying trees, small
trees usually are at least as abundant in a surviving
understory as dead trees are in the overstory. All of these
diverse stand structures are grouped together, however, in the
reported acreages of ``destroyed'' forest.\7\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\7\ Rocca, Monique E. and Romme, William H., Beetle-infested
forests are not ``destroyed,''in Frontiers in Ecology. The Ecological
Society of America, publisher. P. 71.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Further, shade tolerant species like Engelmann Spruce, sub-alpine
fir, and Douglas fir have established in the understory of what from a
distance look like homogenous LPP forests. Also, aspen trees are now
showing up in places where previously there was a homogenous stand of
LPP. With the removal of a live overstory, these suppressed understory
species are released and thriving on the newly abundant resources
(water, sunlight and nutrients) available to them. This advanced
regeneration is the future forest already established, ensuring that
future forests will be much more heterogeneous and diverse than the one
it's replacing.
Whole books could be written about future fire behavior in the
beetle killed LPP. There's understandable concern about fire severity
and rate of spread in the vast dead LPP forest. But, researchers are
demonstrating that it's much more complicated than the simplistic
equation that dead trees equal greater fire hazard. Studies show that
wind, temperature and humidity have a greater impact of fire behavior
than the structural changes wrought by beetles. ``It's important to
remember that nobody is saying beetle-killed forests won't burn,''
Turner says. ``They will burn perfectly well. The point is that they
will burn no more severely than a comparable green forest.'' \8\ The
point is that local ecological context and climatic conditions the day
of burn matter and broad generalizations serve no purpose. In any case,
the fact remains that the highest probability for surviving wildfires
lays in treating the fuels within 40 meters or so of structures at
risk.\9\ If I was a local fire chief, I'd be more focused on educating
residents in my district about the common sense measures they can take
to protect the Home Ignition Zone than the condition of fuels in the
backcountry.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\8\ Bark Beetles and Fire: Two Forces of Nature Transforming
Western Forests. Fire Science Digest, Issue 12. February 2012. p.6.
\9\ Cohen, J. D. (2000). Preventing disaster, home ignitability in
the wildland-urban interface. Journal of Forestry 98(3): 15-21.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
CBBC has chartered a special Future Forests Committee tasked with
developing a nuanced understanding of the variability in numbers,
sizes, and species of surviving trees and the species diversity and
distribution of natural regeneration to get a handle on what future
forests will look like if left alone. Armed with this understanding,
the committee will then initiate a dialog with local communities to
explore what their vision for future forests is. Comparing that vision
to the trajectory forests are naturally on will reveal areas of
conflict where desired future conditions diverge from the forest's
trajectory. This will then inform where forest management actions in
the mid- to long-term must occur to reset the forest trajectory towards
the desired future condition.
Is NEPA a log in the road?
A 2003 GAO report to Congress found that only 3% of hazardous fuels
reduction projects in 2001-02 were litigated affecting only 100,000
acres of the 4.7 million acres authorized by NEPA decisions in those
years.
A 2010 GAO report to Congress found that only 2% of hazardous fuels
reduction projects in 2006-08 were litigated affecting only 124,000
acres of the 10.5 million acres authorized by NEPA decisions in those
years.
Congress recently attached a rider to the FY12 omnibus spending
bill that the President signed into law requiring a fast-track process
that limits citizen participation by applying the streamlined HFRA pre-
decisional objection process to every project implementing a Forest
Plan. The rider provides:
FOREST SERVICE PRE-DECISIONAL OBJECTION PROCESS
SEC. 428. Hereafter, upon issuance of final regulations, the
Secretary of Agriculture, acting through the Chief of the
Forest Service, shall apply section 105(a) of the Healthy
Forests Restoration Act of 2003 (16 U.S.C. 15 6515(a)),
providing for a pre-decisional objection process, to proposed
actions of the Forest Service concerning projects and
activities implementing land and resource management plans
developed under the Forest and Rangeland Renewable Resources
Planning Act of 1974 (16 U.S.C. 1600 et seq.), and documented
with a Record of Decision or Decision Notice, in lieu of
subsections (e), (d), and (e) of section 322 of Public Law 102-
381 (16 U.S.C. 23 1612 note), providing for an administrative
appeal process:
Provided, That if the Chief of the Forest Service determines an
emergency situation exists for which immediate implementation
of a proposed action is necessary, the proposed action shall
not be subject to the pre-decisional objection process, and
implementation shall begin immediately after the Forest Service
gives notice of the final decision for the proposed action:
Provided further, That this section shall not apply to an
authorized hazardous fuel reduction project under title I of
the Healthy Forests Restoration Act of 2003 (16 U.S.C. 6501 et
seq.).
This is an extreme fix for what is apparently more a problem in
lore than reality. This is especially troubling because NEPA is
essentially conservative in intent--it seeks to hold the government
accountable to its citizens. Insulating government from review just
means making government less accountable. Further streamlining of NEPA
has the perverse effect of allowing government bureaucrats in DC to get
away with whatever they want with less public oversight and
accountability.
NEPA allows everyone to participate, gives everyone a voice, and
opens the courthouse door to all who would hold the government
accountable. And, NEPA isn't biased towards one side or the other and
provides the opportunity for everyone to have a voice based on the
study process required by NEPA. While the conservation community is
well known for its skillful engagement in the NEPA process, here are
two examples of where miners successfully navigated the NEPA process.
This year, an individual uranium prospector filed suit against DOI
for putting 1 million acres of lands off-limits to mining near the
Grand Canyon. He didn't even have a lawyer. What he had was NEPA, which
permitted him to provide comments to the agency showing why he thought
uranium mining could occur without harming the environment. And it gave
him rights when he thought BLM had broken the law. While I don't agree
with the substance of his suit, I will defend his right to intervene in
the process. What could be more American than a single individual
trying to hold the government accountable? Should we make it even
harder for him--and for others--to do so?
Another mining interest used the NEPA process to challenge and
enjoin a uranium leasing program they felt wronged by. A key point to
the NEPA injunction issued by Judge Martinez on the DOE uranium leasing
program is that the problems at the lease sites and the narrow analysis
carried out by private contractors were brought to the DOE's attention
in 2006. Instead of taking public input seriously, DOE kept its head in
the sand and is now addressing these issues pursuant to court order and
oversight. Judge Martinez agreed that DOE failed to comply with NEPA
which never would have happened if the public was denied the right to
appeal and litigate. From the conservation community's perspective,
there are a few key factors at play that result in project level NEPA
delaying on-the-ground action. The lengths entrenched agencies go to
avoid disclosure of serious problems is a real culprit. Litigation does
not succeed unless an agency truly botches the job. Outsourcing the job
to government contractors with deep ties to industry is also a key
failure. Our federal agency experts should be doing the analysis, not
industry.
Further, agencies can be their own worst enemies, turning a simple
NEPA process into an analysis black hole. Our experience suggests that
this results from agencies trying to make appeal proof NEPA documents
for controversial or unjustifiable projects. As discussed above, a more
effective and efficient way to avoid appeals and expedite projects to
the ground is through upfront collaboration to build the agreement that
allows projects to sail out the back end uncontested.
______

Mr. Bishop. Thank you.
We will next hear from Ms. Leigh Robertson, who is a grant
writer for the Education Outreach Coordinator, and this is why
I got the gavel now, so I can pronounce this word. Uncompahgre?
Ms. Robertson. Uncompahgre.
Mr. Bishop. Fine, OK. Uncompahgre.
[Laughter.]
Mr. Bishop. You don't have that word in Utah, I'm sorry.
The Uncompahgre Partnership from Ridgway, Colorado.
You have 5 minutes, ma'am.

STATEMENT OF LEIGH ROBERTSON, GRANTWRITER, EDUCATION/OUTREACH
COORDINATOR, UNCOMPAHGRE PARTNERSHIP, RIDGWAY, COLORADO

Ms. Robertson. Thank you, Congressmen, for this opportunity
to testify. As you mentioned, I represent Uncompahgre Com, a
nonprofit that promotes forest health in ways that provide
positive impacts on local economic, cultural and ecological
values. We are also a partner in the Western Colorado Landscape
Collaborative, along with local offices of the Forest Service,
Bureau of Land Management, Colorado Parks and Wildlife, Western
Area Power Administration, and Tri-State Generation and
Transmission Association. Our local collaborative is working
hard to improve the resiliency of our forests, and I would like
to share some information about this valuable model.
To give an example, in July of 2002 the Burn Canyon Fire
charred over 30,000 acres. The Forest Service made plans for a
salvage logging sale in the canyon after the fire.
Environmental groups were concerned about the potential for
ecological damage from logging operations. By discussing the
issues and working together, various interested parties were
able to come up with a win-win solution. This included
developing a multi-party monitoring partnership to determine
the impacts of salvage logging. This stopped appeals by
environmental groups of two other timber sales within the
canyon and helped two small, local timber companies stay in
business. As a result, harvesting and processing of wood
products resulted in an estimated return of over $1,460,000. In
addition, logging, trucking and sawmill businesses spent over
$770,000 in the region for goods and services.
Another example is the Uncompahgre Plateau Collaborative
Forest Restoration Program. By involving local stakeholders
early on in the planning process, environmental concerns were
addressed, and there were no appeals of the NEPA document,
which has resulted in several stewardship contracts. This
environmental assessment has led to over 29,000 hundred cubic
feet of timber to local mills and has provided 229 part- and
full-time jobs.
In addition, we've worked with partners such as WAPA and
Tri-State when planning forest treatments. This has resulted in
larger and more effective treatments that reduce the likelihood
of wildfires destroying power lines and the associated
disruption of power and communication to thousands of people,
property damage, and possible loss of human life. These
treatments also improve wildlife habitat and forest diversity.
So far, over 2,000 acres of power line treatments have been
accomplished.
Currently, the Forest Service and local partners are
planning for the next phase of the CFLR project. The NEPA
document for the Escalante Project Area will cover
approximately 142,000 acres. There are a number of benefits to
planning for large landscapes such as this: the ability to
implement many forest treatments under one NEPA document, which
provides for greater efficiency and coordination. Wildlife,
recreation, industry and environmental concerns can all be
effectively addressed and resolved up front with stakeholders.
The more profitable treatments, such as logging of spruce
trees, can help offset the costs of ecosystem restoration
treatments, such as the thinning of small-diameter pine trees,
which are not profitable to log commercially. Money can be
leveraged among several partners, and projects can be planned
to keep naturally ignited fires compartmentalized between
treated areas and existing roads.
While we have been able to work successfully within
existing environmental regulations, we do see other areas that
could be improved. This includes increasing the authority of
local land managers to move on projects and collaborate with
other partners, and other items mentioned in my written
testimony. We encourage Congress to keep supporting
collaboration, such as through continued funding for the
Collaborative Forest Landscape Restoration Program. The CFLR
Program not only encourages local stakeholder involvement, but
also promotes sharing of knowledge among the various projects
across the U.S., which improves efficiency.
I would also like to mention that the collaborative work we
are doing with Tri-State and WAPA is so unique that the
transmission forum members from Canada, the United States and
Mexico will be meeting this September in Montrose to learn
about this effective model. This kind of partnership between
the utilities, Colorado Parks and Wildlife, Uncompahgre Com,
the BLM and Forest Service can only continue to grow if
collaboration is encouraged and supported in the Federal
agencies.
I thank you for your time.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Robertson follows:]

Statement of Leigh Robertson, Education/Outreach Coordinator,
Uncompahgre/Com, Inc.

Congressmen, thank you for this opportunity to testify.
My name is Leigh Robertson, and I represent Uncompahgre Com, a
nonprofit that promotes forest health in ways that provide positive
impacts on local economic, cultural and ecological values. We are also
a partner in the Western Colorado Landscape Collaborative, along with
local offices of the Forest Service, Bureau of Land Management,
Colorado Parks and Wildlife, Western Area Power Administration and Tri-
State Generation and Transmission Association.
Our local collaborative is working hard to improve the resiliency
of our forests, and I would like to share some information about this
valuable model.
To give an example, in July of 2002 the Burn Canyon Fire charred
over 30,000 acres. The Forest Service made plans for a salvage logging
sale in the canyon after the fire. Environmental groups were concerned
about the potential for ecological damage from logging operations. By
discussing the issues and working together, various interested parties
were able to come up with a win-win solution. This included developing
a multi-party monitoring partnership to determine the impacts of
salvage logging and preventing one timber sale located on steep land
that would have required the construction of new roads. This stopped
appeals by environmental groups of two other timber sales within the
canyon and helped two small, local timber companies stay in business.
As a result, harvesting and processing of wood products resulted in an
estimated return of over $1,460,000. In addition, logging, trucking and
sawmill businesses spent over $770,000 in the region for goods and
services.
Another example is the Uncompahgre Plateau Collaborative Forest
Landscape Restoration Program (CFLRP). By involving local stakeholders
early on in the planning process, environmental concerns were
addressed, and there were no appeals of the NEPA document which has
resulted in several Stewardship contracts. This Environmental
Assessment has led to over 29,000 ccf of timber to local mills and has
provided 229 part and full-time jobs.
In addition, we've worked with partners such as the WAPA and Tri-
State when planning forest treatments. This has resulted in larger and
more effective treatments that reduce the likelihood of wildfires
destroying power lines and the associated disruption of power to
thousands of people, property damage, and possible loss of human life.
These treatments also improve wildlife habitat and forest diversity. So
far, over 2,000 acres of power line treatments have been accomplished.
Currently, the Forest Service and local partners are planning for
the next phase of the CFLR project. The NEPA document for the Escalante
Project Area will cover approximately 142,000 acres. There are a number
of benefits to planning for large landscapes such as this:

The ability to implement many forest treatments under
one NEPA document, which provides for greater efficiency and
coordination

Wildlife, recreation, industry and environmental
concerns can all be effectively discussed and resolved up front
with stakeholders

The more profitable treatments, such as logging of
spruce trees, can help offset the costs of ecosystem
restoration treatments, such as the thinning of small diameter
pine trees--which are not profitable to log commercially

Money can be leveraged among several partners, and

Projects can be planned to keep naturally-ignited
fires compartmentalized between treated areas and existing
roads.
While we have been able to work successfully within existing
environmental regulations, we do see other areas that could be
improved. These improvements could include:

Getting federal budgets to the local field offices
before the end of the current fiscal year.

Increasing the authority of local land managers to
move on projects and to collaborate with other partners,

and other items mentioned in my written testimony.
We would encourage Congress to keep supporting collaboration, such
as through continued funding for the Collaborative Forest Landscape
Restoration Program. The CFLR Program not only encourages local
stakeholder involvement, but also promotes sharing of knowledge among
the various projects across the U.S., which improves efficiency.
Thank you for your consideration of this testimony.
Further suggestions for things that could be improved:

Currently, collaborators can only request federal
funds 30 days before they will be used. It can be very hard to
predict when funds will be needed due to factors such as
weather and contractor's schedules. It would be helpful if the
local forest supervisor had the ability to extend that time up
to 90 days.

Ongoing changes in policies and new regulations can
have a dramatic effect on local offices--reducing efficiencies,
morale and employee production.

The Forest Service often values timber too high,
which can prevent local contractors from bidding on timber
sales. It makes more sense to listen to the local timber
industry reps and see what price is economically feasible. If
the Forest Service keeps the valuation a little lower, industry
contractors can bid up the price.

The recently added additional layer in the state BLM
organization causes less efficiency and hinders local managers
in moving effectively to meet their land management objectives.
We'd rather see that money going to add more field-level
employees.

Additional regulations imposed on collaborators (in
formal participating agreements) increase costs for these
organizations. This makes it very challenging in this economy.
Other Comments:

We don't see any need to circumvent the NEPA process.
Logging of beetle-killed trees could have detrimental
environmental affects in some areas, so the process provides
necessary safeguards. If planning efforts include stakeholders
in the early stages, appeals can often be prevented.

The collaborative approach mentioned above, e.g.,
involving stakeholders and working across large landscapes is
also effective in other areas, such as coordinated weed
management and the Colorado Plateau-wide native plant program.

In addition to the Forest Service, the BLM has been
an important partner in this process, e.g., many power line
treatments were conducted on BLM land.

Another critical component of our success has been
the use of the various funding sources in implementing programs
across agency boundaries to benefit our broad landscape
approach to healthy public lands.

We applaud your efforts to get out to local
communities to hear the issues of concern, since each locale
has their own specific challenges. As you can see, the need to
log beetle-killed pine to improve forest health isn't an issue
on the Uncompahgre Plateau. Here, pine trees aren't even a
species that local loggers and mills want to buy. Spruce is the
tree that is economically feasible to log and mill. That said,
we are doing all we can to:

improve forest resiliency to minimize future
outbreaks of insect infestations and reduce the
likelihood of catastrophic wildfires, and

provide local jobs, recreational opportunities,
and move towards ecosystem health in a collaborative,
science-based manner.
We encourage Congress to continue supporting this effective
approach.
______

Mr. Bishop. Thank you, and I will say Uncompahgre properly
from now on, because I will never say it again.
[Laughter.]
Mr. Bishop. All right. Thank you.
We will next turn to Mr. Downie, who is the David--no. Yes,
Mr. Downie, one page too soon. The Director of the Vegetation
Management and Ancillary Service Program for Xcel Corporation,
from Denver, Colorado.

STATEMENT OF JIM DOWNIE, DIRECTOR, VEGETATION MANAGEMENT AND
ANCILLARY SERVICES PROGRAM, XCEL ENERGY, DENVER, COLORADO

Mr. Downie. Mr. Chairman and members of the Committee,
thank you for the opportunity to share our perspective. Public
Service Company of Colorado is the largest investor-owned
utility in Colorado, with approximately 1.7 million customers.
In Colorado we have approximately 4000 miles of electric
transmission lines, of which 760 are on U.S. Forest Service
lands.
My remarks will focus on the ongoing efforts by Xcel Energy
to maintain its electric transmission rights-of-way as required
by the Colorado PUC and in compliance with Federal regulators
to better ensure the safe, reliable delivery of electricity
while taking into consideration the Forest Service's efforts to
ensure forest health, and the very real challenges of both Xcel
and the Forest Service face every day in advancing these
efforts.
To put the utility issue in perspective, it is important to
understand that, although utility corridors make up less than 1
percent of acreage involved in the current MPB epidemic in
Colorado, the impact of one tree coming into contact with
electric lines starting a fire, or a wildfire damaging or
destroying transmission lines could have far-reaching
consequences for many residents of Colorado and perhaps other
states.
We have long worked in partnership with the Forest Service
to perform vegetation management around electric facilities
located on Federal lands and more recently with collaborative
groups like the CBBC.
Despite this, challenges remain. There are three main
operational challenges, all with ties to overall forest health.
First is NERC implemented the Vegetation Management Standard in
2007 in response to the 2003 Northeast blackout. Essentially,
this standard has a zero tolerance for tree-related outages.
The most practical and cost-effective way for us to ensure that
doesn't happen is to remove all incompatible vegetation from
rights-of-way.
But essentially, the issue is we have FERC and NERC saying
don't have any tree outages, and sometimes the Forest Service
and, more importantly, their critics saying that we want trees
there, maybe to screen the lines so you can't see it and that
kind of stuff. So we have competing Federal mandates and
inconsistent policies impacting national lands. Our progress on
Federal lands has been inconsistent, ranging from removal of
incompatible vegetation to limited removal.
The second issue is, beginning in 2008, the impact of
unprecedented levels of mountain pine beetle activity left
thousands of dead trees within striking distance of our
facilities. We have managed that very successfully. We have
removed about 200,000 trees in the last several years. They
were all hazard trees, and we greatly appreciate the assistance
the forest has been able to provide regarding this, but we are
all frustrated by legal and regulatory constraints that prevent
us from performing this work more efficiently, effectively and
safely.
The last issue is the bark beetle infestations have brought
about an awareness of the potential for radiant heat that can
damage and destroy transmission structures. In the MPB epidemic
area alone, 76 percent of our transmission structures are made
out of either wood or aluminum, which obviously are very
sensitive to heat. Some transmission lines are more critical
than others, with many providing electricity to hundreds of
thousands of customers.
In the event of a fire, transmission lines can be short-
circuited by smoke. This is usually a short-term problem.
However, if a fire completely destroys structures, the loss of
the lines ability to serve electricity can be long-term. In
other words, it is out of service until we can repair it or
rebuild it. Losing multiple structures or more than one
transmission line at the same time from fires can create an
even greater challenge for our customers.
We are keenly aware that the challenges facing our company
are occurring in the context of a much larger one the Forest
Service faces with regard to forest health. We are most
appreciative of the leadership shown by the Forest Service to
address the situation, and we also are very appreciative of the
leadership shown in the Congress by the two committees
represented here, as well as Senator Udall and his tireless
efforts on the matter.
In seeking to address the situation in the long term, it
has become clear to us that existing Federal laws are a
significant barrier to enabling the Forest Service and
utilities like us to work together in a comprehensive way to
address the two main challenges, which are again trees coming
in contact with the lines and the potential for wildfire
damage.
The moment we step onto lands outside the rights-of-way, we
face a significant legal challenge. The property is owned and
managed by the Forest Service, and the utilities are not the
stewards of these lands. The challenge is that such lands are
now impacting our infrastructure, which is critical to the
health, safety and welfare of our modern society. Although we
do not have the legal control for these areas outside our
permits, some have argued that utilities like ours should
somehow be responsible for the conditions that were created by
events wholly outside of our control.
In sum, the laws and regulations governing forest
management do not provide flexibility for the Forest Service
and companies like ours to effectively and efficiently and
safely address forest health/fuels treatments in areas
immediately adjacent to our rights-of-way and sometimes on the
right-of-way. One needs to look no further than right here
where, as Ms. Robertson and Mr. Jiron have noted, there are
some great projects and great success stories with WAPA and
Tri-State working on Forest Service lands and leaving a really
great end product.
Because of that common interest, addressing this matter in
such a way where we can access these areas in a swift but
limited manner, without shouldering extensive liability, we
believe should be a priority.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for the chance to share our views.
I would be happy to answer any questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Downie follows:]

Statement of James S. Downie, Director,
Vegetation Management & Ancillary Programs, Xcel Energy

Mr. Chairman and Members of the Committee
Good Morning, My name is James S. Downie. I am the director of
vegetation management and ancillary programs for Public Service of
Colorado, which is an Xcel Energy company. Today I am representing Xcel
Energy.
Thank you for the opportunity to share our perspective.
Company Overview
Xcel Energy is an investor-owned electricity and natural gas
company with regulated operations in eight Midwestern and Western
states. Based in Minneapolis, Minn., we provide a comprehensive
portfolio of energy-related products and services to approximately 3.4
million electricity customers and 1.9 million natural gas customers
through our four wholly owned utility subsidiaries (Public Service of
Colorado, Northern States Power -Minnesota; Northern States Power-
Wisconsin; Southwestern Public Service).
In Colorado, we are the largest investor owned utility with
approximately 1.7M residential, commercial and industrial customers.
In Colorado we have approximately 4000 miles of high voltage
overhead electric transmission lines that serve large load centers, of
which 760 are on U.S. Forest Service Lands. Statewide we have
approximately 10,000 miles of distribution lines that serve primarily
residential customers, of which 134 are on U.S. Forest Service lands.
My remarks will focus on the ongoing efforts by Xcel Energy to
maintain its electric transmission rights-of-way as required by the
Colorado Public Utilities Commission and in compliance with federal
regulators to better ensure the safe, reliable delivery of electricity
while taking into consideration the Forest Service's efforts to ensure
forest health--and the very real challenges both Xcel Energy and the
Forest Service face every day in advancing these efforts. To put the
utility issue in perspective it is important to understand that,
although utility corridors make up less than one percent of acreage
involved with the current mountain pine beetle epidemic in Colorado,
the impact of one tree coming into contact with an electric line
starting a fire, or a wildfire damaging or destroying high voltage
transmission lines could have far reaching consequences for many
residents of Colorado and perhaps other states.
Vegetation Management on Public Lands: Opportunities, Challenges And
Barriers
We have long worked in partnership with the Forest Service to
perform vegetation management around electric transmission and
distribution facilities located on federal lands and more recently with
collaborative groups like the Colorado Bark Beetle Cooperative (CBBC).
Despite this, challenges remain on the relatively small footprint
utility corridors make within the total acreage of the Forest. There
are three main operational challenges, all with ties to overall forest
health:
1.  The North American Electric Reliability Corporation (NERC)
implemented the Vegetation Management Standard (FAC-003-1) in
2007 as a response to issues highlighted by the 2003 Northeast
Blackout, which was initiated by transmission lines sagging
into the tops of trees. This Standard generally sets a ``zero-
tolerance'' for any tree related outages from trees located
within the existing right-of-way on lines >200kV. The most
practical and cost-effective way to meet both the letter and
spirit of this Standard is to remove all incompatible
vegetation from these rights-of-way and implement a long-term
integrated vegetation management approach to this work that is
environmentally responsible and sustainable. Xcel Energy has a
program designed to accomplish this task and hundreds of
thousands of incompatible trees have been removed from our
rights-of-way in all eight states in the past five years, on
both private and public lands. However, due to competing
federal mandates and inconsistent policies impacting national
lands, our progress on federal lands has been inconsistent,
ranging from complete removal of incompatible vegetation to
limited removal.
2.  Beginning in 2008 the impact of unprecedented levels of
bark beetle activity left thousands of dead trees within
striking distance of our facilities. Xcel Energy has
successfully used emerging technologies such as LiDAR and near
infrared imagery to better manage this threat, both on and off
the right-of-way, removing approximately two-hundred thousand
hazard trees on both electric distribution and transmission
facilities in the past several years. We greatly appreciate the
assistance the Forest has been able to provide regarding this
issue to date. However, we are all frustrated by legal and
regulatory constraints that prevent us from performing this
work more efficiently, effectively and safely.
3.  Bark beetle infestations have brought about an awareness of
the potential for radiant heat that can damage and destroy
transmission structures in the event of a wildfire and thus
highlights two needs from our perspective:
a.  Reducing ground fuel load within 50-60 feet of wood
and aluminum structures and maintaining it below an
acceptable threshold.
b.  Reducing the potential for damage to structures
from crowning fires by reducing crown closure on
portions of the forest adjacent to these structures.
We note that the above measures are estimates and they cannot
guarantee that facilities will not be damaged by radiant heat
in the event of a fire.
Of particular concern to us is that approximately 76 percent of
the structures located within the current mountain pine beetle
epidemic area are constructed of wood and aluminum. In
addition, we recognize that the threat of radiant heat damage
from wildfires may exist outside the epidemic area.
Some transmission lines are more critical than others, with many
providing electricity to hundreds of thousands of residential,
commercial and industrial customers.
In the event of a fire, transmission lines can be short-circuited
by smoke. This is usually short-term problem. However, if a wildfire
completely destroys structures, the loss of the lines ability to serve
electricity can be long-term (i.e. out of service until the line is
repaired or rebuilt). For example, during the 2002 Hayman fire Public
Service Company lost one structure on a 230kV line near Cheeseman
Reservoir. Because of the remote location, terrain and access
restrictions it took about a week to replace this structure and get the
line back in service. Losing multiple structures or more than one
transmission line at the same time from fires could create even greater
challenges to serve our customers.
We are keenly aware that the challenges facing our company are
occurring in the context of a much larger one the Forest Service faces
with regard to forest health and fuels treatment work. We are most
appreciative of the leadership shown by the Forest Service to address
the situation and we also are very appreciative of the leadership shown
in the Congress, both by the two committees represented here as well as
Senator Udall and his tireless efforts on the matter of bark beetle
infestation across Colorado.
Indeed, but for the collective leadership of the Congress and the
agency, the situation would no doubt be considerably more dire than it
is today.
In seeking to address the situation in the long term, it has become
clear to us that existing federal laws are a significant barrier to
enabling the Forest Service and utilities like us to work together in a
comprehensive way to address two main challenges. First is the
reduction of the ever present potential for hazard tree contact and
wildfire damage risk to electric facilities throughout the state of
Colorado. Second is the ability for utilities to efficiently and
effectively ensure compliance with federal regulations.
Here is why: we are issued permits to access the rights-of-way, for
the purposes of maintaining our lines, including the sometimes limited
removal of incompatible vegetation. In short, with the permits, we have
the authority to manage those portions of Forest Service lands to some
degree.
However, the moment we step onto lands outside the rights-of-way,
we face a significant legal challenge--the property is owned and
managed by the Forest Service and the utilities are not the stewards of
these lands. The challenge is that such lands are now impacting our
infrastructure, which is critical to the health, safety and welfare of
modern society. Although we do not have the legal control for these
areas outside our permits, some have argued that utilities like ours
should somehow be responsible for the conditions that were created by
events wholly outside of our control.
The challenge we face, however, as alluded to earlier, is that such
a situation creates potentially significant liabilities for us and our
customers--while at the same time limiting our ability to efficiently
and effectively address potential threats. The result: we are not in
complete control of our own destiny in terms of providing electricity
service, yet we and our customers could well be punished for it through
higher costs and lost electricity supply should a fire on public lands
destroy or damage our lines.
To be clear, we recognize that the Forest Service, too, is often
limited to where, and how often, they can get to these areas due to a
number of factors, not the least of which is limited resources.
In sum, the laws and regulations governing forest management do not
provide flexibility for the Forest Service and companies like ours--and
our contractors--to effectively, efficiently and safely address forest
health/fuels treatments in the areas immediately adjacent to our rights
of ways and sometimes on the right-of-way (e.g. use of mechanized
equipment which in some areas is welcomed and other areas shunned). The
potential impacts of this are clear.
For utilities, the Forest Service and collaborative groups like the
CBBC there is a real intersection of protecting the public interest
here.
Because of that common interest, addressing this matter in such a
way where we can access these areas in a swift but limited manner,
without shouldering extensive liability, we believe should be a
priority.
Thank you Mr. Chairman for the chance to share our views. I would
be happy to answer any questions.
______

Mr. Bishop. Thank you.
[Applause.]
Mr. Bishop. We now turn to Mr. Dodd, who is with the Enviro
Land Management from Whitewater, Colorado.
You are still with us even though you don't have a name
tag.

STATEMENT OF DAVID DODD, ENVIRO LAND MANAGEMENT, LLC,
WHITEWATER, COLORADO

Mr. Dodd. OK. Thank you for the opportunity. Thank you,
Chairman Bishop and McClintock and Representative Tipton. We
really appreciate you being here. It is really a breath of
fresh air to get someone on the same side that we have been on
for the last 20 years.
My name is David Dodd. We own DDI Equipment. We started in
1978 in Steamboat Springs. We started out selling forestry
equipment, and then we later moved to Grand Junction.
In 2001, we seen that the forestry sawmills were closing
and there was a real negative impact on the ability to obtain
sawlogs from the Forest Service. So we started a company called
Enviro Land Management, and that company was designed to go in
and service. At the time, we thought because of the lack of
management on the U.S. Forest Service ground, that there was
going to be an opportunity to go in and actually be paid to
work and service, which we are right now, the thinnings and the
removal of product.
So at this point in time, we have about 15 full-time
employees, and then we have, maybe in peak season, which we are
approaching now, we might have 25. We have a modest fleet of
equipment with fellers, bunchers, forwarders, log trucks and
chip trucks.
Right now we also have four current contracts with the
Forest Service. We are just closing in on finishing a 3,000-
acre fuels mitigation project in Arizona. Then we have a
project at Vail and Summit County and Steamboat Springs.
These types of projects are expensive for the Forest
Service and for landowners, which is part of what we do is do
mitigation for private, which we used to do probably 50
percent. Now it is down to 10 percent because of the economy.
So 90 percent of what we do is government agencies.
The logs that you are seeing this morning on our truck out
there was what we called POL, product other than lumber. A big
portion of the forest that we do treat is not exactly sawlogs.
That came off a project which is 100 acres in Summit County,
and all of those logs coming off of that project are what we
call POL, product other than lumber, or product that is real
difficult to find a place to do something with, like Mr. Ford
mentioned, that is a good place to go.
In our opinion, the sawmill here in Montrose and the
opportunity in Saratoga is huge because there are not a lot of
places to take timber, even in a multi-state region, right now.
We provide about 200 to 300 loads of logs to Montrose a
year, which is a small percentage of what the total needs are,
but it is very important to us to have that opportunity. It
also helps reciprocal when we go to bid jobs, that we know we
are going to have some money to help pay for that project with
better sawlogs.
Although most of our projects we have to remove the POL as
well as the sawlogs, so it actually becomes sort of a liability
to us unless we can find a place to take that material. A
couple of years ago we were doing a job in Eagle and we had--it
was a private landowner, and he was very meticulous and wanted
everything off of the ground, and we had to take 100 loads. We
had to chip all the logs with the undesirable material, the
slash and undesirable logs, and we took 100 loads to the dump
in Eagle County and had to pay them to take the loads.
So there is a big opportunity that we could use to do
something with that material, although the real tough part
about any of that, with the mill and the POL, is that people
that want to make an investment have to have assured that they
are going to be able to have a sustainable supply of timber.
We did have an OSB mill, an OSB plant--that is oriental
strand board--in Olathe, and that went by the wayside around
2004 or 2005. Those places are exactly what we need in this
area to handle a big volume of material. We looked at what is
going on in Arizona right now, which was brought up earlier.
They are allegedly--it is pretty out there for public
information, but they have a $300 million contract to deal with
cleaning up the forest, which is 30,000 to 50,000 acres a year,
and it is my understanding that they are negotiating with an
OSB plant right now to facilitate that.
Anytime you talk about a 10-year stewardship or long
stewardships, in our opinion, you had to have--I am color
blind, by the way, so if I go over--you have to have a place to
go with material. We looked at 10-year stewardship contracts
and we declined to try to bid on those because you had to put a
lot of time and effort into trying to find some place to deal
with that material, just like Arizona. They have a 10-year huge
contact, but you have to have a plan. And to take a plan,
somebody on Wall Street or any bank, anybody else, is that, OK,
show me how you are going to pay back the money. And, oh, by
the way, the Forest Service could cancel the clause because
they could have an appeal from an environmental appeal that
could stop the project. So it is not the Forest Service's
fault.
Wrap it up?
Mr. Bishop. I need you to finish, yes.
Mr. Dodd. OK. Again, thank you for the opportunity, and we
really appreciate you guys' interest in helping us.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Dodd follows:]

Statement of David Dodd, Enviro Land Management, LLC

Thank you Chairman Bishop, Chairman McClintock, and Representative
Tipton for your interest in national forest management and the
opportunity for me to testify this morning.
My name is David Dodd. We have owned and operated DDI Equipment in
Grand Junction since 1979. We specialize in sales and service of forest
vegetation management equipment, and we have worked with dozen of
sawmills, loggers, and forestry contractors throughout Colorado, New
Mexico, Arizona, and South Dakota. We also own a company called Enviro
Land Management LLC (ELM) located in Whitewater, Colorado, just south
of Grand Junction. ELM was started in 2001 to offer services in
forestry and fuels mitigation. We are considered the pioneers of the
industry and have a modest fleet of equipment, including feller
bunchers, skidders, forwarders, wood grinders, log trucks, and chip
trucks. We normally employ 15 people with up to 25 during our peak
season.
We have 4 current projects with the U.S. Forest Service--a 3,000
acre fuels mitigation project that we are just completing near
Prescott, AZ, and three roadside hazard tree removal projects in Summit
County, and near Steamboat Springs and Vail, CO. We have a very good
rapport with the U.S. Forest Service and the Colorado State Forest
Service, and we enjoy working with both.
These types of projects are very expensive to the landowner, in
some cases private landowners but most often the U.S. Forest Service.
As long as there are adequate markets, forestry projects that include
trees meeting sawlog standards makes a tremendous difference in the
project economics, either reducing the cost to the landowner or
allowing more acres to be treated.
In our opinion, the industry's largest challenge is markets for
forest products. The Montrose sawmill (Intermountain Resources) is the
best option for sawlogs. Our company delivers 200 to 300 loads per year
to Intermountain Resources, which is a small percentage compared to the
mill's total needs, but critical to our business and the economics of
the projects we work on. The sawmill is a critical part of the ELM
business plan as we work on projects from government agencies and
private individuals.
These projects also require us to remove products other than logs
(POL). With better markets, POL could be a great resource, but now it
is a great liability. Depending on the contract, we have to remove down
to a 3'' top, and lop and scatter or pile for burning the
unmerchantable slash, limbs, tops, and cull material. A biomass co-
generation power plant is in the planning stages near Gypsum, CO, and
that could be a tremendous outlet for the slash and unmerchantable
small material. One of their biggest issues is the need for an assured
supply of raw materials at the right price.
Our goal now is to do everything we can do to help Intermountain
Resources survive, for the health of our business and for other logging
and forestry contractors who depend on that mill. We continue to
provide equipment, parts and service to a number of other contractors,
and those jobs are critical both for the work they accomplish in the
woods and for the jobs and economic benefits to local communities in
western Colorado.
In Arizona, we believe the best option for small diameter trees is
an oriented strand board (OSB) plant. That is under consideration in
Arizona as we speak. The biggest challenge has been, and will be, a
sustainable supply of raw materials, and whether the Forest Service can
offer a predictable, sustainable supply, especially with the constant
threat of appeals and litigation.
I understand the challenges with the federal budget, but in the
long-run, it makes a lot more sense to do proactive work in our forests
to reduce the potential for catastrophic fires and beetle epidemics,
while simultaneously providing jobs and economic benefits in our local
communities.
In closing, I want to thank you for the privilege of testifying
here today. Managing the national forests is complex and I appreciate
you taking the time to hold this hearing to learn more about the issues
and potential solutions. Our company is committed to sustainable forest
management, jobs, families and communities. I would be delighted to
work with you and your staffs in finding solutions to the issues
discussed here today.
______

Mr. Bishop. Thank you. That is my fault for not watching,
either. But I have never heard the color blind excuse used
before.
[Laughter.]
Mr. Bishop. That is good, that is good.
Our final speaker, our final witness, last but not least,
is Mr. Gary Wilkinson, who is the President of the San Juan
Trail Riders Association in Durango.
Mr. Wilkinson.

STATEMENT OF GARY WILKINSON, SAN JUAN TRAIL RIDERS ASSOCIATION,
DURANGO, COLORADO

Mr. Wilkinson. Thank you, Chairmen McClintock and Bishop,
and Congressman Tipton, for providing me the opportunity to
testify at today's field hearing.
My name is Gary Wilkinson. I have been involved in the
motorsports industry for almost 45 years. I co-owned and
managed Handlebar Cycle, a motorsports business, for 27 of
those years. My business grew from a small operation to one
that supported 10 families.
I am a native of Colorado and have lived in Durango since
1963. I am the second of four generations of the Wilkinson
family who have had the privilege to enjoy OHV recreation on
the public lands in Colorado. I am the president of San Juan
Trail Riders, which is a 400-plus member organization dedicated
to promoting responsible OHV recreation, and I currently serve
on the Colorado State Parks OHV Subcommittee.
Colorado offers unique opportunities for motorized
recreation throughout much of the state. The sport and the
industry have enjoyed an increase in popularity by both
residents and non-residents. Off-highway vehicle and
snowmobile-based recreation contributes to the state's economy
via the purchase of vehicles, expenditures incurred while on
recreational trips, maintenance of vehicles, purchasing
accessories, and other expenditures that support their
activities.
A recent study conducted by the Lewis Berger Group gives us
the best available data. According to that study, motorized
recreation enthusiasts were estimated to have generated in
excess of $1 billion in direct gross sales during the study
period. Motorized recreation in Colorado is directly or
indirectly responsible for over 12,000 jobs and $370 million in
labor income and $107 million in indirect business taxes.
My family, and the local OHV groups that I have been
involved with, have been active partners with the U.S. Forest
Service for decades. We maintain trails and encourage a ``stay
the trail'' ethic. It is important to note that the OHV
community in Colorado has fully supported the 2005 policy
limiting us to designated routes.
The 2005 Travel Rule was originally promulgated to address
unmanaged OHV use. Instead, the agency has used the rule to
make landscape-level changes to the existing road and trail
infrastructure. This is in addition to a steady stream of
legislation, litigation, and other agency initiatives over the
last three decades that has closed thousands of miles of roads
and trails and eliminated tens of thousands of acres of
snowmobile opportunities. Conversely, many millions of acres
have been set aside for the exclusive use of non-motorized
visitors.
Recently, several travel plans completed by the San Juan
National Forest have followed a very distressing pattern.
First, through the process to eliminate cross-country travel,
the agency closes a significant percentage of the existing OHV
opportunity. Once final, the environmental community steps in
and seeks to close even more via litigation such as in the case
in the Rico/West Dolores area, where a lawsuit threatens to
close 14 different trails that I personally have ridden for
more than 40 years. Lawsuits, in my opinion, don't protect the
environment. This sort of litigation is part of the problem
with public lands management today.
The problem isn't limited to United States Forest Service
lands. Proposed BLM LRMP's for the Colorado Valley and
Kremmling offices proposes closing 40 and 60 percent of the
trails in those respective offices. They assert somehow that
there will be zero economic impacts from these closures, which
I find illogical.
The motorized community is deeply committed to improve the
recreational experience for all public land users and to
protect our natural resources. Colorado's OHV registration
program brings in around $4 million a year. These funds are
made available to address a variety of land use issues and
further demonstrate our commitment.
Numerous studies, including one on wilderness prepared for
Congress by Utah Representative Bill Orton, state that most
citizens, including the elderly, children, most handicapped,
and the poor, are almost entirely excluded from use and
enjoyment of Federally managed lands by limiting vehicle access
and facilities. A 2001 BLM study shows that a major reason for
the increase in popularity of OHV use is an aging population
who find OHV recreation an enjoyable way to visit public lands.
I do support managing some areas as primitive where
vehicles are not allowed. However, Colorado has a plethora of
areas that are set aside for the exclusive use of people who
prefer non-motorized recreation. Those of us who prefer or
because of limitations are required to use vehicles for access
and recreation are being squeezed into smaller and smaller
areas with each passing year.
According to a presentation U.S. Forest Service officials
recently submitted, the total agency-wide acreage affected by
the beetle kill since the outbreak began in 1996 is 41.7
million acres. You have heard that here today. Specifically in
Region 2, some 10.7 million acres have been affected. Here in
Colorado, the agency estimates some 6.6 million acres are
affected. Over the next 10 years, they estimate that an average
of 100,000 trees will fall daily as a result of the bark beetle
epidemic. Beetle-killed trees now threaten thousands of miles
of roads, trails and developed recreation sites. Our
communities are also at risk as, in addition, beetle-killed
forests now threaten essential water supplies and an estimated
550 miles of transmission and distribution power lines.
Mr. Bishop. Mr. Wilkinson, I need you to sum up now.
Mr. Wilkinson. OK. While many in the U.S. Forest Service
seem to acknowledge the problem, an overburdened regulatory
system delays any real action. When, in the rare circumstance,
the agency does complete the necessary analysis, the litigious
environmental groups step in. These well-funded and
philosophically driven groups seem to oppose even modest fuel
reduction programs. These problems need solutions.
I believe that it is imperative that you become more
involved in the processes which will ultimately determine the
health and well-being of our public lands, while ensuring that
they are fairly managed for all users. I am convinced that for
us to have sustainable forests, we must demand that the
decisions made by our public land managers be based on proven
science, not ideology and perception.
Thank you for your time.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Wilkinson follows:]

Statement of Gary Wilkinson, President,
San Juan Trail Riders Association, Durango, Colorado

Thank you Chairmen McClintock and Bishop for providing me the
opportunity to testify at today's field hearing.
My name is Gary Wilkinson I have been involved in the motorsports
industry for almost forty five years. I co-owned and managed Handlebar
Cycle from 1980 to 2007. Handlebar Cycle grew from a more or less mom
and pop operation to a business that supported 10 families when I sold
the business in 2007. I am currently employed at Handlebar Motorsports
where I am the general manager.
I am a native of Colorado and I have lived in Durango since 1963. I
am the second of four generations of the Wilkinson family who have had
the privilege to enjoy OHV recreation on the public lands in Colorado.
I am the president of San Juan Trail Riders which is a 400 plus member
organization dedicated to promoting responsible OHV recreation and I
currently serve on the Colorado State Parks OHV Subcommittee. I also
hike, mountain bike, and in past years have enjoyed hunting and fishing
in ``Colorful Colorado.''
Economic importance of Off Highway Vehicle and snowmobile recreation
Colorado offers unique opportunities for motorized recreation
throughout much of the state. This is mainly due to the vast amount of
appropriate terrain for off-highway motorized recreation. As such, the
sport and industry of motorized recreation has enjoyed an increase in
popularity in the state by both residents and non-residents. Off
Highway Vehicle (OHV) and Snowmobile based recreation contributes to
the State's economy via the purchase of vehicles, making expenditures
while on recreational activity trips (day and overnight), spending
money to operate and maintain vehicles, purchasing other accessories
needed while riding (clothes, safety equipment), and making other
expenditures for items that support their activities (food and fuel,
etc.).
While most tourism and recreation economic impact studies under-
represent the impact of OHV and Snowmobile recreation, the most recent
(2009) study by the Colorado Off Highway Vehicle Coalition, conducted
by the Louis Berger Group,gives us the best data to date. According to
that study, which surveyed the economic activity in the 2007-08 season,
motorized recreation enthusiasts were estimated to have generated over
$784 million in total direct gross sales for motorized recreation
throughout the year. This direct spending generated an additional $243
million in downstream gross sales due to additional economic activity.
Motorized recreation in Colorado is directly or indirectly responsible
for over 12,000 jobs and $370 million in labor income and $107 million
in Indirect Business Taxes.
Decades of road, trail and snowmobile closures--a critical mass has
been reached
My family, and the local OHV groups that I have been involved with,
have been active partners with the USFS for decades. We've been
involved in maintaining trails and encouraging a ``Stay the Trail''
ethic--even when the USFS allowed us to go anywhere, anytime! It is
important to note that the OHV community in Colorado has fully
supported the 2005 policy limiting us to designated routes.
Sadly, it has not worked out as advertized. The 2005 Travel Rule
was originally promulgated to address ``un-managed'' OHV use. Instead,
the agency has used the rule to make landscape level changes to the
existing road and trail infrastructure. This is in addition to a steady
stream of legislation, litigation and other agency initiatives that,
over the last 3 decades, has closed thousands of miles of roads and
trails and tens of thousands of acres of snowmobile areas. Conversely,
many millions of acres have been set aside for the exclusive use of non
motorized visitors.
Recently, several travel plans completed by the San Juan National
Forest have followed a very distressing pattern. First, through the
process to eliminate cross country travel the agency closes a
significant percentage of existing OHV opportunity. Once final, the
environmental community steps in and seeks to close even more via
litigation such is the case in the Rico/West Dolores area where a law
suit threatens to close 14 different trails that I personally have
ridden for more than thirty years. The problem isn't limited to USFS
lands. Proposed Bureau of Land Management, LRMP's for the Colorado
Valley and Kremmling offices proposes closing 40 and 60% of trails in
those respective offices. They assert somehow, that there will be zero
economic impacts from these closures. These are just horrible plans
which will result in huge negative impacts to those communities
This sort of litigation is part of the problem with public lands
management today. When planning doesn't go exactly the way someone or a
group prefers they can easily mangle the process via lawsuits. The
motorized community is deeply committed to improve the recreation
experience for both motorized and non motorized users. We work with our
public land managers and stake holders to improve trail opportunities
and protect our natural resources. We have a strong OHV registration
program which brings to the table more than 4 million dollars each
year. This money is made available in the way of grants. These grants
fund all aspects of trail maintenance. It is too bad that the
environmental groups won't work with the motorized community to provide
trails for all users instead of filing frivolous lawsuits. Lawsuits
don't protect the environment. Working cooperatively with trail users
will.
Regulations that limit access harms the elderly and disabled
According to numerous studies, including a comprehensive study on
Wilderness prepared for Congress by Utah Representative Bill Orton,,
most citizens including the elderly, children, most handicapped, and
the poor are almost entirely excluded from use and enjoyment of
federally managed lands by limiting vehicle access and facilities. The
Bureau of Land Management's National Management Strategy for Motorized
Off-Highway Vehicle Use on Public Lands shows that a major reason for
the increase in popularity of OHV use is an aging population who find
OHV recreation a enjoyable way to visit public lands. And, if I may
speak for my family, I would implore the Subcommittee to recognize
that, without vehicle access, my family is essentially locked out of
vast areas of Colorado's public lands.
I will not say that I do not support managing some areas as
``primitive,'' where vehicles are not allowed. In fact, I have
supported this type of management where it is appropriate. However,
Colorado has a plethora of areas that are set aside for the exclusive
use of people who prefer non-motorized recreation. Those of us who
prefer, or are required to use vehicles for access and recreation are
being squeezed into smaller and smaller areas. Each year, more and more
of Colorado's scenic backcountry is available to those healthy enough
to hike long distances.
Lack of effective response to the Bark Beetle outbreak questions the
ability of the agency to properly manage its lands
According to a presentation our local USFS officials gave to the
OHV community, the CITE HERE the total agency wide acreage affected by
bark beetle (all beetles) since outbreak began in 1996 is 41.7 million
acres. In Region 2 (Colorado, Wyoming, South Dakota, Nebraska), some
10.7 million acres have been affected by bark beetle (all beetles)
since outbreak began. Here in Colorado the agency estimates some 6.6
million acres are affected. The agency estimates that over the next 10
years, an average of 100,000 trees will fall daily as a result of the
bark beetle epidemic.
Visitors to USFS lands are affected not only by the visual impacts.
Falling trees pose serious risk to human life and the infrastructure
our rural communities rely on. Dead trees across the state have created
heavy fuel loading which can result in intense, so-called ``fatal
wildfires.'' Beetle-killed trees now threaten thousands of miles of
roads, trails and developed recreation sites. Our communities are also
at risk. Beetle-killed forests now threaten essential water supplies
and an estimated 550 miles of transmission and distribution power
lines.
It is worthwhile to note the agency's own review of the Bark Beetle
Outbreak in Northern Colorado and Southern Wyoming identifies
Wilderness and Roadless as a contributing factor to the out-break and
as a limiting factor as to how the agency can respond. Only a tiny
fraction (less than 15%) of beetle-killed areas are open to any sort of
active management to address the situation. This is because budgetary
and regulatory limitations--such as prohibitions on entering roadless
areas and designated wilderness areas preclude those efforts. And yet,
Colorado's new Roadless Rule increased ``upper tier'' roadless areas to
1.4 million acres from the previous 550,000acres.
To recreationists, this problem needs a solution. While many in the
USFS seem to acknowledge the problem, an overburdened regulatory system
delays any real action on the ground. When, in the rare circumstance,
the agency does complete the necessary ``analysis,'' the litigious
environmental groups step in. These well funded and philosophically
driven groups seem to oppose even modest fuel reduction programs. Often
they oppose any and all efforts to remove excessive fuel loads.
In closing while I don't claim to be an expert in forest health I
am convinced that for us to have sustainable forests we must demand
that the decisions that are made by our public land managers be made
based on proven science not ideology or probability.
______

Mr. Bishop. Thank you.
[Applause.]
Mr. Bishop. To all of those who have come distances to
provide information and testimony here, we thank you very much
for your testimony. Your written testimony will obviously
always be included in the record, as well as the oral
testimony, your answers to questions here as well.
Once again, we appreciate the input you have in here. I
want you also to know that if there may be--just so you keep
this in mind--additional questions for witnesses, we will ask
you to respond to them in writing if we don't have enough time
to go through this here.
We have a time when we must end this meeting, so I want to
make sure that Mr. Tipton gets the opportunity first to have
his questions asked and answered. We will go through several of
those potential rounds. So I will turn to him for 5 minutes to
ask some questions.
Representative Tipton.
Mr. Tipton. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Did I mention I am
color blind?
[Laughter.]
Mr. Tipton. I would like to, with unanimous consent, submit
for the record a statement by Mr. Bruce Ward, who is the
Founder of Choose Outdoors and the White House Champion of
Change for Rural Colorado.
Mr. Bishop. No objection.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Ward submitted by Mr. Tipton
follows:]

Statement of Bruce Ward, Founder of Choose Outdoors
and a White House Champion of Change for Rural America

The smoke is gone, but the fear remains. We have lived in Denver's
``wildland urban interface'' for decades because of our love of
Colorado's beauty, but now the yearly ``fire watch'' causes us pause as
we hold our breath hoping the forest around us doesn't burn. The most
recent fire--the Lower North Fork -claimed at least three human lives,
27 homes, over 4,200 acres
The obvious question; Who is to blame? We should also ask--why are
we suffering such fire catastrophes? Is this the truth behind Smokey
The Bear's accusation--``only YOU can prevent Forest Fires!''
The Good News? We reduce or prevent future fires by promoting
forest health. The Bad News? We may have to give up the easy answers of
either blaming one person for ``setting'' each fire, and that there is
nothing we can do to prevent these fires. Understanding the cause and
addressing it gives us the ability to stop tragic fires.
We need to stop thinking that trees live forever; like all living
things they have finite life spans. This radical idea of recognizing
the cycle of life means forest health is contingent on new trees. This
requires us to challenge our belief that cutting trees is not
``environmental'' or ``green''. The old ethos of ``Let nature take its
course,'' and ``in 500 years the earth will have healed itself'' must
be seen as flawed.
The problem has roots from when the West was being settled and
clear cutting was considered expedient and necessary. We were more
focused on creating a civilized west. The unintended consequence of
endless fire suppression is now manifesting itself. Native Americans
commonly set fires every Spring knowing it kept the trees and animals
within stronger and saw fire as a tool used extensively prior to the
white man's encroachment and restrictions.
The documented excesses of tree harvesting without environmental
limits in the 19th and 20th Centuries created a culture that reacted by
believing that cutting any tree was sacrilege, using products made from
trees wasteful and uneducated. Tree Killers should feel guilty about
their role in hastening the destruction of our planet.
We know many trees in nature would have life spans not much longer
than the longest living human--yet we protect geriatric trees whose
very nature is turning them toward fire and replacement. We can see the
effects all around us as nature pushes to return to a balance allowing
new trees to replace the old, the time has come to dispel that well
intentioned but wrong environmentalist mantra that forbids ``killing
trees'' and realize that interfering with nature is what creates the
problem. Now is the time to embrace a new environmentalist culture that
embraces planting new trees, that enjoys wood products from local
sources because they come from renewable resources, provide jobs to
rural economies, and most importantly bring our environment back into
balance.
Undersecretary of Agriculture Harris Sherman asked for my help to
increase the awareness of the mountain pine beetle epidemic and engage
the private sector solutions to deal with millions of acres of pine
trees dying and turning brown--our own potential ``Katrina of the
West''. I reached out to stakeholders who shared their views that on
the complexity and unprecedented magnitude of the epidemic.
I found caring citizens who were using ``Rocky Mountain Blue
Stain'' wood; a community of environmentalists, lumberman, builders,
lumber yards, pellet mills, furniture makers working together to take
our blue wood and turn it into products that would help the forest
heal. But even these efforts struggle against the mistaken belief that
using wood is somehow bad.
The time is now to change decades of outmoded public perception
that the only good forestry goal is to let our forests age, and how
sustainable forestry is married to utilizing wood products in order to
plant and grow new trees.
______

Mr. Tipton. With regards to a statement that he had made
that the beetle infestation is potentially the Katrina of the
West. And with unanimous consent, I would like to submit that
for the record.
Mr. Bishop. It is already in.
Mr. Tipton. This question I think I would like to have for
all of our panelists, and it is pretty simple and
straightforward. Just a yes or no I think will probably
suffice.
Do you think that the bark beetle infestation, the threat
of forest fire here for the West, is an emergency?
I will start with Ms. Fishering.
Ms. Fishering. Yes.
Mr. Ford. Yes.
Mr. Georg. Yes.
Mr. Jiron. Yes, qualified.
Ms. Robertson. Yes.
Mr. Shoemaker. Yes.
Mr. Downie. No question.
Mr. Tipton. No question.
I think that is. It has been interesting listening to some
of the testimony, that we all recognize that this is a genuine
threat.
Mr. Jiron, you and I were just down in Chimney Rock, had
the opportunity to be able to tour, and noted how healthy the
forests are. Your forest rangers pointed out to me the spacing
between the trees, said this is a healthy forest.
I would like to go ahead and ask, what are some of the
inhibitions that we are seeing--and, Mr. Jiron, I might start
with you--that are inhibiting the Forest Service from
fulfilling that mission of creating healthy forests?
Mr. Jiron. Our desire, like everyone has spoken here, is to
always do more. We have been able to increase the amount of
timber output and coming up with new ways of doing business. We
are looking at a series of stewardship contracts, including
that area around Chimney Rock, which would help. We are also
looking at continuing our work in green timber sale contracts.
Mr. Tipton. Are you seeing regulatory and legal concerns
that are inhibiting you as well? When we hear Mr. Downie speak
about conflicting regulations between FERC and the Forest
Service management as well?
Mr. Jiron. We are always concerned about those challenges
when they come up. Our job at the end is to make sure that we
are implementing the laws and policies that Congress passes,
and then----
Mr. Tipton. So there are those challenges?
Mr. Jiron. We do have challenges. But when we do find
those, we are always looking ourselves what else can we do
within our current authorities to be more efficient. I
mentioned just very briefly in my comments on the Black Hills,
for example, we have been able to try some very effective NEPA
efficiencies on the Black Hills, working with collaborative
groups, working with citizens in South Dakota, and it has been
effective.
So we do have those challenges. We look forward to always
looking at ways to resolve them.
Mr. Tipton. As you all know, the commercial viability of
our timber projects, and by extension the ability of the Forest
Service to be able to partner with private industry to address
the bark beetle epidemic on an effective scale, depends in
large part in terms of the timber industry contacts.
Mr. Ford, in your testimony you mentioned the need for 15-
to 25-year stewardship contracts rather than the current
maximum of 10 years. Why is that timeframe necessary, and what
other aspects of timber contracts would be helpful to properly
merge the market needs of the timber industry with the safety
and forest health that the public needs?
Mr. Ford. Well, the length of time is important for the
amount of investment dollars that have to be put up. You can't
ask a private enterprise to come forward with, as in our case,
$22 million and then limit the time amount that you are going
to give a supply. It is pretty simple. If you want to go to
your bank, you want to go to your investors with any kind of
business plan, you are going to have to have a timeline in
which you can pay back the investment, and 10 years is not
adequate for the size of the projects that we are looking at.
Another problem that we have come up against is that there
seems to be a misconception of the value of timber in that 12,
13 inches and smaller, and I don't care if it is ponderosa pine
or lodgepole pine or others. There seems to be too much of a
value put on that, when it is a product actually that we are
all looking for ways to dispose of. I think we are going to
have to bring the products other than logs up to a higher
amount, and that is what is going to have to get paid for in a
service contract, and then industry will pay by the ton, or
however you sell it, the products that are larger than that.
Mr. Tipton. Thank you for that.
Ms. Fishering, could you maybe speak--we are running short
here on time, but which laws and some of the regulations and
inconsistencies are still holding back progress?
Ms. Fishering. I would still say you spoke to or we heard
about the efficiencies that we are trying to get to. There has
been a new report called ``Increasing the Pace and Scale of
Restoration.'' The problem with me is it doesn't go fast
enough, it is still not big enough. Saw timber has to be a
bigger component of it, or it is not cost effective. You heard
us numerous times today say there is not a good enough supply.
As Mr. Jiron mentioned, we have 91 million board feet that
should be put on the market this year.
The reason I say that, when you put it in context, you open
a mill in Saratoga and you get Intermountain and Montrose
operating at full capacity, those two alone could use the 90
million board feet. What happens to every other single supplier
like the biomass users that are trying to grow their industry?
What are you going to do with the little mills in the rest of
the state? You have Delta Timber right down the street. That is
another 9 million board feet need per year. We are not going to
be there, and you are sitting there with tons of problems.
You need a bigger capacity industry, do more merchantable
trees per acre, and you have a recipe that you might get past
some of the laws, and the speed. South Dakota is a great
example. It is going to take 18 months to do that environmental
impact statement. It is going to give them great new authority,
such as doing adaptive management. We look forward to it. We
are working with the Forest Service. But those are laws making
it take 18 months. The bugs move faster than 18 months.
So we do need some efficiencies and speed.
[Laughter.]
[Applause.]
Mr. Tipton. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Mr. Bishop. OK. We will come back with another round for
you.
Mr. McClintock, do you have some questions for our
witnesses?
Mr. McClintock. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Dodd, it used to be that lumber companies would bid for
timber on Federal lands. They would pay the Federal Treasury to
purchase that Federal timber. Now it seems the Federal
Government has to pay you to remove timber from the public
lands. How is it that tending our forests has gone from a
profit-making venture that relieves Federal taxpayers of their
burdens to a costly one that actually burdens those same
taxpayers?
Mr. Dodd. In the late '90s, in the mid '90s, the Forest
Service would put up timber sales, and when they would do that,
they were subject to appeals. And basically, in my industry, a
lot of the people thought, well, this is the Forest Service's
fault because they won't put up enough sales.
I guess in my logic I was thinking, well, why should they
put up sales when they are only going to be appealed, and the
only one you are putting money into is the environmentalists'
pocketbooks and the lawyers of the environmentalists? So why
put up the sale when it was going to be appealed and it wasn't
going to do anything anyway? So that was the biggest problem.
Then the mills wanted a sustainable supply. I know LP,
Louisiana Pacific, had the OSB plant here, and they did about
60 million a year in board feet, and they said that they wanted
to stay but they had to have that guarantee. There is no way
the Federal Government could give that guarantee when a Federal
judge at any point in time, like Judge Mickey in the mid '90s,
did that to Arizona and New Mexico.
Mr. McClintock. And since this has occurred, how has the
health of our forests trended?
Mr. Dodd. It went way downhill. I mean, right now we have
such a problem that it is not just a matter of when; it is
going to happen anytime. In fact, we predicted this was going
to happen. One of the things that really spurred our interest
was in '99 we had a 20,000-acre blowdown in Steamboat Springs,
tons and tons of timber up there, and we had mills in Saratoga
and Montrose, and they only put up about 1 percent of that. A
lot of people think that is what precipitated the beetle
outbreak because the trees, when they are dying, put out the
pheromones, and then it just multiplied from there.
Mr. McClintock. So what has happened to our forests and
what has happened to our forest economy is not because we have
been struck down by some mysterious act of God. These are all
acts of government, are they not?
Mr. Dodd. Absolutely.
[Applause.]
Mr. McClintock. And I guess the good news is that acts of
government actually are within our power as a people to change
if we summon the political will to do so. Is that your sense of
it?
Mr. Dodd. Absolutely. Only in America will you have the
government that pays, that actually gives grant money to
environmental groups, and these same environmental groups sue
the government.
[Applause.]
Mr. McClintock. And I want to point out, that is exactly
the kind of nonsense that needs to come to a screeching halt.
[Applause.]
Mr. McClintock. And frankly, I would challenge the
Republican majority in the House to bring that to a halt.
[Applause.]
Mr. McClintock. You can't blame the Senate or the President
for that. All appropriations originate in the House. It doesn't
get spent unless we say it gets spent, and perhaps we need to
be held accountable for the damage that is being done by these
grants of taxpayer money to groups that are in direct
opposition to the interest of the taxpayers.
[Applause.]
Mr. McClintock. Mr. Jiron, you have mentioned that while we
have increased our yield of board feet from 189 million board
feet to 193 million board feet, that sounds very impressive
until we look at the written testimony that Ms. Fishering has
provided us, which shows a catastrophic decline in timber
harvest measured from the 1970s or '80s, so let me put this to
you directly.
You have submitted this as a great achievement, going from
189 million board feet to 193 million board feet. How does that
compare with what we were harvesting in the 1970s and '80s?
Mr. Jiron. Thank you, sir, for the question. I am not sure
that I am submitting it as a great achievement, rather progress
forward from working within authorities that Congress has given
us, like long-term stewardship contracts, collaboration.
Certainly, conditions have changed since the 1970s, but we are
using the authorities that we do have to try to increase it. We
recognize the economic conditions. We have done things like
cancellation of contracts to help operators.
Mr. McClintock. But the point I want to emphasize is this
is not some great step forward. It is not even an incremental
step forward compared with the catastrophic decline in timber
sales that has occurred over the past 20 years.
Thank you.
Mr. Bishop. OK. To our friends here, this is actually an
official hearing. I realize you have a great deal of passion.
We are also on a time limit. If you approve of what we say, it
cuts into the amount of time we can ask questions. So please
don't like anything we say.
[Laughter.]
Mr. Bishop. Don't dislike anything we say, either.
[Laughter.]
Mr. Bishop. We would appreciate it if you would maintain
that decorum.
Before I ask any other questions, I am going to yield to
Mr. Tipton for a second round.
Mr. Tipton. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would like to follow
up a little bit.
As we went down the line, every person noted that we have a
bark beetle infestation challenge, an emergency literally in
this state; the threat of fire, the threat that that is going
to have literally on our environment, the threat that it is
going to be having on our businesses.
Ms. Robertson, glad to hear about the collaborative
processes that you have been able to work through.
I would like, though, to ask Mr. Ford, because part of the
solution is common sense, win-win situations where we can get
in and harvest some of this timber to be able to make the
treatments, and also create jobs, and also create energy,
perhaps, for this country.
So, Mr. Ford, can your business model, the biomass plant
that you are proposing down in Pagosa Springs, is this a model
that can be replicated elsewhere?
Mr. Ford. We tried hard to make this a model that can be
wrapped around a 50-mile radius of any small community that
would like to see the forest come to a healthy standard around
there. It would be easy to reproduce. You could reproduce it in
areas that already have an existing timber saw timber market.
You wouldn't have to have a small mill at that point, or if you
need to add that component to it, you also could do that.
The 50-mile radius is also key because for the small coops
that are in these mountain states, that is about the max they
want to buy power in the chunks that they are from us. So the
5-megawatt, the 50-mile radius is all key numbers.
Mr. Tipton. OK. Thank you for that.
Mr. Jiron, I would also like to be able to go back to some
of the visit that we had down in Pagosa Springs, some of the
issues that we are seeing as we drive throughout the West
Slope, particularly in Colorado; in fact, our entire state. We
have a variety of different designations on our land. As I
travel through our district, 54,000 square miles of Colorado, I
see people who love their state, care about the environment
that they live in and want to be able to protect it, and I
think that is part of the Forest Service mission as well, to be
able to protect the landscape that we see.
But the recent report, the report that I mentioned in my
earlier question, noted that only 25 percent of the bark beetle
outbreak area was accessible due to designations, and it was
inhibiting the Forest Service's ability to be able to
effectively allow the opportunity to be able to treat these
areas.
So I am curious. What impact do designations have? Are we
inserting the win-win philosophy, the common sense value, when
we have the real threat that every person on this panel noted
is a threat to the State of Colorado, to our environment, to
our water, to our tourism, to the ability to be able to create
jobs by not allowing access into some of these areas to be able
to treat?
Mr. Jiron. Thanks for that question. It is a compelling
one. I think that designations play a part in management. We
have been dealing with that issue of some kind for decades, and
we do have to think about how something is designated as we
formulate management plans to do it.
As I mentioned in my testimony, though, a lot of the work
that we have had to do in the immediate last few years related
to bark beetle has been emergency work. Much of that work has
had to occur in wildland-urban interface, near communities,
nearest to communities. Those areas tend not to have as much
designation or some kind of sanction from Congress.
So we have been able to use our authorities both in the
national forest system and state and private forestry to be
able to use those. As we go further into it, we may have to
work through challenges. But as many on the panel have
mentioned today and as all of you have acknowledged, there is a
great deal of work to do.
So I haven't bumped into it as much in terms of management.
We may run into that, and we will deal with that as we go. But
again, a lot of the emergency work is around communities and
private landowners and that sort of thing.
Mr. Tipton. OK, thanks.
Ms. Fishering and Mr. Dodd, a big concern I have is it is
about jobs and the economy. We want to be able to do things
sensibly. We want to make sure that we are doing it right. We
want to be able to create those win-wins.
But you have worked in this part of Colorado for years and
have obviously been integral to the timber industry in this
area, which we have seen as really suffering. But also, you
know the effects that this is having on our larger community as
well.
What impacts have you seen that the decline in the timber
industry have had on our ability to create, to sustain jobs, to
be able to create a healthy community, and to be able to
provide for our children's future?
Ms. Fishering. I don't want to go ad nauseam about
merchantable saw timber, but you can't have a sawmill if you
only use small diameter. The emphasis--and it is a challenge
for the Forest Service because the forest health, public health
and safety is key in our state with falling trees because of
bark beetle. However, the trees falling on the roads aren't
typically good, merchantable saw timber. So, therefore, we are
creating a tension between the needs of getting biomass out of
the forests and what is economically effective to keep the 100
jobs at the Montrose mill.
The allocation of dollars, I brought that up. Keep in mind
that this region is truly the second lowest funded region in
the country. It didn't have the extra money when we had the
bark beetle attacks coming. We had to deal with--we got extra
campground money, extra road maintenance dollars. We did not
get one extra dollar for timber management dollars, which kind
of ties their hands behind their back. That is where I talk
about conflicting laws.
Right now, there is a new algorithm. It is an algorithm out
of D.C. that cuts hazard fuel treatment dollars to this region
of Colorado. That took $400,000 right out of the budget of this
forest right here, but we got an extra $400,000 from the new
authority, but we are not gaining any traction.
So without that right allocation of dollars, all of our
hands are tied even if we come to all the agreement in the
world. But we need saw timber, and people who are the
collaborators often don't understand a tree this big is a whole
lot different than a tree this big. This species is different
than that species. There is a lot of devil in the details.
But we are working on it. We meet with these folks
regularly. But allocation of dollars is going to be huge.
Algorithms that get unintended consequences are killing jobs in
Colorado.
Mr. Tipton. Thank you.
Mr. Bishop. Thank you.
Allow me to ask a couple of questions, if I might, first of
all to Mr. Georg. Especially if you are talking about reopening
a plant, all the time in D.C. we are hearing that one of the
reasons that forest timber sale programs are in decline is
because there is simply no market for it. If this is the case,
why is your group trying to reopen a sawmill?
Mr. Georg. That is a very good question.
Mr. Bishop. Right into the microphone.
Mr. Georg. Is that better? Can you hear me now? How about
now? OK.
It is a very good question. One of the conditions--we have
not opened the mill yet. It is our intent to open the mill. One
of the things we need before we open the mill is a supply of
saw timber, and it is important to note that it is saw timber.
We have purchased our first timber contract, but we realize
before we open this mill we need to acquire a number of
contracts.
Mr. Bishop. Is there a market for your product?
Mr. Georg. I am sorry. Yes, there is a market. Lodgepole
pine can be used for studs. It will not be appropriate for
places like Home Depot and places like that, but there is a
wholesale market for lodgepole pine, and we can use it.
Mr. Bishop. OK. Thank you. Then let me go to Ms. Fishering
again, if I could.
One of the testimony that was given in here by a different
witness says that litigation has only affected a very small
percentage of hazardous field projects, which may be true for
hazardous field projects, but is there any value--what has been
your experience with litigation on projects that offer
sufficient material to keep those mills running?
Ms. Fishering. Our history in Colorado very specifically is
we had those issues in large scale in the '90s, and that is
what led to the lowest supply of saw timber in the history of
this region, and Representative McClintock spoke to that, and
it was by 2001 that most of the big mills closed, leaving ours
as the only one, and the collaboration has helped us avoid the
litigation.
What it does do, the one downside of collaboration is it is
compromise, compromise, compromise, sometimes to get to that
sweet spot where everyone agrees, and what I see being lost is
saw timber. So we decide, oh, we won't work here, we won't get
you quite as much as you could get. We need them to understand
economics because that is, right now, a handicap for us in
Colorado.
Mr. Bishop. All right. So in addition, they are
compromising you out of existence. What about land designation
such as the wilderness habitat restrictions? How does that
limit the land base for the management?
Ms. Fishering. I still believe we can strategically target
areas. We have some very good examples. I think of the Upper
Blue, where we sat down with everybody in the room, and this is
more power and water because we are trying to protect the
reservoirs, the City of Denver, and we found plenty of acreage
that we needed to treat that was on suitable land.
The problem is so big, there are plenty of acres even with
some of the restrictions. There are some areas we can't be
strategic. But you talk to our power companies. We try to find
the most fire risk location, and we have been able to find
suitable acres to get that done.
Mr. Bishop. OK. Mr. Wilkinson, I think I probably know this
from your testimony, but is there sufficient balance, in your
opinion, with how the Forest Service manages for multiple use?
Mr. Wilkinson. No, there is not, in my opinion, and I think
too much of the decisions or too many of the decisions are
based on, as I said, ideology and not on hard science.
If I could follow up to Ms. Fishering, I don't claim to be
a forest health management expert, but I can tell you when we
increase our roadless, upper tier roadless to 1.4 million acres
from 550,000 acres, it is going to have an effect on our
ability to manage those forests. I believe that is a key
contributor.
Mr. Bishop. Thank you.
Mr. Jiron, if I could ask you a couple of questions in a
minute or less. What kind of beetle treatments are you able to
implement in wilderness areas?
Mr. Jiron. In wilderness areas, we are limited to what we
can do to any non-mechanized treatment, open trails and things
like that.
Mr. Bishop. In the 2011 regions report, you said the
commercial access on large scales that would support a long-
term supply of wood to industry is difficult outside of the WUI
and at-risk communities. Can you elaborate on what you mean?
What are the reasons that make this difficult? In 20 seconds or
less.
OK, now it is 24.
Mr. Jiron. Much of our resources have had to go into
wildlife-urban interface based on the level of beetle
infestation to protect communities.
Mr. Bishop. Did that answer my question? Why is it
difficult outside of those areas?
Mr. Jiron. Because we have had to invest a lot of our
resources----
Mr. Bishop. So that is the prioritization you are using.
Mr. Jiron. Correct.
Mr. Bishop. I see.
Mr. Jiron. The prioritization.
Mr. Bishop. My time is up.
Mr. McClintock, do you have some more questions?
Mr. McClintock. Yes. Actually, Mr. Chairman, I would like
to defer to Mr. Tipton on some issues involving transmission
that are critical to the work of the Water and Power
Subcommittee.
Mr. Tipton. Thank you, Chairman McClintock.
Mr. Downie, I did want to follow up with you. How does
losing transmission lines to wildfire or falling trees present
an economic and a public risk? Can you talk about that a bit?
Mr. Downie. To some degree. Obviously, transmission
operations itself is not my expertise. But to give you an
example, I think somebody mentioned the 2002 Hayman fire, and
we lost just one structure on a 230 line by Cheesman Reservoir,
and it took us a week to get that structure rebuilt due to
terrain issues, but also access issues and those types of
things. So that is kind of ominous if more structures are lost
or more than one line was affected.
Mr. Tipton. So it is economic and it is a safety risk if
you aren't allowed to get in and treat; correct?
Mr. Downie. Yes, sir.
Mr. Tipton. Right. Mr. Downie, the ability to be able to
get in and use equipment, you talked in your testimony
originally about if you got a foot off of your right-of-way,
you may have had some issues, but assuming you can stay in your
right-of-way, is the ability really to be able to get in trucks
to be able to make these treatments, is that critical to the
delivery of transmission and to keep those lines up and going?
Mr. Downie. Yes, in some cases. In our testimony we were
referring to mechanized equipment, essentially equipment that
can masticate dead trees very effectively. In our issues there,
again it is an inconsistent thing. In some parts of the forest,
it has been welcomed. In other areas, it has been shunned. Some
areas we are told that we need to do NEPA and that kind of
stuff in order to use it, other areas we don't. So it has been
very inconsistent.
But when we are dealing with a dead forest, as somebody
said, kind of falling down around our ears, we hesitate to put
our contractors at risk with hand crews to fell those trees
when we can take a piece of mechanized equipment like, for
example, a slash buster, which is a track hoed vehicle with a
masticating head on it, and a tree falls on that, you don't
have too much of an issue.
But we can get the work done much more efficiently,
effectively, cost-effective and safely. You can't use it
everywhere because it is restricted by slope and access, and
unfortunately in some areas the time has now passed for us to
really take advantage of it because there was such an urgent
issue for us to get those trees dealt with, we just went ahead
and did it by hand.
Mr. Tipton. So it is a matter of public safety. Maybe you
could explain just a little bit to us--and I will be happy to
yield back, Chairman McClintock, if you had any other
questions--but what do you need to more safely manage the
transmission lines that run through government? We were talking
about conflicting regulations, the ability to be able to get
in, timeframes. What would really help accelerate this for you?
Mr. Downie. I think the Forest Service needs more
flexibility, and examples of that would be, for example, again,
we are talking about a relatively small footprint here when we
are talking about utility lines. How about something like a
categorical exclusion from some of this stuff so that we can go
in and deal with those three operational issues that I
described in our testimony so that we can just go in and get it
done?
We also need to have the liability issue dealt with. We
weren't the cause of the dead forest adjacent to our line. It
is not our property. So we see us as needing some relief from a
liability perspective on that issue.
Mr. Tipton. Thank you, and I yield back.
Mr. McClintock. Thank you.
Mr. Georg, about how long does it take the Forest Service
to prepare an average timber sale?
Mr. Georg. My understanding is it takes about 3-and-a-half
years on a normal timber sale.
Mr. McClintock. Now, after a tree gets infected by beetles
and dies or is killed by fire, how long does the tree remain
marketable for higher-value products like 2x4s?
Mr. Georg. You are asking me a question I am not sure of.
But my understanding----
Mr. McClintock. Mr. Dodd or anyone who is in the business?
Ms. Fishering?
Mr. Dodd. Anytime between 3 and 6 years. It depends.
Ms. Fishering. And I think it is higher than that. There
are all sorts of--you can evolve to different kind of products
at a certain stage because the tree continues to check during
the winter, which means cracks into the trees, so you get less
and less saw timber. But the plan at the sawmill in Montrose
was to change product mix over time so we would be able to be a
factor and to be helping on using those trees for at least 10
years. It depends on geography and it depends on weather. But 3
to 6, if we said that, we would be closing our doors to most of
the mills in Colorado. We are finding a good way of staying in
business using that wood.
Mr. McClintock. The concern I am trying to explore is that
just the bureaucratic delay alone in preparing the sale
consumes a great portion, if not the entire portion, of the
salvage time that you have to go in and get that timber for
high-value products.
Ms. Fishering. Which is why we support using the Healthy
Forest Restoration Act, which shortens that time period for a
conventional timber sale.
Mr. McClintock. Yes, but then you have the litigation that
follows on top of that. That is the problem in my area. We have
had tremendous forest fires, enormous volumes of fire-killed
timber that is still salvageable. But once we get through the
bureaucratic process, then the litigation starts, and the
litigation has no chance of success but it is able to delay the
process enough so that we can't salvage any of that timber,
which is simply insane.
Ms. Fishering. True.
Mr. McClintock. Thank you. I yield back.
Mr. Bishop. Let me ask a couple of final questions, if I
might, Mr. Jiron, if I may of you. How many acres do you treat
with stewardship contracts versus traditional timber sales?
Mr. Jiron. With stewardship contracts, since 1999 we have
treated about 70,500 acres. So it is a good portion of our
work, but we still use traditional timber sale contracts for
the balance.
Mr. Bishop. Give me a reference point to what ``good
portion'' means.
Mr. Jiron. If I can submit for the record, I can get back
with you a number for that.
Mr. Bishop. We have heard from--I would appreciate it if
you would.
We have heard from a few of our witnesses talk about how
the timeframe for allowing timber harvests exceeds the
timeframe for when the beetle-killed trees can be produced for
a high-value product. Is it even possible within our current
authority to correct this discrepancy and allow trees to be
harvested in a timely manner?
Mr. Jiron. We share that concern. In South Dakota we have
been looking at NEPA efficiencies that have increased the time
that we have been able to get to a decision and move on with
the project. I am looking at trying to transfer those
efficiencies to elsewhere in the region just to help us be able
to move faster so we are doing all we can within the statutory
authority we have.
Mr. Bishop. So the answer was no, you don't have the
authority to move this timeline.
Mr. Jiron. We are using all the authority that we have
right now.
Mr. Bishop. All right. So I am making the assumption that
if it is still slow, then you need more authority to move the
timeline forward.
Mr. Jiron. Well, there----
Mr. Bishop. And I am not trying to put words in your mouth.
I think that is a summation of what took place.
Chief Tidwell sent a communication out very recently which
simply said, ``When appropriations are reduced for parts of our
mission, production and services will also be reduced.'' I
recognize it is difficult, and you oftentimes have dangerous
jobs that you and your land managers do on the ground, and we
appreciate the work the agency is doing to address this
epidemic. But this fiscal crisis is actually a reality, and the
bottom line is this problem is not going to be solved with more
Federal funds coming in for the problem. Sometimes I wonder if
even the priorities are straight. The last time you had
stimulus money that came to Colorado for this issue, you got
$53 million. Only $16 million was put toward this problem.
Others went to some more aesthetic kinds of situations.
I will give you the last--do you have other questions from
either of you?
Mr. McClintock. No, sir.
Mr. Tipton. No.
Mr. Bishop. Then I will actually give you the last chance
to address one of the concerns I have.
This is not a new issue. We have been over 20 years with
this issue. The solution is not new. We all know what it is. I
don't care what the problem is, whether it is drought or
climate change or management practices, the solution is to thin
trees. We all know that, and we are not doing it for over 20
years. We are flat-out not doing it. And that is why the
frustration I have as we start to look through new aspects and
new concepts, and we are starting to try other words that sound
good. ``Collaboration'' is the new word. ``Transparency'' was
the old word. It still means we are not doing it. We know what
we need to do, and we are flat-out not doing it.
[Applause.]
Mr. Bishop. No, wait. I told you, you can't like anything I
say.
[Laughter.]
Mr. Bishop. Senator Udall asked for a study that came out
of the Rocky Mountain research department. It was actually last
September, and I just read it over the weekend, and I am very
much concerned about what I flat-out have read in here, that
when we are talking about what areas have been treatable so
far, we are talking about, like, 18 or 12 percent of the roads
that have done--12 percent of the roads mitigated for hazardous
trees, 12 percent of the trails mitigated for hazardous trees,
61 percent of the recreation sites, 18 percent of the wildland-
urban interface. We are not coming even close to where the
problem is, and we still all know what the problem is.
And then the conclusions of this report are scary to me.
They say, ``The factors that limited access to many areas for
treatment to maintain forest stands, which include slopes,
adjacency to inventory roadless areas, prohibition of
mechanical treatment in designated wilderness, are still
applicable today, and they haven't changed at all.'' And then,
``Owing to terrain, budgetary, economic, regulatory limitations
that also deals with things like our social license'', which
means lawsuits, ``as well as roadless policies, owing to that,
active management will be applied to a small fraction, probably
less than 15 percent of the forest areas killed by the Mountain
Pine Beetle.''
The problem is--I am sorry. I get this sense of frustration
in here. This is not new. We know what the solution is. There
is no new solution. I am very frustrated that we are actually
not moving forward in a way that solves the problems, and if we
did so, we would solve some economic problems at the same time.
So I will give you--once again, don't like what I say,
please. I went over 12 seconds. I will give you another minute
if you would just like to respond to that in summation.
Mr. Jiron. We are absolutely committed to increase the
amount of thinning and work that goes on in national forests. I
know, we know that communities are benefitted by this,
watersheds are benefitted by this, that it reduces the amount
of taxpayer funding in catastrophic fire costs. So we will
continue to use everything we have to be able to increase this
work.
Mr. Bishop. I appreciate that, and I think that is a fair
summation. My problem is everything we have ain't good enough,
and we have to do more, and I don't care whether that is a
directive from Washington or it comes from the grassroots up.
Somewhere along the line, I think that is what my colleagues
have said here as well. What we have been doing for 20-plus
years is not good enough and we have to change that way.
With that, I want to thank our witnesses for their valuable
testimony. As I said earlier on so you would be prepared for
it, members of the Subcommittees here and not here may have
additional questions for the witnesses. We ask you to respond
to these in writing. The hearing record will be open for 10
business days to receive any kind of responses that you may
have or additional written testimony if you would like to add
that to it.
I would also like to thank those who have been here in
attendance. It has been a respectful audience. I told you, we
are running under the rules of what would happen if this were
back in Washington, D.C. So when I said you can't like or
dislike what we say, I am sorry, but you can't, and I
appreciate the way you have held on this topic, which is a very
significant and important topic, and an emotional topic as
well.
Mr. Tipton, I would like to yield to you if you would like
to say one last word before we bring this Committee to a close.
Mr. Tipton. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would like to
thank everyone in attendance, particularly our panel for taking
the time to be able to be here today. I know for many of you,
that is time away from work, and that is something that is
critically important.
You know, just out on the road, we have a logging truck
that is parked with a load of logs, and this is something that
I think Chairman Bishop and Chairman McClintock have spoken to
very eloquently.
It is not brain surgery to be able to create healthy
forests, and that is ultimately what we want to be able to do.
One thing that we often don't think about, particularly in a
year like this, is we are looking up on the Sneffels Range and
we are seeing our snow shed starting now to be able to
evaporate. Those trees are actually part of what helps protect
our water. So we need those healthy forests to be able to do
that.
Our logging industry has actually played a very critical
role in terms of job creation and those healthy forests. So I
applaud those efforts, applaud J.R.'s concept of being able to
take some of these downed and dead timber and to be able to
turn it into usable energy and to be able to create jobs right
here in the 3rd Congressional District.
I thank all of you for your time because this is a
passionate issue and an emotional issue at a variety of
different levels. But as I listened to the testimony that went
through, we do have that common ground of people that care
about this state. I believe what I have been able to hear are
sensible ways of just good common sense through the Forest
Service to be able to address some of these issues. We look
forward to being able to work with you to help be able to
facilitate the fulfillment of your mission, and that is healthy
forests and helping industry to be able to create jobs and be
able to get people back to work.
I will close. There is one other component that we have not
talked about. Congressman Bishop, you and I visited on this at
length at times, but this is also about education for our
children as well, when we are talking about secure rural
schools, our ability to be able to get in and harvest. So the
multiple benefits that we can see I think are critically
important.
I certainly want to thank my two counterparts for taking
the journey down to one of the most beautiful parts of the
entire world here in Montrose County and for being with us, and
thank you for your efforts, and all of our staff here as well.
Mr. Bishop. You had to bring in the education part. You
knew I am a school teacher, didn't you? You had to bring that
in.
What I also want you to do is, if you would thank the
Montrose High School ROTC for the very professional way in
which they did the Color Guard for us, or the posting of the
colors, I appreciate that.
And once again, for all of you, thank you for allowing us
to come here and visit you in Montrose.
If there are no objections heard, this Committee hearing
will be in adjournment.
[Whereupon, at 10:50 a.m., the Subcommittees were
adjourned.]

[Additional material submitted for the record follows:]

Constituent Feedback

Brian Bavin
1009 Tiyoweh Trail
Montrose, CO 82403

[emailprotected]

970-240-8546

Comments:

1)  All roadless areas should be eliminated if they
have not been designated official as wilderness as of
now. This would allow the USFS and BLM to properly
manage these areas.
2)  Potential tax incentives or subsides to the
development of chipping and/or politicizing of products
other than logs in order to facilitate the use of these
sustainable resources for the production of energy.
------

Constituent Feedback

Ken Emory
2551 Silver Way
Montrose, CO 82401

[emailprotected]

970-596-5111

Comments:

We need to be able to get access into WSA's and wilderness
areas to manage for wild fires. All of our public lands are
controlled by some federal agency. Each year more and more of
our public lands are being closed for recreation, mining,
logging and other areas that are creating job losses for local
communities. However, each year more and more citizens are
wanting to use their public lands, which should provide
positive economic impacts, but it can also cause over use in
some areas. Over 20% of Colorado mountains are designated
wilderness. We need to manage our public lands not close them
off forever for all future generations.
------

Constituent Feedback

Richard Frantz
512 E. Main St
Montrose, CO

[emailprotected]

970-249-9008

Comments:

Rep. McClintock asked why it costs money to government to
harvest trees when it used to be a profit center for the
government. His question was never answered, I would like to
hear that answered.
------

Constituent Feedback

David White
PO Box 1611
Montrose, CO

[emailprotected]

970-252-4531

Comments:

1)  Please note that any discussion of biomass or using
wood chips for power generation will run straight into
Obama's Executive Order on mercury and air toxins
standards that allows the EPA to not only shut down
coal fired power plants that might also burn biomass
but the timber industry due to its onerous regulations
via the EPA!
2)  Note in testimony by Mr. Jiron that $33 million is
available to treat 16,000 acres when Ms. Robertson
stated that 30,000 acres were destroyed in the Burn
Canyon fire. Something is wrong with this picture!!


