- JOBS AT RISK: WASTE AND MISMANAGEMENT BY THE OBAMA ADMINISTRATION IN REWRITING THE STREAM BUFFER ZONE RULE

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

JOBS AT RISK: WASTE AND MISMANAGEMENT BY THE OBAMA ADMINISTRATION IN
REWRITING THE STREAM BUFFER ZONE RULE

=======================================================================

OVERSIGHT HEARING

before the

SUBCOMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND

MINERAL RESOURCES

of the

COMMITTEE ON NATURAL RESOURCES

U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

Friday, November 4, 2011

__________

Serial No. 112-82

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Natural Resources

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.fdsys.gov
or
Committee address: http://naturalresources.house.gov

U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
71-120                    WASHINGTON : 2012
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800; DC
area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104  Mail: Stop IDCC, Washington, DC
20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON NATURAL RESOURCES

DOC HASTINGS, WA, Chairman
EDWARD J. MARKEY, MA, Ranking Democrat Member

Don Young, AK                        Dale E. Kildee, MI
John J. Duncan, Jr., TN              Peter A. DeFazio, OR
Louie Gohmert, TX                    Eni F.H. Faleomavaega, AS
Rob Bishop, UT                       Frank Pallone, Jr., NJ
Doug Lamborn, CO                     Grace F. Napolitano, CA
Robert J. Wittman, VA                Rush D. Holt, NJ
Paul C. Broun, GA                    Raul M. Grijalva, AZ
John Fleming, LA                     Madeleine Z. Bordallo, GU
Mike Coffman, CO                     Jim Costa, CA
Tom McClintock, CA                   Dan Boren, OK
Glenn Thompson, PA                   Gregorio Kilili Camacho Sablan,
Jeff Denham, CA                          CNMI
Dan Benishek, MI                     Martin Heinrich, NM
David Rivera, FL                     Ben Ray Lujan, NM
Jeff Duncan, SC                      John P. Sarbanes, MD
Scott R. Tipton, CO                  Betty Sutton, OH
Paul A. Gosar, AZ                    Niki Tsongas, MA
Raul R. Labrador, ID                 Pedro R. Pierluisi, PR
Kristi L. Noem, SD                   John Garamendi, CA
Steve Southerland II, FL             Colleen W. Hanabusa, HI
Bill Flores, TX                      Vacancy
Andy Harris, MD
Jeffrey M. Landry, LA
Jon Runyan, NJ
Bill Johnson, OH
Mark Amodei, NV

Todd Young, Chief of Staff
Lisa Pittman, Chief Counsel
Jeffrey Duncan, Democrat Staff Director
David Watkins, Democrat Chief Counsel
------

SUBCOMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND MINERAL RESOURCES

DOUG LAMBORN, CO, Chairman
RUSH D. HOLT, NJ, Ranking Democrat Member

Louie Gohmert, TX                    Peter A. DeFazio, OR
Paul C. Broun, GA                    Madeleine Z. Bordallo, GU
John Fleming, LA                     Jim Costa, CA
Mike Coffman, CO                     Dan Boren, OK
Glenn Thompson, PA                   Gregorio Kilili Camacho Sablan,
Dan Benishek, MI                         CNMI
David Rivera, FL                     Martin Heinrich, NM
Jeff Duncan, SC                      John P. Sarbanes, MD
Paul A. Gosar, AZ                    Betty Sutton, OH
Bill Flores, TX                      Niki Tsongas, MA
Jeffrey M. Landry, LA                Vacancy
Bill Johnson, OH                     Edward J. Markey, MA, ex officio
Doc Hastings, WA, ex officio
------
CONTENTS

----------
Page

Hearing held on Friday, November 4, 2011.........................     1

Statement of Members:
Holt, Hon. Rush D., a Representative in Congress from the
State of New Jersey........................................     4
Prepared statement of....................................     6
Lamborn, Hon. Doug, a Representative in Congress from the
State of Colorado..........................................     1
Prepared statement of....................................     3
Markey, Hon. Edward J., a Representative in Congress from the
State of Massachusetts.....................................     7
Prepared statement of....................................     8

Statement of Witnesses:
Pizarchik, Hon. Joseph G., Director, Office of Surface Mining
Reclamation and Enforcement, U.S. Department of the
Interior...................................................     9
Prepared statement of....................................    11
Response to questions submitted for the record...........    12

OVERSIGHT HEARING TITLED ``JOBS AT RISK: WASTE AND MISMANAGEMENT BY THE
OBAMA ADMINISTRATION IN REWRITING THE STREAM BUFFER ZONE RULE.''

----------

Friday, November 4, 2011

U.S. House of Representatives

Subcommittee on Energy and Mineral Resources

Committee on Natural Resources

Washington, D.C.

----------

The Subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 11:05 a.m., in
Room 1324, Longworth House Office Building, Hon. Doug Lamborn
[Chairman of the Subcommittee] presiding.
Present: Representatives Lamborn, Thompson, Duncan of South
Carolina, Flores, Johnson, Holt, Markey, and Costa.
Mr. Lamborn. The Committee will come to order. The Chairman
notes the presence of a quorum, which under Committee Rule 3(e)
is two Members.
The Subcommittee on Energy and Mineral Resources is meeting
today to hear testimony on an oversight hearing on ``Jobs at
Risk: Waste and Mismanagement by the Obama Administration in
Rewriting the Stream Buffer Zone Rule.''
Under Committee Rule 4(f), opening statements are limited
to the Chairman and Ranking Member of the Subcommittee.
However, I ask unanimous consent to include any other Members'
opening statements in the hearing record if submitted to the
clerk by close of business today.
Hearing no objection, so ordered.
I am about to give my opening statement. Then I expect that
the Ranking Member will give his opening statement. At that
point, there will be a minute or two left in the voting, and we
will have to take a recess to do this next series of votes.
Then, I think we will have a window where we can come back and
hear from you, sir, and have questions and wrap up this
hearing.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. DOUG LAMBORN, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF COLORADO

Mr. Lamborn. Thank you for your flexibility this morning. I
now recognize myself for 5 minutes.
On Monday, September 26, of this year the Subcommittee held
a field oversight hearing titled, ``Jobs at Risk: Community
Impacts of the Obama Administration's Effort to Rewrite the
Stream Buffer Zone Rule,'' in Charleston, West Virginia, where
we heard from State regulators, the coal industry, West
Virginia now-Governor Tomblin, Senator Manchin, and many others
directly about the adverse impacts to communities of the
Administration's proposed rule.
During today's hearing, we will hear from the Director of
the Office of Surface Mining as part of the Committee's ongoing
investigation into the rewrite of the 2008 Stream Buffer Zone
Rule. In addition, we will also discuss the recent Secretarial
Order requiring the merger of the Office of Surface Mining with
the Bureau of Land Management. Parenthetically, let me say that
this is a proposal I am deeply concerned about because it
impacts the ability of the Nation to access vast coal reserves.
Furthermore, there are clear statutory limitations prohibiting
the OSM from leasing or promoting coal, which is the key
responsibility of BLM, but more about that at another time.
Back to the Stream Buffer Zone Rule. Transparency and
openness are laudable goals for any administration and are said
to be goals of this Administration. The President has said,
``My Administration is committed to creating an unprecedented
level of openness in government. We will work together to
ensure the public trust and establish a system of transparency,
public participation, and collaboration.''
After the testimony we heard in September and at the budget
hearing in April, I can't say that I would characterize the
current rulemaking process as an example of transparency and
openness. The one exception might be from the June 18, 2010,
Federal Register notice that said, ``We had already decided to
change the rule following the change of administrations on
January 20, 2009.''
Wyoming Governor Freudenthal made this point in a December
6, 2010, letter to you where he stated, ``The action OSM is
taking is a comprehensive rewrite of regulations under the
Surface Mining Control and Reclamation Act, SMCRA, not a stream
protection rule. The packaging of this major revision to a law
that has served the country well for over 40 years as a `stream
protection rule' is misleading. Some of the changes being
contemplated have broad implications and deserve thoughtful
evaluation....Yet, we do not believe we have been given
meaningful opportunities to comment and participate. Sections
of the EIS with 25, 50, and even 100's of pages are distributed
to the States with only a few days to read, review, and provide
comment back to the agency.''
The Western Governors Association and other cooperating
agencies raised similar concerns with you in separate letters.
In addition, they complained bitterly about the quality,
completeness, and accuracy of the draft portions of the EIS
that they had reviewed. Testimony at the West Virginia hearing
from various States shows that they believe the serious
shortcomings in how their input was solicited rises to the
level of legally objectionable deficiencies of process.
This Committee has heard from industry, whose engineering
analysis of the draft rule that was leaked earlier this year,
showed that not only would mountaintop mines be affected by the
new rule but the Nation's underground longwall and room and
pillar mines as well.
One company has estimated that this would result in a loss
of 40 percent of their eastern longwall minable reserves. At
current market prices, this equates to a $66 billion loss and a
major hit to the U.S. taxpayer, and that is only one company we
are talking about.
More than 130,000 Americans depend on coal production for
their livelihood. Throughout the United States there are places
where the only industry in town is the coal mine. While this
Administration may think it is a preferred alternative to
displace tens of thousands of workers, destroying coal mining
will kill these one-industry towns, push tens of thousands of
American families into poverty, and leave our Nation poorer,
driving up the price of energy, all reversing the original
intent of SMCRA.
SMCRA was designed to promote the development of fuel to
help meet the energy needs of the American people while
ensuring the extraction of coal be done in an environmentally
responsible manner.
Our abundant natural resources have made the U.S. the
richest country in the world, helped us win world wars, and
raise our standard of living far above the rest of the world.
Promoting increased access to those resources will continue to
allow us to become less dependent on foreign sources of energy
and mineral resources, create new private sector jobs, and add
revenue to government coffers, reducing the national debt and
thereby increasing our national and economic security.
Unfortunately, we have an Administration that sees
thousands of job losses as the preferred alternative and rushes
a major rulemaking through by limiting public comment because
their decision has already been made. This is poor policy and
poor management and, in the end, will only make America poorer.
I now yield to the Ranking Member for 5 minutes.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Lamborn follows:]

Statement of The Honorable Doug Lamborn, Chairman,
Subcommittee on Energy and Mineral Resources

On Monday, September 26, of this year the Subcommittee held a field
oversight hearing titled ``Jobs at Risk: Community Impacts of the Obama
Administration's Effort to Rewrite the Stream Buffer Zone Rule'' in
Charleston, West Virginia where we heard from state regulators, the
coal industry, West Virginia Governor Tomblin, Senator Manchin and many
others directly on the adverse impacts to communities of the
Administration's proposed rule.
During today's hearing we will hear from the Director of the Office
of Surface Mining as part of the Committee's ongoing investigation into
the re-write of the 2008 Stream Buffer Zone Rule. In addition we will
also discuss the recent Secretarial Order requiring the merger of the
Office of Surface Mining with the Bureau of Land Management. A proposal
I am deeply concerned about impacting the ability of the Nation to
access our vast coal resources. Furthermore there are clear statutory
limitations prohibiting the OSM from leasing or promoting coal which is
a key responsibility of BLM.
It is frequently said that Transparency and openness, are laudable
goals for any Administration and purportedly they are a goal of this
Administration.
The President has said that ``My Administration is committed to
creating an unprecedented level of openness in Government. We will work
together to ensure the public trust and establish a system of
transparency, public participation, and collaboration. Openness will
strengthen our democracy and promote efficiency and effectiveness in
Government.''
After the testimony we heard in September and at the Budget hearing
in April I can't say that I would characterize the current rulemaking
process as a stellar example of ``transparency or openness.''
The one exception might be from the June 18, 2010 Federal Register
Notice that said: ``we had already decided to change the rule following
the change of Administrations on January 20, 2009.'' And that's about
where the ``transparency and openness'' ends.
Wyoming Governor Freudenthal's made this point in a December 6,
2010 letter to you where he stated: ``The action OSM is undertaking is
a comprehensive rewrite of regulations under the Surface Mining Control
and Reclamation Act (SMCRA) not a stream protection rule. The packaging
of this major revision to a law that has served the country well for
over 40 years as a ``stream protection rule'' is misleading. Some of
the changes being contemplated have broad implications and deserve
thoughtful evaluation.. . ..Yet, we do not believe we have been given
meaningful opportunity to comment and participate. Sections of the EIS
with 25, 50, and even 100's of pages are distributed to the States with
only a few days to read, review, and provide comment back to the
agency. States have been forced to withdraw staff from permitting and
other critical areas in order to have any opportunity to provide
feedback to OSM within the required timeframe.''
The Western Governors Association and other cooperating agencies
raised similar concerns with you in separate letters. In addition, they
complained bitterly about the quality, completeness and accuracy of the
draft portions of the EIS that they had reviewed.
This Committee has heard from industry, whose engineering analysis
of the draft rule that was leaked earlier this year, showed that not
only would mountain top mines be affected by the new rule but the
Nation's underground long wall and room and pillar mines as well.
One company has estimated that this would result in a loss of 40
percent of their eastern longwall minable reserves. At current market
prices this equates to a $66 billion loss and a major hit to the US
taxpayer. And that's only one company we're talking about.
More than 130,000 Americans depend on coal production for their
livelihood. Throughout the United States there are places where the
only industry in town is the coal mine. While this Administration may
think it is a ``preferred alternative'' to displace tens of thousands
of workers, destroying coal mining will kill these one industry towns,
push tens of thousands of American families into poverty, and leave our
nation poorer--all reversing the original intent of SMCRA.
SMCRA was designed to promote the development fuel to help meet the
energy needs of the American people while ensuring the extraction of
the coal in an environmentally responsible manner.
Our abundant natural resources have made the US the richest country
in the world, helped us win world wars, and raised our standard of
living far above the rest of the world. Promoting increased access to
those resources will continue to allow us to become less dependent on
foreign sources of energy and mineral resources, create new private
sector jobs and add revenue to government coffers reducing the National
debt and thereby increasing our National and Economic Security.
Unfortunately, we have an Administration that sees thousands of job
losses as the preferred alternative and rushes a major rulemaking by
limiting public comment because their decision has already been made.
This is poor policy and poor management and in the end will only make
America poorer.
______

STATEMENT OF THE HON. RUSH D. HOLT, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF NEW JERSEY

Mr. Holt. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
During surface mining operations in the Appalachians, known
as mountaintop removal, I would remind everyone that mining
companies remove rock that overlays the coal deposits and some
of the removed rock cannot be returned to the mined-out area
and ends up in the valleys. According to the EPA, since 1992
nearly 2,000 miles of Appalachian streams have been filled with
debris from mountaintop removal activities. The EPA has found
that mountaintop removal mining adversely affects aquatic life
downstream and disrupts the entire ecosystem and has affected 9
out of 10 streams in the region.
Yet the previous Administration, the Bush Administration,
in the final weeks of office issued a rule that loosened
Reagan-era restrictions of this destructive practice, and the
Bush Administration regulation was challenged in court. Now,
the Obama Administration has begun the process of implementing
a Stream Protection Rule, a revised rule, that we hope would
better protect streams from mining waste.
The key point is we must ensure that Appalachian streams
and waters are protected for the sake of the people in the
region.
Now, I look forward to discussing here, and later, the
reorganization that has been proposed by the Administration to
consolidate OSM and BLM. But, on the issue at hand, it seems
that the majority has focused on OSM's relationship with one
contractor, Polu Kai Services, PKS, that was hired a year and a
half ago to prepare an Environmental Impact Statement as part
of revising this rule. It's worth pointing out that the
Administration and the contractor ended their relationship
earlier this year, ended it prematurely.
However, the documents prepared by the contractor are
drafts and should be regarded as such. I think it is important
that we look at the credibility of the work done by the
contractor.
OSM received draft EIS chapters from the contractor over a
period of months from late last year to early this year,
circulated those chapters to States and government agencies for
feedback, and the feedback was nothing short of devastating I
thought. The draft EIS documents were regarded as incomplete
and unreliable.
In reviewing the contractor's work, the Virginia Department
of Mines wrote, ``I certainly hope that the EIS is not going to
be developed based on this inaccurate and incomplete
information contained in the document.''
From the Wyoming Department of Environmental Quality, ``The
analysis is insufficient for a document of this importance.''
The West Virginia Department of Environmental Protection
wrote, ``The document displays very little depth of
understanding of technical issues.''
The Indiana Division of Reclamation wrote, ``The logic
[used] is not readily apparent and appears in many cases to be
based upon erroneous assumptions, incorrect interpretations,
and a lack of understanding of current programmatic practices
from one region to another.''
And it should be apparent to all listeners here that the
comments were not made by States that are opponents of mining.
I hope that the majority doesn't want to use these
incomplete and unreliable draft documents prepared by the
contractor in an attempt to block the Administration's efforts
to fix the inadequate and improper midnight regulations of the
Bush Administration. They need to be fixed. The proposed rule
hasn't been issued yet by OSM, and I hope that the majority
will keep that in mind.
The fundamental issue that we face is that the current rule
does not adequately protect streams and water quality, does
not. And if we ignore this, more Appalachian streams will be
buried, and the health of the region's people--and we are not
just talking about snails or something in the water. This is
widespread throughout the ecosystem, and it will affect--it is
affecting the region's people. OSM should be encouraged to
investigate the best way to address this problem.
Today's hearing I think is not quite on topic. I hope we
can get to this essential issue of how we are going to protect
the waters of Appalachia.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Holt follows:]

Statement of The Honorable Rush D. Holt, Ranking Member,
Subcommittee on Energy and Mineral Resources

During surface mining operations in the Appalachian Mountains, also
known as mountaintop removal mining (MTR), mining companies remove rock
that overlies the coal deposits. Some of the removed rock cannot be
returned to the mined-out area, and is often placed in adjacent
valleys. According to the Environmental Protection Agency, since 1992,
nearly 2,000 miles of Appalachian streams have been filled with debris
from mountaintop removal activities.. Mountaintop removal activities
have deforested an area the size of Delaware. The EPA has found that
mountaintop removal mining adversely affects aquatic life downstream in
nine out of every 10 streams in the region.
Yet the Bush administration, in its final weeks in office, issued a
rule that loosened Reagan-era restrictions on this destructive
practice. The Bush Administration regulation was challenged in court
and now the Obama Administration has begun the process of implementing
the Stream Protection Rule, a revised rule to better protect streams
from mining waste.
We must ensure that Appalachian streams and the water quality for
people in the region are protected. Unfortunately, the Republican
Majority appears intent on preventing the Office of Surface Mining from
making changes to this rule that would protect the public health and
the environment in the Appalachian region.
In particular, the Majority has focused on OSM's relationship with
a contractor, Polu Kai Services, or PKS, that was hired in April 2010
to prepare an Environmental Impact Statement as part of revising this
rule. The Administration and this contractor ended their relationship
in March of this year, roughly one month early. Some have alleged that
OSM ended its contract with PKS early because of estimates prepared by
the contractor in unfinished draft EIS documents showing that jobs
could be lost.
However, the documents prepared by the contractor were just drafts.
And I think it's important that we look at the credibility of the work
done by the contractor.
OSM received draft EIS chapters from the contractor over a period
of several months from late 2010 to early 2011, and immediately
circulated those chapters--without making any changes and without
attempting to verify data--to states, other government agencies, and
internal experts for feedback.
That feedback from states, which has been obtained by the
Democratic Minority staff, makes one thing crystal clear: The draft EIS
documents were incomplete and unreliable.
In reviewing the contractor's work, the Virginia Department of
Mines wrote ``I certainly hope that the EIS is not going to be
developed based on this inaccurate and incomplete information contained
in this document.''
Comments from Wyoming Department of Environmental Quality stated
``The analysis is insufficient for a document of this importance.''
The West Virginia Department of Environmental Protection wrote,
``the document displays very little depth of understanding of technical
issues.''
The Indiana Division of Reclamation wrote ``The logic [used] is not
readily apparent and appears in many cases to be based upon erroneous
assumptions, incorrect interpretations, and a lack of understanding of
current programmatic practices one region to another.''
These comments were not made by states that are opponents of
mining.
However, the Majority is using these incomplete, and unreliable
draft documents prepared by this contractor in an attempt to block the
administration's efforts to fix this Bush Administration midnight
regulation. In fact, a proposed rule hasn't even been issued yet by the
OSM.
The fundamental issue we face is that the current rule does not
adequately protect streams and water quality. If we ignore this, as the
Majority would have us do, more Appalachian streams will be buried and
the health of the region's people will be at risk. OSM should be
encouraged to investigate the best way to address this problem. Today's
hearing, unfortunately, is a distraction from that effort.
______

Mr. Lamborn. All right. Thank you. We will be in recess. I
note that there is only one vote in this series is so we should
be able to just walk over there, vote, and walk right back. So,
hopefully, in 10 or 12 minutes we can reconvene and then hear
from Mr. Pizarchik and then have our questions and be done. The
Committee will be in recess.
[Recess.]
Mr. Lamborn. The Subcommittee will come back to order, and
I can verify that everyone scurried both there and back and
tried to make this as quick as possible.
We now have the Ranking Member with us. So, as a courtesy,
I will recognize him for 5 minutes for an opening statement.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. EDWARD J. MARKEY, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF MASSACHUSETTS

Mr. Markey. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, very much.
Mountaintop removal mining is one of the most
environmentally destructive practices there is. Mountains are
turned into barren plateaus. Streams in the bottoms of valleys
are filled with debris. Heavy metals destroy water quality for
nearby residents and ruin ecosystems.
Days before leaving office, the Bush Administration issued
a midnight regulation revising a Reagan-era regulation called
the Stream Buffer Zone. This midnight rule made it easier for
mining companies to engage in this destructive practice.
The Obama Administration is now in the process of revising
this rule so that we can better protect streams and the people
who live next to them from the worst effects of mountaintop
removal mining. And the Republican majority has derided this
effort to undo a Bush Administration parting gift to the mining
industry, saying that it will lead to the loss of thousands of
jobs.
However, the Republican majority is making this claim based
on a draft environmental analysis done by an outside
contractor, Polu Kai Services. Unfortunately, as demonstrated
by the comments that Mr. Holt cited, there was near universal
agreement from agency experts and States where coal mining is
prevalent that the work done by PKS was unreliable. The review
done by this contractor was characterized by the State experts
as inaccurate, incomplete, erroneous, incorrect, and
insufficient. PKS even plagiarized work from other analyses
that weren't even focused on coal mining and included it in its
review.
In fact, PKS did not even have any previous experience
conducting this sort of review. While the contractor had done
previous work in construction, environmental remediation, and
hazardous waste management, this was the first time PKS was
responsible for preparing an Environmental Impact Statement.
But the Republican majority has taken the jobs numbers
contained in this shoddy draft review done by PKS and held them
up as inviolate. They are essentially taking an analysis little
better than some figures scribbled on the back of an envelope
about mountaintop mining and treating them as though they were
carved in stone tablets brought down from a mountain. In these
mining activities, we know that tons of debris come down from
the mountaintop, but these numbers certainly did not.
Once again, they are trotting out their well-worn arguments
that protecting public health and the environment will harm our
economy. The American people know better. They know that we do
not have to sacrifice our health and our environment in order
to grow the economy. We can do both. When it comes to rewriting
the Stream Buffer Zone Rule, it seems that what we really need
is a buffer zone from the Republican stream of opposition to
any efforts to limit pollution or end giveaways to special
interests.
I look forward to hearing today from the Interior's
Department Office of Surface Mining on how rewriting this Bush
Administration regulation can better protect not only the
environment but also the economy of the Appalachian region.
In addition, I look forward to hearing more about the
proposed reorganization into the Interior Department that
Secretary Salazar announced last week. We need to be sure that
any efforts to combine the Office of Surface Mining with the
Bureau of Land Management ensure that we can still effectively
regulate coal mining, ensure proper reclamation of mine sites,
and provide taxpayers and States with a proper return on these
minerals.
I look forward to the testimony, and Mr. Chairman, I yield
back.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Markey follows:]

Statement of The Honorable Edward J. Markey, Ranking Member,
Committee on Natural Resources

Mountaintop removal mining is one of the most environmentally
destructive practices there is. Mountains are turned into barren
plateaus. Streams in the bottoms of valleys are filled with debris.
Heavy metals destroy water quality for nearby residents and ruin
ecosystems.
Days before leaving office, the Bush Administration issued a
midnight regulation revising a Reagan-era regulation called the Stream
Buffer Zone Rule. This midnight rule made it easier for mining
companies to engage in this destructive practice.
The Obama Administration is now in the process of revising this
rule so that we can better protect streams, and the people who live
next to them, from the worst effects of mountaintop removal mining. And
the Republican Majority has derided this effort to undo a Bush
Administration parting gift to the mining industry, saying that it will
lead to the loss of thousands of jobs.
However, the Republican Majority is making this claim based on a
draft environmental analysis done by an outside contractor, Polu Kai
Services. Unfortunately, as demonstrated by the comments that Mr. Holt
cited, there was near universal agreement from agency experts in states
where coal mining is prevalent that the work done by PKS was
unreliable. The review done by this contractor was characterized by
these state experts as ``inaccurate,'' ``incomplete,'' ``erroneous,''
``incorrect,'' and ``insufficient.'' PKS even plagiarized work from
other analyses that weren't even focused on coal mining and included it
in its review.
In fact, PKS did not even have any previous experience conducting
this sort of review. While the contractor had done previous work in
construction, environmental remediation, and hazardous waste
management, this was the first time PKS was responsible for preparing
an Environmental Impact Statement.
But the Republican Majority has taken the jobs numbers contained in
this shoddy draft review done by PKS and held them up as inviolate.
They are essentially taking an analysis little better than some figures
scribbled on the back of an envelope about mountaintop mining and
treating them as though they were carved in stone tablets brought down
from a mountain. In these mining activities, we know that tons of
debris come down from the mountaintop, but these numbers certainly
didn't.
Once again they are trotting out their well-worn arguments that
protecting public health and the environment will harm our economy. The
American people know better--they know that we do not have to sacrifice
our health and our environment in order to grow the economy. We can do
both. When it comes to rewriting the Stream Buffer Zone Rule, it seems
that what we really need is a buffer zone from the Republican stream of
opposition to any efforts to limit pollution or end giveaways to
special interests.
I look forward to hearing today from the Interior Department Office
of Surface Mining on how rewriting this Bush Administration regulation
can better protect not only the environment but also the economy of the
Appalachian region.
In addition, I look forward to hearing more about the proposed
reorganization of the Interior Department that Secretary Salazar
announced last week. We need to be sure that any efforts to combine the
Office of Surface Mining with the Bureau of Land Management ensure that
we can still effectively regulate coal mining, ensure proper
reclamation of mine sites and provide taxpayers and states with a
proper return on these minerals.
I look forward to the testimony and yield back.
______

Mr. Lamborn. All right. Thank you.
Before I invite the witness forward, I ask unanimous
consent that the gentleman from West Virginia, Mr. McKinley,
and the gentleman from Nevada, Mr. Amodei, who is a member of
the Committee but not on this Subcommittee be allowed to join
the members of the Subcommittee on the dais if and when they
arrive and to participate in the hearing. Without objection, so
ordered.
I now invite forward The Honorable Joseph Pizarchik,
Director, Office of Surface Mining Reclamation and Enforcement.
Your written testimony will appear in full in the hearing
record. So I ask that you keep your oral statement to 5 minutes
as outlined in our invitation letter to you. Our microphones
are not automatic, but I know you know how to work them so I
won't go through that.
Director Pizarchik, you may begin.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. JOSEPH PIZARCHIK, DIRECTOR, OFFICE OF
SURFACE MINING RECLAMATION AND ENFORCEMENT, U.S. DEPARTMENT OF
THE INTERIOR

Mr. Pizarchik. Thank you, Mr. Chairman and members of the
Committee, for the opportunity to testify on behalf of Office
of Surface Mining Reclamation and Enforcement regarding the
Bureau's proposed rulemaking to better protect streams from the
adverse effects of coal mining. OSM looks forward to working
with you on matters relating to its mission under the Surface
Mining Control and Reclamation Act.
OSM derives its regulatory authority and responsibilities
from SMCRA, an Act that Congress passed more than 34 years ago.
Congress specified several purposes for OSM in the law. One
purpose is to assure that American coal mines operate in a
manner that protects people and the environment and that the
land is restored to productive use. Another is to assure that
coal supply essential to the Nation's energy requirements is
provided, and strike a balance between protection of the
environment and agricultural productivity and the Nation's need
for coal. A third purpose is to provide an abandoned mine land
program to address hazards to people and the environment that
were created by more than 200 years of unregulated coal mining.
One thing that SMCRA is not, it is not a law to promote
development of coal. It is replete with numerous references
that its purpose is to protect the people and the environment
from the adverse effects of coal mining.
We fully appreciate how coal production is important to the
Nation's economy and energy supply. Coal mining provides good
paying jobs. Coal also provides about half of this country's
electricity and will remain an important part of our energy mix
for the foreseeable future.
We also recognize the need to not only carry out our
mandate but to do so using the best available science and
technology. We are considering revising the 2008 Stream Buffer
Zone Rule because there are areas that should be improved.
Scientific advances not fully explored and considered in the
2008 rule will allow us to better understand coal mining's
impact on water and aquatic ecosystems. With that information,
together with our on-the-ground experience gathered over the
past decades, we are exploring ways to improve mining practices
to prevent environmental damages before it happens. We also
know that existing technological advances enable the industry
to do a better job of reclaiming the land and restoring the
natural resources for the benefit of the communities that
remain there long after the coal is gone.
We are also considering ways to improve key regulatory
provisions. SMCRA requires that the surface mining and
reclamation operations be conducted to minimize disturbances to
fish and wildlife and related environmental values to the
extent possible using the best technology currently available.
We are considering refinements that will provide solid
benchmarks for companies to meet that will be based on the
latest accepted science. Clear and uniform standards provide
greater predictability and certainty to the industry and can
better protect affected communities.
SMCRA prohibits material damage to hydrologic balance
outside the permit area. That phrase has never been defined in
OSM's regulations. We are considering ways to provide a clear
definition that can be applied uniformly across the country. It
is important to define the term in order to fully implement the
law, to protect drinking water, to protect water quality and
resources for recreation, wildlife, and scenic values.
Protection of our waterways is a high priority as we continue
to develop our coal resources.
OSM has never specified what is required for coal operators
to return mine sites to approximate original contour. The
Surface Mine Act requirements that operators reclaim the mined
areas to closely resemble their original pre-mining shape and
size. Decades of research and on-the-ground practice have
demonstrated that careful restoration of post-mining areas will
limit and, in many cases, eliminate the harmful levels of
pollution from mines that can impact local communities and
degrade downstream aquatic resources. Uniform regulations that
result in carefully reclaimed areas will create opportunities
for continued productive use of the land and water after coal
mining ends.
We also published an Advanced Notice of Proposed Rulemaking
last November. It described OSM's intent to consider whether
the SMCRA regulation should be updated to require mine
operators to collect more complete stream data before, during,
and after mining. These data would provide a better baseline to
set the standard for the successful restoration of streams
after mining is completed. Data collected during mining would
allow the operator to make adjustments as mining continues so
that corrective measures can be implemented before material
damage occurs.
The Environmental Impact Statement that OSM is developing
in support of the rule will examine a range of alternatives. In
addition to analyzing the significant environmental issues
associated with the proposed Stream Protection Rule and its
alternatives, the EIS will evaluate the economic impacts of
each regulatory decision. OSM plans to produce and publish a
proposed rule and associated draft EIS next year. There will be
ample opportunity for additional public input on both the rule
and the draft EIS.
The National Environmental Policy Act and other laws are
laws that we will follow as we prepare these documents. They
provide, as we move forward, that we have received extensive
input to date. We have received over 50,000 comments from the
public on the draft EIS, on the scoping documents, and on the
Advanced Notice of Proposed Rulemaking.
Thank you for the opportunity to appear here today to
testify on this development. I look forward to working with you
as we work together to better protect America's streams from
the adverse impact of coal mining.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Pizarchik follows:]

Statement of Joseph G. Pizarchik, Director, Office of Surface Mining
Reclamation and Enforcement, U.S. Department of the Interior

Mister Chairman and Members of the Committee, thank you for the
invitation to testify on behalf of the Office of Surface Mining
Reclamation and Enforcement (OSM) regarding the bureau's proposed
rulemaking to better protect streams from the adverse effects of coal
mining. OSM looks forward to working with you on matters relating to
its mission under the Surface Mining Control and Reclamation Act
(SMCRA).
OSM derives its regulatory authority and responsibilities from
SMCRA, an act that Congress passed more than 34 years ago. Congress
specified several purposes for SMCRA. One purpose is to assure that
American coal mines operate in a manner that protects people and the
environment, and that the land is restored to beneficial use following
mining. Another purpose is to assure that the coal supply essential to
the Nation's energy requirements is provided, and strike a balance
between protection of the environment and agricultural productivity and
the Nation's need for coal. And a third purpose is to provide an
Abandoned Mine Land program to address hazards to people and the
environment that were created by more than two hundred years of
unregulated coal mining that occurred before SMCRA's enactment.
We fully appreciate how important coal production is to the
Nation's economy and energy supply. Coal mining provides well-paying
jobs. Coal also produces about half of the Nation's electricity and
will remain an important part of our energy mix for decades to come.
We also recognize the need to not only carry out our mandate, but
to do so using the best available science and technology. We are
considering revising the 2008 Stream Buffer Zone Rule because there are
areas that should be improved. Scientific advances not fully explored
and considered in the 2008 rule will allow us to better understand coal
mining's impact on water and aquatic ecosystems. With that information,
together with our on-the-ground experience, we are exploring ways to
improve mining practices to prevent environmental damage before it
occurs. We also know that existing technological advances enable
industry to do a better job of reclaiming the land and restoring
natural resources for the benefit of the communities that will remain
long after the coal is gone. These goals are fully consistent with
SMCRA's mandate and OSM's mission.
As we proceed with development of the Stream Protection Rule, we
are considering ways to improve key regulatory provisions. SMCRA
requires that surface coal mining and reclamation operations be
conducted to minimize disturbances to fish, wildlife, and related
environmental values ``to the extent possible using the best technology
currently available.'' We are considering revisions that will provide
solid benchmarks for companies to meet, and that will be based on the
latest accepted scientific methods. Clear and uniform standards provide
greater predictability and certainty to the mining industry, and can
better protect affected communities.
As OSM described in its Advance Notice of Proposed Rulemaking
(ANPR) on the Stream Protection Rule, SMCRA prohibits ``material damage
to the hydrologic balance outside the permit area.'' This phrase has
never been defined in OSM's regulations. We are considering ways to
provide a clear definition that can be applied uniformly across the
country. It is important to define the term in order to fully implement
the law to protect water resources beyond the area covered in the
mining permit; to protect drinking water; and to protect water quality
and resources for recreation, wildlife, and scenic values. Protection
of our waterways is a high priority as we continue to develop our
important coal resources.
As the ANPR also noted, OSM has never clearly specified what is
required for coal operators to return mine sites to their approximate
original contour. SMCRA requires that mine operators reclaim mined
areas to closely resemble their original pre-mining shape and size.
Decades of research and on-the-ground practice have demonstrated that
careful restoration of post-mining areas will limit, and, in many
cases, eliminate, harmful levels of pollution from mines that often
impact local communities and degrade downstream aquatic resources.
Uniform regulations that result in carefully reclaimed areas will
create opportunities for continued productive use of the land and water
after coal mining ends.
The ANPR also described OSM's intent to consider whether SMCRA
regulations should be updated to require mine operators to take more
extensive or more specific measurements of water quality and biology in
streams before, during, and after mining. These data would better
provide a baseline to set the standard for successful restoration of
streams after mining is completed. Data collected during mining would
allow the operator to make adjustments as mining continues, so that
corrective measures can be implemented before long-term damage occurs.
As OSM proceeds with development of its proposed Stream Protection
Rule, it will consider the extensive public and agency comments it has
received. It will also consider the benefits, as well as the costs, of
the agency's regulatory alternatives.
The Environmental Impact Statement (EIS) that OSM is developing in
support of the rule will examine a range of alternatives. In addition
to analyzing the significant environmental issues associated with the
proposed Stream Protection Rule and its alternatives, the EIS will
evaluate the economic impacts of each alternative, and will provide OSM
with critical information needed to inform its regulatory decision-
making and the public. OSM plans to publish a Proposed Rule and
associated Draft EIS next year. OSM will take the time necessary to
make informed regulatory decisions supported by the Draft EIS analysis,
with ample opportunity for additional public input on both the rule and
its Draft EIS.
Consistent with the National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA), the
Administrative Procedure Act, and other applicable laws, we will ask
interested stakeholders--whether from Congress, industry, environmental
organizations, or members of the public--to read and comment on the
Proposed Rule and Draft EIS once those documents have been published.
We have received extensive input from the public, states, and other
Federal agencies on issues that we ought to consider in drafting a
proposed rule, including more than 32,000 comments in 2009 on the ANPR,
and more than 20,000 after we held public scoping meetings last year.
We look forward to receiving additional public review and comment on
the proposed rule and Draft EIS once they are published.
Thank you for the opportunity to appear before the Committee today
to testify on the development of OSM's Stream Protection Rule. Our
efforts will result in regulatory improvements that will more fully
carry out the bureau's mission, make use of the best available science
and technology, better protect streams nationwide, and provide greater
clarity and certainty to the mining industry and the affected
communities. I look forward to working with you to ensure that we
protect the Nation's land and water while meeting its energy needs.
______

Response to questions submitted for the record by the Office of Surface
Mining Reclamation and Enforcement, U.S. Department of the Interior

Questions for the Record from Representative Johnson of Ohio
1.  In a settlement agreement dated March 19, 2010 the Administration
settled two lawsuits, one with a group of plaintiffs known as
``The Coal River Plaintiffs'' and another with the National
Parks Conservation Association, regarding the 2008 Stream
Buffer Zone Rule. In the agreement, the Administration agreed
to pay the Plaintiffs in both suits the cost of litigation up
until March 19, 2010 under the Endangered Species Act, the
Surface Mining Control and Reclamation Act and the Equal Access
to Justice Act. How much were the Plaintiffs in both suits paid
as a result of this settlement agreement?
Response: On March 19, 2010, the United States and the National
Parks Conservation Association (NPCA) entered into an agreement to
settle a complaint filed by NPCA under the case captioned NPCA v.
Kempthorne, et al., Case No. 1:09-cv-00115 (D.D.C.), which sought
judicial review of the Office of Surface Mining Reclamation and
Enforcement's (OSM's) 2008 Stream Buffer Zone Rule. Under a subsequent
settlement agreement regarding costs of litigation, the United States
paid $48,142.40 as full settlement of all potential claims by NPCA for
its costs of litigation.
On March 19, 2010, the United States and Plaintiffs Coal River
Mountain Watch, Kentucky Waterways Alliance, Ohio Valley Environmental
Coalition, Save Our Cumberland Mountains, Sierra Club, Southern
Appalachian Mountain Stewards, Waterkeeper Alliance, and West Virginia
Highlands Conservancy (collectively ``Coal River Plaintiffs''), entered
into an agreement to settle a complaint filed by the Coal River
Plaintiffs under the case captioned Coal River Mountain Watch, et al.
v. Kempthorne, et al., Case No. 1:08-cv-02212 (D.D.C.), which sought
judicial review of OSM's 2008 Stream Buffer Zone Rule. Under a
subsequent settlement agreement regarding costs of litigation, the
Department of the Interior paid $12,840 as full settlement of all
potential claims by the Coal River Plaintiffs for their costs of
litigation.
2.  With whom and when did you, political appointees at the Department
of the Interior, or OSM staff have contact with employees of
the Council on Environmental Quality or any other employee in
the Executive Office of the President on the Stream Buffer
Zone? Furthermore, please provide any emails or phone logs you,
political appointees at the Department of the Interior, or OSM
senior staff have with any Executive Office of the President
employee on the re-write of the 2008 Stream Buffer Zone rule.
Response: In accordance with Executive Order 12866, the National
Environmental Policy Act (NEPA) and other applicable Federal law,
agencies coordinate with the Office of Management and Budget (OMB) and
the Council on Environmental Quality (CEQ) with respect to new
regulations and the analysis of such regulations under NEPA. Early
coordination with these agencies promotes consistent application of
applicable law, maximizes communication among agencies with similar
policies or activities, and promotes a more effective regulatory
program. OSM and the Department work with OMB and CEQ as appropriate on
regulatory matters, including ongoing development of OSM's Stream
Protection Rule. As the Department has stated previously to the
Committee in both written and staff level communications, requests for
information related to an ongoing rulemaking process implicate
important and substantial Executive Branch confidentiality interests.
Question for the Record from Representative Flores
1.  Were any of the OSM Employees involved in selecting Polu Kai
Services, LLC also involved in selecting the 2nd contractor?
Please provide to the Committee the names and roles of the OSM
team in both selection processes.
Response: On June 1, 2010, OSM awarded a contract to Polu Kai
Services, LLC. In awarding this contract, OSM followed the competition
requirements under section 8(a) of the Small Business Act, 15 U.S.C.
637(a), and appropriate provisions of the Federal Acquisition
Regulations (FAR). OSM also followed applicable procedures for
obtaining approval for the procurement action, and in rating and
selecting the contractor. The Source Selection Evaluation Board (SSEB)
for this selection consisted of OSM career staff, including subject
matter experts and contracting personnel.
On June 17, 2011, OSM awarded a contract to Industrial Economics,
Inc. In awarding this contract, OSM followed the applicable FAR
procedures, which allow the agency to limit competition to eligible
Federal Supply Schedule (FSS) contractors, in accordance with all
applicable Department of the Interior and FAR requirements. The SSEB
for this selection consisted of OSM career staff, including subject
matter experts and contracting personnel.
Some, but not all of the staff who were members of the SSEB that
rated the Polu Kai Services, LLC, contract, were also members of the
SSEB that rated the contract for Industrial Economics, Inc.
______

Mr. Lamborn. All right. Thank you. We will now begin
questioning. Members are limited to 5 minutes for their
questions but we may have additional rounds. I now recognize
myself for 5 minutes for questions.
Based on the evidence in the record, it appears that OSM
has predetermined the outcome for this rulemaking. For
instance, before initiating any scoping hearings under NEPA,
you wrote the entire 400-page rule. In addition, your own
Federal Register notice on June 18, 2010, said that, ``we had
already decided to change the rule following the change of
administrations on January 20, 2009.''
Is OSM giving fair consideration to a range of reasonable
alternatives to this regulation, including the no action
alternative?
Mr. Pizarchik. Yes, we are giving fair consideration to all
the alternatives, including the no action alternative. In fact,
in order to comply with NEPA, it is important for us to have
developed some alternatives and a potential proposal for
consideration so that information can be assessed in order that
we can make an informed decision as to what should be in the
proposed rulemaking, and that is what we are undertaking.
Mr. Lamborn. In the scoping documents and the Federal
Register notice announcing the preparation of the EIS, you
point to the court settlement agreement reached with
environmentalists and the Interagency Memorandum of
Understanding as reasons for the stream protection rulemaking.
Nowhere do you discuss the specific on-the-ground environmental
problems you are trying to address. Nor have we found any
indication in OSM's State program oversight reports any
suggestion of environmental concerns necessitating this rule
change.
So what is the basis for proceeding with such a
comprehensive rewrite of the agency's regulations?
Mr. Pizarchik. There are a number of bases, Mr. Chairman.
If you look at what is actually happening in the field and look
at the experiences that we have, there were things that were
not considered when the 2008 rule was put together. For
instance, a few years ago just up in Dunkard Creek on the
Pennsylvania-West Virginia border, there was a huge fish kill
which was due to high levels of total dissolved solids that was
discharged from an underground mine with their treated water.
That has never been taken into consideration. The emerging
science out there shows that selenium that is released from
some mines in the area can have a bioaccumulation and poison
the aquatic community. This could have a poisoning effect on
the people who eat the fish in those streams. Those are the
types of things that we need to take care of.
Also, in regard to the 2008 rule, there are provisions in
it that are inconsistent with the statute. For example, it
provides for the codification in our regulations of the process
that is referred to as valley fills. That is where the excess
spoil that is blown from the top of the mountain is shoved over
the side of the mountain and it wind dumps or end dumps,
allowing the rocks to cascade into the valley below to fill the
streams on the premise that the more durable rocks will roll
farther than the dirt and the undurable rocks, to form the
underdrain, the process that the industry calls shoot and
shove.

Well, the statute says that that material is to be
transported down and placed in a controlled fashion. There are
evidences of failures where those types of uncontrolled dumping
of the material over the side of the mountain has resulted in
devastation downstream. We also have emerging science that
shows that high levels of total dissolved solids is having an
adverse effect.--
Mr. Lamborn. OK. I see how after the fact you have come up
with things, but how can the States and how can the public
provide meaningful comment on the proposed rule without knowing
the specific environmental problems that the proposed change is
attempting to address when they are nowhere addressed in all of
the scoping documents and the Federal Register notice?
Mr. Pizarchik. The public will get the opportunity to
review that and to provide comment on those reasons when the
proposed rule is provided and published next year. It
specifically provides for that information. We will have it in
the preamble to the rulemaking. It will be discussed in the
draft Environmental Impact Statement, and in accordance with
the Federal requirements, the legal requirements, the public
will have an opportunity to review and comment on those issues.
Mr. Lamborn. OK. I may have a few more questions later. At
this point, I will recognize the Ranking Member for 5 minutes.
Mr. Holt. Thanks, Mr. Chairman. I would like to follow on
the Chairman's line of questioning for a moment.
So it has been several years since the adoption of the 2008
rule. The Chairman seemed to be asking--and I think we would
all like to know--what is it about the rule that you would list
that isn't working? I think it is probably a pretty long list,
but when you talk about the preamble and the scoping, is that
where you will lay out all the reasons that there is a need for
a new rule or have you already somewhere laid that out?
Mr. Pizarchik. The appropriate place under the current
practices and the requirement is that we will lay out those
reasons in the preamble of the proposed rule. They will also be
laid out in detail in the draft Environmental Impact Statement
that we will publish next year for public comment. There are a
number of things in the 2008 rule that need to be fixed. There
are also things elsewhere in our regulations that have not
resulted in the full implementation of the law as Congress
envisioned 34 years ago----
Mr. Holt. Would you care to take 1 minute and just list
some of the categories where the rule is failing or, well,
needs replacement or reform?
Mr. Pizarchik. Yes. The one I mentioned earlier was about
the valley fills or end dumps or shoot and shove. We need to
take care of that. There are other things that we have learned,
for instance, on reforestation. We know that we get less
pollution off a reclaimed mine site if it has been properly
reforested. The statute has always required the sites be re-
vegetated with native vegetation. We have between 750,000 to 1
million acres in Appalachia alone that have not been
reforested. We have provisions where the law has always
required the prevention of material damage, yet we have never
defined material damage. If you don't define material damage,
how do you know what it is?
Mr. Holt. That is material damage to areas outside the
immediate area?
Mr. Pizarchik. Yes, right, and the law has always required
the collection of baseline data. We have never collected or
required the collection of baseline data on the aquatic
community living in the stream. Seems pretty simple to a small,
old farm boy like me, that if you know what is in the stream
beforehand and they are living in the stream after mining, that
you were successful in your mining and reclamation.
There are also geomorphic land reclamation techniques that
not only can restore the land to its productive use, but can
restore its form and function and do so in a way that will
actually save operators money. Those things need to be updated.
I could go on but I see I am running a little out of time
here.
Mr. Holt. Thank you. Those are some significant categories,
and I thank you for that.
Let me turn in the short time remaining to get a comment or
two about the proposed reorganization. Perhaps you will be
restrained in what you can say since it is a preliminary
suggestion or well--combining OSM and BLM raises in my mind
some questions. BLM, for example, has no experience in
regulating mine cleanup activities on private lands. BLM hasn't
been working with State agencies in the way that OSM has.
How would the proposed consolidation ensure that mines on
State and private lands continue to be cleaned up effectively?
Would this--it concerns me a little bit that we might lose some
experience, expertise, as well as authority in those cleanups.
Mr. Pizarchik. Thank you. We are in the very early stages
of this process. It was just announced last week. We are
beginning the consultation with the employees, with the other
stakeholders to provide input on that. There are some
efficiencies that could be gained. OSM has experience in
reclaiming the abandoned mine lands, both hard rock and coal,
and out in the West where we have worked with the western
operators, and that expertise, if it is integrated between OSM
and BLM, could have the benefit of actually improving more
reclamation in the West.
Mr. Holt. All right. For the moment I think that is it.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Lamborn. All right. Thank you. I now recognize the
gentleman from Pennsylvania.
Mr. Thompson. Thank you, Chairman. Thank you, Director, for
being here and thanks for your previous service in Pennsylvania
as well.
I know one of the accomplishments that you did was you
helped to coauthor the Pennsylvania Environmental Good
Samaritan Act. I worked with a lot of partners, went out and
saw some of those projects where different groups are able to
get involved, and so I appreciate that.
Two questions. OSM has admitted spending over $4.4 million
on the Environmental Impact Study for this rule, plus an
additional $925,000 to alter the economic analysis which
predicted thousands of job losses. By contrast, in 2005,
several agencies managed to produce a 5,000-page programmatic
EIS, including 30 Federally funded studies on all aspects of
surface mining, for about the same amount.
My question is, couldn't the agency avoid the need for this
merger or reorganization, or whatever word is proper to
describe it, by frankly managing its existing resources more
efficiently?
Mr. Pizarchik. I would like to be able to be in a position
to have done that, but the fact is, over the last decade, our
staffing levels have dropped by about 16, 17 percent due to
insufficient support. If you go back about 20 years, our agency
has been reduced in staff by almost 50 percent. We are doing
more with less. We have been doing that for decades, and in
order to keep providing the technical support and training to
the States that we are statutorily obligated to do, to do the
oversight, and to do our rulemakings, we simply did not have
the resources in-house to do all of that work internally, so we
had to turn to the private sector for assistance.
Mr. Thompson. That kind of actually does kind of touch with
my second question, which really has to do with primacy between
the States and the Federal Government, and obviously in terms
of taking primacy away from the States, and really
clarification I was looking from you. In 2007 when you worked
for the State of Pennsylvania you signed a letter to OSM
objecting to the scope of the Stream Buffer Zone Rule saying,
and this is your quote, ``OSM's proposed major overhaul of its
regulations which, if adopted, would force States to make major
changes to their primacy program regulations and statutes to
fix a problem that does not exist in those States without
mountaintop mining.''
So I guess the question is, why are you now advocating a
comprehensive nationwide rulemaking which in your own words is
much broader than the 2008 rule that contradicts your earlier
position? What has changed?
Mr. Pizarchik. I don't agree that it contradicts my earlier
position. What has changed is that what we are looking at is
updating and modernizing our regulations to take advantage of
the science that we now know and that has developed, to take
advantage of the experience we have to more fully implement the
law. And it is just as important to protect streams in
Appalachia as it is in the West or the Midwest.
And SMCRA provides for and requires us to have a uniform
law to provide a level playing field for mine operators in all
States in order not to give a competitive advantage to one area
or one region of the country over the other. So we are looking
and carrying out our responsibilities to try to maintain that
level playing field across the country and to modernize our
regulations to more fully implement the law.
Mr. Thompson. Thank you, Mr. Director. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman. I yield back.
Mr. Lamborn. OK. I now recognize the gentleman from Texas.
Mr. Flores. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I am going to start by
one comment related to the merger of BLM and OSM. First of all,
I don't think there is any statutory authority. Second, it
appears like the Department of the Interior is a little bit
schizophrenic because on the offshore drilling side they have
broken apart two agencies that were formerly combined. The
regulatory function and the leasing function are split, and now
with respect to coal mining, they want to merge those two
functions. I wish they could figure out which direction they
want to go.
My other question is, you talked about emerging science as
justification for the new rule or modified rule. Can you
identify for me the science that would support the rule change
for coal mines that are located outside of Appalachia, in
particular Wyoming, Montana, Colorado, and Utah.
Mr. Pizarchik. For example, in New Mexico, which is out in
that area, it is not one of the ones you listed, they have been
utilizing geomorphic land reclamation principles, reclaiming
the land to look like and function like it did prior to mining.
As a result of that, they were able to cut down on the amount
of pollution that was going into the streams. It was also
successfully used in Texas. It is not being successfully used
everywhere. So what we are trying to do is to modernize the
regs, using that experience and the science that we have
learned in those particular areas where our State partners have
learned that and demonstrated these things can be successful in
better protecting streams and apply that across the country as
is required to do with a level playing field.
Mr. Flores. I would like to yield the balance of my time to
Mr. Johnson.
Mr. Johnson. Well, thank you. I appreciate my colleague
yielding. You know, I was kind of dumbfounded by--first of all,
Mr. Director, you might find it interesting, I am an old farm
boy myself. Only I am a two-wheel wagon mule farmer. So you
know, nobody is more concerned that we protect what God has
given us than I am, but I am very concerned that we do it in a
responsible way that incentivizes America's exceptionalism, not
putting strangleholds.
One of your comments when asked--``When will the American
people see and get an opportunity to see the analysis?''--your
response was, ``Well, they will get a chance to see it when we
publish next year.'' That is awfully reminiscent. I mean, did
the Administration and you guys hire somebody to develop that
tag line? I mean, that is a rhetorical question, but that
sounds awfully reminiscent of another major piece of
legislation that has been destructive to America's economy and
future generations when our former Speaker said, hey, let's
pass this bill so we can see what is in it. That seems the way
that your Administration, your Department wants to work. You
want to do these things in the blind, keep America in the dark,
and expect nobody to notice until it is too late. But I am glad
to say that we are not going to wait and it is not going to be
too late.
So let me get into my questions. As you might be aware, as
the Chairman mentioned, we had a field hearing in West Virginia
earlier, and I had the opportunity to question three State
regulators about what their experiences have been with OSM in
this rulemaking process as compared to the rulemaking process
that resulted in 2008. The State regulators have all expressed
that they had the same experiences this time around and that it
was not pretty.
I must say that I am highly disappointed with OSM and the
way that they have treated the States in this rulemaking
process. Specifically, Director Clarke of the West Virginia
Division of Mining and Reclamation, said that, and I am quoting
him, he thinks OSM seems to want to complete this rulemaking
process at a world record pace, which is unrealistic
considering the other one took 5 years to complete.
Director Pizarchik, what is your response to his claim--
Director Clarke's claim that OSM has set an unrealistic time
frame to complete this rulemaking process?
Mr. Pizarchik. The process that we are using, that we
engaged on, has had more public involvement, more public input
than was used on the 2008 rule. We have already received more
public comments than were received on that entire rulemaking.
We haven't even gotten to the proposed stage yet.
As far as moving forward with this, yes, we were trying to
get this rule done in a timely fashion, and the States,
notwithstanding their protestations to the contrary, had
provided almost 200 pages of comments, hundreds and hundreds of
comments, many of which were cited earlier.
Mr. Johnson. Mr. Chairman, my time has expired here. I will
come back to these questions on another round, but you know,
talking about hundreds of pages, the prior rulemaking process
had tens of thousands of pages of analysis and comments. So I
will comment on it in a minute. Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Lamborn. Thank you. The gentleman from South Carolina.
Mr. Duncan. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Just real quickly, we
have had numerous hearings where folks from the Department of
the Interior have been here and we have seen this constant
merger and changes within the Department which seems to me they
are consolidating power. That is just how I am going to leave
it. I am concerned about the specific efficiencies that they
are trying to attempt and this merger is trying to attempt. I
am also concerned about employees losing their jobs through
this merger. I am not going to ask any specific questions.
I am going to allow the gentleman from Ohio to continue his
line of talk, and I yield the balance of my time to him.
Mr. Johnson. I thank the gentleman for yielding.
Going back to the line of questioning that we had before I
finished, the Ranking Member said that the 2008 rulemaking was
a midnight rewrite, a rollback, if you will, which in fact it
was a 5-year process. You are claiming now hundreds of pages of
public testimony when the prior rulemaking process had
thousands and thousands of pages of public comment. Clearly, if
they think that the 2008 rulemaking process was a midnight
rule, then my gosh this must be somewhere between coffee and
breakfast rulemaking that you guys are doing because it is
proceeding at breakneck speed.
Specifically, I would like to know from you, how was the
2008 rule a rollback? First of all, do you think it is a
rollback, and--do you think it is?
Mr. Pizarchik. We are engaged in our third year as far as
this rulemaking----
Mr. Johnson. Is the 2008 rule a rollback?
Mr. Pizarchik. There are folks who have the belief that if
you look at the----
Mr. Johnson. What do you believe? I am asking you. Is the
2008 rule a rollback?
Mr. Pizarchik. The 1983 rule was replaced which provided a
100-foot buffer to stream----
Mr. Johnson. Is the 2008 rule a rollback, Mr. Pizarchik?
Yes or no? Let me ask it another way. Maybe you can answer it
this way. What can an operator do under the 2008 rule that you
disagree with that he couldn't do under the Reagan-era rule?
Mr. Pizarchik. He can bury streams with excess spoil
pursuant to the law or pursuant to the regulation. That was not
allowed under the----
Mr. Johnson. But you testified earlier that there are laws
in place already that restrict those kinds of things. So aren't
you talking about maybe an operator rather than a regulatory
action?
Mr. Pizarchik. No. What I am talking about is appropriate
and proper implementation of the statute.
Mr. Johnson. OK. All right. You know, let me ask you a
question about what led into this rewrite. This rewrite stemmed
from a lawsuit, right?
Mr. Pizarchik. Not entirely, no.
Mr. Johnson. OK.
Mr. Pizarchik. It stemmed from, if I may----
Mr. Johnson. Why did not OSM and the Department fight the
lawsuit and try to uphold the 2008 law that was in place?
Mr. Pizarchik. There were two lawsuits on that. The
Department had admitted errors in the rulemaking. We had a
choice of trying to defend a rule that we admitted that there
were errors in that rulemaking process, and we thought it was
in the best interests of the American public to go forward with
revising the regulation to modernize it. We have sought input
from the public and an Advanced Notice of Proposed Rulemaking
in 2009----
Mr. Johnson. Let me ask you this, did the environmentalist
group that brought the lawsuit have their legal fees repaid
after the settlement?
Mr. Pizarchik. I have no idea, Mr. Congressman.
Mr. Johnson. Do you know how much the settlement on that
lawsuit cost the American taxpayers?
Mr. Pizarchik. I do not.
Mr. Johnson. OK. Well, if you don't know, you know, I
suggest that you should know. Do you think you can find out?
Mr. Pizarchik. I believe that we could find out, and we can
provide that----
[The response to Mr. Johnson can be found on page 12.]
Mr. Johnson. I would like you to find out if the
environmentalist group that brought that suit had their legal
fees repaid by the American taxpayer, and if so, how much.
Is it safe to say that OSM and the Department were not
upset to be sued by the environmentalists because it gave OSM
more credibility to legally reopen the 2008 rulemaking process?
Mr. Pizarchik. I don't know that I could----
Mr. Johnson. Did that lawsuit bother you that you were
sued?
Mr. Pizarchik. That lawsuit was well on its way before I
even got here on the job, and part of my job was figuring out
how the best to proceed with that, and in my judgment it was
best to proceed to put that lawsuit on hold and spend our
resources on improving the regulations to modernize the science
and the experience we have.
Mr. Johnson. Mr. Chairman, I yield back and hopefully we
have additional rounds.
Mr. Lamborn. OK. Thank you. We will have a second round
right now, and I will go ahead and recognize myself for 5
minutes.
Mr. Pizarchik, if OSM is giving fair consideration to all
alternatives, and we talked earlier about there is a 400-page
rule already written by OSM, has each alternative received
equal treatment where they have received a 400-page writing for
each of the alternatives?
Mr. Pizarchik. We are still in the process of developing
the proposed rule. We do not yet have a proposed rule. All of
the alternatives are getting a fair evaluation, both on the
environmental impacts and the costs and benefits of that. That
information in accordance with NEPA I will be using to helping
inform me to make an informed decision as to what should be in
the proposed rulemaking.
Another point, a number of the changes that we are looking
at is a matter of carrying out some of the Executive orders
where we are looking to modernize our regulations to improve
clarity to remove redundant provisions or outdated provisions.
So there is a significant portion of what we anticipate being
in the proposed rulemaking that will better improve the quality
of those regulations.
Mr. Lamborn. Well, the part I am concerned about is the
part that will kill jobs and stop coal mining. So when you look
at the EIS, will it look at the impacts to manufacturing and
service industry and the electrical generation industry if we
have to switch to an alternative and/or higher cost fuel when
the production of coal is curtailed through the Stream Buffer
Zone Rule?
Mr. Pizarchik. First off, I am not an expert on the
economics. That is why we have hired outside experts to do the
analysis. I am not familiar with the intimate details of what
the analysis is going through. I am confident that our
contractor will look at what all of the requirements are under
the Federal law in order to come up with a NEPA-compliant cost-
benefit analysis and draft Environmental Impact Statement for
us. So, all of that information will be--whatever is
appropriate under the law will be considered and evaluated for
the various options, and this is not a job-killing rulemaking.
The numbers which you refer to were numbers that the contractor
put together. Those numbers were fabricated based on
placeholder numbers and have no basis in fact.
Mr. Lamborn. So has there been a second contractor who has
come up with different numbers or you just don't believe what
the first contractor came up with without any real evidence?
Mr. Pizarchik. The numbers that the first contractor came
up with were based on no evidence. They have no basis in fact.
The current contractor that we have hired to complete the
economic benefits and costs of the rulemaking is still in the
process of preparing that. I don't have that information. That
information will be used to help inform----
Mr. Lamborn. Well, I certainly look forward to hearing
that. I think common sense would tell me, an old farm boy also
from Kansas, that if you stop the production of coal mining
because the rules for extracting it are more stringent, you are
going to have less coal, and therefore you will have less coal
mining. Therefore, you will have fewer jobs mining coal. So I
don't know what the number is. I just know there is going to be
a number. I hope it is an accurate number.
And on that point, will the EIS take into account the loss
of jobs? I asked about the higher cost of coal. Will it take
into account the loss of jobs?
Mr. Pizarchik. Again, I believe that the NEPA requirements
will be fulfilled by this contractor taking into consideration
all of the environmental benefits and costs of not only the
preferred alternative but the other alternatives, including the
no action alternative. So we expect to have all of that
information to be used for helping to make my decision on that,
and then once I make the decision, we get out what is in the
proposed rule, you all, the public, the industry, the citizens,
the environmentalists will all have their opportunity to look
at that information and provide their input on it. The State
regulators will have that input. It is the way the process is
supposed to work.
Mr. Lamborn. OK. And to be real specific, on the economic
analysis will we also see what will be lost to States and the
Federal Government, the loss of severance taxes, for instance,
directly costing governments revenue, and will we see the
indirect costs? When you have fewer jobs, that is fewer people
paying taxes.
Mr. Pizarchik. Again, Mr. Chairman, I am not familiar with
all of the intimate details of what is required to be in the
environmental analysis required by the National Environmental
Policy Act, but you have to remember that the Surface Mining
Act never contemplated that every ton of coal could be mined
regardless of the environmental impact. It is a balancing act
between helping meet our country's energy needs and protecting
the people and the environment from adverse effects of mining.
Coal is not in short supply. We are exporting coal in this
country out of the ports in the South, the ports in the East.
There are even proposals to build a new port in the West to
export coal. We have the coal production to meet our needs and
saying that rulemaking and the regulations is going to cost
jobs, that isn't any more true today than it was 40 years ago
when the Surface Mining Act was passed and the regulations were
passed.
What we have is better protection of the environment,
better protection of the people, balanced with meeting our
country's energy needs, and we will continue to do that. That
was part of what my job is, to make sure we have that balance.
Mr. Lamborn. OK. Well, I hope that that is what happens. I
now recognize the Ranking Member for 5 minutes.
Mr. Holt. Thanks. Director Pizarchik, following along these
lines, after PKS Services completed its draft analysis, it was
forwarded for review. Isn't it true that Mr. Bradley Lambert,
Deputy Director of Virginia Department of Mines, submitted
comments that contain--stating that the information contained
in the documents prepared by PKS was, ``inaccurate and
incomplete''?
Mr. Pizarchik. Yes.
Mr. Holt. Isn't it true that Kathy Ogle, a hydrologist at
the Wyoming Department of Environmental Quality, wrote of the
PKS work, ``the analysis is insufficient for a document of this
importance''?
Mr. Pizarchik. Yes.
Mr. Holt. Isn't it true that Thomas Clarke of the West
Virginia Department of Environmental Protection submitted
comments stating that PKS document displays very little depth
of understanding of technical issues; that Mr. Bruce Stevens,
Director of the Indiana Division of Reclamation, on the PKS
analysis wrote that ``the logic used is not readily apparent
and appears in many cases to be based upon erroneous
assumptions, incorrect interpretations, and a lack of
understanding of current programmatic practices''; and David
Lane, a civil engineer within the OSM office, wrote ``the
writers seem to have little knowledge of Appalachian mining
practices and overall surface mining practices and this should
be rewritten by professional engineers, geologists, and
regulatory experts with a working knowledge of the subject
matter''?
Mr. Pizarchik. I believe those are all true.
Mr. Holt. Would you agree then that with the near universal
assessment, not only by OSM experts but also by experts of the
State agencies where coal mining is widespread and strongly
supported, that the work done by this contractor, PKS, was
incomplete and inaccurate and that there are lots of reasons to
take their draft work with a grain of salt or a grain of sand
or a grain of coal or perhaps many grains?
Mr. Pizarchik. Yes, I would agree with that.
Mr. Holt. And so should we place any more credence in their
job impact numbers than we do in their interpretations,
assumptions, and conclusions about mining practices and other
things that have been declared to be without basis?
Mr. Pizarchik. No.
Mr. Holt. So I do want to make that point. Of course, we
are interested in jobs, but you know, let's have a debate based
on the facts, and I hope that we will have contractors working
on documents based on the facts.
Back to this proposed reorganization. I understand and you
were clear that the details of the consolidation of OSM and the
Bureau of Land Management are not firm and there is much that
you can't yet discuss. But can you assure this Committee that
the reorganization will not harm the regulation of mining
activities on public, State, and private lands and harm the
public interest in that?
Mr. Pizarchik. Perhaps the best way I can do that is to
read something that Secretary Salazar said to the OSM and BLM
employees when he made his announcement last week. He says,
``The second thing that I want to make sure is understood here
is that OSM is a separate and independent entity. It is by law.
It is so under SMCRA and as so it will remain. With a Director
who is a Presidentially appointed, Senate confirmed person, I
recognize the independence of OSM under the statute and the
function that it carries on. So I don't want anybody to walk
away from here thinking that what we are doing is somehow
minimizing the future of OSM. We are not doing that. It will
remain an independent agency.''
And there are also experts within OSM that it is believed
that our expertise in dealing with reclamation can actually
help and improve the reclamation.
Mr. Holt. Well, that is the kind of assurance that I am
looking for from you, that this will not harm and, if possible,
will improve our ability to properly clean up mines, to reclaim
lands, Federal, State, and private, and that revenue collection
will not be harmed in any way.
Mr. Pizarchik. And from the standpoint of--well, what we
are trying to prove, as a small agency, it is difficult for us
to compete, and the Secretary's belief is that we will be able
to compete better in these difficult budgetary times in order
to have the resources to prevent further erosion of OSM's core
function.
Mr. Holt. Well, I will take that as a reassurance, and I
thank the witness. I thank you, Mr. Director.
Mr. Lamborn. OK. I now recognize the gentleman from Texas.
Mr. Flores. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Funny, listening about
all these farm boys. I am a former ranch hand from Texas so I
guess I am related but slightly dissimilar.
One of the messages I would like for you to take back with
you is that the Department of the Interior has no statutory
authority to merge these functions, and so it sounds like you
are going to try to keep them separate, and I hope that is
actually the case.
Ranking Member Markey and Ranking Member Holt have had
quite a dialogue with you talking about PKS and saying that
they lack the experience for conducting this analysis. I think
that is essentially what you have agreed with. Is that the
case?
Mr. Pizarchik. Based on our experience with the work that
they produced, yes.
Mr. Flores. OK. That raises the next question. Why were
they hired in the first place?
Mr. Pizarchik. We used a competitive hiring process. They
represented themselves as NEPA experts. With the
representations, it appeared to be the case. They indicated
they also had qualified subcontractors who had done work both
in the environmental community and in the mining community. At
that time, the team that evaluated them had determined they met
the requirements for their demonstration, that they appeared to
be a contractor who was qualified to perform this work.
Mr. Flores. An OSM team made the evaluation, is that
correct, and did the due diligence?
Mr. Pizarchik. That is my understanding, yes.
Mr. Flores. OK. Didn't do a very good job, I guess, did
they?
Mr. Pizarchik. 20/20 hindsight, I would have--we all
expected better results.
Mr. Flores. OK. And then what I understand, who do you
think made the mistakes in the PKS work? Is it PKS or the
subcontractors?
Mr. Pizarchik. I guess from the standpoint of looking back,
I am not in a position to go into the intimate details of the
other things. The fact is that when we had our concerns we
shared them with PKS with a notice of cure, giving them the
opportunity to cure the problems with the products that they
were supposed to deliver. They provided their response and they
indicated that they acknowledged what they provided was
incomplete on that, and from the standpoint of looking at the
aspects of it, I think there was probably some things where
that complicated things, and we reached the end that we all
concluded, that PKS and the Department concluded that it was in
the best interest of both parties to end the contracting
relationship. We ended it 2 months early from when it was set
to expire. We had an option to renew that we elected not to
renew, and so from all the things considered, we just thought
it was in the best interest of everybody to go forward.
Mr. Flores. From what I understand, the OSM picked the
subcontractors that PKS was supposed to use; is that correct?
Mr. Pizarchik. Not to my knowledge.
Mr. Flores. OK. The team that hired PKS, did you use the
same team to hire the replacement contractor?
Mr. Pizarchik. I don't recall the exact composition.
Mr. Flores. Would you get that back to us, please? That
would be pretty interesting because if I can't trust your
judgment on the first contractor, even though OSM appointed the
subcontractors to get this result, how are we to trust, if
particularly the same team is used, how are we to trust the
judgment going forward? That is troubling to me.
[The response to Mr. Flores can be found on page 13.]
Mr. Flores. One last question. You know, the first
analysis, I mean you said it was flawed. It did point out job
losses that were pretty extensive. In your rulemaking, what
level of job losses is acceptable?
Mr. Pizarchik. Under the National Environmental Policy Act,
we are required to look at the cost and the benefits of it, and
it is a balancing of those parts. So this is a rulemaking that
we need to look at all of those factors and take that all into
consideration. I don't know that there is a magic number one
way or the other. We believe that there are going to be
significant environmental benefits out of this rulemaking, and
our job is to strike that appropriate balance and that is what
we intend to do, once we get the information that allows us to
make the informed decision.
Mr. Flores. I think most economists would say if coal
prices rise substantially as a result then you have higher
energy prices; high energy prices result in lower economic
activity; lower economic activity results in fewer Americans
employed. Are you going to look at this analysis on a macro
basis like that, like the real world does?
Mr. Pizarchik. Again, the analysis that is being prepared
by the contractor is what is required under the National
Environmental Policy Act. I am not prepared today to tell you
that I am an expert on this and that I know all the ins and
outs of those details. I do not.
Mr. Flores. Well, I hope it is a different team that picked
the contractor than picked the last one. Thank you.
Mr. Lamborn. OK. As we begin to wrap up, I recognize the
gentleman from Ohio.
Mr. Johnson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want to get back to
the contractor, the contractor that was fired. Did any official
at OSM or the Interior or any part of the Administration ask
that contractor to change the assumptions for the economic
analysis which would then lower the jobs impacts of their
analysis?
Mr. Pizarchik. Well, first of all, the contractor was not
fired. As regarding any official, anybody in the management
level, I don't believe that occurred.
Mr. Johnson. Remember your last testimony when you
testified, it was a mutual agreement between your Department
and the contractor that the contractor had not produced
results, correct?
Mr. Pizarchik. What I testified, and I believe, is that the
contractor and us agreed that it was in the mutual interest of
both parties----
Mr. Johnson. Because they did not produce the results that
you were looking for.
Mr. Pizarchik. Because, yes, the contract requires them to
provide a NEPA-compliant document----
Mr. Johnson. OK. In your earlier testimony today, you
claimed that there was no basis in fact for their conclusions.
Then you turn around and say that you are not an expert. So who
made the determination that there was no basis for that
contractor's determinations?
Mr. Pizarchik. Congressman, I think everyone would agree
that if you use placeholder numbers that have no basis in fact
or anything and you plug that into a formula to come up with
job numbers that those job numbers----
Mr. Johnson. Did you make that determination as a nonexpert
or did you get an outside independent agency to look at that
contractor's results? You are not the expert; you said so,
right?
Mr. Pizarchik. I said I am not an expert on the NEPA
requirements----
Mr. Johnson. OK. It is amazing to me that we sit and listen
to my colleague from Massachusetts talk about how dismal of a
performance this contractor did, and yet he wasn't fired. Was
he paid?
Mr. Pizarchik. He was paid for the--as I mentioned
earlier--he was on a time and material basis----
Mr. Johnson. How much was the contractor paid?
Mr. Pizarchik. The contractor was paid $3.7 million.
Mr. Johnson. $3.7 million, my goodness. Wow. Wow. Have you
heard many of the President's speeches these days as he is out
campaigning across the country? You talked about this
rulemaking is going to give or this rulemaking change is going
to give us environmental benefits. Have you heard the President
talking about his campaign? Does he have an environmental
benefits bill before the Senate and the House or is he focused
on creating jobs according to him?
Mr. Pizarchik. I have not been listening to----
Mr. Johnson. The focus is on creating jobs, right?
Mr. Pizarchik. Yes, and----
Mr. Johnson. OK. Let me ask you this. Is it safe to say,
Mr. Director, that if you further restrict coal mining activity
with an irresponsible rewrite of a rule that is already in
place and you further restrict coal mining activity, that is
going to cost America jobs, right, and reduce coal production?
Mr. Pizarchik. That is not safe to say.
Mr. Johnson. It is not? How can you come to that
conclusion?
Mr. Pizarchik. Because if you look at the history of the
rulemaking, we have to strike that balance. If you have to take
more sampling of the streams to get the baseline data, you are
going to need more people to do that. It takes more people to
haul that excess spoil from the top of the mountain to place it
in the valley below----
Mr. Johnson. It takes more people to enforce your rule than
it does to mine coal, for crying out loud.
Mr. Pizarchik. That is not true.
Mr. Johnson. You know, I don't think you guys have the memo
about what your President, our President, said in his State of
the Union. He said let's create jobs, let's have regulatory
reform. Instead of regulatory reform, what we get from the
Department of the Interior and the Department of Office Surface
Mining and Reclamation is further overreach.
Mr. Pizarchik. We don't even have----
Mr. Johnson. Let me ask you a question, the last time you
testified before this Committee, I asked you if you had any
contact with the Executive Office of the President on this
issue. Do you recall that line of question?
Mr. Pizarchik. Vaguely, yes.
Mr. Johnson. At first you replied no but then after the
questioning portion of the hearing was over, a member of your
staff pointed out to you that the Council on Environmental
Quality is a part of the Executive Office of the President,
right?
Mr. Pizarchik. That is correct.
Mr. Johnson. OK. And that, therefore, you have had contact
with the Executive Office of the President. Briefly with whom
and approximately when did you have contact with the staff or
the Counsel on Environmental Quality or other Executive Office
of the President about this particular issue?
Mr. Pizarchik. Well, first, I am not knowledgeable with who
all is in the Office of the White House as you said----
Mr. Johnson. There is expertise lacking all across the
board in your Department, isn't there?
Mr. Pizarchik. Can you name everyone?
Mr. Johnson. I am asking you the question. When did you
talk to the President's staff?
Mr. Pizarchik. The folks who I have talked to are on the
list of documents we provided where we shared copies of some of
the documents with them, and I provided briefing to a couple of
staff members on I think OMB or NCEQ.
Mr. Lamborn. If the gentleman could suspend for a moment,
it has come to my attention that earlier I neglected to give
the gentleman from Ohio his own 5 minutes because others had
yielded to him and I assumed that that was his time. So to even
everything out, you have an additional 5 minutes, and you can
use all or part of it and then we will be finished.
Mr. Johnson. Thank you. I appreciate it. I am sure the
Director appreciates it as well. Let's continue.
So you have provided this Committee with a record of your
communications with the Executive Office of the President?
Mr. Pizarchik. We have provided a response to a request
that we have received from this Committee and from Chairman
Hastings on that, and I don't recall exactly what is all in
that, but we have provided answers to those questions. There
are still some more documents that are being reviewed through
the process that will be provided as soon as we can complete
the review.
Mr. Johnson. OK. I want to get into the merger a little
bit. I asked some questions yesterday of your potential future
boss Mr. Abbey, and I was not impressed with the answers that I
received. Perhaps maybe you have a different slant on this
since the two of you may have had a chance to talk. Maybe you
can shed some light on it. How is this merger allowed to take
place when SMCRA, the law, clearly prohibits the merger of the
two agencies?
Mr. Pizarchik. I believe the provision in SMCRA you are
referencing is the one prohibiting OSM from having impact or
any connection with an agency that develops coal; is that
correct?
Mr. Johnson. That is correct.
Mr. Pizarchik. All right. We are in early stages of
evaluating this, and as the Secretary indicated----
Mr. Johnson. Is it a proposed merger or is it a decision
that has already been made?
Mr. Pizarchik. The Secretary announced his Secretarial
Order last week. The Secretarial Order provides for
consultation over this month, and it provides for it to take
effect on December 1, and then we are to prepare.
Mr. Johnson. So it is not a proposed merger. The Secretary
has announced that it is a merger, correct?
Mr. Pizarchik. The Secretary's order is quite clear on it,
and that we are going to be engaging in consultation with the
employees----
Mr. Johnson. On how to implement the merger?
Mr. Pizarchik.--with Members of Congress and all that
information will be used to help develop a plan and a schedule.
Mr. Johnson. A plan and schedule on how to implement?
Mr. Pizarchik. We have to--I guess we have to get that
input----
Mr. Johnson. When do----
Mr. Pizarchik.--how this consolidation is to----
Mr. Johnson. When does the Secretary plan to come before
Congress, perhaps this Committee, and talk about the law that
is in place that would prohibit that merger?
Mr. Pizarchik. I can't answer that but the statutory
provisions under which this is looked at, we are going to be
working with our solicitors and looking very carefully at what
would be allowed under the law and what would not be allowed
under the law. We intend to do this within the full bounds of
the law without seeking legislative amendment.
Mr. Johnson. Mr. Director, I have to tell you that this
whole process is very concerning to me. We have job numbers
today. In the last 4 months we created less jobs in the month
of October than we did over the previous 4 months, any of the 4
months, unemployment still at 9 percent, and yet your
Department, this Administration continues down this road of
job-killing regulatory policies. It is mind boggling to me that
you can't, number one, admit that and, number two, stop that.
Ohio gets 87 percent of its energy from coal, and I can
tell you that should this Stream Buffer Zone Rule go through--
and I am going to continue to fight with all I have to make
sure that it doesn't happen--it is going to hurt a lot of
people in eastern and southeastern Ohio. And so I dare say, as
long as you are in your job, you and I are going to be spending
a lot of time over the next little while.
So, with that, I would like to yield some time to my
colleague from Texas.
Mr. Flores. Well, Mr. Director, thank you for appearing
today. Since the Secretary's order said that he was going to be
seeking congressional input, I want to go ahead and give you my
input and let you know I think that you need to report back to
him that at least this Congressperson thinks that he has no
statutory authority to merge these agencies.
Thank you.
Mr. Holt. Would the gentleman yield to me for a couple of
seconds?
Mr. Flores. It is Mr. Johnson's time, I believe.
Mr. Johnson. You have one second. Mr. Chairman, it is up to
you.
Mr. Holt. May I unanimous consent for 15 seconds?
Mr. Lamborn. Please be brief.
Mr. Holt. Thank you.
I just wanted to reassure Mr. Johnson that there is nothing
nefarious or conspiratorial or clandestine about conversations
with Council on Environmental Quality. An agency should go to
the Council on Environmental Quality. That is the organization
that coordinates administrative actions with respect to the----
Mr. Johnson. Would the gentleman yield?
Absolutely. What I am trying to determine here is if they
went, and when they went, and if they've let the President of
the United States, who is out campaigning the country, talking
about creating jobs, if they've let him know what they are
about to do to the coal industry and jobs across eastern and
southeastern Ohio.
Mr. Lamborn. OK. We are going to wrap up now. This has been
an invigorating discussion. I appreciate the Director being
here, taking all the questions and supplying his testimony.
Members of the Committee may have additional questions for
the record. I would ask that you respond to these in writing.
But finally, I need to say, on February 8, Chairman
Hastings and I sent the OSM Director, Mr. Pizarchik, a letter
requesting documents surrounding the dismissal of Polu Kai. It
is now 10 months later and while some documents have been
produced, the Committee is still waiting on documents that we
requested then.
This Committee has a constitutional duty to conduct private
oversight of the Executive branch, and we are unable to perform
that duty if the Administration does not comply with our
request.
Republicans have committed to running an open and honest
House of Representatives, and we expect the same out of an
Administration that President Obama has referred to in the same
manner.
That being said, Director Pizarchik, I hope that we can get
an assurance from you today that the balance of the documents
that we requested will be promptly delivered to the Committee.
If there is no further business, without objection, the
Committee stands adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 12:36 p.m., the Subcommittee was adjourned.]


