- PROTECTING FEDERAL HYDROPOWER INVESTMENTS IN THE WEST: A STAKEHOLDER'S PERSPECTIVE

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

PROTECTING FEDERAL
HYDROPOWER INVESTMENTS
IN THE WEST:
A STAKEHOLDER'S PERSPECTIVE

=======================================================================

OVERSIGHT HEARING

before the

SUBCOMMITTEE ON WATER AND POWER

of the

COMMITTEE ON NATURAL RESOURCES
U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

Wednesday, May 4, 2011

__________

Serial No. 112-27

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Natural Resources

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.fdsys.gov
or
Committee address: http://naturalresources.house.gov

----------
U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE

66-205 PDF                       WASHINGTON : 2011

For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800;
DC area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104 Mail: Stop IDCC,
Washington, DC 20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON NATURAL RESOURCES

DOC HASTINGS, WA, Chairman
EDWARD J. MARKEY, MA, Ranking Democrat Member

Don Young, AK                        Dale E. Kildee, MI
John J. Duncan, Jr., TN              Peter A. DeFazio, OR
Louie Gohmert, TX                    Eni F.H. Faleomavaega, AS
Rob Bishop, UT                       Frank Pallone, Jr., NJ
Doug Lamborn, CO                     Grace F. Napolitano, CA
Robert J. Wittman, VA                Rush D. Holt, NJ
Paul C. Broun, GA                    Raul M. Grijalva, AZ
John Fleming, LA                     Madeleine Z. Bordallo, GU
Mike Coffman, CO                     Jim Costa, CA
Tom McClintock, CA                   Dan Boren, OK
Glenn Thompson, PA                   Gregorio Kilili Camacho Sablan,
Jeff Denham, CA                          CNMI
Dan Benishek, MI                     Martin Heinrich, NM
David Rivera, FL                     Ben Ray Lujan, NM
Jeff Duncan, SC                      John P. Sarbanes, MD
Scott R. Tipton, CO                  Betty Sutton, OH
Paul A. Gosar, AZ                    Niki Tsongas, MA
Raul R. Labrador, ID                 Pedro R. Pierluisi, PR
Kristi L. Noem, SD                   John Garamendi, CA
Steve Southerland II, FL             Colleen W. Hanabusa, HI
Bill Flores, TX                      Vacancy
Andy Harris, MD
Jeffrey M. Landry, LA
Charles J. ``Chuck'' Fleischmann,
TN
Jon Runyan, NJ
Bill Johnson, OH

Todd Young, Chief of Staff
Lisa Pittman, Chief Counsel
Jeffrey Duncan, Democrat Staff Director
David Watkins, Democrat Chief Counsel
------

SUBCOMMITTEE ON WATER AND POWER

TOM McCLINTOCK, CA, Chairman
GRACE F. NAPOLITANO, CA, Ranking Democrat Member

Louie Gohmert, TX                    Raul M. Grijalva, AZ
Jeff Denham, CA                      Jim Costa, CA
Scott R. Tipton, CO                  Ben Ray Lujan, NM
Paul A. Gosar, AZ                    John Garamendi, CA
Raul R. Labrador, ID                 Edward J. Markey, MA, ex officio
Kristi L. Noem, SD
Doc Hastings, WA, ex officio

------

CONTENTS

----------
Page

Hearing held on Wednesday, May 4, 2011...........................     1

Statement of Members:
Hastings, Hon. Doc, a Representative in Congress from the
State of Washington........................................     6
Prepared statement of....................................     7
McClintock, Hon. Tom, a Representative in Congress from the
State of California........................................     1
Prepared statement of....................................     3
Napolitano, Hon. Grace F., a Representative in Congress from
the State of California....................................     4
Noem, Hon. Kristi, a Representative in Congress from the
State of South Dakota......................................     8
Tipton, Hon. Scott R., a Representative in Congress from the
State of Colorado..........................................     6

Statement of Witnesses:
Corwin, R. Scott, Executive Director, Public Power Council,
Portland, Oregon...........................................     9
Prepared statement of....................................    10
Fahlund, Andrew, Senior Vice President for Conservation,
American Rivers, Washington, D.C...........................    22
Prepared statement of....................................    24
Gillen, Roman, President and CEO, Consumers Power, Inc., and
President, Oregon Rural Electric Cooperative Association,
Salem, Oregon..............................................    29
Prepared statement of....................................    30
Karier, Tom, Washington Council Member, Northwest Power and
Conservation Council, Portland, Oregon.....................    32
Prepared statement of....................................    33
Morgan, Chris, Board President, Colorado Rural Electric
Association, and Board Member, Gunnison County Electric
Association, Gunnison, Colorado............................    15
Prepared statement of....................................    17
Simmons, Vic, General Manager, Rushmore Electric Power
Cooperative, Rapid City, South Dakota......................    20
Prepared statement of....................................    21
Ward, Grant, Water and Power Consultant, Maricopa-Stansfield
Irrigation District, Maricopa, Arizona.....................    38
Prepared statement of....................................    39

OVERSIGHT HEARING ON ``PROTECTING FEDERAL HYDROPOWER INVESTMENTS IN THE
WEST: A STAKEHOLDER'S PERSPECTIVE.''

----------

Wednesday, May 4, 2011

U.S. House of Representatives

Subcommittee on Water and Power

Committee on Natural Resources

Washington, D.C.

----------

The Subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 10:01 a.m. in
Room 1324, Longworth House Office Building, The Honorable Tom
McClintock [Chairman of the Subcommittee] presiding.
Present: Representatives McClintock, Tipton, Gosar,
Labrador, Noem, Hastings, Napolitano, and Garamendi.
Also present: Representative DeFazio.
Mr. McClintock. The Subcommittee on Water and Power will
come to order. The Chair notes the presence of a quorum, which
under Committee Rule 3[e] is two Members.
The Water and Power Subcommittee meets today to hear
testimony at this oversight hearing entitled ``Protecting
Federal Hydropower Investments in the West: A Stakeholder's
Perspective.'' We also meet under the mandate of House
Resolution 72, to identify regulatory impediments to job
creation.
The Chair will begin by asking unanimous consent that the
gentleman from Oregon, Mr. DeFazio, be allowed to sit with the
Subcommittee and participate in the hearing. Without objection,
so ordered.
We will begin with five-minute opening statements by myself
and the Ranking Member, followed by the Subcommittee Members,
and I will begin by recognizing myself for five minutes.

STATEMENT OF HON. TOM McCLINTOCK, A REPRESENTATIVE IN CONGRESS
FROM THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA

Mr. McClintock. The purpose of today's hearing is to
receive testimony on the benefits that hydroelectricity offers
to our nation's prosperity, the impediments hydroelectricity
generators now face, and the costs that these impediments
impose on the family budgets of millions of Americans, and on
job creation at a time when Americans suffer the most prolonged
period of high unemployment since the Depression.
Hydropower is by all accounts the cheapest and cleanest
electricity available to modern technology. Its cost is
typically estimated at between a half a cent and three cents
per kilowatt hour compared with the subsidized cost of more
than 14 cents per kilowatt hour for solar power and, of course,
without those subsidies, it would be much, much higher.
Hydroelectricity produces zero air emissions, and yet no major
hydroelectricity facility has been built in many years and our
existing facilities are being bled dry by endless litigation
and regulatory obstacles that result in major increases in
electricity prices and chronic shortages of electricity.
Earlier this year this Subcommittee heard from the Federal
agencies charged with producing and delivering hydropower. It
became painfully clear that crushing new costs continue to be
heaped on our electricity bills from overregulation, water use
restrictions, and mandated use of so-called alternative energy
sources. Worse, it became apparent that there are no plans
actually being implemented to increase our hydroelectric
generation through the construction of major new facilities.
We see around us the wreckage of these retrograde policies.
California, which boasts of being on the cutting edge of this
folly, now suffers the highest electricity prices in the
continental United States, chronic shortage of capacity, per
capita electricity consumption that is now lower than Guam and
Aruba, and an economy that leads the Nation from the bottom.
This must not be America's future.
Our water and power pioneers had the vision of constructing
large multi-purpose facilities to make the desert bloom and to
provide low cost, emissions-free energy. The cheap and abundant
hydroelectricity generated in the West's Federal dams played a
major role in producing the armaments and food necessary to
defeat our enemies in World War II, and it laid the foundation
for the explosive economic growth and prosperity of the western
United States in the post-war years.
This Administration purports to support hydroelectricity
through press releases, yet actions speak louder than words. It
continues to pursue the destruction of four hydroelectric dams
on the Klamath that produce enough electricity for more than
150,000 homes. The capital cost of doing so is more than half a
billion dollars on top of crushing replacement costs, on top of
the loss of the Iron Gate Fish Hatchery that releases 5 million
salmon smolt each year.
It continues to fund extremist organizations like the one
invited by the Minority Party today whose president has said
that the destruction of these dams would be a model for the
demolition of four additional dams on the Snake River that
produce enough electricity for 1.1 million homes, adding a half
billion dollars per year just in replacement costs.
It continues to pursue high-flow spillage from the Glen
Canyon Dam that wastes millions of dollars of lost electricity
production, and ironically increases predator populations that
devour endangered humpback chub. Upstream it has its sights on
the Aspinall Unit in western Colorado. We will hear today that
30 percent of the electricity bills that families in the
Pacific Northwest are just to meet environmental regulations.
Protecting endangered species is a worthy goal and worthy
goals need to be pursued with common sense and sound science,
not left-wing ideology and junk science. We need to ask whether
the enormous wealth that is being consumed by these policies
has made any significant contribution to enhancing endangered
populations compared to far less expensive and effective
alternatives, including predator control, increasing overall
water supplies, and hatchery production. As far as I can tell,
the principal beneficiaries of current policies have been the
law firms and environmental fund raising organizations and the
principal victims have been the families and workers who face a
dismal future of rationing, shortages, prohibitively expensive
water and power, and a dying economy.
It is the purpose of these hearings to begin moving the
pendulum back toward sensible and proven policies that build
our hydroelectricity infrastructure. Today we will hear from
leading experts from outside the Beltway whose work is
dedicated to providing for the needs of a growing population.
Their insights on hydropower policy will provide this
Subcommittee with guidance to restore the Federal Government as
a positive force for prosperity, abundance, and plenty once
again.
With that I will recognize our Ranking Member for an
opening statement of five minutes.
[The prepared statement of Mr. McClintock follows:]

Statement of The Honorable Tom McClintock, Chairman,
Subcommittee on Water and Power

The purpose of today's hearing is to receive testimony on the
benefits that hydroelectricity offers to our nation's prosperity, the
impediments that hydroelectricity generators now face, and the costs
that these impediments impose on the family budgets of millions of
Americans and on job creation at a time when American suffer the most
prolonged period of high unemployment since the Depression.
Hydropower is by all accounts the cheapest and cleanest electricity
available to modern technology. Its cost is typically estimated at
between a half-cent and three cents per kilowatt hour, compared with
more than 14-cents per kilowatt hour for solar power. It produces zero
air emissions.
And yet, no major hydro-electric facility has been built in many
years, and our existing facilities are being bled dry by endless
litigation and regulatory obstacles that result in major increases in
electricity prices and chronic shortages of electricity.
Earlier this year, this subcommittee heard from the federal
agencies charged with producing and delivering hydropower. It became
painfully clear that crushing new costs continue to be heaped onto our
electricity bills from over-regulation, water use restrictions and
mandated use of so-called alternative energy sources. Worse, it became
apparent that there are no plans actually being implemented to increase
our hydro-electric generation through construction of major facilities.
We see around us the wreckage of these retrograde policies.
California, which boasts of being on the cutting edge of this folly,
now suffers the highest electricity prices in the continental United
States, chronic shortage of capacity, per capita electricity
consumption that is now lower than Guam and Aruba, and an economy that
leads the nation--from behind. This must not become America's future.
Our water and power pioneers had the vision of constructing large
multi-purpose facilities to ``make the desert bloom'' and to provide
low cost, emissions-free energy. The cheap and abundant
hydroelectricity generated in the west's federal dams played a major
role in producing the armaments and food needed to defeat our enemies
in World War II. And it laid the foundation for the explosive economic
growth and prosperity of the western United States in the post-war
years.
This Administration purports to support hydropower through press
releases, yet actions speak louder than words:
It continues to pursue the destruction of four hydroelectric dams
on the Klamath that produce enough electricity for more than 150,000
homes. The capital cost is more than half a billion dollars, on top of
crushing replacement costs, on top of the loss of the Iron Gate Fish
Hatchery that releases 5 million salmon smolt each year.
It continues to fund extremist organizations like the one invited
by the minority party today, whose President has said the destruction
of these dams would be a model for the demolition of four additional
dams on the Snake River that produce enough electricity for 1.1 million
homes--adding a half-billion dollars per year just in replacement
costs.
It continues to pursue high flow spillage from the Glen Canyon Dam
that wastes millions of dollars of lost electricity production and
ironically increases predator populations that devour endangered
humpback chub. Upstream, it has its sights on the Aspinall Unit in
western Colorado.
We will hear today that thirty percent of the electricity bills of
families in the Pacific Northwest are just to meet environmental
regulations.
Protecting endangered species is a worthy goal and worthy goals
need to be pursued with common sense and sound science, not left-wing
ideology and junk science. We need to ask whether the enormous wealth
that has being consumed by these policies has made any significant
contribution to enhancing endangered populations compared to far less
expensive and effective alternatives, including predator control,
increasing overall water supplies and hatchery production. As far as I
can tell, the principal beneficiaries of current policies have been the
law-firms and environmental fundraising organizations--and the
principal victims have been families and workers who face a dismal
future of rationing, shortages, prohibitively expensive water and power
and a dying economy.
It is the purpose of these hearings to begin moving the pendulum
back toward sensible and proven policies that built our hydro-electric
infrastructure. Today, we will hear from leading experts from outside
the beltway whose work is dedicated to providing for the needs of a
growing population. Their insights on hydropower policy will provide
this subcommittee with guidance to restore the federal government as a
positive force for prosperity, abundance and plenty once again.
______

STATEMENT OF HON. GRACE NAPOLITANO, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA

Mrs. Napolitano. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Today's hearing focuses on protection of our existing
hydropower resources and restoring production, assuming the
continuation of which by definition describes plentiful
quantities of fish or supply. An abundance of hydropower in the
Pacific Northwest is reminiscent of how electricity from the
Columbia River powered aluminum plants in shipyards, enabling
us to win World War II. Equally embedded into the Pacific
Northwest culture is the role of fisheries in the region
whether it is through rights and traditions of a salmon harvest
for Native Nations or during the abundant times of the 1860s
and 1960s when commercial fisheries actually annually harvested
millions of pounds of fish and salmon, thereby fueling their
local economy.
Let us acknowledge what abundance means to everybody. What
it means to generations of fishermen, the Native American
Tribes, what abundance means to generations of recreational
enthusiasts, what it means to water and power perspective, and
what it means to restoring our environment and commercial
fisheries. The vision of abundance is not an isolated view.
There is no argument about the important role hydropower
has played and continues to play in meeting our energy demands
all over the West. Changes since that time, dams have been
built which include, of course, the changes in those areas
include climate change, environmental, tribal water rights,
population shifts, and increases. We have to face all the
realities and work together to find the solutions.
As Mr. Fahlund aptly mentioned in the written testimony,
environmental quality is not a luxury good. Leaving our
children with the burden of environmental deficit is no less
insidious than leaving them with the burden of a financial one.
To find that balance requires leadership and cooperation on all
levels, leadership exemplified by local stakeholders like in
the Klamath Basin where farmers, tribal leaders, and
environmentalists reached a historic agreement that would
preserve farming in the region, restore our environment, and
meet our trial trust responsibilities. We seem to forget that
Native Americans have the first right to water.
Leadership like in the Yakima region where farmers and
environmentalists are working together on developing and
creating new water supplies by taking into account the needs of
the environment. Leadership like in the Colorado region where
stakeholders and water users work together to implement the
multi-species habitat conservation plan while allowing for
water and power deliveries to continue in accordance with state
and Federal laws.
Our local communities must be commended for their courage
and their leadership in creating these collaborate
partnerships. They are not looking to blame. They are looking
for solutions. If we want to preserve hydropower as a resource
for the future, we must support these collaborative efforts as
well as look at the efficiencies, the new technologies, and the
alternative power sources, like solar, wind, geo, just to name
a couple, to help meet our future demands.
I know that Northwest delegation is actively looking at
solutions to support the development of renewals while
protecting their hydropower resources and operation integrity
of the BPA grid. The issue of high wind, high water where power
supply is exceeding demand is a challenge but it is a challenge
that can possibly be solved.
As I have stated at our PMA budget hearing on March, I
would like to offer any help in facilitating a solution to this
discussion since California depends on the renewables generated
in the Northwest Region.
I see I have a couple of moments and I would like to, of
course, state that I have looked at the statements that were
submitted for the record with great interest, and I find that
there are some concerns, and quite a few concerns in increasing
rates, but I most pose a question to all of you. If we are not
able to help the grids or the PMAs be able to--what do I say--
increase the capability, increase the generation of power by
adding new technology or by replacing some of the old turbines,
by assisting them in being able to create a better environment,
how else are you going to be able to meet it if you do not
increase the rates, at least for a portion of time? To me, that
is a serious question and, yes, it will mean--of course, the
point was made that some of the folks that would be least able
to pay for that increase would be people on fixed incomes. We
have issues with that, yes, but it is also true that most of
those are waived by the electric companies.
With that, I thank our witnesses for being here today. We
look forward to your testimony.
Mr. McClintock. The Chair would ask unanimous consent to
allow Mr. Tipton to go out of order. He has an urgent matter
that he has to attend to following his comments, so without
objection Mr. Tipton for five minutes.

STATEMENT OF HON. SCOTT TIPTON, A REPRESENTATIVE IN CONGRESS
FROM THE STATE OF COLORADO

Mr. Tipton. Good morning and thank you, Chairman McClintock
and Ranking Member Napolitano for convening this important
hearing today. I would like to take this opportunity to be able
to welcome one of my constituents, Mr. Chris Morgan. Chris is
the President of the Colorado Rural Electric Association and a
board member for the Gunnison County Electric Association.
Skyrocketing energy prices make the topic of today's
hearing very timely. These high energy prices and the state of
the economy make low-cost energy sources like hydropower more
important than ever. Hydropower is unquestionably the most
affordable and reliable form of renewable energy on the market
today. Unfortunately, efforts by this Administration are
threatening access to this carbon-free power source. The
decision made in Washington have a direct effect on all
stakeholders in the real world, so I am very interested to hear
from Chris and our other witnesses, and again, Mr. Chairman,
Ranking Member, thank you so much for this consideration
allowing me to go a little early. Thank you.
Mr. McClintock. The Chair is now pleased to recognize the
Chairman of the Natural Resources Committee, Congressman Doc
Hastings of Washington.

STATEMENT OF HON. DOC HASTINGS, A REPRESENTATIVE IN CONGRESS
FROM THE STATE OF WASHINGTON

Mr. Hastings. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, and thank
you very much for the courtesy of allowing me to be here today.
This hearing is a valuable opportunity to discuss Federal
hydropower and the importance of protecting low-cost renewable
energy and the jobs that it creates. We are fortunate to be
joined by witnesses who have firsthand knowledge of what
hydropower brings to their communities and to their ratepayers.
I would especially like to thank our Pacific Northwest
witnesses for being here today, and I also want to welcome many
in the audience from the rural utilities who have taken time to
attend this hearing.
My district in central Washington contains the heart of the
Federal Columbia River Power System. This network of Federal
dams and reservoirs has provided emission-free, reliable
hydropower for generations. It is our duty to make this
affordable renewable energy source, make sure that it continues
into the future.
However, these investments and economic drivers are under
constant assault. They are repeatedly targeted by bureaucratic
regulation, lawsuits, and even the whims of the Federal judge.
According to the Bonneville Power Administration, over 1,000
megawatts, or enough energy to power one million homes, has
already been lost in recent years to salmon recovery efforts.
However, many salmon recovery programs are working. How do
you measure that? You measure that by the high number of salmon
returning to the rivers, but for some that is simply not
enough. There are organizations whose singular focus appears to
be to destroy dams and the hydropower they produce, and I would
like to note, as the Chairman pointed out, that one of the
organizations testifying here is a party to an almost decade-
long litigation aimed at breaching the four lower Snake River
dams--this despite the Northwest Power and Conservation
Council's finding that such removal would, and I quote,
``increase the carbon emissions, cost and risk of the regional
power system.''
I can emphatically tell you that as long as I am Chairman
of this Committee and as long as I am a member of this
Congress, these dams will remain intact and functioning. They
will not be breached, removed or destroyed. The people of the
Northwest understand that dam removal is an extreme action that
drives up energy costs and won't help recover fish.
There are those who live outside the Pacific Northwest who
fail to understand the important multiple functions these dams
serve. In addition to providing most of the power for the
region, these dams provide flood control, barge transportation
of agricultural commodities, irrigation, recreation, and they
ensure the reliability of other renewable energy sources. In
addition to protecting existing resources, we must also be
looking at how we can create more hydropower through new water
storage, canal-based hydropower and other measures. Everything
to create more hydropower should be on the table. Efforts to
eliminate this low-cost renewable energy or to drive up its
costs will be emphatically resisted by this Committee.
To be clear, a true commitment to renewable energy requires
a commitment to protecting existing hydropower dams and the
many benefits that they provide. I am committed and have been
committed to pursuing all of the above energy approach for our
nation. This is a top priority for the Natural Resources
Committee. Hydropower is a key part of this strategy. We simply
need more of this original renewable energy. For that reason I
commend the Subcommittee Chairman and Ranking Member for having
this hearing, and I look forward to working with you on this
legislation that may be produced by this Committee, and as the
Chairman said, it all starts with today's hearing. Once again,
thank you for your courtesy. I yield back.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Hastings follows:]

Statement of The Honorable Doc Hastings, Chairman,
Committee on Natural Resources

This hearing is a valuable opportunity to discuss federal
hydropower and the importance of protecting the low-cost, renewable
energy and jobs it creates. We're fortunate to be joined by witnesses
who have firsthand knowledge of what hydropower brings to their
communities and ratepayers. I'd especially like to thank our Pacific
Northwest witnesses for being here today. I also want to welcome many
in the audience from the rural electric utilities who have taken the
time to attend this hearing.
My district in central Washington contains the heart of the Federal
Columbia River Power System. This network of federal dams and
reservoirs has provided emissions-free, reliable hydropower for
generations. It's our duty to make sure this affordable, renewable
energy source continues well into the future.
However, these investments and economic drivers are under constant
assault. They are repeatedly targeted by bureaucratic regulation,
lawsuits, and even the whims of a federal judge. According to the
Bonneville Power Administration, over 1,000 megawatts--or enough energy
to power one million homes--has already been lost in recent years due
to salmon recovery efforts. However, many salmon recovery programs are
working based on the high number of salmon returning to the rivers. But
for some, that's simply not enough. There are organizations whose
singular focus appears to be to destroy dams and the hydropower they
produce.
I'd like to note that one of the organizations testifying here
today is a party to the almost decade-long litigation aimed at
breaching the four lower Snake River dams. This, despite the Northwest
Power and Conservation Council's finding that such removal would
``increase the carbon emissions, cost and risk of the regional power
system.'' I can emphatically tell you that as long as I'm Chairman of
this Committee, and as long as I'm serving in Congress, these dams will
remain intact and functioning. They will not be breached, removed, or
destroyed. The people of the Pacific Northwest understand that dam
removal is an extreme action that will drive up energy costs and won't
help recover fish.
There are those who live outside the Pacific Northwest who fail to
understand the important multiple functions these dams serve. In
addition to providing most of the power for the region, these dams
provide flood control, barge transportation of agriculture commodities,
irrigation, recreation and ensure reliability of other renewable energy
sources.
In addition to protecting existing resources, we must also be
looking at how we can create more hydropower through new water storage,
canal-based hydropower and other measures. Everything to create more
hydropower should be on the table. Efforts to eliminate this low-cost
renewable energy, or to drive up its costs, will be resisted by this
committee.
To be clear, a true commitment to renewable energy requires a
commitment to protecting existing hydropower dams and the many benefits
they provide
I'm committed to pursuing an ``all of the above'' energy approach
for our nation. This is a top priority for the Natural Resources
Committee. Hydropower is a key part of this strategy. We simply need
more of this original, renewable energy. For that reason, I commend the
Subcommittee Chairman for having this hearing and I look forward to
working with him and others to pursue hydropower production legislation
in the near future. It starts with today's hearing.
______

Mr. McClintock. I now recognize Ms. Noem of South Dakota
for her opening statement.

STATEMENT OF HON. KRISTI NOEM, A REPRESENTATIVE IN CONGRESS
FROM THE STATE OF SOUTH DAKOTA

Ms. Noem. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I am pleased to have the
opportunity to introduce one of the witnesses today that is
here from South Dakota, Mr. Vic Simmons. Vic graduated from
South Dakota State University, and is the General Manager of
Rushmore Electric Cooperative in Rapid City, South Dakota.
He has been with Rushmore Electric for 12 years, and for
over 30 years has also had experience with the Rural Electric
Cooperative and the municipal electric system. His long history
of electric utility experience throughout South Dakota gives
him a unique perspective on providing hydropower to communities
in South Dakota generated from the dams on the Missouri River.
He has a wealth of knowledge on the impacts of the rising costs
of regulations, such as compliance with Endangered Species Act
requirements, so I want to thank Vic for coming today and for
testifying before this Subcommittee. I look forward to hearing
your testimony and working with you on deferral hydropower
investments in the West. Thank you. I yield back.
Mr. McClintock. Thank you. That concludes the opening
statements. We will now hear from our panel of witnesses. Each
witness's testimony will appear in full in the hearing record
so I would ask that witnesses keep their oral statement to five
minutes as outlined in our invitation letter and also as under
Committee Rule 4[a].
I would also like to explain how our timing lights work.
When you begin to speak, our clerk will start the timer. The
green light will appear. After four minutes, a yellow light
will appear, and at that time you should begin to conclude your
statement. At five minutes, the red light will come on. I would
ask you to complete the statement, but then stop after that.
And with that we will begin. Our first witness is Mr. Scott
Corwin, the Executive Director of the Public Power Council of
Portland, Oregon.

STATEMENT OF SCOTT CORWIN, EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR, PUBLIC POWER
COUNCIL, PORTLAND OREGON

Mr. Corwin. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Ms. Ranking Member,
Members of the Subcommittee and greetings to Chairman Hastings
as well from our region. I apologize for my voice this morning.
I may have been yelling too much, which is an occupational
hazard, but I will plow through here.
Our members were granted preference rights to Federal power
because these utilities are owned by their consumers, and they
have a mandate to pass the benefits through to the citizens who
are their owners. Several leaders of rural electric
cooperatives from our region and around the country are here
today. You have my full testimony as you said. I am just going
to make four points.
First, the Columbia River Power System, or FCRPS, is
extraordinarily valuable and it is an investment worth
protecting. It has 31 dams, total installed hydro capacity of
22,000 megawatts. The system is coordinated with Canada, and
there is a big decision approaching regarding whether it is in
our interest to continue that treaty with Canada in its current
form.
The dams lend not only clean renewable power, they are
critical to transportation, irrigation, flood control, and
recreation as well. Barges on the Columbia River moves about 40
million tons of goods each year. Four lower Snake Dams provide
1,100 average megawatts of emission-free energy, enough to
power the city the size of Seattle. They provide about 3,500
megawatts of capacity, which is increasingly important.
Replacing that power could cost about $5 million annually, and
is likely to be from thermal resources, increasing carbon
productions, and the rate impacts to citizens would be
dramatic.
Certainly breaching these dams as some advocate makes no
sense from an energy perspective, but it also would not
significantly improve access to history spawning areas, and is
not needed for juvenile or certainly adult fish passage which
is already about 96 percent at each project.
The second point, the value has been degraded as operations
of Federal dams are being increasingly constrained by
environmental regulation. Notably, operational constraints on
the FCRPS in the name of salmon mitigation, such as spilling
water over the dams or adjusting timing of the flows in the
river, have reduced the average generation of the system by
about 1,100 average megawatts of energy, or about 13 percent
since 1995.
Over the past five years the average annual replacement
cost of that energy has averaged $460 million, a cost borne by
the customers. That is part of the total cost to BPA power
customers of $800 million a year for fish and wildlife expenses
which is about 30 percent of their entire wholesale power bill
for these utilities. Customers will need a continuing role and
review of the operations and budget obligations to continue to
try to make sure ratepayer dollars are spent more efficiently.
The first step to protecting this investment is to
stabilize this regulatory impact by having the 2010
supplemental biological opinion approved in court, and there is
a hearing in Portland next week on that. With all Federal
agencies, almost all of the tribes in the entire region, and
the States of Washington, Idaho, and Montana solidly behind
that plan, it is an opportunity to move forward as a region and
build on the success we have seen so far in salmon mitigation.
The third point, beyond fish and wildlife a new challenge
for hydropower investment is the impact of integration of
intermittent resources like wind into this system. PPC members
support efforts to responsibly add cost-effect renewable
resources, but there is an increasing limitation on the
capacity to do so, and the wind variability presents
operational challenges and tees up key questions about proper
cost allocation so that hydro ratepayers are not unfairly
paying the cost of this integration.
One anomaly occurs from time to time during heavy spring
runoff and there is too much generation for regional loads
threatening reliability. All generators interconnected to BPA
system, including wind generators, are asked to ramp down and
receive Federal hydropower at low prices or even free. The
agency now has a draft policy out with a whole list of actions
they must take before requesting wind projects to fetter off,
but the agency has said it will not pay generators for the
value of lost production tax credits, which is a good result
from the viewpoint of electricity ratepayers who pay for the
system and cannot envision having to pay others to take Federal
hydropower to cover a lost taxpayer-funded subsidy.
That said, we see policy changes we would all work on
together such as qualifying hydropower in that instance as
eligible for those renewable energy or tax credits.
My last point relates to recent budget proposals. Remember
that all of the costs of this power system are paid by
ratepayers, all of the costs. There is no Federal subsidy
involved here. That is why we find so offensive any proposals
to force power market administrations like BPA to charge higher
rates to fund deficit reduction. It is nothing less than a
unfair regional tax.
Our economy is dependent upon this hydropower system, and
we feel strongly this large investment is worth protecting so
we thank you for holding this hearing, Mr. Chairman, and for
the opportunity to speak with you today, and I look forward to
any questions. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Corwin follows:]

Statement of R. Scott Corwin, Executive Director, Public Power Council

Introduction
Good afternoon, Chairman McClintock, Ranking Member Napolitano, and
Members of the Subcommittee, and greetings to our Northwest
Representatives on the Natural Resources Committee, Chairman Hastings,
Representative DeFazio, Representative Labrador, and Representative
Bishop. My name is Scott Corwin. I am the Executive Director of the
Public Power Council. I thank you for the opportunity to testify today
on this important topic, along with fellow Northwest panelists, Roman
Gillen and Tom Karier.
The Public Power Council (PPC) is a trade association representing
the consumer-owned electric utilities of the Pacific Northwest with
statutory first rights (known as ``preference'') to purchase power that
is generated by the Federal Columbia River Power System and marketed by
the Bonneville Power Administration (BPA). These preference rights were
granted to publicly and cooperatively-owned utilities because they have
a mandate to pass the benefits through to the citizens of the
Northwest, the consumers who are their owners. Our member utilities
have service territories in portions of seven western states and serve
over 41% of the electricity consumers in the region. Several leaders of
the rural electric cooperatives from our region are in the room today.
These utilities, being both some of the largest and the smallest in
the Northwest, are committed to preserving the value of the Columbia
River system for clean, renewable hydropower and for the system's
multiple other uses. Because the utility members of PPC are owned by
and answer directly to their customers, they are very sensitive to the
rates they pay for wholesale power and transmission of electricity.
Today, I will talk about: (1) the value of these large ratepayer
investments in federal hydropower in the West; (2) some of the
regulatory constraints on the hydropower system, and the fish and
wildlife mitigation effort; (3) new challenges to the system, including
integration of variable resources such as wind power; and (4) some
ideas about how to protect the investment now and in the future. For
more on these issues, I welcome you to visit our website at
www.ppcpdx.org or the website of Northwest RiverPartners at
www.nwriverpartners.org for issues regarding salmon recovery.
The Investment in Federal Hydropower
The Federal Columbia River Power System (FCRPS) is, by any measure,
an incredible achievement in engineering, foresight, and political
leadership that benefitted from the region's geographical and
historical uniqueness. With respect to investments in the federal
hydropower system, publicly and cooperatively owned utilities and their
customers are the stakeholders who pay the costs, and have the most
invested in seeing the system maintained to successfully meet all of
its statutory obligations. Under long-term contracts, these utilities,
commonly referred to as ``preference customers'' pay the costs
attributed to power production in the FCRPS (power costs are about 80%
of the total). Flood control, navigation, recreation, and irrigation
are other important uses of the river system. On issues such as fish
and wildlife mitigation, and specifically salmon recovery, the
preference customers of BPA are committed to success as regional
citizens who care for the resource and pay for this effort through
their power rates.
Hydropower has played, and will continue to play, an incredibly
important role in our nation's energy policy. Nowhere is this more
evident than in the Northwest. This is the original renewable source of
power, and has been nothing less than the lifeblood of the Northwest
region throughout modern history. And, even with this history of
relatively low-cost power, the Northwest has made enormous strides as
well in achievement of energy-efficiency.
The dams lend not only a clean, continuing supply of power, they
are critical to transportation, irrigation, flood control, and
recreation as well. Barging on the Columbia River moves 40 million tons
of goods each year and keeps hundreds of thousands of trucks and their
associated emissions off of the road. The Columbia and Snake River
Basin is the number one transportation gateway nationally for wheat,
barley and several other commodities.
To an area that was still largely without electricity in the early
20th century, the dams brought light and then economic hope coming out
of the Great Depression. Upon the foundations of the Reclamation Act in
1902 and the Flood Control Act in 1917, investment in the system took a
leap with the Bonneville Project Act in 1937. Construction on the
larger projects, such as Bonneville and Grand Coulee Dam, began in
1933. The oldest dam in the FCRPS is Minidoka, which began operating on
the Snake River in 1909.
In the Federal Columbia River Power System there are now 31 dams
run by the Bureau of Reclamation and the Army Corps of Engineers,
ranging from a three megawatt diversion dam in Boise, Idaho, to the
6795 megawatt (MW) Grand Coulee Dam in Washington. Total installed
hydropower capacity in the federal system is over 22,000 MW. This
system is coordinated with Canada's portion of the river system, and it
should be noted that an important decision is approaching regarding
whether it is in our interests to continue the current treaty with
Canada.
Part of the ``protection of investment'' challenge is to maintain
the system we have. Over the next few years, total annual operations
and maintenance costs to ratepayers for the FCRPS hydro program are
expected to increase from about $280 million annually, to almost $350
million per year, not including capital. Fish and wildlife mitigation
costs are about $800 million per year, about one-third of the total
power revenue requirement in BPA rates.
Of particular note in value and importance to the region are the
four lower Snake Dams, completed in the 1970s. They provide about 1,100
average megawatts of renewable, emission-free energy which is
approximately the amount of energy necessary to power the city of
Seattle. Replacing that power could cost $300-$500 million annually,
and is likely to be from thermal sources (a notable consideration for
West Coast states looking at aggressive carbon reduction goals). A
study by the Northwest Power and Conservation Council shows that
removal of these dams would increase green house gasses by 4.4 million
tons/yr in the Northwest and 5.2 million tons/yr west-wide, nearly the
equivalent of two typical 400 MW coal-fired power plants. This would
occur because the baseline scenario, without dam removal, already
assumes that the region will pursue all cost-effective energy
conservation and meet state renewable portfolio standards.
In addition, these lower Snake River dams provide other key
economic benefits such as irrigation and transportation. Over 10
million tons of commercial cargo travels this stretch of river to
Lewiston, Idaho.
Finally, in contrast to some accounts, removal of the lower Snake
Dams would not provide much if any benefit to fish listed under the
Endangered Species Act (ESA). Current juvenile fish passage survival
rates are at or above 95% at all four dams according to NOAA fisheries.
In any case, these dams only affect 4 out of 13 Endangered Species Act
listed salmon and steelhead stocks in the Columbia River Basin. And,
these four dams inundated only 10% of the historic fall chinook
spawning habitat in the Snake River; spring chinook, sockeye and
steelhead were even less affected.
So, removal of these dams would not significantly improve access to
historic spawning areas, is not needed for fish passage, and would make
no sense from an energy portfolio perspective.
Regulatory Constraints on Federal Hydropower
In the Northwest, we are ever cognizant of the impact of the
federal hydropower system on the environment. An enormous portion of
the investment in the system has been committed in order to address
those concerns. This investment has been not only in financial form,
but also in the form of time dedicated by thousands of individuals from
state and local agencies, tribal agencies, federal agencies, and the
private citizenry.
For electricity ratepayers this investment is not only reflected in
the current $800 million of annual expenditures mentioned earlier, but
in the cumulative impact of over $13 billion in costs over the past
three decades for fish and wildlife efforts funded through BPA power
rates. Most of these costs arise from implementation of the Endangered
Species Act (ESA) and the Pacific Northwest Power Planning and
Conservation Act. However, from a preference customer viewpoint, it
appears that electricity ratepayers are asked to fund endeavors far
beyond the actual impacts of the hydropower system because BPA has been
the easiest funding source to tap. It is appropriate to remember that
salmon have lifecycles covering thousands of miles in which mortality
occurs well before and after their travel through the ratepayer-funded
hydropower system.
The 2010 supplemental biological opinion currently before the U.S.
District Court is an evolution of at least 18 years of work by dozens
of state, tribal and federal agencies, and is a regionally created,
scientifically sound path to success. We are hopeful that the
comprehensive approach and broad support for this latest biological
opinion will lead to court approval and full implementation.
Several different biological opinions under the ESA have guided
regional efforts since the first listings of salmonids in the early
1990s. Eventually, these documents recognized what the science showed:
hydropower operations alone would not recover the species. Many other
factors contributed to the salmon's decline including over harvest,
hatchery practices, degraded habitat and ocean conditions.
Now, the massive effort seems to be paying off: fish passage
through the projects has been good and is improving all the time. Adult
passage using ladders has been excellent for many years. And, new
technology is seeing juvenile fish passage downstream at very high
rates. In fact, the new biological opinion sets very high, but
achievable, targets for juvenile passage at each dam of 96% in the
spring and 93% in the summer. Last year saw 648,000 fall chinook
return, and strong projections for 2011 could show record numbers for
chinook, coho, and sockeye in the Columbia and Snake rivers.
The investments put forth by ratepayers spread to many areas of the
federal hydropower system, including:

Improvements to the fish passage structures at the
eight federal dams on the Snake and Columbia Rivers;

Screens in front of the turbines to keep juvenile
fish from entering the turbines;

New design of the turbine blades and housing to
minimize injury to fish;

Juvenile bypass systems to collect juvenile fish and
route them around the dams;

New ``fish slides'', or spillway weirs, that pass
fish safely over the dams;

Flow deflectors at spill bays to improve water
quality during spill; and,

Many improvements to fish and wildlife habitat and
hatcheries.
As we look to protect these investments in fish mitigation,
predation is a significant factor on salmon and steelhead mortality and
needs more attention as part of a comprehensive plan. A classic
``conflict of laws'' problem between the ESA, the Migratory Bird Treaty
Act, and the Marine Mammal Protection Act has left bird predators
consuming between 4% and 21% of the juvenile salmonids migrating down
river each year, and sea lions consuming an estimated 4% or more of the
adult spring chinook population passing the Bonneville Dam each year.
They also consume large numbers of sturgeon and lamprey. This figure
does not include salmon and steelhead taken by sea lions from the
estuary up to Bonneville Dam.
Despite these non-hydro impacts, juvenile in-river survival today
is nearly twice as high as it was in the mid-to-late 1970's. Adult
survival through the dams and reservoirs is similar to that observed in
natural rivers. Again, hydropower is only one of many factors impacting
species. Any approach to salmon recovery that will be successful long-
term must take into account all aspects of the salmon lifecycle
including impacts from hydro, hatcheries, harvest, and habitat.
But, it is the mandated constraints on federal hydropower
operations that have been most striking in both in their cost and their
operational impact on the system. Operational constraints on the FCRPS,
such as spilling water over the dams or adjusting the timing of flows
in the river, have reduced the average generation of the system by
about 1100 average megawatts of energy, or about 13%, since 1995. Over
the past five years, the average annual replacement cost of that energy
is $460 million, borne by the customers.
Water is spilled over the federal dams in the lower Snake and main-
stem Columbia River to purportedly improve survival of juvenile fish
passing these dams. The current spill program starts in early April
each year and concludes at the end of August. The program is balanced
with optimizing safe juvenile fish passage using fish transportation
programs which often provide the highest fish survival benefit,
especially in low water years.
The 2010 biological opinion allows the potential for modification
of the spill program and other river and dam operations to optimize
fish survival for both adult and juvenile fish. Research indicates that
at times, transporting by barge is the safest route of passage for
juvenile fish, especially late in the summer and during low water
years. The current court injunction mandates specific spill schedules
and dam operations which do not provide the flexibility to improve
operations of the federal hydrosystem to maximize fish passage
survival.
The spill and flow regimes causing a decrease in federal hydropower
generation, and the extra associated costs, have occurred at the same
time that load growth and other demands for that power have increased
in the region. As noted in the Northwest Power and Conservation
Council's Sixth Power Plan, this will push the region to add more
thermal, carbon-emitting generation as gas-fired generation is the most
likely available source to meet base-load power needs.
New Challenges for the Hydropower Investment: Intermittent Resources
As noted above, a challenge for hydropower in the near future comes
from the combination of increasing demand for electricity at the same
time that this resource has experienced increased regulatory
limitations on generation.
The reliability and flexibility of hydropower generation make the
FCRPS particularly well-suited to integrating other renewable sources
of energy, such as wind, that are much more intermittent. But, there is
a limit to the available capacity and flexibility of the system, and
therefore a limit to the demands that can be placed on the system
regardless of whether those demands are created by fish and wildlife,
wind and other intermittent resource integration, or simply following
the swings in customers' loads placed on the system.
PPC members support efforts to responsibly add cost-effective
renewable resources to the region's electric generation resource mix.
But, effectively integrating intermittent renewable resources poses a
number of challenges that must be properly addressed to ensure
effective operations, system reliability and cost allocation.
Further complicating this dynamic is the dramatic pace of wind
development in the Northwest even as the region scurries to catch up to
the technological and operational challenges posed by wind power's
unique characteristics. As recently as 2005, the system operated by BPA
integrated only 250 MW of wind generation. That amount doubled in 2006,
then doubled again in 2007. Today, there is over 3500 MW of wind being
integrated into the BPA transmission and power system. This represents
a 1400 percent increase in just six years.
BPA and the region should be acknowledged for this massive effort
to integrate such a large volume of renewable energy so quickly. And,
preference customers have been directly involved with the development
and purchase of some of those projects. But, wind generation in the
Northwest is mostly localized in one portion of the region. This
creates a dynamic where variability of total output can range very
suddenly from almost full regional capacity to almost none.
Forecasts showing that wind capacity might double again in the next
few years raise numerous concerns and questions about the operational
impacts to the system: Can an increasingly congested transmission
system handle this influx? Can a constrained hydro system be relied on
to provide reserves to balance the variability? As those reserves are
provided, or as additional sources of capacity and new transmission are
added, who will fund these initiatives, and will proper principles of
cost causation be followed? There is a fundamental rate-making
principle that there should not be costs shifted to those who do not
cause the cost or who do not benefit from the expenditure.
Over-generation: Too Much of a Good Thing? As we look at this
year's estimate of high water run-off in the Columbia River system,
which is currently 119 percent of average, it raises the specter of
another serious challenge that occurs when the region experiences an
oversupply of generation during surging spring runoff, as it did in
June 2010. Water moving through the Columbia and Snake Rivers must pass
through generators in order to avoid excessive spill that can harm
endangered and threatened fish and violate Clean Water Act requirements
that prevent over-saturation of gas in the water column. The challenge
is further exacerbated when it occurs during periods of low electrical
demand, since there must be a load to use the electricity that is
generated at the dams in order to keep the system in balance.
In these instances water must run through generators instead of
spilled in order to ensure the hydropower operations necessary to meet
fish protection requirements (avoiding high gas saturation). The extra
power is sold at low prices, or even given for free, to utilities that
reduce generation from their own projects and use federal power instead
to make their deliveries (this is known as ``environmental
redispatch''). Thermal generation projects have historically taken
advantage of these sales to displace their own generation with lower-
cost hydropower. During the high water oversupply event in June 2010,
thermal generation was largely shut down or reduced by purchases of
energy from BPA.
However, because of differing economic incentives, such as the need
to generate electricity in order to receive renewable energy credits
(RECs) or tax credits, wind generators in the region did not similarly
shutdown during the high water event last June. This resulted in the
threat of harmful levels of spill in order for the system to avoid the
extreme consequences of over-generating.
BPA has developed a Record of Decision to describe how they will
handle this type of event entering the spring run-off season this year.
PPC believes the policy is a solid approach that meets the obligations
of the federal system, reflects prudent business practice, helps
protect the investment in the system, and meets legal requirements
designed to protect fish.
In line with BPA's proposed policy, PPC believes: (1) BPA should
use all other reasonable means to dispose of excess federal generation
during a high water event before providing federal hydropower at no
cost to displace renewable generators within the BPA Balancing
Authority; (2) BPA should adhere to clear and transparent steps it will
take to reduce spill during high runoff conditions with specific
triggers for environmental redispatch; (3) BPA should not pay an entity
to take federal hydropower in order to replace a lost taxpayer subsidy
or renewable energy credit. Also; and, (4) BPA, its customers, and the
other stakeholders should seek other policy changes to provide
compensation for the revenues associated with federal and state
renewable energy rules. For instance, hydropower delivered under
environmental redispatch conditions should be classified as
``renewable'' to meet the REC or tax credit requirements so that wind
generators still receive the associated revenues they expect.
Conclusion: Protecting the Investment
In light of its significant benefits to customers and to the
environment as a clean, renewable, and flexible form of generation,
hydropower should be preserved, encouraged, and enhanced where
possible. Over the last 75 years of major federal hydropower production
in the Pacific Northwest, citizens of our region and neighboring
regions have benefited from this resource and its clean energy, low
impact transportation, irrigation, flood control, and recreation.
The first and best step to protecting this investment is to
stabilize the regulatory burden upon it. The 2010 supplemental
biological opinion for operation of the FCRPS for salmonids is the
result of massive work to create science-based consensus among states,
tribes, and federal agencies. It should be approved and allowed to
work.
While the biological opinion and associated memoranda of agreement
represent ominous costs to preference customers, we also see the need
to get the plan approved in order to create some regulatory stability.
This is an opportunity to move forward as a region and build on the
success we've seen so far in salmon mitigation. Meanwhile, better
approaches to predation, better policies around harvest and hatchery
practices, and more efficient use of water through the system are areas
customers will watch closely.
Another way to protect the investment in all areas of the FCRPS is
to work hard to make sure future investments are sensible and are the
best possible use of limited ratepayer dollars. Our goal is to have
significant input at the front end of the BPA, Army Corps of Engineers,
and Bureau of Reclamation budget processes for the Federal Columbia
River Power System. As customers, we do not want merely to be arguing
in rate cases over the allocation of costs already incurred. Currently,
an evolution of the budget process for BPA called the Integrated
Business Review is further refining how and when customers get
information. But, an enhanced customer role in key spending decisions
still is needed, especially as additional wildlife funding commitments
are considered. We look forward to working closely as well with the
Northwest Power and Conservation Council in that pursuit.
One other way to protect the investment is to protect the investors
from unintended consequences. BPA should conduct a new assessment of
the impact of the influx of wind generation, and of potential impacts
in light of forecasts for future development. The Northwest Wind
Integration Forum, with an array of regional stakeholders, is one venue
where this could take place. Preference customers are looking to BPA to
adhere to the principles of cost causation as it incurs direct and
indirect costs from this challenge. But, we are ready to work
collectively towards long-term solutions.
And, one final way to protect those expected to make investments in
the federal hydropower system is to oppose any proposals to hijack the
value of that investment by raising the rates of Power Marketing
Administrations in the name of federal deficit reduction. Preference
customers pay for the costs of operations and maintenance of the
system, and they pay the principle plus interest of any Treasury debt
annually (the payment to Treasury last year was $864 million).
Proposals to raise the rates of Power Marketing Administrations for
deficit reduction are a misguided attempt to create a new regional tax
to fund the federal government.
At a critical time in our nation's history with respect to energy
policy, the federal hydropower system will play a lead role as a key
domestic source of adequate, efficient, reliable, and renewable energy.
Our large investment in the system certainly is worth protecting. Thank
you for holding this hearing, and for the opportunity to speak with you
today. I look forward to addressing any questions you may have.
______

Mr. McClintock. Thank you very much for your testimony. Our
next witness is Mr. Chris Morgan, President of the Colorado
Rural Electric Association and a Board Member of Gunnison
County Electric Association of Gunnison, Colorado.

STATEMENT OF CHRIS MORGAN, COLORADO REA PRESIDENT AND BOARD
MEMBER OF GUNNISON COUNTY ELECTRIC ASSOCIATION, GUNNISON,
COLORADO

Mr. Morgan. Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member and the rest of
the Committee, thank you for allowing me to come and speak to
you today.
I am here today to discuss the importance of Federal
hydropower, a reliable renewable resource, and keeping the
rates of Colorado's 1.25 million electric cooperative member-
owners affordable. Specifically, I will confine my testimony to
the Aspinall Unit.
The Aspinall Unit consists of three dams--Blue Mesa, Morrow
Point and Crystal Dams on the Gunnison River, and the Aspinall
Unit provides a number of benefits to the folks in the western
United States. It provides flood control, water storage for
municipal use and for irrigation, and it provides hydropower
generation. That hydropower generation is very cheap. In fact,
hydropower generation is the cheapest source of electricity
available to Gunnison County Electric Association and the other
cooperatives in the area.
The Aspinall Unit also has another critical feature. It
provides nearly half of the power peaking flexibility of the
Colorado River Storage Project. In addition, the energy
produced at the Aspinall Unit is renewable and emissions free.
As you know, Colorado has an active renewable portfolio
standard and has goals of being a leader in producing clean
energy. The Federal Government has set similar goals and is
currently contemplating an RPS for the nation. The Aspinall
Unit has been meeting those goals for many, many years already.
The Aspinall Unit also provides benefits to the West. It
provides recreational opportunities such as boating, fishing,
sailing, and river running. They provide water flows to help
protect endangered species, and the creation of a substantial
fishery.
Mr. Chairman, currently we have a reasonable balance in the
Aspinall Unit. After seven years of Federal litigation and a
mediated settlement, the Black Canyon Consent Decree was signed
on December 31, 2008. The drafting of the consent degree
involved approximately 30 parties including the relevant
Federal agencies, Reclamation, National Park Service and
Western Area Power Administration, also the State of Colorado,
environmental interests and recreational enthusiasts, and
Federal hydropower customers. So as you can see there has
already been struck a balance between environmental interests
and hydropower.
The Bureau of Reclamation should be given the power of
discretion to operate the Aspinall Unit to meet a wide variety
of important needs from power generation to recreation to
environmental concerns, and I understand there are proposals to
restrict power generating operations at the Aspinall Unit which
would have a direct impact on the ability of the Western Power
Administration to deliver power to its customers, ultimately
leading to increased rates.
As you know, Colorado has been hit hard by the recent
recession. My constituents and cooperative members have lost
jobs and some have even lost their homes. The people of
Colorado are already experiencing significant increases in the
cost of electric generation due to many factors: increased
construction costs of generation and transmission facilities,
increased costs of siting, increased cost of additional
regulations, and increased costs associated with rising fuel
costs.
The people of Gunnison County and Colorado cannot tolerate
anymore rate increase, and since electric cooperatives are
nonprofit utilities every additional dollar that is passed down
goes directly to the consumer.
Mr. Chairman, in closing, I would like to assert that I am
not only advocating solely for the electric utility industry.
This is because why? I am an environmentalist as well and a
nature lover. While I am not a scientist, I am an avid boater.
I have had the opportunity to run the Grand Canyon in a kayak
four times. I have spent over 60 nights down at the bottom of
the Grand Canyon. I have had opportunities to kayak the Black
Canyon on the Gunnison which the Aspinall Unit resides upon. I
have seen that there is a balance. I go to these places because
they are beautiful and they are wonderful places to go visit,
and I also understand at the same time that we need clean,
reliable, affordable, low-cost dispatchable electric
generation, and that we cannot afford to lose any of our dams.
We cannot afford to pass more costs onto our consumers.
So, I would assert that we currently have a balance and we
should maintain the status quo that we have today. Thank you
very much, sir.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Morgan follows:]

Statement of Chris Morgan, Board President,
Colorado Rural Electric Association

Chairman McClintock and Ranking Member Napolitano, my name is Chris
Morgan. I am currently a board member of Gunnison County Electric
Association (GCEA) in Gunnison County, Colorado and I am also currently
serving as the Board President of the Colorado Rural Electric
Association (CREA). GCEA's service boundaries encompass portions of
Gunnison, Hinsdale and Saguache counties in Colorado, and it serves
over 10,000 customers on 1,030 miles of distribution lines. CREA is the
state association representing the 1.25 million Coloradans spread
across 70% of the state's landmass who depend on an electric
cooperative for their electricity.
I am here today to discuss the importance of the Federal
Hydropower--a reliable renewable resource- in keeping the rates of
Colorado's 1.25 million electric cooperative member-owners affordable.
Specifically, I will confine my testimony to the importance of the
Colorado River Storage Project (CRSP) and the integral role that the
Bureau of Reclamation's Aspinall Unit--the facilities of which are in
Gunnison County's backyard--plays in providing reliable renewable
generation during peak times of electric power consumption in the West.

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

GCEA purchases power under a contract with Tri-State Generation
and Transmission. GCEA's average wholesale cost of power year for year
to date 2011 is $69.24 per MWh. That translates into a wholesale cost
of nearly 7 cents a KWh. As you can see from the graph to the right,
Hydroelectric power represents the cheapest portion of the portfolio of
the electricity that GCEA purchases at a wholesale rate of less than
half of the cost of the blended cost the energy we purchase. In
addition, while I do not represent nor is GCEA associated with the
power consumed by the municipal utility of the City of Gunnison, the
City of Gunnison also enjoys rate relief from the hydropower produced
by the Aspinall Unit.
The Aspinall Unit consists of three dams and reservoirs on the
Gunnison River in Colorado: Blue Mesa, Crystal, and Morrow Point. The
Aspinall Unit is one of the components of the federal multi-purpose
Colorado River Storage Project that is operated by the Bureau of
Reclamation. CRSP power resources are marketed, under long-term
contract, pursuant to federal law, to non-profit entities such as
electric cooperative and municipal utilities in the States of Colorado,
New Mexico, Wyoming, Utah, Nevada and Arizona. The Glen Canyon Dam in
Arizona is the largest generating feature of the CRSP. However, due to
environmentally imposed restricted operations at Glen Canyon in Arizona
and the Flaming Gorge Dam in Utah, the Aspinall Unit in Colorado
currently provides nearly half of the peaking flexibility in the
overall CRSP. In other words, the Aspinall Unit is like a light switch
in your house--you can turn it on during peak times of electricity
usage and turn it off when electricity demand decreases.
There are proposals to restrict power-generating operations at the
Aspinall Unit, which would have a direct impact on the ability of the
Western Area Power Administration (``WAPA'') to deliver power to its
customers--ultimately leading to increased rates. (WAPA delivers the
hydropower generation to Tri-State Generation and Transmission
Association, a power supply co-op headquartered in Colorado, which in
turn provides the power to GCEA).
As the economy struggles to make its way out of the ``Great
Recession''--Colorado's electric cooperative consumers cannot afford
increased electricity rates.
In order to understand the importance of the Aspinall Unit, it is
important to know the history of Federal power generation in the Upper
Colorado River Basin. The Colorado River Basin resources are split
between the needs of the Upper (Colorado, Wyoming, Utah and New Mexico)
and Lower (Utah, Arizona and California) Basin states as codified in
the Colorado River Basin Compact of 1922. The compact calls for the
Upper Basin states not to deplete the flow of the Colorado below 75
million acre feet during any period of 10 consecutive years. During the
post World War II boom years the population density of the U.S. began
to shift to the West and Southwest increasing demand on the resources
of the Colorado River Basin. In a bid to sustain economic development
in the Upper Basin and prevent the catastrophic consequences to the
Upper Basin states of a Lower Basin Compact ``call,'' Congress passed
and President Eisenhower signed into law the Colorado River Storage
Project Act of 1956.
The CRSP Act authorized the construction of the Glen Canyon,
Aspinall, Flaming Gorge and Navajo facilities. This Act had three
purposes: ``the reclamation [irrigation] of arid and semiarid land,
control of floods, and for the generation of hydroelectric power. . .''
The CRSP Act excluded fish, wildlife and recreation from its purposes.
About a decade after President Eisenhower signed the CRSP Act into
law, further population shifts to the Southwest prompted Congress to
pass the Colorado River Basin Project Act (CRBPA). The1968 Act included
language stating that ``. . .improving conditions for fish and
wildlife'' was a purpose of the Act, but it also explicitly states that
``Nothing in this chapter [act] shall be construed to alter, amend,
repeal, modify, or be in conflict with the provisions of. . .the
Colorado River Storage Project Act.'' In other words, the language
included in the 1968 law for fish and wildlife does not, in any way,
change the original purposes of the 1956 law which were to promote
irrigation, flood control and hydropower generation.
Unfortunately, questions still arise regarding the authorized
purposes of facilities constructed under the authority of both laws.
Those questions over the last 10 years have created the following
debate: should the Aspinall Unit be operated primarily to meet the flow
requirements of two endangered species of fish, the Razorback Sucker
and Bonytail Chub OR should Reclamation have the discretion to operate
Aspinall to meet its statutory obligations and authorized purposes
while at the same time benefitting the additional resource needs of
fish, wildlife and recreation? I would argue that Reclamation should
operate the three dams on the Gunnison to meet both power generation
needs and to protect endangered species.
Nearly 10 years ago, the National Park Service asked for a reserved
water right in the Black Canyon of the Gunnison, which is immediately
downstream from the Aspinall Unit. In the meantime, Reclamation began
work on an environmental impact statement (EIS) process which was
intended to provide for operational changes at Aspinall to help meet
flow recommendations thought to be necessary for the endangered fish
species. After several years of negotiation with multiple federal
agencies and stakeholders, a consensus draft EIS was prepared. The
draft was put ``on hold'' until the Black Canyon water right issues
were settled.
After seven years of federal litigation and a mediated settlement,
the Black Canyon Consent Decree was signed on December 31, 2008. The
drafting of the consent decree involved approximately 30 parties,
including the relevant federal agencies (Reclamation, National Park
Service, and Western Area Power Administration), the State of Colorado,
environmental interests, recreational enthusiasts and federal
hydropower customers. The decree was intended to ``split the baby'' by
allowing for the Aspinall Unit to be operated for two concurrent
purposes--a Spring Peak flow release to meet flow recommendations which
should assist in the recovery of endangered species while at the same
time providing a peak for the National Park Service resources in the
Black Canyon of the Gunnison National Park..
In late December, 2010, after nearly two years of being ``on
hold'', the draft EIS was reissued to the cooperating agencies. It was
significantly revised by the Department of the Interior in Washington,
D.C. with no consultation among the stakeholders that had worked
diligently for several years during the drafting process. Several
aspects of the revised EIS appear to elevate Park resources above the
originally authorized Project purposes, and could have significant
impact on the flexibility and timing of hydropower generation.
Cooperating agencies submitted comments on April 1, but as of this
time, it is uncertain as to what the next steps will be. The State of
Colorado, the Platte River Power Authority and the Western Area Power
Administration all submitted detailed comments recommending that those
consensus provisions contained in the draft be reinstituted in the
revised EIS and that the careful balancing of resource purposes and
benefits that was sought by those involved in the drafting be
reinstated. This ``balance'' is critical when federal multi-purpose
projects are operated. As noted in a recent District Court decision,
Judge David Campbell, in ruling for the United States, highlighted the
importance of ``balance''. Although he was referring to the operation
of Glen Canyon Dam, I believe that his ruling is equally applicable to
Reclamation's operation of the Aspinall Unit because the projects of
the CRSP are inextricably linked. ``This experience aptly illustrates
the complex set of interests Reclamation must balance in operating the
Dam. Those interests include not only the endangered species below the
Dam, but also tribes in the region, the seven Colorado River basin
states, large municipalities that depend on water and power from Glen
Canyon Dam, agricultural interests, Grand Canyon National Park, and
national energy needs at a time when clean energy production is
becoming increasingly important.'' \1\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Grand Canyon Trust v. United States, No. CV-07-8164-PHX-DGC,
Order of March 29, 2011
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
In addition, Mr. Chairman, GCEA has sought the evaluation of the
possibility of pursuing the addition of a hydroelectric generation
facility to an existing BOR dam within our service territory. The
specific storage facility is known as Taylor Park Reservoir Dam. We
have conducted a feasibility study of the possibility of adding a
hydroelectric generator to that existing dam alongside two other
partners--The Upper Gunnison River Conservation District and the
Uncompahgre Water Users Association. The results of this study
concluded that there were two feasible options for electric generation
from this facility, shown below. These conclusions are based upon
historic hydrological conditions, existing and possible electric
distribution line capacity, power generation potential and a
comprehensive economic analysis. The two preliminary recommendations
provided by the URS Corporation are briefly outlined below.

1.960 MW hydropower plant. This would be possible
under the current single phase transmission capabilities
existing in the Taylor River Canyon currently.

3.675 MW hydropower plant. This option would require
a complete rebuild of the transmission facilities from Taylor
Reservoir in order to place the energy on the grid.
This power would be available from an existing water storage
facility. In addition, the power would be emissions-free and
potentially be dispatchable in order to help mitigate peak demands of
electric energy. As you are aware, mitigation of peak demand periods
eliminate or delay the need to build new generation resources, reduce
emissions and reduce costs to the consumer.
However, GCEA is very concerned that as we are a very small not for
profit utility with limited revenues. The financial risks associated
with the navigation of the governmental regulatory process in pursuing
this project may be a hurdle we cannot overcome. A small utility such
as GCEA needs regulatory certainty or we cannot pursue a project, and
GCEA has observed historically that regulatory certainty is not
something we can count on. In order for a small utility such as GCEA to
help coordinate the use of an existing government owned water storage
facility for the production of reliable, emission free and reliable
electric energy, we need your help.
In closing, Mr. Chairman, I think Judge Campbell's decision is
correct and speaks to the title of this hearing. If we are moving
toward a cleaner and greener energy future, there must be a recognition
of the fact that hydropower is the cheapest, and most abundant
renewable energy resource. In my view, protecting Federal Hydropower
Investments in the West means primarily utilizing Aspinall and other
CRSP facilities for one of the purposes for which they were originally
intended--the generation of clean, renewable and affordable hydropower.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, I'd be happy to answer any questions you
or members of the committee might have.
______

Mr. McClintock. Great. Thank you for your testimony. Our
next witness who has already been introduced, Mr. Vic Simmons,
General Manager of Rushmore Electric Cooperative in Rapid City,
South Dakota.

STATEMENT OF VIC SIMMONS, GENERAL MANGER, RUSHMORE ELECTRIC
COOPERATIVE, RAPID CITY, SOUTH DAKOTA

Mr. Simmons. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Members of the
Committee.
As introduced, I am Vic Simmons. I am General Manager of
Rushmore Electric Power Cooperative. Rushmore Electric is a GNT
in western South Dakota. Our hydropower comes from the Bureau
of Reclamation and Corps of Engineers dams on the Missouri
River and its tributaries.
Rushmore's allocations along with allocations to five
Native American tribes in western South Dakota make up about
one-fourth of our power supply resources. I also serve as
Chairman of the Water and Power Planning Committee of the
Midwest Electric Consumers Association. Midwest is a regional
coalition of over 300 consumer-owned utilities serving over 3
million consumers through nine western states.
Rushmore Electric strongly supports the funding necessary
to keep the Federal hydropower resources operating as a vital
part of our power supply. Without dependable funding in the
Federal budget the reliability of this system will suffer.
Replacing this renewable hydropower with other resources would
cost the consumers of western South Dakota over $2.7 million
per year. This extra burden is not affordable in an area that
continually ranks among the lowest income areas in the United
States. This is an area where we often measure the number of
miles of line it takes to serve a customer, not the other way
around.
The continuing rising cost of regulations, compliance with
Endangered Species Act requirements, and rules that seem to
lack common sense take up valuable time and resources. As an
example, the spring rise scenario to encourage pallid sturgeon
to spawn would release water when electric loads are at their
lowest, thus wasting that stored water. If that water is not
there in the summer when we need it most for peaking
conditions, it would have to be replaced with natural gas-fired
generation at a higher cost and a higher environmental issue.
Like most of the infrastructure in this country, a safe and
reliable Federal hydropower system needs adequate and
dependable funding for capital improvements, operations and
maintenance. These facilities were built over 45 years ago.
While the Bureau of Reclamation and the Corps of Engineers have
done a remarkable job of keeping these facilities in top
condition, as they get older these facilities need more funds,
not less.
As Federal hydropower consumers, as my friend and colleague
stated, we pay 100 percent of the costs. We pay that back with
interest. We also cover our share of the dams and the
reservoirs, and we pay a share of irrigation. So far as of the
end of 2009 $1.2 billion of the $2.8 billion Federal financed
power facilities have been paid back with interest.
Protecting the Federal hydropower investment in the West is
not only about providing hydropower, flood control, municipal
and industrial water supply, irrigation, recreation,
navigation, fish and wildlife, it is also a sound business
decision for the United States. The Corps of Engineers is
determined that the Missouri River Dams have prevented over 25
billion in flood damage since 1938, thus repaying the original
investment in the dams billions of times over. The Federal
hydro system has returned the investment of the past and will
continue to return the investments of the future. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Simmons follows:]

Statement of Vic Simmons, General Manager,
Rushmore Electric Power Cooperative

Mr. Chairman and members of the subcommittee, thank you for the
opportunity to testify before you today on protecting federal
hydropower investment in the west.
My name is Vic Simmons. I am the General Manager of Rushmore
Electric Power Cooperative. Rushmore Electric is a Generation and
Transmission cooperative serving western South Dakota. Our hydro power
comes from the Bureau of Reclamation and Corps of Engineers dams on the
Missouri River and its tributaries through allocations from the Western
Area Power Administration. Rushmore Electric's allocation along with
allocations to five Native American Tribes located within our western
South Dakota service territory make up just short of one-fourth of our
power supply resources.
I also serve as the Chairman of the Water and Power Planning
Committee of the Mid-West Electric Consumers Association. The Mid-West
Electric Consumers Association is a regional coalition of over 300
consumer-owned utilities (rural electric cooperatives, public power
districts, and municipal electric utilities) serving over 3 million
consumers through purchases of hydropower generated at federal multi-
purpose projects in the Missouri River basin under the Pick-Sloan
Missouri Basin Program. The nine states included within the Mid-West
footprint are Colorado, Iowa, Kansas, Minnesota, Montana, Nebraska,
North Dakota, South Dakota and Wyoming. Midwest and its members enjoy
an excellent working relationship with our federal partners.
Rushmore Electric strongly supports the funding necessary to keep
the federal hydropower resources operating as a vital part of our power
supply. Without dependable funding in the federal budget, the
reliability of this system will suffer. Replacing this renewable
hydropower with other resources would cost the consumers of western
South Dakota over $2.7 million dollars per year. This extra burden is
not affordable in an area that continually ranks among the lowest
income areas in the United States. This is an area where we often
measure the number of miles of line it takes to serve a customer,
rather than the number of customers per mile of line.
The continually rising costs of regulations, compliance with the
Endangered Species Act requirements, and rules that seem to lack common
sense take up valuable time and resources. As an example, the spring
rise scenario to encourage the pallid sturgeon to spawn, would release
water when electrical loads are at their lowest, thus wasting the
stored water. If that water is not there when it is needed for peak
conditions later in the summer, expensive natural gas fired turbines
would need to be used.
Like most of the infrastructure in this country, a safe and
reliable federal hydropower system needs adequate and dependable
funding for capital improvements, operations, and maintenance. These
facilities were built over 45 years ago. While the Bureau of
Reclamation and the Corps of Engineers has done a remarkable job of
keeping these facilities in top condition, as they get older, these
facilities will take more funds to maintain and update, not less.
Federal hydropower facilities are part of the multi-purpose
projects that serve a variety of purposes--flood control, municipal and
industrial water supply, irrigation, recreation, navigation, fish and
wildlife. Unlike most other federal capital projects, much of the costs
of constructing, operating, and maintaining these hydropower projects
are repaid to the federal government with interest.
Power customers purchase electrical power generated at federal
multi-purpose projects that have been authorized for hydropower
development, and are paying back 100% of the costs of these facilities:

the federal capital investment in generation and
transmission facilities, with interest, including all of the
original investment and the repair and replacement costs;

an allocated share of the original multi-purpose
capital investment (the dam, the reservoir, etc.) and an
allocated share of the repair and replacement with interest of
multi-purpose facilities;

all of the annual operations and maintenance cost of
generation and transmission facilities;

an allocated share of the annual operations and
maintenance costs of multi-purpose facilities; and

the portion of the cost of federal irrigation
projects that is deemed to be beyond the ability of the
irrigators to repay.

$1.2 billion of the $2.8 billion total federally
financed power facilities (Power's share of the dams and
transmission) have been paid back.
Protecting the Federal Hydropower Investments in the West is not
only about providing hydropower, flood control, municipal and
industrial water supply, irrigation, recreation, navigation, fish and
wildlife, it is also a sound business decision for the United States.
The Corps of Engineers has determined that the Missouri River dams have
prevented $25 billion in flood damage since 1938, thus repaying the
original invest in just the dams of $1.2 billion many times over. The
federal hydro system has returned the investments of the past and will
continue to return the investments of the future.
Thank you.
______

Mr. McClintock. Thank you for your testimony. Our next
witness is Mr. Andrew Fahlund. He is the Senior Vice President
of Conservation for American Rivers, Washington, D.C. His group
is referenced in several of the opening statements, and I want
to stress is here at the invitation of the Minority Party. Mr.
Fahlund for five minutes.

STATEMENT OF ANDREW FAHLUND, SENIOR VICE PRESIDENT OF
CONSERVATION, AMERICAN RIVERS, WASHINGTON, D.C.

Mr. Fahlund. Mr. Chairman and Members of the Subcommittee,
thank you for inviting me to testify before you today.
I am Senior Vice President for conservation programs
through American Rivers. We were founded in 1973 with offices
throughout the nation, and we are the leading voice for healthy
rivers and the communities that depend on them.
Hydropower dams have flooded forests, destroyed fisheries,
diminished recreational opportunities and caused great harm to
the long-term viability of mostly rural and coastal economies
that depend on those resources. However, when hydropower is
sited, operated, mitigated appropriately, hydropower can be a
tremendous benefit to the nation. That is why American Rivers
is signatory to settlements supporting the continued operation
of thousands of megawatts and supports the new development of
thousands more.
To have a serious conversation about increasing our
nation's hydropower resources, let us look at where the big
opportunities really lie instead of scapegoating the interests
of recreation, fisheries, tribal resources, and environmental
sustainability. The majority of people in the hydropower
industry, the environmental community and government have moved
beyond that sort of simplistic thinking. I want to touch on the
two greatest opportunities to increase hydropower capacity in
the United States and address two of the greatest threats.
The first is to use existing infrastructure. Some Federal
agencies estimate we could increase Federal hydropower output
by as much as 30 percent by simply replacing old turbines and
generators. This may present an opportunity to also reduce
environmental impacts and would spark job creation through the
manufacture and installation of those devices. Adding turbines
to non-hydropower dams, pipes and canals offers some potential
as well. Numerous tax incentives and renewable energy portfolio
requirements have included this sort of incremental hydropower,
and we have supported that as well.
The second is to better coordinate the operations of dams
within each basin. Hydropower dams are owned and regulated by a
patchwork of entities. They typically serve many more functions
than simply generating power, and those are often competing. In
fact, if we really wanted to maximize hydropower production, we
would stop diverting water out of streams for consumptive use.
That is not something that most would support. However,
efficiency is part of the answer.
We can make some big gains in power production as well as
improve other ways of managing water if we require agencies to
periodically review and coordinate dam operations on a basin-
wide scale and balancing all of the competing interests.
Of the threats, perhaps the greatest to hydropower
production in the near term is drought. Models are fairly
universal in their productions. The climate change will result
in less snow pack and more drought. Confronting the causes of
climate change is vital to maintaining our hydropower capacity
as well as to protecting fisheries and other species.
The other threat that I would like to highlight is
political paralysis. Living in a democracy means that getting
anything done typically involves consensus and collaboration.
One side may win at the expense of the other for a short time,
but those victories are fleeting. Continuing to fight the old
flights of zero sum gains will continue to lead us into court
and stalemate and won't advance the cause of hydropower
environmental restoration or anything else.
We need to move forward with co-equal goals of power
production, environmental enhancement and sustainable water
supplies. That may sound Pollyanna to some, but I have seen
what success can look like in places like Penobscot in Maine
and the Klamath in Oregon and California.
I visited the dams in the Klamath Basin in 2002 at the very
height of the hostilities there, and rather than seeing despair
and cynicism some of us saw opportunity and hope. As we began a
dialogue among the many stakeholders we understood that what
each of us wanted was not water, electricity or fish, but
predictability, trust and hope to raise families, to make a
living, and maintain a way of life. We reached agreement on
power issues, water issues and fish issues when we all started
viewing each other as neighbors who rise and fall together. Are
the needs of a farmer in Klamath Falls any more or less
important than a fisherman in Eureka? Not anymore. And that was
a remarkable transformation.
Discussions about hydropower often get derailed into a
referendum on dam removal. Despite the claims of some, dam
removal is not the biggest threat to hydropower capacity in
America. I would be the first to agree that suggesting all or
even most dams should be removed is a radical notion, but no
more radical than suggesting that all dams should remain no
matter what the cost. Dams are not monuments. Dams are tools
and tools wear out or become obsolete.
Leaving our children with the burden of an environmental
deficit is no less insidious than leaving them with the burden
of a financial one, and we believe it is possible to protect
the environment while protecting our investments in hydropower
and other water infrastructure.
Thank you for the opportunity to testify, and I would be
happy to answer your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Fahlund follows:]

Statement of Andrew Fahlund, Senior Vice President for Conservation,
American Rivers

1. Introduction
Chairman McClintock, Ranking Member Napolitano, and Members of the
Subcommittee: thank you for this opportunity to testify today and to
share American Rivers' perspective on U.S. hydropower policy.
American Rivers is the nation's leading voice for healthy rivers
and the communities that depend on them. We believe rivers are vital to
our health, safety and quality of life. American Rivers mobilizes an
extensive network comprised of tens of thousands of members and
activists located in every state across the county. We have been
working to protect and restore the health of rivers that have been
impacted by hydropower dams since we were founded in 1973. We also
serve on the Steering Committee of the Hydropower Reform Coalition, a
broad consortium of more than 150 national, regional, and local
organizations with a combined membership of more than one million
people. In doing so, we represent stakeholders--anglers, canoeists,
outdoor enthusiasts, conservation advocates, and lake homeowners--who
seek to improve the water quality, fisheries, recreation, and general
environmental health of rivers that have been damaged by hydropower dam
operations. We are active in many hydropower licensing proceedings
currently pending before the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission
(FERC), as well as other hydropower-related proceedings involving the
Bureau of Reclamation and the Army Corps of Engineers. We have
constructively contributed to numerous hydropower-related policy
discussions.
2. Towards a balanced Federal hydropower policy that encourages
environmentally responsible hydropower development and
operation
American Rivers is emphatically not anti-hydropower. We seek to
improve the nation's hydropower system by encouraging increased
generation while improving environmental performance. Conventional
hydropower is one of the oldest and most well-established among a
growing number of technologies that provide low-emissions alternatives
to fossil-fuel energy. Nationally, hydropower provides about 75,000
megawatts of capacity, and represents nearly 7% of total generation. We
expect that hydropower will continue to be a part of our nation's
energy mix for years to come, and accordingly we have signed dozens of
agreements supporting the continued, long-term operation of
hydroelectric dams that together provide our nation with thousands of
megawatts of generating capacity. Reasonable modifications have
dramatically improved the performance of these dams, providing fish
passage, improving flows, enhancing water quality, protecting riparian
lands, and restoring recreational opportunities.
American Rivers supports the development of new hydropower
resources that can be brought online while avoiding significant
additional harm to local ecosystems. In recent years, we have worked
closely with the National Hydropower Association to develop and promote
several pieces of legislation that provides incentives for new
hydropower generation. We support hydropower that is developed and
operated in a responsible manner that avoids harm to America's precious
river resources. Given the very real environmental and social impacts
of global climate change--especially on vital freshwater systems -we
understand the need to develop new sources of energy that can replace
America's reliance on fossil fuels. Hydropower is and will continue to
be an important part of this mix.
However, we also know that the energy we receive from hydropower
comes at an enormous cost to the health of our nation's rivers and
communities. Hydropower is unique among renewable resources in the
scale at which it can damage the environment. Hydropower's
environmental and social impacts are serious and extremely well
documented. Hydropower dam operations are responsible for the
extinction and near-extinction of a number of species. Hydropower
plants often divert water around entire sections of river, leaving them
dry or constantly alternating between drought and flood-like
conditions. Hydropower dams have flooded forests, destroyed fisheries,
diminished recreational opportunities, and caused great harm to the
long-term viability of the local--mostly rural--economies that depend
on those resources.
The harm caused by most hydropower dams can be avoided if
hydropower is sited, constructed, and operated in a responsible manner.
A few simple changes can make an enormous difference in the health of a
river. Hydropower operators can change the timing of power generation
to mimic a river's natural hydrologic conditions, stabilize lake levels
and dam releases to protect riverside land from erosion, provide fish
ladders and other measures that protect fish and allow them to pass
safely upstream and downstream of dams, restore habitat for fish and
wildlife, alter the design and operation of plants to maintain
appropriate temperature and oxygen levels in rivers, and provide public
access and release water back into rivers so that people can fish,
boat, and swim. These types of changes have a miniscule impact on the
overall generation of the nation's hydropower fleet. In fact, an
analysis by FERC found that since Congress passed laws in the 1986s to
encourage these types of improvements, overall generating capacity has
actually increased by 4.1%. The benefits to human and natural
communities have been immense.
There are, however, some rare cases--where the environmental,
social, and economic impacts of a dam cannot be adequately mitigated.
Where those impacts outweigh the benefits of a dam, American Rivers and
others sometimes advocate for decommissioning of hydropower dams. We
take this extraordinary step with great caution, and only as a last
resort: out of 20,441 MW of capacity that has been relicensed by FERC
since 1986, American Rivers' advocacy has led to roughly 222 MW of
licensed capacity being identified as suitable for decommissioning. Our
analysis indicates that this 222 MW is roughly equivalent to the
capacity of existing FERC-regulated projects that are in non-compliance
and not generating because their owners have failed to maintain them in
proper working condition. It represents just 1% of the capacity
relicensed by FERC since 1986, and only two-tenths of one percent of
the nation's total hydropower capacity. American Rivers has supported
policies and projects that have already resulted in much more new
hydropower capacity being brought online than capacity that has been
removed.
The threat of climate change demands urgent action on two major
fronts. First, we must dramatically reduce greenhouse gas emissions.
Our current hydropower capacity contributes to decreased dependence on
fossil fuels and our recommendations below represent suggestions for
how to build additional capacity without causing significant additional
harm to healthy rivers and the communities that depend upon them.
Ironically, because the forecasts of climate change in the west call
for less rain and snow, the fundamental fuel for hydropower is
significantly compromised.
Second, even if we bring emissions under control, the carbon
already in the atmosphere from historic emissions will cause inevitable
changes to the climate. We must therefore also take immediate action to
help both human and natural communities prepare for inevitable climate
changes. By protecting and restoring healthy watersheds, increasing
water efficiency, and improving the quality of our infrastructure we
can build resilient communities and ecosystems that stand a better
chance of weathering the impacts of global warming.
America is still blessed with many healthy, free-flowing rivers,
wetlands, and natural floodplains that protect communities, support
local jobs, and provide significant economic value. In fact, in many
rural economies, recreation and tourism play a greater role in job
creation and economic productivity than any other sector. We must
preserve and restore these natural resources and promote them as a
vital part of our economy. Now and in the years to come, we need
hydropower projects that are sited, built, and operated to produce
power while minimizing impacts to the rivers that sustain America's
human and natural communities. Federal agencies with a role in U.S.
hydropower policy, including the Bureau of Reclamation, the U.S. Army
Corps of Engineers, the Department of Energy, and the Federal Energy
Regulatory Commission must make the enhancement of environmental
quality--at existing and new sites alike--a top priority.
A balanced and responsible hydropower policy must encourage
responsible development while continually holding developers and
federal operators accountable for their environmental impacts and
insisting on the strictest performance standards. It must remove
unnecessary obstacles to development while recognizing at the most
fundamental level that a high level of environmental performance it is
a reasonable and necessary cost of doing business. It must encourage
new development to take place while also accepting that some sites are
simply not appropriate for new or increased hydropower production.
Congress must address both sides of this equation equally.
3. Opportunities for new hydropower development
American Rivers supports the development of hydropower projects
that are sited, constructed, and operated in a responsible manner so as
to avoid harm to America's precious river resources. Hydropower
projects that re-use existing water and hydropower infrastructure are
the best candidates for responsible development. There is enormous
potential from these types of projects. The U.S. Department of Energy
has estimated that more than 12,000 MW of new capacity could be added
simply by replacing antiquated generating equipment, and more than
12,600 MW more could be added by adding turbines to non-powered dams
(only 3% of the nation's dams are currently generating power), many of
which are owned and operated by the Federal government. With roughly
75,000 megawatts of installed capacity in the U.S., these types of
projects could provide a 30% increase in installed capacity, all
without the enormous costs and risks associated with new dam
construction. Encouraging such capacity additions at existing federal
facilities would be one of the most cost-effective ways to use scarce
taxpayer dollars to protect federal investments in water
infrastructure.
American Rivers has long advocated for policies that would
encourage or require hydropower operators to upgrade aging turbines and
generating equipment with updated, modern equipment. We believe that
the public should receive the full benefit of each drop of water that
passes through a turbine, and antiquated, inefficient equipment dilutes
these benefits. Efficiency improvements are relatively low-cost, use
turbines and equipment that is manufactured in the United States, and
can often contribute to improved environmental outcomes. These
efficiency upgrades are the simplest, most cost-effective, and lowest-
impact means of increasing hydropower generation. The potential gains
in generation are significant: in many cases, these upgrades can result
in a 10-20% increase in generation from the same amount of water. There
are substantial environmental benefits to these upgrades as well:
modern turbines often feature designs which are less harmful to fish,
and can operate efficiently across a different range of release levels,
allowing for managed flow regimes which more closely mimic a natural
river.
Turbines can also be added to many existing hydropower and non-
hydropower dams. While these retrofits are not appropriate in every
case, they offer new capacity for minimal additional environmental
impacts when done right. In some cases, retrofitting existing dams for
hydropower can leverage additional environmental improvements to the
affected river reach. For instance, a pending retrofit at the Holtwood
project on the Susquehanna River in Pennsylvania will more than double
that project's generating capacity while also providing for
substantially improved fish passage. Several years ago, American Rivers
worked closely with the hydropower industry and Members of Congress to
craft legislative language that would encourage such forward-thinking
development. This language has since been incorporated into the federal
law which provides a Production Tax Credit for Renewables, providing
developers with an incentive to develop at existing dams that are
currently operated for flood control, navigation, and water supply and
that could be developed without harmful changes to river flows.
Finally, an increasing number of developers--especially in the
west--are exploring off-stream hydroelectric development. Some
developers propose to place turbines in existing water conveyance
pipes. Others are adding hydropower capacity to irrigation canals.
Still others are placing turbines in municipal water treatment
facilities. While there is no official estimate of how much capacity
may be available from new conduit projects, we expect that it may be
significant, and new technologies are improving the economic viability
of these types of projects. Many of these projects have the potential
to create substantial environmental benefit. For instance, some
irrigation districts are using the revenue from power sales to fund
projects that will result in the more efficient use of water, leaving
more water in the river to provide ecosystem services. American Rivers
is working with conduit developers to find ways to lower the cost and
effort associated with developing these types of projects.
3.1 Balanced management of the federal hydropower system
The 171 hydropower plants that make up the federal hydropower
system provide more than 37,000 MW of electric capacity, or 50% of
total hydropower production in the United States. The federal
investment in hydropower production at these facilities is typically
seen as secondary to the dams' other authorized purposes, and
generation is very often secondary to flood control operations or water
deliveries for agriculture. In western basins where reservoirs are used
for multiple purposes, outdated operational guidelines, poor water
management and conservation practices, and an alarming lack of
coordination among multiple federal and non-federal projects are
leaving megawatts on the table. The Bureau of Reclamation and the Army
Corps of Engineers should improve their cooperation with FERC and its
non-federal licensees to ensure that water control and hydropower
systems are being operated efficiently on a basin scale. Additionally,
any water that is diverted from storage reservoirs for consumptive use
is water that is not available to generate power. Federal operators
should, as they examine water delivery contracts, consider the
relationship between end-user efficiency and hydropower production, and
take steps to ensure that hydropower generation is not threatened by
inefficient and wasteful consumptive water use.
American Rivers has worked on dozens of hydropower licensing
proceedings before the FERC over the past two decades, and our
experience has shown that the comprehensive review of hydropower
projects operations with extensive stakeholder involvement results in
significant improvements to environmental quality while retaining
nearly all of those projects' capacity to generate electricity. While
the concept of a periodic review that is open to all interested members
of the public is a long-standing one in the realm of non-federal
hydropower projects, a similar process is lacking--and needed--for
hydropower facilities that are owned and operated by the federal
government.
Each Federal project has a plan of operation, but many of these
plans have not been revised in decades and are hopelessly out of date,
despite laws that permit and/or require Federal operators to review the
operational plans for their facilities. We recommend that this
Subcommittee direct the Federal operators over which it has
jurisdiction to examine changes to the design, configuration, or
operation of their existing dams in order to improve upon existing
operations, and to periodically repeat this analysis. Federal operators
should be directed to consider efficiency upgrades, opportunities to
install new physical capacity, and more operational changes that will
enhance and maximize the array of beneficial public uses these dams
provide, including energy production, environmental protection, water
supply, navigation, recreation, and whether facilities are receiving a
market return for their services, including energy production.
3.2 Basin-scale coordination of multiple projects
While individual hydropower dams have their own impacts, the
cumulative effects of multiple hydropower dams are often much greater
than the simple sum of their direct impacts. A single-dam may block
fish passage and displace wildlife. A series of dams can harm an entire
watershed or cause the extinction of an entire fishery, even if the
effect of each of the individual dams seems relatively mild when
considered in isolation. The impact of a single dam that kills only 5%
of fish in its turbines may seem relatively small, but eight dams along
the same river, each of which only kill 5% would reduce the river's
fish population by more than a third, placing a cumulative burden on
the population that is too great to be sustained over time.
The solution to such cumulative impacts is to address hydropower at
a watershed or basin scale instead of at the individual project level.
It is often possible to get an increase in generation and significant
improvements in environmental quality when the operation and management
of multiple facilities is addressed in a coordinated manner. For
instance, consider Maine's Penobscot River basin. For decades, a series
of dams in this basin blocked access to high-quality habitat and all
but wiped out the river's valuable Alewife, Atlantic Salmon, and Shad
fisheries. When these projects were relicensed, parties examined the
entire basin and came up with a plan that would restore more than 1000
miles of habitat--and millions of fish--by removing two dams, bypassing
a third with a nature-like fishway, and installing fishways at others
while allowing for a net increase in power generation. This plan also
allows the remaining dams to generate more, concentrating environmental
restoration measures where they are most needed and power production
where it will have the least impact on the basin as a whole.
The Penobscot agreement demonstrates how the coordinated review and
planning of hydropower in a basin can result in more power and better
environmental outcomes. Unfortunately, the circumstances on the
Penobscot--where all of the dams were owned by a single entity and
subject to the jurisdiction of a single agency--are the exception
rather than the rule. Consider, for instance, California's rapidly
declining populations of Salmon and Steelhead. A combination of federal
and non-federal dams in six watersheds in California (the American, the
Feather, the Merced, the Stanislaus, the Tuolumne, and the Yuba) blocks
these commercially valuable fish from accessing more than 2,200 miles
of their highest-value historic habitat.\1\ These dams are managed by a
patchwork of federal and non-federal operators. The operators
coordinate the management of these watersheds for water supply and
power production. But when it comes to mitigating the effects of this
environmental catastrophe, each operator points its fingers at the
others. There is not one major river in the Central Valley that has
even a single fish passage structure. All the major salmon runs are
stuck on the valley floor, unable to ascend to the upper reaches of
these watersheds where the best quality habitat is located. FERC, its
licensees, and the federal operators in these basins have failed to end
this avoidance of responsibility by coordinating effectively to find
basin-wide solutions to restore fish passage to this valuable historic
habitat. As a result, these species are at the brink and downstream
users are stuck with a disproportionately higher burden for addressing
their protection and restoration.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Lindley, S.T. et al, ``Historical Population Structure of
Central Valley Steelhead and its Alteration by Dams,'' 2006.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
There is an urgent need for the type of basin-scale planning and
coordination of hydropower projects that led to the Penobscot
agreement. We recommend that Congress direct the Bureau, the Corps, and
FERC to cooperate to address multiple projects in a coordinated fashion
to increase power generation and environmental outcomes at the basin--
not project--scale. For instance, when FERC is relicensing a project in
a basin where the Corps or the Bureau also operate hydropower projects,
those agencies should participate as cooperating agencies in FERC's
analysis and use that opportunity to review the operations of their own
projects in coordination with the FERC-licensed projects.
4. Conclusion
A balanced U.S. energy policy must recognize that hydropower has
impacts as well as promise, and it should address both. New hydropower
development must be sited, operated, and mitigated responsibly, and it
must simultaneously encourage increased generation and improved
environmental performance at new and existing projects. American Rivers
supports the development of new hydropower resources that can be
brought online responsibly, avoiding significant additional harm to
local ecosystems. We offer the following recommendations to this
Committee as it considers how to protect the federal investment in
hydropower:
1.  Encourage the development of new capacity using existing
water infrastructure, espeicaly capacity and efficiency
upgrades and power added to non-powered dams. As a class, these
hydropower projects can be brought online for the least cost
and with the least additional impact to the environment, and
could provide as much as a 30% increase in hydropower
generation.
2.  Direct Federal hydropower operators to evaluate their
facilities and operations as well as the relative values of
existing authorized purposes in order to find new opportunities
to add power, improve efficiency, and improve environmental
quality.
3.  Direct Federal hydropower operators to coordinate with each
other and with FERC to take a basin-scale approach to
hydropower development and reoperation rather than a myopic
project-by-project view, and encourage multiple operators
within a basin to find shared solutions that will increase
generation, use water more efficiency, and restore
environmental quality.
Environmental quality is not a luxury good: leaving our children
with the burden of an environmental deficit is no less insidious than
leaving them with the burden of a financial one. Fortunately, it is
possible to protect the environment while protecting our investments in
hydropower and other water infrastructure. American Rivers has learned
some important lessons in our nearly four decades of experience with
hydropower. Disputes over water are complex and contentious, and
finding solutions to those problems requires a commitment on the part
of each party to see that all other parties interests are respected. A
solution that is based on ``abundance'' as it is defined by one party
to a dispute will never be satisfactory to all. We must find solutions
that seek abundant water, abundant clean energy, abundant fish and
wildlife, and abundant jobs. When traditional foes stop hurling
accusations at each other and instead sit down, roll up our sleeves,
and work together to meet each others interests, we can and often do
find lasting, mutually agreeable solutions.
Thank you again for this opportunity to testify you today. I look
forward to answering your questions.
______

Mr. McClintock. Thank you for your testimony. Our next
witness is Mr. Roman Gillen. He is the President of the Board
of Directors of the Oregon Rural Electric Cooperative
Association in Salem, Oregon.

STATEMENT OF ROMAN GILLEN, PRESIDENT OF THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS,
OREGON RURAL ELECTRIC OPERATIVE ASSOCIATION, SALEM, OREGON

Mr. Gillen. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Good morning, Mr.
Chairman and Members of the Subcommittee. I am Roman Gillen,
President and CEO of Consumers Power, Incorporated, an electric
distribution cooperative located in western Oregon, in
Philomath near Corvallis. Thank you for this opportunity to
testify before the Subcommittee today and for holding this
hearing on this important topic.
CPI is a customer of the Bonneville Power Administration
through our generation and transmission cooperative, P&GC
Power, of which I am a board member. CPI serves over 17,000
members in parts of six counties from the Cascade Mountains to
the Pacific Ocean, including the 4th Congressional District
served by Representative Peter DeFazio. Most of our electricity
sales are to residential members. Today I also represent the
Oregon Rural Electric Cooperative Association as its board
president. ORECA represents the legislative interests of all 18
Oregon electric co-ops, serving over 200,000 members in mostly
rural and remote parts of Oregon.
My testimony today centers on three Federal policy issues
of concern to our members: high wind, high water, over-
generation events; proposals to force power marketing agencies
to sell electricity at market-based rates; and salmon recovery
on the Columbia River Basin.
As this Committee knows, the Northwest is blessed with an
extremely valuable Federal asset, the Federal Columbia River
Power System. CPI helps pay for this asset through the rates we
pay as a preference customer of BPA. Today, this same Federal
system plays a leading role to support the growth of non-hydro
low variable cost renewable resources, especially wind.
BPA Administrator Steve Wright told this Committee in March
that the amount of wind generation in the Northwest may triple
in size over the next six years. This really concerns me as I
believe the Northwest is ill equipped to deal with such rapid
growth in wind generation. Problems that occur when too much
wind coincides with an abundance of hydropower and low utility
loads in the spring will only get worse as the Northwest
emerges from the drought conditions of recent years.
The second Federal policy issue I would like to speak to
concerns wholesale power rates in the Northwest. Cost-based
power is the life blood of utilities like CPI in the Northwest,
so we are gravely concerned to see proposals re-emerge that
force PMAs to sell power at market rates. We oppose legislation
that arbitrarily taxes power rates in select regions of the
U.S. Northwest preference customers, including CPI members, pay
all of the costs to operate and maintain the Federal hydropower
system. Forcing PMAs to sell power at market rates would force
utilities like CPI to raise retail rates, perhaps dramatically,
causing great harm to our residential members, especially those
on fixed incomes. Many of our members depend on electricity to
heat their homes in the winter with few alternatives to choose
from. With the cost of food and gasoline already increasing it
makes no sense to add an additional energy tax, especially upon
consumers who can least afford it.
Finally, I would like to say a few words about salmon
restoration efforts in the Northwest. We sincerely hope that
Federal Judge James Redden approves the 2008 biological opinion
when he hears arguments on the plan next Monday, May 9. In that
vein, I thank Chairman Hastings and Representative DeFazio for
their excellent March 11th opinion piece that strongly endorsed
this biop.
CPI and other BPA customers also strongly support the biop
even though it comes at a high cost to our members and other
BPA customers who are footing the bill. We also thank Chairman
Hastings and others on the Committee for their work to ensure
that salmon recovery investments are working and that they are
cost-effective.
I thank the Subcommittee for allowing me to participate in
this discussion and I would be happy to answer any questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Gillen follows:]

Statement of Roman Gillen, President and CEO, Consumers Power, Inc.,
and President, Oregon Rural Electric Cooperative Association

I. Introduction
Mr. Chairman and Members of the Subcommittee, I am Roman Gillen,
President and CEO of Consumers Power, Inc. (CPI), an electric
cooperative located in Western Oregon in Philomath, just outside of
Corvallis. Thank you for the opportunity to testify before the
Subcommittee today, and for holding this hearing on this important
topic. I also wish to thank Committee Chairman Rep. Doc Hastings and
Committee Members Rep. Rob Bishop, Rep. Peter DeFazio and Rep. Raul
Labrador for their work to protect federal hydropower investments in
the Northwest on behalf of their constituents who are customers of the
Bonneville Power Administration (BPA). CPI is a customer of BPA through
our Generation and Transmission Cooperative, PNGC Power.
Today I am representing both CPI and the Oregon Rural Electric
Cooperative Association (ORECA). We are members of NRECA, the National
Rural Electric Cooperative Association, and we are members of the
Public Power Council, a trade association of BPA customers led by my
fellow panelist Scott Corwin. I would also like to recognize my other
panelists, especially Tom Karier of Washington State, a member of the
Northwest Power and Conservation Council.
CPI is an electric distribution cooperative formed in 1939. CPI's
60 employees serve 17,500 members in parts of six counties covering a
3,500 square mile service area, from the Cascade Mountains to the
Pacific Ocean. We are the fourth largest electric cooperative in Oregon
with 22,000 meters and 46 aMW in electricity sales in 2010. 70% of our
sales are to residential members, 14% small commercial, 14% industrial,
and 2% irrigation and street lighting.
My career at CPI began in 1986 in the Information Technology area
and I have served as President and CEO for the last five years. I am
CPI's representative on the board of PNGC Power, and I currently serve
as the board president of ORECA. ORECA represents the legislative and
regulatory interests of all 18 Oregon electric co-ops, serving over
200,000 members in mostly rural and remote parts of Oregon with over
30,000 miles of wire. According to Oregon State University, our
economic activity directly and indirectly contributes to over 3,000
jobs in Oregon.
As you know, electric cooperatives are owned by our customers, who
we refer to as members. Electric cooperatives are not owned by a
government or city agency. We are chartered under state cooperative
statutes and we are governed by a locally elected Board of Directors
from our membership. Unlike a for-profit business we do not retain
profits. Any income above expenses is, by law, returned to our members.
Our goals of accountability, efficiency and meeting customer needs
resemble those of a for-profit electric utility, but our means of
getting there are different.
My testimony today will focus on three issues of concern to CPI's
ratepayers that are driven by federal policy. These include:
1.  High wind/high water overgeneration conditions.
2.  Proposals to force Power Marketing Agencies (PMAs) to sell
electricity at market based rates.
3.  Salmon recovery in the Columbia River Basin.
II. Overgeneration
As this Committee knows, the Northwest is blessed with a valuable
federal asset, the Federal Columbia River Power System (FCRPS). As a
preference customer of BPA, CPI has shared in those benefits for many
years, and we have shared in paying for them through the rates we pay.
Today, that same federal system is playing a lead role in supporting
the growth of non-hydro, low variable-cost, renewable resources,
especially wind. BPA Administrator Steve Wright told this Committee in
March that the region's wind generation system may triple in the next
six years. I am concerned that the Northwest is not ready for that
rapid growth.
In June 2010 the region experienced overgeneration conditions, when
too much wind and water arrived in the system at the same time. We
expect more high wind/high water events in the future. These events
could threaten BPA's ability to protect migrating salmon. Some of the
proposed remedies could cause BPAs customers to pay higher rates for
electricity. We encourage the Subcommittee to closely examine these
issues, and we support BPA's ongoing efforts to develop policies that
protect our ratepayers and maintain reliability in the federal system.
III. PMAs at Cost Based Rates
We are aware that proposals have reemerged to force PMAs to sell
power at market rates. We oppose these and any other proposal that
arbitrarily taxes power rates in some regions. Ratepayers at CPI and
throughout the Northwest pay all of the costs of operations and
maintenance of the federal hydropower system. In addition to the annual
revenue requirement for BPA power of over $2.2 billion, ratepayers fund
an annual payment on principal and interest of debt to Treasury of over
$860 million. In exchange, BPA sells power at cost. Power sales at cost
have been a legal requirement since BPA's inception and are the
foundation of the contracts that BPA customers signed through 2028.
Forcing PMAs to sell power at market rates would clearly force CPI to
raise our rates, perhaps dramatically. This would cause great harm to
the residential members that we serve, especially those on fixed
incomes. With the cost of food and gasoline already increasing, it
doesn't make sense to add an additional energy tax, especially upon
consumers who can least afford it.
IV. Salmon Recovery
We are hopeful that Federal Judge James Redden will approve the
2008 FCRPS Biological Opinion (BiOp) when he hears arguments on the
plan next Monday, May 9. In that vein, I wish to thank Chairman
Hastings and Member DeFazio for their excellent March 11 opinion piece
that so strongly endorsed this BiOp. CPI and other BPA customers also
strongly support the BiOp, even though it comes at a high cost to our
members and other BPA customers who are footing the bill. We also wish
to thank Chairman Hastings and others on the Committee for their work
to ensure that salmon recovery investments are working, and that they
are cost effective. As the Chairman knows, the dams at issue in this
salmon plan provide our region with clean, renewable hydroelectric
power. In addition, these dams offer residents of the Northwest
multiple benefits, including a valuable transportation system and
irrigation source.
BPA customers have paid over $13 billion for fish and wildlife
mitigation in the Columbia Basin over the past 32 years. The good news
is that some of those investments are working. The BiOp is the product
of a recent historic and unprecedented collaboration of Native American
tribes, federal agencies, and the states of Washington, Idaho and
Montana. It is based on the best available science and has been
reviewed and approved by an independent panel of scientists. It has
also been reviewed and approved by one of Oregon's best and brightest,
former Oregon State University professor and current National Oceanic
and Atmospheric Administration Director, Dr. Jane Lubchenco. We hope
that May 9 will mark the beginning of a new, successful chapter in
salmon recovery in the Northwest.
V. Conclusion
Mr. Chairman and Members of the Subcommittee, thank you for
inviting me to testify at this hearing. As a representative of PMA
customers, I appreciate the opportunity to highlight several issues
that are of concern to PMA customers in the Northwest: high wind/high
water overgeneration conditions, proposals to force Power Marketing
Agencies (PMAs) to sell electricity at market based rates and salmon
recovery in the Columbia River Basin.
I thank the Subcommittee for allowing me to participate in this
discussion.
______

Mr. McClintock. Thank you for your testimony. Our next
witness is Mr. Tom Karier. He is a Council Member of the
Northwest Power and Conservation Council in Portland, Oregon.

STATEMENT OF TOM KARIER, COUNCIL MEMBER WASHINGTON STATE,
NORTHWEST POWER AND CONSERVATION COUNCIL, PORTLAND, OREGON

Mr. Karier. Chairman McClintock and Members of the
Subcommittee, thank you for the opportunity to testify today at
this important hearing on protecting Federal hydropower
investments in the West.
My name, as you said, is Tom Karier, and I am one of two
Washington members of the Northwest Power and Conservation
Council, and Chair the Council's Power Committee.
The Council is a compact of the four Northwest states of
Idaho, Montana, Oregon and Washington. The Council is
authorized by Federal law, the Northwest Power Act of 1980, to
prepare and periodically update a Northwest Power Plan that is
implemented by Bonneville Power Administration. The power plan
is also used by electric utilities throughout the Northwest in
preparing their own lease cost plans, and in my State of
Washington our renewable portfolio standards law requires the
energy efficiency savings be calculated using the Council's
methodology. So the reach of the Council's planning is region
wide.
Hydropower provides more than half of the electricity in
the Northwest. It is in this context as an energy policymaker
in a region rich in hydropower that I bring five messages for
you today.
First, preserving the capability of the existing hydropower
system will keep power costs and power system carbon emissions
low in the Northwest. In the current version of power plan
which we completed last year, we assess the impacts of removing
the four Federal dams in the lower Snake River from the
regional power supply. The results are that existing natural
gas-fired and coal-fired generating plants would be used more
intensively. The region would export less energy and import
more. Carbon emissions would increase by three million tons per
year, and the annual cost of the power system would increase by
more than $530 million by 2020. And because Bonneville sells
the output of those dams, the cost to the wholesale power would
increase 24 to 29 percent.
Second, hydropower helps back up intermittent wind power.
Hydropower is an excellent companion for wind power because it
can be increased or decreased almost instantaneously to match
the variability of wind. The availability of this balancing
energy from hydropower is one important reason why wind power
is proliferating in the Northwest from about 4,500 megawatts of
installed capacity today to more than 6,000 megawatts in the
next few years.
Balancing is providing a new source of income for
Bonneville and the utilities that own dams. For Bonneville,
this means 30 to 50 million dollars in annual revenue that
helps to offset customer rates. As well, some utilities that
own hydropower dams are realizing as much value from providing
balancing services for wind as they are from selling surplus
power.
Third, energy efficiency complements and protects the
Northwest heritage of clean and affordable hydropower. In the
Northwest Power Act, energy efficiency is the highest priority
resource to meet new demand for power. Bonneville has a program
to require efficiency consistent with our power plan. In the 31
years since the Power Act the Northwest has acquired 4,250
average megawatts of energy efficiency. As generated power,
that would be equivalent to the entire States of Idaho and
Montana today.
In our current power plan we identify 5,900 more megawatts
at an average cost of 3.5 cents per kilowatt hour. That is
three times less than the lowest cost new generating resource.
That much energy efficiency could meet 85 percent of the new
demand for power over the 20-year time period for this plan.
Complementing hydropower with energy efficiency stretches the
benefits of hydropower.
Fourth, while hydropower affects fish and wildlife, the
effects can be mitigated. The Council's Columbia River Fish and
Wildlife Program includes strategies to improve dam passage
survival for migratory fish. I believe these measures in
combination with improvements in fish habitat and the careful
use of artificial production are some of the reasons for the
increasing number of adult fish returns from the ocean to
spawn.
Fifth, and in conclusion, in our region the mix of
hydropower, energy efficiency, and wind power is providing
electricity consumers with a consistent supply of low-cost
carbon-free energy. By continuing to add energy efficiency to
the power supply the region will preserve and enhance the
flexibility of the hydropower system to meet demand while also
providing low-cost balancing services for increasing amounts of
wind power.
Thank you again for the opportunity to testify today and I
would be glad to answer questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Karier follows:]

Statement of Tom Karier, Washington Council Member,
Northwest Power and Conservation Council

Chairman McClintock and members of the Subcommittee, thank you for
the opportunity to testify today at this important hearing on
protecting federal hydropower investments in the West. My name is Tom
Karier, and I am one of two Washington members of the Northwest Power
and Conservation Council and chair of the Council's Power Committee.
The Council is authorized by federal law, the Northwest Power Act
of 1980 (Public Law 96-501; 94 Stat. 2717), to prepare and periodically
update a Northwest Power Plan that is implemented by the Bonneville
Power Administration, a federal power marketing administration.
Bonneville markets the output of the Federal Columbia River Power
System, which comprises 31 hydropower dams and one non-federal nuclear
power plant in the Northwest. Through its customer utilities,
Bonneville supplies about 30 percent of the electricity consumed in the
Northwest so the Council's power plan directly affects a significant
portion of the region's electricity ratepayers. But the plan also is
used by utilities throughout the region as they develop their own
integrated resource plans, and Washington's renewable portfolio
standard law requires that energy efficiency savings be calculated
using the Council's methodology. So the reach of the Council's planning
goes far beyond Bonneville.
The Federal Columbia River Power System includes many of the
largest hydroelectric dams in the United States and provides 56 percent
of the hydropower generated in the Northwest. Regionwide, hydropower is
our largest source of electricity, averaging more than half of the
power generated under normal precipitation.
The first dams of the Federal Columbia River Power System were
constructed during the Depression, and so for more than 70 years our
region has been enjoying clean, renewable, low-cost electricity thanks
to the water power of the Columbia River and its tributaries.
It is in this context, as an energy policymaker in a region rich in
hydropower, that I am testifying today. The Northwest Power and
Conservation Council is working to ensure the long-term viability of
the Columbia River Basin hydropower system for present and future
generations while also protecting and enhancing fish and wildlife that
have been affected by hydropower dams.
The Council was formed by the states of Idaho, Montana, Oregon, and
Washington in 1981 in accordance with the Power Act. Each state's
governor appoints two members to the Council. Through the Council,
Northwest citizens can participate in determining how growing
electricity needs will be met in the region, and also how fish and
wildlife will be protected from the impacts of hydropower dams. The
Council's power plan looks 20 years into the future, and by law we
review the plan for revisions every five years. We issued our current
plan, the sixth revision since the Council was created, in 2010.
According to the Power Act, the purpose of the power plan is to
assure an adequate, efficient, economical, and reliable power supply
for the Northwest region. The Act also recognized that development of
the region's hydropower dams in the Columbia River Basin had
detrimental effects on migratory and resident fish, and also wildlife,
and required the Council to develop a program to mitigate those
effects. The Council's Columbia River Basin Fish and Wildlife Program
is an integral part of the Council's power plan. The Council's power
plan and the fish and wildlife program are developed through open,
public processes to involve the region's citizens and businesses in
decisions about the future of these two interdependent aspects of the
Pacific Northwest environment and economy.
Removing hydropower dams would increase carbon emissions and raise
electricity costs
The region's hydroelectric system continues to be the Northwest's
most important generating resource. Preserving the capability of the
existing system will keep power costs and carbon emissions low compared
to the rest of the country.
Concerns about climate change have altered the power planning
landscape dramatically, both nationally and in the West. These concerns
have resulted in new polices that affect electricity resource choices,
such as restrictions on new coal-fired power plants because of concern
about their emissions. In developing the Sixth Power Plan, the Council
included estimates of the future cost of complying with carbon policies
as a risk. Energy efficiency mitigates the risks of volatile fuel
prices and unknown carbon costs.
The Northwest power system emits about half the carbon dioxide per
kilowatt-hour of the nation or the rest of the western states. This is
due to the large role played by the hydroelectric system of the region.
A power system that maximizes cost-effective energy efficiency and
renewable resources is a system that also minimizes the risk of
exposure to the uncertain future cost of complying with carbon-
reduction policies. To quantify the value of such a system, the
Council's Sixth Power Plan includes an analysis of the effects of
reduced hydropower capability. The analysis, which technically was one
of our future-scenario models, examines the effects of removing the
four federal dams on the lower Snake River--Lower Granite, Little
Goose, Lower Monumental, and Ice Harbor--from the regional power
supply. While the scenario is specific to the removal of those four
dams, the results could apply to other changes that reduce the
capability of the hydroelectric system for any reason.
The lower Snake River dams provide 1,110 average megawatts of
energy under average water conditions, about 5 percent of regional
annual electric energy needs. In addition, the dams provide 3,500
megawatts of short-term capacity, a little more than 10 percent of the
total hydroelectric system capacity, and as part of the Automated
Generation Control (AGC) System, they provide system reserves to
maintain the reliability of the power supply. They also provide
reactive support for the stability of the transmission system.
The effects of removing the capability of the lower Snake River
dams are mainly determined by the replacement resources that would be
required for the power system to duplicate the energy, capacity, real-
time load following, stability reserves and reactive support currently
provided by the dams. The analysis assumed that the power produced by
the dams was removed in 2020--half way through the 20-year timeframe of
the Sixth Power Plan--and the energy and capacity were replaced by
other least-cost resources selected by the Council's regional portfolio
model. That is, given the reduced energy and capacity of the
hydroelectric system, a low-cost and low-risk portfolio of new and
replacement resources would take the place of the four dams.
The analysis showed that dam removal would increase the carbon
emissions, cost, and risk of the regional power system. Existing
natural gas-fired and coal-fired generating plants would be used more
intensively. In addition, the region would export less energy and
import more. Carbon emissions would increase 3 million tons per year
because of the increased use of generating plants that burn fossil
fuels, and the annual cost of the power system would increase by more
than $530 million by 2020. Further, because the lower Snake River dams
serve Bonneville public-utility customers, those utilities and their
consumers would bear the cost increases. Using a rate-making rule of
thumb that a $65 million to $80 million cost increase translates into a
$1 per megawatt-hour increase in Bonneville rates, a $530 million
increase in Bonneville costs would raise rates by between $6.60 and
$8.15 per megawatt-hour. Based on Bonneville's priority firm rate (this
is the rate Bonneville charges its public utility customers) of $28 per
megawatt-hour in 2009, dam removal would raise that rate 24 percent to
29 percent.
Hydropower helps back up intermittent wind power
While the primary resource in the Council's Sixth Power plan is
energy efficiency, cost-effective renewable resources also play a large
role, accounting for 17 percent of new resources. This amount is only
what is required to meet existing renewable energy portfolio standards
in Oregon, Washington, and Montana (Idaho does not have a renewable
portfolio standard). Aside from hydropower, wind currently is the
dominant form of renewable energy in the Northwest, as it is
competitive in price with new natural gas-fired generation given the
various incentives and subsidies for wind power.
Beginning in 1998 with the 25-megawatt Vansycle Ridge project in
southeastern Washington, commercial wind power has grown to exceed
4,000 megawatts of nameplate capacity in the Northwest. Wind power now
is the fourth-largest component of the Northwest power system in terms
of installed capacity (4,571 megawatts). Current plans call for wind
power capacity to reach 6,200 megawatts in just a few years.
Although wind power is four times as expensive as energy
efficiency, wind power shares some of the important advantages of
efficiency. It is free of fuel-price risk and carbon-policy risk and
can be developed in small increments with relatively short lead times.
However, wind has very little capacity value for the power system. That
is, it cannot be counted on to meet peak loads because wind turbines do
not produce power in consistent amounts throughout the day. In
addition, rather than providing flexibility to adjust to changing
electricity demand, wind power imposes additional flexibility
requirements on the power system because of its variability.
Hydropower is an excellent companion for wind because hydropower
can be generated continuously and the output of dams can be increased
or decreased to match the variability of wind. The availability of this
backup energy from hydropower is one important reason why wind power is
proliferating in the Northwest. So it is important to continue to
maintain and improve the efficiency of the hydroelectric system where
possible.
This backup role (sometimes called ``balancing'') for hydropower
also is providing a new source of income for Bonneville and utilities
that own dams. For Bonneville, this is yielding $30 million to $50
million in annual revenue that offsets customer rates. Some utilities
that own hydropower dams are realizing as much value from providing
backup services as they are from selling surplus power.
Energy efficiency is the highest-priority new resource in the Northwest
So important is energy efficiency in the Northwest's mix of
electricity resources that in the Power Act Congress not only made it
the highest-priority resource but also directed Bonneville to have a
program to acquire efficiency resources consistent with the Council's
plan. Importantly, Congress directed the Council to include in its
power plans all of the energy efficiency that the Council determines is
cost-effective--not all of the energy efficiency that is available at
any cost. Nonetheless, in developing its Sixth Power Plan in 2010 the
Council identified a vast amount of cost-effective energy efficiency,
nearly 6,000 average megawatts through the year 2029. The Council noted
the size and value of this resource in the text of the Sixth Plan:
Across multiple scenarios considered in the development of the
plan, one conclusion was constant: the most cost-effective and
least risky resource for the region is improved efficiency of
electricity use.

and

The plan finds enough conservation to be available and cost-
effective to meet 85 percent of the region's load growth for
the next 20 years. If developed aggressively, this
conservation, combined with the region's past successful
development of energy efficiency could constitute a resource
comparable in size to the Northwest federal hydroelectric
system. This efficiency resource will complement and protect
the Northwest's heritage of clean and affordable power.
Over the years since the Council was formed, improved energy
efficiency has met nearly half of the region's growth in energy-service
demand. If the region's energy savings were added back to the regional
energy loads, load would have increased by 8,150 average megawatts
between 1980 and 2008. During that time the region acquired 3,900
average megawatts of energy efficiency, so that actual loads to be met
by electricity generation only increased by 4,250 average megawatts.
Today, in 2011, acquired energy efficiency totals nearly 4,300 average
megawatts. The Council's power plan is rich with energy efficiency
because the Power Act requires the Council to meet future demand with
cost-effective resources, energy efficiency gets highest priority among
resources in the Act, and the Council has identified literally hundreds
of potential efficiency improvements that cost less than one-third as
much as the lowest electricity-cost generation technologies. The
average cost of the energy efficiency in the Sixth Power Plan in 2009
was 3.6 cents per kilowatt-hour; the cost of the least-expensive new
natural gas-fired power plant was 9.2 cents, and wind power in the
Columbia Basin cost 10.4 cents per kilowatt-hour.
The availability of so much cost-effective energy efficiency is
good news for those of us who care about protecting federal hydropower
investments in the West, as it means that energy efficiency is helping
to ensure that hydropower will remain the dominant electricity resource
in our region by reducing the need to build thermal generating plants
to augment the hydropower supply. Not only is energy efficiency by far
the least-expensive resource available to the region, it also avoids
risks of volatile fuel prices and the financial risks associated with
large-scale resources, and also mitigates the risk of potential carbon-
pricing policies to address climate-change concerns. Improved
efficiency contributes not only to meeting future energy requirements
but also provides capacity during peak load periods. The savings from
efficiency generally follow the hourly shape of energy use, saving more
energy when more is being used. As a result, efficiency contributes
more to load reduction during times of peak usage. Or in other words,
efficiency improvements have capacity value, as well as energy value.
Hydropower affects fish and wildlife, but the effects can be mitigated
Preserving the capability of the existing hydroelectric system has
significant value for the region. Mitigating damage to anadromous fish
from development of the Federal Columbia River Power System has changed
the operation of the hydroelectric system, reducing its energy
capability and its flexibility. It is important to mitigate this
damage, but also to do it in a way that best preserves the value of the
low-cost, low-carbon hydropower resource. The Council attempts to
ensure that its fish and wildlife program uses cost-effective
strategies to improve survival of juvenile and adult anadromous fish
that migrate past Columbia and Snake river dams to and from the Pacific
Ocean, including salmon, steelhead, sturgeon, and Pacific lamprey. The
program also addresses the effects of hydropower on resident fish--
those that do not go to the ocean.
Importantly, the fish and wildlife program is part of the power
plan. The Power Act requires the Council to include measures in the
program to protect, mitigate, and enhance fish and wildlife affected by
the development, operation, and management of hydropower dams in the
Columbia River Basin while also assuring the Pacific Northwest an
adequate, efficient, economical, and reliable power supply through the
power plan. The Act also directs federal agencies that operate the dams
and sell their power to undertake those responsibilities in a manner
that provides equitable treatment for such fish and wildlife with the
other purposes for which the dams and related facilities are managed
and operated.
The program identifies a comprehensive set of interrelated fish and
wildlife problems and responsive strategies. State and federal fish and
wildlife agencies, Indian tribes, and others propose projects to the
Council to address the problems and implement the strategies. All
project proposals are reviewed by the Council's Independent Scientific
Review Panel, which submits its reviews to the Council. The Council
then makes project-funding recommendations to Bonneville.
Mainstem hydropower dam operations and fish-passage improvements
are addressed in the program with strategies that aim to optimize the
survival of focal species. These efforts include re-establishing
natural river processes to the extent feasible and consistent with the
Council's responsibilities in the Power Act. The program also aims to
rebuild healthy, naturally producing fish and wildlife populations by
protecting, mitigating, and restoring habitats and the biological
systems within them.
This has resulted in operational changes at the dams since the
Council was created. Because of the Power Act, and more specifically
because of the Endangered Species Act listings of more than a dozen
species of salmon and steelhead in the Columbia River Basin since the
early 1990s, hydropower generation has been reduced by about 1,100
average-megawatts. This primarily is due to legal requirements to spill
water over dams to aid downstream juvenile fish migration during the
spring and summer months.
The fish and wildlife program includes strategies to improve
passage survival for migratory fish at the dams. I believe these
measures, in combination with improvements in fish habitat and the
careful use of artificial production, are helping to boost the number
of adult fish returning from the ocean to spawn. In the last ten years
or so we have seen big increases in some runs, particularly some
species of Chinook and sockeye salmon. Especially since 1999, adult
salmon and steelhead counts at Bonneville Dam have been averaging much
higher than any comparable period since the dam was completed and fish
counting began in 1938.
Snake River sockeye, the first Columbia River Basin salmon species
listed for protection under the Endangered Species Act (in 1991), have
demonstrated a strong response to a captive broodstock program and
favorable ocean conditions over the last decade. The number of these
fish returning to spawn and counted at Lower Granite Dam has been
higher in recent years than any time since the 1950s. As well, juvenile
salmon and steelhead passage survival at the dams also has been
improving in recent years due to factors such as spill, system bypass
improvements, and in-river improvements such as predator control.
Finally, fish spawning and rearing habitat is being improved under
the Council's fish and wildlife program. From 2005 to 2010, for
example, 1,435 miles of instream and streamside habitat were improved
and 1,527 miles of habitat were opened to spawning by the removal of
passage barriers.
Conclusion: Hydropower and energy efficiency: Critical to a low-cost,
low-risk power supply
The Pacific Northwest power system is faced with significant
uncertainties about the direction and form of climate-change policy,
future fuel prices, salmon recovery actions, economic growth, and
integrating rapidly growing amounts of variable wind generation. The
Council's resource strategy for the Sixth Power Plan provides guidance
for Bonneville and the region's electric utilities on choices that will
help meet the region's growing electricity needs while also reducing
the risk associated with uncertain future conditions.
Hydropower is the most important source of electricity in the
Northwest, not only providing low-cost, carbon-free energy on a
consistent basis but recently providing critical backup for the
increasing amount of carbon-free wind power in the region. By
continuing to add energy efficiency to the power supply, the region
will preserve and enhance the flexibility of hydropower to meet demand
while also providing low-cost backup services for increasing amounts of
renewable energy.
______

Mr. McClintock. Thank you for your testimony. For the final
testimony of the day I would like to yield to Mr. Gosar to make
the introduction.
Dr. Gosar. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
First of all, I would like to welcome my fellow Arizonan up
here to Washington. Now if he can take some of this rain back
to Arizona, we would love it. Principally he has served as a
consultant primarily for the State Legislature throughout the
state for numerous water and electrical districts, but more
importantly, primarily for the Maricopa-Stanfield District, Mr.
Grant Ward.
Thank you very much.

STATEMENT OF GRANT WARD, WATER AND POWER CONSULTANT, MARICOPA-
STANFIELD IRRIGATION DISTRICT, MARICOPA, ARIZONA

Mr. Ward. Thank you, Representative Gosar. I appreciate
that.
Chairman McClintock and Ranking Member Napolitano, Members
of the Committee, my name is Grant Ward and I served from 1995
to 2008 as the General Manager of the Maricopa-Stanfield
Irrigation and Drainage District, and since then have been
serving as their water and power consultant. MSID was created
in the late 1960s and includes 87,000 acres of irrigated
farmland located in western Pinal County of Arizona.
I would first like to address my remarks to the title of
this hearing by discussing the hydropower produced at the Glen
Canyon Dam. When one looks at the issue of protecting Federal
investments, it should be noted that while Glen Canyon Dam has
the capacity to produce 1,361 megawatts, the capacity has been
reduced by approximately one-third. This means that instead of
having the availability of 1.361 megawatts there is only about
900 megawatts available. Based on whether the capacity of the
dam is for a wet or a dry year, the loss is in the range of 200
megawatts to 400 megawatts which is equivalent to providing
enough electricity for 175,000 to 250,000 residential
customers.
Utilities still have to make up that loss by buying
supplemental electricity to provide to their customers and that
most often is generated in the form of coal, oil, or natural
gas. What that means is that instead of having clean renewable
energy in the from of hydropower a carbon footprint is created
equaling approximately 1.63 billion pounds of carbon annually.
We would ask for a more reasonable approach to the use of the
full capacity of Glen Canyon Dam.
We recognize there has to be a balance between the economy
and the environment, but believe that the operation of Glen
Canyon Dam is not the ultimate cause of the environmental
concerns.
Second, I would like to discuss the opportunity for the
construction of low head hydro units for the purpose of
generating power both Federally owned and private canal
systems. My experience and understanding comes from the efforts
to construct a hydropower unit for our canal system. Our
district began looking into this capacity of installing such
units in early 2009.
We first reviewed our canals to determine the amount of
drop at our gates and turnouts, and the average flow of water
that would go over that structure for the year. We found that
we have a possibility of constructing 14 separate low hydro
units at a minimum. The largest output on any individual drop
structure was determined to be approximately 300 kilowatts to
350 kilowatts. Combining all of the units together we found
that the total amount of electricity that could be produced
equaled approximately 2,200 kilowatts which would provide
electricity to power 550 to 1,100 residential homes.
Our struggle over the last two plus years has been trying
to determine the requirements of the Bureau of Reclamation.
Briefly, our struggles can be summed up in the following four
points:
Reclamation rules of ownership, exactly how that is
qualified, and we have struggled in getting some of the
direction from Reclamation as well as understanding where we
should go. As a result of owner, under ownership you are
required to have a lease of power privilege agreement. Exactly
how does that apply to a canal system such as ours? Under the
environmental assessment being required if it is a Bureau-owned
system, if the canal was built in the last several years and
was required to have an EA at that time, is it necessary to go
through the complete process again if all the new work will be
within the original right-of-ways?
And finally FERC, Federal Energy Regulation Commission,
most hydro units in our canals would produce hydropower of less
than 1.5 megawatts, yet we are still required to go to FERC for
an exemption permit. If it is the exemption and there are rules
that say how it should be exempted, we believe that it raises
the question of why having to apply for a permit to get an
exemption if we already meet those standards.
These four items together can be very costly and very time
consuming, and being able to be successful in building systems.
As a final note, during our two plus years of determining
our eligibility to either work through Reclamation or paying
our own costs, we have found Reclamation sincerely interested
in getting low head hydro systems off the ground and developing
this type of renewable energy. However the concern we have is
the time delay that has taken place to obtain answers, and
sometimes the different answers from different departments or
locations.
We would make a suggestion that as interested as
Reclamation is in going forward with low head hydro systems
they put any and all resources that are working on these
systems in one office for all requests, all questions, all
opportunities, and when someone or some entity shows any desire
to look into low head hydro systems their call is immediately
forwarded to that one office for any and all answers and
direction.
I thank you for the opportunity to testify.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Ward follows:]

Statement of Grant R. Ward, Water and Power Consultant to
Maricopa-Stanfield Irrigation & Drainage District

My name is Grant Ward and I served from 1995 to 2008 as the General
Manager of the Maricopa-Stanfield Irrigation & Drainage District
(MSIDD), and since then have been serving as their Water and Power
consultant. MSIDD was created in the late 1960s and includes 87,000
acres of irrigated farmland, located in western Pinal County of
Arizona. It was formed primarily to take Colorado River water from the
Central Arizona Project (CAP) system, when it became available, by
connecting with the CAP's Tucson aqueduct and delivering the water
through more than 250 miles of concrete-lined canals, laterals,
pipelines, pumping plants and related works. The system is also used to
deliver groundwater operated with pumps powered by electricity from
Hoover Dam, Glen Canyon Dam, and Parker-Davis Dam, as well as
supplemental purchased power, all provided by its sister district,
Electrical District No. 3, Pinal County.
I would first like to address my remarks to the title of this
hearing by discussing the Hydropower produced at the Glen Canyon Dam.
When one looks at the issue of protecting federal investments, it
should be noted that while Glen Canyon Dam has the capacity to produce
1,361 mw (equivalent to producing power of up to 1,320,000 residential
customers), the capacity has been reduced by approximately 1/3 based on
a Record of Decision issued October 8, 1996, Operation of Glen Canyon
Dam Final Environmental Impact Statement. This means that instead of
having the availability of 1,361 mw (name plate number), there is only
about 900 mw available. Based on whether the capacity of the dam is for
a wet year or a dry year the loss is in a range of 200mw to 400mw,
which is equivalent to providing enough electricity for 175,000 to
250,000 residential customers. Utilities still have to make up that
loss by buying supplemental electricity to provide to their customers,
and that most often is generated in the form of coal, oil or natural
gas. What that means is that instead of having clean renewable energy
in the form of hydropower, a carbon footprint is created equaling 1,341
pounds per mwh, or 1.63 billion pounds of carbon annually.
We would ask for a more reasonable approach to the use of the full
capacity at Glen Canyon Dam. We recognize there has to be balance
between the economy and the environment, but believe that the operation
of Glen Canyon Dam is not the ultimate cause of the environmental
concerns.
Second, I would like to discuss the potential opportunity for the
construction of low head hydro power units for the purpose of
generating power in both federally owned (Bureau of Reclamation) and
private canal systems. My experience and understanding comes from the
efforts to construct a hydro power unit for our canal system. Our
district began looking into the possibility of installing such units in
early 2009. We first reviewed our canals to determine the amount of
drop (the actual footage from one level of the canal down to the next
level) at our gates and turnouts and the average flow of water that
would go over that structure for the year. We found that we have a
possibility of constructing 14, as a minimum, (up to 17) separate low
head hydro units along various drops and canal turnouts. The largest
output on a drop structure was determined to be approximately 300kws to
350kws. Using the more conservative number that is enough electricity
to power approximately 100 residential customers. When we reviewed the
numbers for the installation of possible low head hydro units we found
that the total amount of electricity that could be produced equaled
approximately 2,200kws (further study would be needed on some of the
proposed systems to determine cost/benefit ratios), which could provide
electricity to power 550 to 1100 residential homes.
Our struggle over the last 2 plus years has been trying to
determine the requirements of the Bureau of Reclamation (the canals are
federally owned, although our district operates and maintains the
entire system serving the district). Briefly our ``struggles'' can be
summed up in the following four points:
1.  Reclamation rules of ownership--if Reclamation is involved
in providing any funding for a hydro project, they will own all
improvements to the facility (meaning the hydro unit). But if
the canal is fully operated and maintained by the district, the
debt for the original construction has basically been paid off,
and the District is willing to pay 100% for the new
construction, must Reclamation still have ownership of the low
head hydro facility?
2.  Under ownership requirements of Reclamation, all must
comply with the issuing of a Lease of Power Purchase agreement,
which requires Reclamation to give a Federal Register Notice
allowing companies to bid, and Reclamation awards the bid to
the successful bidder, even if the district is constructing the
unit either by itself or through a contractor that has been
approved by the district board under their bidding regulations.
Lease of Power privilege requires an annual fee. We are not
sure what that fee will be but have been told it could be 1-
3mils/kwh, or could be 5% of the annual revenue.
3.  Environmental Assessment will be required. If the canal was
built in the last 20 years (the system is fully cement lined)
and was required to have an EA at that time, is it necessary to
go through the complete process again if all the new work will
be within the original rights-of-way?
4.  Reclamation has indicated that if the canal is a federally
owned canal, and the original legislation (or contract)
creating the canal system was also approved for power
development, the District would not be required to have a FERC
permit. However, when districts either don't have that clause
in their contract, or if they are private canals, they would
have to face going to FERC for an ``exemption'' permit. Most of
these drop structures will produce hydropower of less than
1.5mw, which I understand falls below FERC's regulations. In
any event, they have to obtain an exemption permit which, when
one Arizona private district located on the west side of
Phoenix had to obtain an exemption permit (for 12kw), they had
to spend $40,000.00 (including pro-bono work by a consultant),
and it took 8-9 months to obtain the permit.
As a final note, during our 2 plus years of determining our
eligibility to either work through Reclamation (funding) or paying our
own costs, we have found Reclamation sincerely interested in getting
low head hydro systems off the ground and developing this type of
renewable energy. We have met with the Commissioner's, office, the
Denver office, the Phoenix Area office, as well as the Power Manager's
office. However, the concern we have is the time delay that has taken
place to obtain answers (approximately 30 emails as well as several
face to face meetings), and sometimes the different answers from
different departments or locations. To their credit they have been
trying to obtain the correct answers between departments, but that has
added to delays (I can't help but feel that the review of most hydro
projects are being appraised using rules that primarily apply to dams
that presently have no hydro plants, not irrigation canals). We would
make a suggestion that as interested as Reclamation is in going forward
with low head hydro systems, they put any and all resources that are
working on these systems in one office--for all requests, questions,
opportunities--and when someone or some entity shows any desire to look
into low head hydro systems, their call is immediately forwarded to
that one office for any and all answers and direction.
I wish to thank the subcommittee for this opportunity to present
our concerns to you and hereby submit this testimony for your review
and consideration.
______

Mr. McClintock. Thank you all very much for your testimony
and for your presence here today. At this point we will begin
questions of witnesses. To allow all of our Members to
participate and to ensure that we can hear from all of our
witnesses, Members will be limited to five minutes for
questions, although if Members have additional questions we can
have additional rounds, and Members can also submit questions
for the hearing record.
After the Ranking Member and I pose our questions, I will
then recognize Members alternatively on both sides of the aisle
in order of their appearance here today, and I will now begin
by recognizing myself for five minutes.
First, I would like to correct the misimpression that
somehow the agreement to tear down the four dams on the Klamath
was the result of a local consensus. Quite the contrary. There
has been at least one voter referendum in Siskiyou County in
which voters overwhelmingly opposed the agreement. There have
been several elections on both sides of the state line that
were decisively settled in favor of the opponents of the
agreement, and the Siskiyou County Board of Supervisors has
formally called for the agreement's reversal.
I would like to begin with Mr. Corwin regarding the
proposal for the destruction of the Snake River Dams. Who
exactly is proposing this and at what stage is the proposal?
Mr. Corwin. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
As far as the actual parties operating the system, all of
the relevant Federal parties, all of the ratepayer groups, the
states, all of those folks who were listed before on the
biological opinion, none of them are proposing destruction of
those dams.
Mr. McClintock. Who is proposing it?
Mr. Corwin. In years past it tended to be some of the
advocacy groups, you know, that had proposed that, so some of
the fish advocacy groups and others.
Mr. McClintock. Are any of them here today?
Mr. Corwin. Yes, the American Rivers is part of that
coalition.
Mr. McClintock. At the invitation of the Minority Party, I
would stress.
Mr. Corwin. Yes.
Mr. McClintock. What would be the replacement cost of this
proposal? What is the cost of destroying those dams and what is
the value of the dams themselves that we would be destroying?
Any ballpark estimates?
Mr. Corwin. You know, when you total it all up it is in the
billions and we can provide the reports that have been done in
the past. Frankly, it is not under--you know, it hasn't been
updated for awhile because we have been trying to move forward
with a real solution.
Mr. McClintock. OK. Could I ask each of your power
providers to give me an estimate of the percentage of the
electricity bills that their consumers are paying right now
because of environmental and other governmental regulations and
litigation?
Mr. Corwin. Yes.
Mr. McClintock. Start with you, Mr. Corwin.
Mr. Corwin. Yes, certainly. Like I said, just for fish and
wildlife the wholesale electricity bill is 30 percent. On that
you could probably add a few percent more for other
constraints. On your question before, too, we do have--just the
power replacement portion for those Snake River Dams, and this
is in Mr. Karier's testimony as well, it is like he said, about
a half a billion dollars, and you are looking at rate
increases----
Mr. McClintock. OK, I would just like to----
Mr. Corwin.--25 percent.
Mr. McClintock.--know on behalf of the consumers how much
of their electricity bill is going to meet all of these
demands. Mr. Morgan, any ideas for your folks?
Mr. Morgan. Yes, sir. I have to clarify something. Gunnison
County Electric is the second smallest cooperative in the State
of Colorado, and we do not directly purchase power from anyone
except under a purchase power agreement, wholesale power
agreement with TriState Generation and Transmission. So all the
Federal hydropower is purchased by TriState, and their whole
blended portfolio of energy, about 18 percent is regulation.
Mr. McClintock. Mr. Simmons.
Mr. Simmons. I am not sure that is an easy question to
answer, and the reason for that is a lot of these costs are
embedded in our wholesale rates and it is hard to find out
exactly how much money is being spent on the different issues.
We don't know them.
Mr. McClintock. Would you say--is 30 percent about right,
Mr. Corwin's number, about 18 percent Mr. Morgan's?
Mr. Simmons. I would say we are in the similar ballparks.
Mr. McClintock. OK, Mr. Gillen.
Mr. Gillen. For our utility, about 30 percent of our
wholesale power bill pays for Bonneville's fish and wildlife
costs. Wholesale power costs are about half.
Mr. McClintock. Mr. Karier.
Mr. Karier. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Those numbers from
Scott Corwin and Roman Gillen sound about right. The Council
tracks----
Mr. McClintock. I am going to have to move on because my
time is short. Mr. Ward?
Mr. Ward. Since 1996, the cost economics for Glen Canyon
Dam's loss of that power if over 500 million. Breaking it out
probably somewhere in the range of 20 to 25 percent.
Mr. McClintock. Do the consumers get any notice on any of
their bills that nearly a third of their electricity prices is
the cost of these regulations and this litigation?
Mr. Ward. Not to my knowledge.
Mr. Gillen. We do not publish a line item on the bill.
Mr. McClintock. Don't you think they have a right to know
how much of their electricity bill is going for these purposes?
Mr. Gillen. Absolutely, and we do print that information in
many publications that we provide to our members.
Mr. McClintock. Let me ask if any of the providers who want
to take a crack at it, what do you see as the future for your
consumers under existing Federal policy given the current
litigation and regulatory structure, and what can we do to fix
it? In 20 seconds or less.
Mr. Ward. Twenty seconds or less.
[Laughter.]
Mr. Ward. I would say that what we are facing right now in
litigation is reducing the amount in Glen Canyon Dam down to 50
percent of supply.
Mr. McClintock. I will try and pick that up in my second
round of questions. My time is about to expire, and I will
yield to the Ranking Member for five minutes.
Mrs. Napolitano. Thank you, sir.
Mr. Karier, you mentioned the Council's six power plan.
What role do efficiencies play in preserving hydropower
production and how much of the projected future demand of the
Northwest can be met with efficiencies?
Mr. Karier. Thank you. The plan covers a 20-year period and
over that 20-year period we expect that we can meet 85 percent
of the new loads through energy efficiency, and at a cost,
again, of a fraction of other new generation.
Mrs. Napolitano. Thank you. Mr. Fahlund, you mentioned on
page 5 of your testimony that you would hope that the multiple
Federal agencies work together.
Mr. Chair, I am introducing into the record an MOU between
the agencies in December of last year to streamline and
simplify authorization of small hydro projects. If you wish a
copy, I would be glad to provide it for you.
You also mentioned efficiency----
Mr. McClintock. Without objection.
Mrs. Napolitano. Thank you. You also mentioned efficiency
upgrades as one of the simplest. Most cost-effective and lowest
impact means of increasing hydropower generation, can Congress
help to incentivize efficiency upgrades at existing facilities
and how?
Mr. Fahlund. Yes, Congresswoman. I think Mr. Simmons
alluded to this briefly, that effectively most of these
facilities which were sort of built during the last great
Federal stimulus program were effectively--have effectively not
been heavily invested, with a few exception, in terms of new
turbines, new generators, and so these old facilities could be
upgraded significantly. There are technologies out there that
can also help enhance fish and wildlife, provide fish and
wildlife benefits and give an ability to release water and
generated at various levels and at different times that can be
beneficial to both the environment and to power production. DOE
has done a lot of study on this.
Mrs. Napolitano. Which then leads me to Mr. Simmons. On
page 2 you indicate that some of the facilities are 45 years or
older, and a lot has been gone over, the cost of O&M is costing
more to fund, consequently the ratepayer ends up paying for
that, I am assuming.
What is the life expectancy of some of the--especially the
on that you are with that will demand infrastructure repair,
infrastructure addition or a replacement of?
Mr. Simmons. A lot of these facilities are figured at
basically 100-year lives. So we are halfway through that life
cycle. Now, rotating equipment, bearings, things like that need
to be replaced, and a lot of that has been done through
operations and maintenance. So it is an ongoing item. The real
problem, I think, is that we need dependable funding from you
guys to make sure that these things get done.
Mrs. Napolitano. OK, and that would be at low-cost loans?
Mr. Simmons. They are your facilities. They are not ours.
Mrs. Napolitano. But you benefit from them.
Mr. Simmons. We pay those rates, but they are your
facilities, and this is a question that probably will come up
later, but we as customers put up funding for capital
improvements. We are doing that through basically cash advances
that we do. I don't know how we can put up more when we do not
have title to something. You know, if we are going to pay for
something----
Mrs. Napolitano. That is an issue that we need to take up
then.
Mr. Simmons. You know, pay for something that you guys own,
how do we get a loan to do that when we don't have title?
Mrs. Napolitano. OK. Well, that is an issue we should be
able to look at.
Again, Mr. Fahlund, you mentioned in your testimony you
would like to see Federal facilities take a basin-wide approach
to hydropower. Can you give an example of where it has worked
in the past and why would this be beneficial from an
environmental?
Mr. Fahlund. Yes. One example from the East very quickly is
the Penobscot River. We reached an agreement with Pennsylvania
Power & Light, which owns the dams on the Penobscot River, and
effectively that yielded an agreement that restored habitat,
access to habitat, and also yielded a net increase in power
production. That project hasn't been fully implemented just
yet, but the agreement nonetheless we can see adequate trades
offs between power and fish and wound up getting an increase in
both.
Mrs. Napolitano. Thank you, Mr. Chair. Look forward to the
second round.
Mr. McClintock. Next is Ms. Noem.
Ms. Noem. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I have a question
for Mr. Simmons, I guess. You mentioned in your testimony the
rising costs of complying with regulations such as the
Endangered Species Act. And I know you gave us a couple of
examples of how that directly impacts ratepayers, but there are
other rules that are costly and time-consuming. Could you
expand on some of those other rules and the effect that they
have on electric co-ops? And then specifically, I mean, address
how consumer rates increase to meet the cost of complying with
these government regulations because that is truly how they are
impacted, how the ratepayers are impacted by your
administrative costs and by the costs that you have because of
these regulations you are trying to comply with.
Mr. Simmons. All of the costs for whatever we have to do
end up in the customers' rates. There is no other place to put
it. I mean, we are consumer owned. So if one neighbor doesn't
pay for it, the other neighbor has to, so it all ends up in the
rates.
Endangered species is probably the biggest issue that we
deal with on the river. We have the pallid sturgeon that we
deal with in the Missouri River, we have the least tern in the
piping plover. We have been dealing with the tern and the
plover for 25 years. It is hard to identify what that cost is
because it has become part of the normal operations.
Ms. Noem. So you don't have any specifics on how much, what
percentage of the costs actually would be probably complying
with regulations or----
Mr. Simmons. I am not sure we can identify that. We don't
know most of those costs.
Ms. Noem. Have you significantly seen those costs rise as
regulations have risen?
Mr. Simmons. I would say drought has more of an issue than
that does by far on us, but they are there.
Ms. Noem. Are these customers aware that their rate
increases are related to government regulations and for outside
influences?
Mr. Simmons. If I can't tell you how much they are, how
could they?
Ms. Noem. But do these recognize that----
Mr. Simmons. I don't think so.
Ms. Noem. They don't. OK, thank you very much. I appreciate
it. I yield back the balance of my time.
Mr. McClintock. Mr. DeFazio.
Mr. DeFazio. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
To the Power Counsel witness, Mr. Karier, you have an
incredibly ambitious plan. I mean, 85 percent of new load or
new demand can be met through efficiency and conservation, is
that correct?
Mr. Karier. That is correct.
Mr. DeFazio. Anybody else in the United States of America
come anywhere near those kind of numbers in any other region?
Mr. Karier. I think there are a few areas. California does
a lot with conservation, but I think we are among the leaders
in the country in this.
Mr. DeFazio. Right. So what if we just said, well, how
about you come up with another 3,500 megawatts of short-term
power, or 1,110 megawatts of annual power, just dump that on
top of what you are already doing, could you easily meet that
through more conservation?
Mr. Karier. The difficulty there is that we invest and plan
to invest in all cost-effective conservation, and the fact that
we lose some generation doesn't necessarily change that
calculation. So it is not easy to draw on that.
Mr. DeFazio. So for those who say simplistically to me,
well, we will take those dams out which don't block the prime
spawning habitat which are blocked by the high dams up--private
high dams up, further up the Snake which no one is challenging
their re-licensure, no prominent national environmental groups,
none that I am aware of.
Second, so we are going to lose that power, we are going to
increase costs by $530 million to ratepayers, and we are going
to increase west-wide 5.2 million tons of CO
2
for
replacement power. Now, why would we do that, and does that
include the costs of loss of navigation in terms of carbon?
Does that include the cost of dam removal?
Mr. Karier. No, we are looking only at the cost of
replacing the generation and capacity that those dams----
Mr. DeFazio. What about the 10 years of barging that the
Clinton Administration determined would be necessary because of
the massive siltation with the removal of the dams, what would
that cost, and what would that do to the survival of salmon?
That seems like three generations of all the smolts being
barged. I thought barging was a problem. If barging is a
problem, why would we want to barge all the smolts for 10
years?
Mr. Karier. Those are good questions, Congressman.
Mr. DeFazio. Has the Council addressed those things?
Mr. Karier. We haven't. There was a Federal study by the
Army Corps of Engineers.
Mr. DeFazio. Yes, I read it actually. I think very few
others have.
Mr. Karier. And I think they did a good job of documenting
all of those additional costs, and the costs were significant
in all those.
Mr. DeFazio. Yes, I think we were looking probably--in
today's dollars we would be talking $2-$3 billion for dam
removal. Then we had the loss of navigation. Then, of course,
in those days we didn't think about--people say, oh, just put
all the wheat on the trains, and I have talked to the railroads
and they say, we don't have anymore capacity, and guess what?
The Columbia River is there so we can't expand the line, so I
guess they go on trucks. No, maybe they will go in a different
direction or who knows what will happen, down the Mississippi
through the Panama Canal, I don't know how it is going to get
there. Well, thank you.
We have another big problem which is private wind
generation, contracted very much to California, which does have
ambitious goals on meeting their needs for alternate
transportation, and Mr. Gillen, and I appreciate him traveling
all the way here, I know how difficult it is, addressed this.
Do you want to just address briefly the concern of our public
ratepayers or customers of Bonneville Power Administration
subsidizing private wind power which is being sold under
contract to Southern California in high wind, high water years?
Mr. Gillen. Yes, that is a concern. We want to make sure
that the capacity of the Federal hydro system is compensated to
firm those resources. Another concern is that as those projects
that benefit folks outside the region are built, that takes
capacity away from the Federal system that we are going to need
in the Northwest as we continue to meet growing loads as well.
So there is just a variety of, I think, hidden things that we
are concerned about, we are watching very closely.
Mr. DeFazio. Wouldn't it be fair to say it would be just
sort of a general principle that private wind power entering
into contracts with Southern California utilities should pay
the costs that they add to the system, whether it is on
transmission or loss of capacity or whatever costs they create?
Mr. Gillen. I think that would be a fair policy to
establish, yes.
Mr. DeFazio. Yes, we don't want to be subsidizing a private
industry, right?
Mr. Gillen. That would not make sense.
Mr. DeFazio. Yes. OK, thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. McClintock. If the gentleman will yield for a moment I
will just point out we now are requiring 30 percent of our
electricity to be generated from these facilities.
Mr. DeFazio. Right.
Mr. McClintock. We stopped building new major facilities
decades ago.
Mr. DeFazio. Right.
Mr. McClintock. Do you expect us to pay the cost of these
policies?
Mr. DeFazio. I know that might be unreasonable, Mr.
Chairman.
Mr. McClintock. Next is Mr. Gosar.
Dr. Gosar. Thank you very much.
For all of you, you know, with regulation comes litigation
and it is sometimes inseparable. Can each of you tell me if
there are any sources of litigation that are awarded through
the Equal Access of Justice Funds to challenge hydropower
projects? Let us start on the left side and work our way down.
Mr. Corwin. You know, I would need to check into that and
get back to you. I am not certain.
Dr. Gosar. I would love to know that.
Mr. Corwin. Yes.
Dr. Gosar. And the amounts. Yes, sir?
Mr. Morgan. That would be a question you would have to
address to our power supplier, and so I do not know the answer.
Mr. Simmons. Ditto. I don't know the answer to that. We
could find out.
Dr. Gosar. We would like that. You, sir?
Mr. Gillen. I don't have an answer but we could find out.
Dr. Gosar. I want it.
Mr. Ward. And we would do the same.
Dr. Gosar. Mr. Ward?
Mr. Ward. Congressman, we have seen numbers. To be honest
with you I can't tell you exactly what they are and we will
send to you a copy of what we have seen for those numbers.
Dr. Gosar. Part of why I bring that up is there is a
symbiotic relationship between that funding and the regulatory
bodies because they work synonymously in court, so I would like
to see those numbers.
Mr. Ward. We will do that.
Dr. Gosar. Mr. Ward, as you know, we are going to be more
specific about this, is that we have had in the Endangered
Species Act, and we have reduced some of the power at the Glen
Canyon Dam in regard to the humpback chub. When we reduce the
flow of, or reduce--increase the flow of water out of the Glen
Canyon Dam, for that five-year study did we actually see an
increase in the number of humpback chubs or did we see
something contradictory?
Mr. Ward. We did not. The only thing that we have done
sediment removal or sediment replacement, we have done high
flow, low flow, medium range. The only thing that has shown an
increase in the humpback chub has been from mechanical
harvesting of trout, which are non-native, which started around
2000 for about three years, and the humpback chub numbers
started coming back up.
Dr. Gosar. And Mr. Ward, I know that there are two
different kinds of chubs here. How do we discern those two
different kind of chubs?
Mr. Ward. I cannot answer that. I will have to----
Dr. Gosar. Actually a dorsal fin with seven ribs versus six
ribs, if I am not mistaken. That is the only identifiable
aspect.
Mr. Ward. That sounds good.
Dr. Gosar. Yes. Now, if we were to take that off of line
here and I know I am very specific about this because Arizona
has got a problem, we have deteriorating transmission lines, it
is very hard to add on to, some of the worst in the United
States. How do we replace that? Is there some way of replacing
this lost power?
Mr. Ward. Through the transmission lines?
Dr. Gosar. Well, I mean the loss of this power from----
Mr. Ward. From Glen Canyon?
Dr. Gosar.--this hydroelectric output?
Mr. Ward. It would require some new construction and those
costs, of course, would be part of each of the utilities that
participate. There are some utilities looking to replace
transmission in the southern part of the state, but it would be
through a cost factor, and that would increase the volume
supply available for hydro or other power.
Dr. Gosar. Now, wouldn't you say that Arizona is one of the
prime areas for solar, and a pretty prime spot for wind? Can
they make up the difference?
Mr. Ward. Under the current structure of our hydro dams
that have been there for many years, all of the power is
allotted. You would have to remove some of that allotment from
customers to make up the base load for supplying solar and
wind.
Dr. Gosar. But both those are temperamental, are they not?
Mr. Ward. They are temperamental. Sometimes the wind blows,
sometimes the sun--the sun shines most of the time, I will say
that.
Dr. Gosar. Yes.
Mr. Ward. But it doesn't shine at night.
Dr. Gosar. That is why I put them in that order.
Well, thank you, Chairman. I will yield back my time.
Mr. McClintock. Mr. Labrador.
Mr. Labrador. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Is it Mr. Fahlund?
Mr. Fahlund. Fahlund.
Mr. Labrador. Fahlund. OK. Your organization has focused on
reaching the four lower Snake River Dams for salmon passage,
but if it is true that only four of the listed runs past these
dams, what do you suggest for the other nine species listed in
the Columbia River Basin?
Mr. Fahlund. Well, we have been working on restoration of
the Columbia River and Snake River Basin stocks really for
about the past 25 years pretty intensively. No, no, I take that
back--20 years. Our Northwest office is about to celebrate the
anniversary. And so we have worked actually with several of the
public utility districts, Grant County, Chelan County, on the
re-licensing of their facilities, trying to improve passage
flows and so forth which have met with some success, I believe.
We certainly looked at some of the other Federal facilities in
ways in which they can reduce impacts as well, so that is by no
means is the Snake River dam removal the only game in town as
far as the full panoply of stocks, but the Snake stocks, the
science is pretty clear that the best way to achieve
harvestable runs once again to benefit fishing communities
along the coast is to remove the lower four Snake River Dams
and that is why we have advanced that position.
Mr. Labrador. What about Grand Coulee, would you advocate
taking that out along with 6,800 megawatts of renewable energy
contribution and its flood control and irrigation roles?
Mr. Fahlund. No, by no means.
Mr. Labrador. What is your view on endangered coastal runs
that do not pass any dams?
Mr. Fahlund. Well, endangered coastal runs suffer from a
different host of issues, habitat being probably the main one
of those. Certainly historical logging and mining operations
had impacts. It really depends on the stock and the run in
particular, so those are areas where my organization hasn't
particularly focused. We have limited resources. Other groups
have.
Mr. Labrador. So wouldn't that be just as true with respect
to habitat with the Columbia River species?
Mr. Fahlund. The Columbian snake species do have habitat
issues. That is why in fact we are trying to get most of the
Snake River stocks up into the upper basin because the best
habitat available through upstream passage is actually up in
Idaho in the Salmon River Basin in particular and the clear
water.
Mr. Labrador. I understand that American Rivers is in
current litigation against the Federal Government on Federal
dam operations in the Pacific Northwest. As American Rivers
received Federal grant money?
Mr. Fahlund. We receive Federal grant money from various
sources, yes.
Mr. Labrador. And how much is that?
Mr. Fahlund. I couldn't tell you exactly off the top of my
head. I think it may be in the disclosure statement, or I would
be happy to provide you with that information.
Mr. Labrador. I really would like to see for the record the
grant money and also the Equal Access to Justice Act that was
just referred to money received over the last decade.
Mr. Fahlund. Yes, I don't believe we have received any
Equal Justice Act money. We don't employ litigators so that
money goes elsewhere.
Mr. Labrador. OK. At least the grant money, I would like to
see that.
Mr. Fahlund. Yes, by all means.
Mr. Labrador. OK. For all panelists starting with Mr.
Corwin, we are right now in a pretty serious reduction mode,
deficit reduction mode. Tell me a little bit more about why you
do not think power marking administrations should charge market
rates for their power as proposed by some?
Mr. Corwin. Thank you, Representative. Again, we are
talking today about investments in Federal hydropower projects.
Those investments are made though by ratepayers. This is all
ratepayer-funded dollars. It is not Federal money at stake. So
to the extent you are increasing the rates to try to reduce the
deficit, you are really just increasing the rates on one part
of the country here and one set of customers within that part
of the country. It seems unfair. It is a regional tax. We just
don't think it makes any sense in the deficit reduction
scenarios.
Mr. Labrador. OK. I guess we only have 30 seconds so if one
more person wanted to respond to that.
Mr. Gillen. I would agree with Mr. Corwin. Regional burden
to help the overall Federal budget issues just doesn't seem
very fair, but as Americans we are concerned about the budget
issues, too. We just want to see fairness in how that is done.
Mr. Labrador. Thank you very much.
Mr. McClintock. Mr. Tipton.
Mr. Tipton. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I would like to
ask Mr. Morgan. Given the reduction in hydropower generation at
the Glen Canyon Dam unit due to environmental compliance, just
how critical has the Aspinall Unit become meeting peak
electrical demand during the summer months and other seasons of
high electrical usage?
Mr. Morgan. It has become very critical. As you know,
peaking generation, especially in the summer months, is very
expensive, and being able to utilize the Aspinall Unit for
peaking generation allows our power supplier to utilize
inexpensive peaking generation that would otherwise probably
come from natural gas, which has a significantly higher cost
and has emissions, has, you know, environmental considerations
as well, so we think it is critical.
Mr. Tipton. You know, if we didn't have that peaking
capacity during the times of critical usage during the summer
months, as you know we are going to have to be buying more
expensive generation on the market, thus increasing consumer
rates in a very bad economy, hurting a lot of the citizens,
particularly in my district where we had better than double-
digit unemployment in, I believe it is 27 of the 29 counties
that I represent in the State of Colorado.
What is the practical impact that you really see? How is
that going to be hitting people at home?
Mr. Morgan. Well, I mean, with our power supplier having to
purchase expensive market-based power or generating peaking
power with high cost ramping evenness for that peak, that cost
is going to be passed on directly to our consumers, and you are
correct, Gunnison County is in a bad place right now.
Mr. Tipton. Right. I think that is something, Mr. Chairman,
that is incredibly important for us to be able to keep in mind.
A lot of the decisions that are faced here are impacting real
people at home, and we have one of the--the cleanest source of
energy production in the entire country when we are talking
about hydroelectric power and the importance to our
communities, and particularly when we get out into the western
United States, that is the source. So if we want clean energy,
this is certainly one of the great points.
Mr. Ward, I would like to maybe have you comment just a
little bit in terms of some of the impacts, some of the high
flow that has been coming out of the Grand Canyon Dam.
Mr. Ward. Part of the problem we have had, Congressman, is
when those timings may be made under the agreements between the
environmental community and the utilities there are times of
the year that those waters are released when they are not doing
the most advantage to the utilities and the power rates
peaking, for example.
If we go to what they would like us to do, which is a low
flow or level flow, that means it runs the same way all year
long, but what do you do in the summer with the high
temperatures or in the winter. So as a result it does impact us
on how it flows.
Mr. Tipton. I am incredibly sorry Representative Gosar had
to go to another meeting here. He is one of the few vets that
we have, somebody that probably really understands it, but one
of the purposes of these high flows is to be able to help the
humpback chub, and he was able to describe it apparently what
they look like, going downstream from the dam.
What fish have benefitted most from these high releases?
Mr. Ward. You know, that is difficult to say. I don't know
that the humpback chub have been affected either way. The trout
have probably benefitted. They don't seem to have the same
problem. High flows a lot of times will create sediment. That
doesn't seem to bother the trout too much but it seems like the
humpback chub has a hard time finding their food source and so
on as a result of sediment in the water.
Mr. Tipton. Right. Just kind of historical perspective, I
grew up in the Southwest, you know, before we had some dams,
McPhee Reservoir in my part of the country, and oftentimes
those rivers would almost--natural causes almost run dry. What
happened?
Mr. Ward. You know, your winter runoff comes in April-May.
If you don't have dams, that water goes on down to the coast.
If you have no rain or whatever and you have drought, you don't
have much rain, and there were times in the early West that
they could cross the Colorado in the late summer by walking
across almost.
Mr. Tipton. Right. I would be kind of curious, and this may
or may not be in your purview, but does more water, does it
equal more endangered fish being saved in this case, and is
water the only mechanism really to be able to same the humpback
chub?
Mr. Ward. That is a good question because I don't know that
can be answered. I don't know that more water is the answer to
the problem. It is when the water is released, as far as the
environmental community is concerned, and how they approach it
and some of the litigation is that it should be released at
certain times of the year to avoid certain times like spawning
and so forth, so it just really depends on----
Mr. Tipton. Do we use fish hatcheries? I apologize, Mr.
Chairman.
Mr. McClintock. Yes.
Mr. Ward. We have in the past. I say ``we'', game and fish
in Arizona has done that. I do not believe they have had much
success, and I don't know why in the humpback chub.
Mr. Tipton. Thank you.
Mr. McClintock. Mr. Garamendi.
Mr. Garamendi. I yield to Mr. DeFazio.
Mr. DeFazio. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Garamendi had a
phone call he had to make.
To Mr. Fahlund, you said something I thought was really
extraordinary, and I have seen some numbers out there that if
we removed those four dams that we would have an incredibly
robust coastal fishing area of commercial size for a number of
species. We are getting 95 percent smolt survival now with
those four days, which is pretty equivalent to what happens in
rivers without dams. So what is happening there? How is that
going to give us this huge coastal fishing area on these
endangered species that are currently endangered?
Mr. Fahlund. Well, I think you shouldn't take my word for
it. I think you should take the American Fishery Society's word
for it. They are the fish biologist experts.
Mr. DeFazio. Right, there are biologists on both sides and
Jane Lubchenco has quite some credentials as I understand, and
she engaged her own peer review of the biop. and didn't come to
that same conclusion. Thank you.
Then have you read the Corps of Engineers report, the one
that was commissioned during the Clinton-Gore Administration on
dam removal? Have you read it? It is quite long, about 600
ages.
Mr. Fahlund. There were several----
Mr. DeFazio. Yes, well, the 600-page one that talked about
the siltation 10 years and barging all the smolt.
Mr. Fahlund. My staff----
Mr. DeFazio. About the costs. Well, have you heard, do they
tell you about those things? If barging is bad and we have a
problem now with survival, we are going to barge all the smolts
for 10 years while incurring a $3 billion cost of dam removal
because of siltation. That would be good for the future of
these species. What do the biologists say about that?
I mean, then if barging is that great that we can do it for
three generations, why don't we just barge them all right now,
give them a free ride down to the base of the Columbia?
Mr. Fahlund. I think that is largely what we are depending
on currently.
Mr. DeFazio. No, it is not.
Mr. Fahlund. Spill has been mandated because that has been
determined to be a preferable option.
Mr. DeFazio. Right, but we are not barging the largest
proportion of the smolt. What percent are we barging?
Mr. Fahlund. I couldn't tell you. I haven't got those
figures.
Mr. DeFazio. Yeah, you would have to ask your staff.
So let us go back to what the Northwest Power Council
conclusions. Do you contest those conclusions that it would
cost the ratepayers $530 million on an annual basis if we
remove those dams to purchase replacement power? The
replacement power, since they already have the most ambitious
conservation program and renewable program in the country,
would have to be done with thermal, regionally would increase
carbon emissions by 4.4 million tons, West-wide by 5.2 million
because we would be buying power outside the region and
shipping it back in because we have lost the capacity, and
then, of course, the other small details, barging all the
smolts for 10 years, the loss of navigation which isn't
included, I don't believe. Did you include that in your carbon
estimates, loss of navigation?
Mr. Karier. No we did not.
Mr. DeFazio. OK, that is another pretty significant factor
because actually barging is more efficient than rail and rail
is way more efficient than trucking, and since we can't put all
that stuff on the rail we are going to probably put them on
trucks or maybe we are going to send it somewhere else. I don't
know.
So anyway, so when you hear all of that you just think we
should press ahead with dam removal despite the biop, despite
the conclusions of the Obama Administration on this, and the
Clinton Administration? We are not talking about the Bush
Administration here. We are talking about two Democratic
Administrations that came to the conclusion it would be a
really stupid idea.
Mr. Fahlund. Are you asking me?
Mr. DeFazio. Yes.
Mr. Fahlund. I think that we need an honest dialogue that
keeps all options on the table, and we haven't had that ever.
We have never had a common----
Mr. DeFazio. Did you see the amendments that--you know, and
the language that Ms. Lubchenco had put into the biop that said
should we not meet expectations in terms of these species, that
indeed we would return to a review of dam removal?
Mr. Fahlund. Yes, I did.
Mr. DeFazio. But let us try the biop first, and if it
doesn't work then we could go back to look at this incredibly
stupid and impractical idea of removing all the dams?
Mr. Fahlund. Yes, I have seen that.
Mr. DeFazio. OK. Think that is pretty good? That puts it on
the table if we need it, right? Only if we need it.
Mr. Fahlund. It is on the table if we need it. I suppose
that is a promise but not a guarantee that is for sure.
Mr. DeFazio. OK, thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. McClintock. Mr. Garamendi? Mr. Garamendi, you still
have 20 seconds.
Mr. Garamendi. I hardly know where to start after I have
yielded to Mr. DeFazio.
[Laughter.]
Mr. McClintock. You have about 10 seconds.
Mr. Garamendi. I am shuffling my papers quickly.
Mr. McClintock. I think now the gentleman's time has
expired, but we will have a bonus round with questions----
[Laughter.]
Mr. McClintock.--that will begin right now, and the good
news is you will be next up after the Ranking Member.
Mr. Garamendi. I think I will just wait until after the
Ranking Member and try to figure out where Mr. DeFazio was
coming from with all of that. So if I could just defer for a
moment.
Mr. McClintock. I don't blame you. And I do want to stress
for the third time that the gentleman from American Rivers is
the Minorities' guest here today.
I would like to return to the question that I began my
questions with, and that is the purpose of this series of
hearings is to assess our current Federal policies, where they
are going, and to determine what adjustments we have to make to
get back to a period of abundance and prosperity, and I would
like to ask each of the witnesses here today, where are we
going under current Federal policies and what can we do to fix
that?
Mr. Corwin. Thanks, Mr. Chairman. Certainly costs are going
up. Rates have gone up significantly in the last several years,
and that is tied to some of these policies.
Mr. McClintock. Why? Why? Because of Federal policies?
Mr. Corwin. Yes. Certainly for customers of BPA power fish
and wildlife costs have escalated over the last 20 years
enormously. How do you get to that? You need to meet your
statutory obligations unless you can change the statutes and
you need to do it more efficiently. Obviously, within a $800
million fish cost, there are a lot of efficiencies that can
still be found. Northwest Power and Conservation Council is
trying----
Mr. McClintock. And by the way on that point, what are the
challenges to fish? What are the biggest challenges to fish
populations?
Mr. Corwin. You know, they are all throughout the life
cycle. So this focus on hydropower is--that is where I disagree
strongly with some of the statements by the gentleman from
American Rivers. You know, these fish face challenges all
throughout their life cycle. They are still intentionally
caught and harvested as well. They face predation by sea lions,
significant amounts, eating the adults who are the folks coming
back to spawn.
Mr. McClintock. Are the predations a greater factor in
mortality than the Federal hydropower facilities?
Mr. Corwin. Certainly for adults they are, yes. There is
almost no issue with adult passage through the Federal
hydropower system. The adults go right up the river. But almost
all this focus has been on the juvenile passage downstream.
Well, there we have also had years where avian predation, birds
have eaten 10 million or more of the juvenile smolts that we
are spending all this money to protect trying to get them out
to the river, so there are a lot of issues. Ocean conditions
are another big one. You can't control that a lot, that makes
these populations fluctuate.
What we would like to see are more efficiencies in
operations, especially on the spill regime that has been
mentioned.
Mr. McClintock. What would you offer as a more cost-
effective ways of dealing with these issues? For example, fish
hatcheries, predator control, what are your views on that?
Mr. Corwin. Absolutely more predator control, more
aggressive regime on that; more efficient fish hatcheries. They
have made some improvements on those over time. Not spilling
water over the dams when there aren't fish in the river is a
good start. We are trying to make steps in that direction. This
biop makes steps in that direction, but those are just a few
items.
Mr. McClintock. Any other thoughts on this subject from the
providers?
Mr. Gillen. The region's commitment to the biop, that has
undergone considerable scrutiny and again at considerable cost
to our members. We are in support of that because we think that
is the best chance to address the needs of these endangered
fish.
Mr. Ward. I believe one other thing is, and it was
mentioned a moment ago, was predator control, and with Glen
Canyon Dam you are between a rock and a hard spot. Trout being
the non-native fish are enjoying their lunch on the humpback,
but on the same token the fish below that dam----
Mr. McClintock. And your customers are paying 30 percent
more on their electricity bills in order to feed the trout. Is
that essentially what is going on?
Mr. Ward. I think that is one way of saying it.
Mr. McClintock. This is insane.
Mr. Ward. And I will say that the trout fishery below the
dam is one of the greatest in the world, so they are caught
between what do they do. Do they get rid of them? Do they--you
know, it is a difficult decision.
Mr. McClintock. OK. Mr. Corwin, American Rivers testified
for a basin scale coordination on hydropower. Would this impose
a new review requirements on existing hydropower and keep new
regulations on top of old regulations?
Mr. Corwin. You know, I am not sure exactly what kind of
coordination he was referring to so I would have to look at
that. As far as the power system goes, the Federal Columbia
River Power System is a model of coordination. To have 31 dams
all generating, to have this system working the way it does to
meet the needs of the Northwest is incredible right now.
Mr. McClintock. Mr. Karier, just a quick yes or no on this.
As I understand it, when we add wind and solar to the grid
because it is an integrated grid and because wind and solar are
intermittent for every megawatt that we add of one of these
intermittent sources--wind or solar--we have to have an
additional megawatt of reliable backup, is that correct?
Mr. Karier. Yes.
Mr. McClintock. All right, thank you. Ranking Member.
Mrs. Napolitano. Thank you, Mr. Chair, and I would like to
submit for the record, Mr. Chair, the number of cases pending
litigation as of January 2011 at the Bureau of Reclamation for
the Mid-Pacific Region. There are 20 of them. Five are
environmental suits, the rest are cities, ditches, alliances,
et cetera, et cetera. Just for the record one is closed, so
that leaves four out of 20, and I would like to submit that for
the record.
Mr. McClintock. Without objection.
Mrs. Napolitano. Second, Mr. Karier, you indicate that
almost 500 million annual is spent on environmental mitigation.
BPA has on the books the building of four nuclear plants. Am I
correct?
Mr. Karier. Washington Public Power Supply System from the
plants that weren't built.
Mrs. Napolitano. Correct.
Mr. Karier. Yes.
Mrs. Napolitano. Three were not built. How much are you
paying on that debt? How much is BPA paying? I am sorry.
Mr. Karier. I would have to get back to you, but that is
one of the largest cost items for Bonneville Power is still
paying the interest on that debt.
Mrs. Napolitano. Almost a billion dollars annually is my
estimation. How does that compare to the mitigation of the
environmental issues that we have?
Mr. Karier. The estimates that we have received from
Bonneville about the annual costs for the fish and wildlife
program is about $800 million a year--or $750-$800 million--and
that includes the cost of the foregone power from spilling
water for fish, so it includes some of those operations costs
as well as the out-of-pocket costs, so that is the range. We
report on that annually to the Governors of the Northwest.
Mrs. Napolitano. I understand, but my concern is that we
are comparing some of these costs, and you are bearing costs
for something that was never built.
Mr. Karier. That is correct. That, again, is one of the
largest line item costs for Bonneville is----
Mrs. Napolitano. Thank you.
Mr. Karier.--paying the interest on that investment.
Mrs. Napolitano. Mr. Morgan, you mentioned in your
testimony you need help in developing more hydropower
resources, and are you aware the Memorandum of Understanding
between FERC and the State of Colorado signed last August to
simplify procedures authorizing the development of small-scale
hydropower projects at existing facilities in Colorado, and
have you taken advantage of the program?
Mr. Morgan. No, I was not aware of that.
Mrs. Napolitano. We would like to furnish the information
to you, sir.
Mr. Morgan. OK.
Mrs. Napolitano. Because we do have it available.
And it is my understanding, Mr. Morgan, that a change to
the draft EIS to reflect that Black Canyon's Federally reserved
water rights and that Reclamation has committed to delivering
the park's water as well as its obligations as part of the
Aspinall Unit.
How can we jump to a conclusion and say that Reclamation
isn't protecting hydropower before the filed EIS is even
released?
Mr. Morgan. Well, the movement forward is to continue to
restrict that. That is the direction that it is moving in.
Mrs. Napolitano. But it is not final.
Mr. Morgan. You are correct, it is not final.
Mrs. Napolitano. And how are we assuming that?
Mr. Morgan. That just appears to be the direction that it
is moving in.
Mrs. Napolitano. OK. Mr. Fahlund, in your testimony you
mentioned an analysis by FERC which found that since Congress
passed laws in the mid-1980s to encourage environmental
improvements overall generating capacity has actually increased
by 4.1 percent. Could you elaborate on how generation would
increase while mitigating the environmental impacts?
Mr. Fahlund. That is simply because many of the efforts
within those re-licensing proceedings resulted in agreements
were environmental interests supported additions of capacity
where facilities were under capacity. We also supported
modifications to operations that would have facilitated
increases in generation, not just capacity, so it had intended
to net out positive.
Mrs. Napolitano. Thank you. Mr. Chair, I have more
questions for the record but I would like to leave my remaining
57 seconds to Mr. Garamendi, then he can have his five.
Mr. McClintock. Then Mr. Labrador can have his.
Mrs. Napolitano. Yes, I know but----
Mr. Garamendi. The Chairman spoke to the issue of abundance
and prosperity, good, but an abundance of what and prosperity
for whom, and I will go through a series of questions about
those, and also I note that we are looking at river segments
that basically cover the entire West, and therefore the issues
are remarkable different or dramatically different on each
river, and each segment of the river, and so one size is
clearly not appropriate, and it certainly doesn't fit all, so I
will come to those questions. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. McClintock. Mr. Labrador.
Mr. Labrador. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Corwin, we have spent $13 billion of taxpayer money on
salmon restoration. Can you explain greater detail where this
funding is being spent?
Mr. Corwin. Certainly. Thank you, Representative. And on
that to compare costs, to follow up on a question a little
earlier there, I think that number was wrong as far as the debt
costs remaining on the nuclear plants. The total payment of
Bonneville to the Federal Treasury is almost a billion dollars
a year, but that includes a lot of other pieces of debt
structure in there, so their entire power revenue requirement
is $2.5 billion a year, so they don't have a $1 billion payment
on just the nuclear plant out of that, but there is still a
remaining amount. It is going to be paid off in several years.
The pieces of the fish budget break down into an integrated
program that is reviewed by the Power Council and they do a
good job, but there several hundred projects involved with
that. That is about $250 million a year. The Power Council's
oversight costs themselves are another several million. The
Fish and Wildlife Service has a piece of about 30 million. The
Corps of Engineers has a reimbursement piece of about 40
million, a little bit more than that, and then you have this
enormous operations piece from power replacement purchases or
foregone revenues that is about $460 million a year, and then
you have capital on the fish projects which is about $150
million a year, so that is kind of how it breaks down. More and
more of that has become related to ESA needs, the biological
opinion needs as opposed to general mitigation in the region
under Northwest Power Act.
Mr. Labrador. Do you think this money is being spent as
efficiently as possible?
Mr. Corwin. No. It has gotten better over the years, but we
have a long way to go, and we need to keep our noses to the
grindstone as customers and work with the Power Council and
Bonneville and other agencies to make sure that is as efficient
as possible.
Mr. Labrador. Aside from the dollars spent to replace power
loss through spill, what are some of the operational impact to
losing this generation?
Mr. Corwin. Yes. I mean, just the spill portion and flow
that we were talking about before, the capacity, the
flexibility that you lose is, as was mentioned earlier, that is
the same flexibility people want to use to try to integrate new
resources, these variable resources that drop off suddenly in
an hour. Well, hydro can follow those--back up those resources
hour to hour, so you lose that capability. You also lose
important voltage support for reliability of the system.
We have gotten better about that over time, but in 1996,
the West Coast power outage put four million people into a
blackout, and that was mainly because of really increasing
temperatures and loads, and the lines sagged into some trees,
and then McNary Dam went down. Well, part of what they needed
was more voltage support and when you have all that project
spilling, you don't have that. It is also one of the arguments
that came to fore when they were looking at drawing down the
John Day Reservoir; that if you didn't have that resource there
how would you back up those power needs when you really need
them in those situations.
Mr. Labrador. Yes, American Rivers has said that the Snake
River dams are incompatible with healthy salmon runs. What is
the current rate of fish passage at the Snake River Dams?
Mr. Corwin. Yes, as we were saying earlier, it is about 96
percent, and certainly for adults it is the same as you would
have with a natural river. There are other issues that get
pulled up in that debate, but the proof is in the pudding on
the returns that we are seeing now. The Chinook, especially is
really showing good returns, and specific to the Snake River,
those returns have improved, and the trend is upwards.
Now, they go up and down according to ocean conditions as
well, but the passage improvements that you can measure through
the hydropower system are evident.
Mr. Labrador. OK, thank you.
Mr.--is it Karier?
Mr. Karier. Karier, yes.
Mr. Labrador. We heard some say that without the four Lower
Snake Dams in place the region could replace that energy and
capacity with energy efficiency and renewable energy. Is that
true?
Mr. Karier. Well, that has been one part of this argument.
The Council's analysis looked at how the region would
practically do that. It is more complicated than just energy
because of the capacity value of the dams. The dams can meet
peak loads. Wind power, for instance, cannot do that for the
most part.
So if those dams were removed and the region was faced with
replacing that, the Council's analysis shows a combination of
primarily less exports, more imports into the region, an
increased use of the existing coal plants and the natural gas
plants, and expansion of natural gas plants in the Northwest, a
small increment of conservation beyond what we already are
getting primarily because we are getting all cost-effective
conservation in our current plan.
Mr. Labrador. Great. Thank you.
Mr. Karier. So that would be the portfolio that would be
required to replace that.
Mr. Labrador. Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. McClintock. Mr. Garamendi.
Mr. Garamendi. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Abundance and prosperity for whom and what? Clearly the
issue of abundance of the natural species in the river is of
great concern. If you are talking salmon, you are also
seriously talking about prosperity for those who rely upon the
salmon for their income. But we really have to deal with the
balancing here. It is not one way or the other. It is a
balancing situation.
The testimony that I heard a few moments ago that it is
about predation, listen, it is about dams on the river.
Predation has always been there in one for or another, and will
always be there, and the ocean does change from time to time,
but clearly there is no doubt that the dams on the river are
the principal issue.
The question for us is given that there are dams on the
river how do we provide abundance in its many forms: abundance
of electrical power, abundance of water when needed, where
needed, and also abundance of fish, many species, and this is
true on everyone of the river here, and I will note once again
that each of these river segments is quite different from the
other so we are dealing with different circumstances.
Some dams can be removed without great harm to electrical
power or others. Other dams, no way, no how, it isn't going to
happen, so let us get real here and kind of focus on what each
of the rivers need and each specific stem of the river. It has
been a long time since I have dealt with the Columbia, in fact,
it was 1998 that I left the Department of the Interior and the
work that I was doing on the Columbia, so I am not up to date,
and I have missed most of this hearing. I apologize for that,
but I will come up to speed on it.
Going forward what I would like to see us do, Mr. Chairman,
is to really figure out how best to deal with a very complex
problem to achieve all of the abundance that we need: abundance
of fish, salmon, other species, as well as the abundance of
power. It is not going to be easily done. We have added to the
mix in the last decade--wind, solar--both of which as you point
out, Mr. Chairman, are intermittent, and we have the electrical
power. The integration of these sources of power is of utmost
importance to all of us because all are clean energy, and it
may require us to think differently than we have in the past
about the integration, about the resources, and the timing of
those resources.
I also note, and I guess I am just making a speech here
without many questions, but so be it. That was Mr. Boehner's
word, wasn't it, ``so be it''. Anyway, how can we do these
thing? How can we have an abundance of fish?
Trucking, Mr. DeFazio's purpose about moving beyond the
dams. A lot of the testimony here that I have heard, 96 percent
return compared to what? Downstream, the smolt going
downstream, the salmon issues.
Mr. Chairman, you are on an issue here that if we think
about this in a very holistic way, taking into account the
complexities that exist, I think we can make some progress
here. We are not going to remove the dams on the Columbia or
the Snake for that matter. It isn't going to happen, at least
in our lifetimes. So given that how can we improve the
fisheries on an extraordinary river system? That is our
challenge. We ought to focus on those things that are possible.
I know the Klamath--you and I may disagree with that, Mr.
Chairman--but on the Klamath we ought to complete the study on
the Klamath about removing the dams. It hasn't yet been
completed. We don't have all the information in. It may make a
lot of sense to do so. It may not. We come to this with our own
initial prejudices. I suspect yours, Mr. Chairman, is don't
remove them. I know mine is to remove them, but let us get on
with it and let us find out what the details are in the
Klamath.
With regard to the Colorado, yes, the fish have been eating
each other for a long time, but we want to make sure that they
are all there to eat each other in the future. Numbers have
been tossed around here about power losses and the like and
about costs and the like, but we are really kind of playing a
political game without getting down to the real details that we
need to understand. I thank the Ranking Member for bringing out
some of those points, so let us get past the rhetoric, and let
us recognize that we have a very complex problem in which we
ought to be maximizing the abundance in every form, and making
sure that there is prosperity for all who have now historically
and in the future depended on these rivers. That ought to be
our goal. These are complex issues, very tough issues. But if
we go at it with goodwill, I think we can make some progress.
Mr. Chairman, I thank you for the hearing, and I look
forward to working with you.
Mr. McClintock. Thank you. That concludes our rounds of
questions. I want to thank all of our witnesses for their
valuable testimony. Members of the Subcommittee may have
additional questions or comments for witnesses. We would ask
that you respond to those in writing, and I also would like
again to ask all of you for your input on what changes you
believe need to be made in current Federal policy to achieve
those objectives of abundance and prosperity that we have
outlined. The hearing record will be open for 10 business days
to receive these responses.
If there is no further business to be brought before the
Committee, without objection, the Committee stands adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 11:56 a.m., the Subcommittee was adjourned.]


