- THE EFFECTIVENESS OF FEDERAL SPENDING ON NATIVE AMERICAN PROGRAMS AND THE PRESIDENT'S FY 2012 BUDGET REQUEST FOR THE BUREAU OF INDIAN AFFAIRS AND THE OFFICE OF THE SPECIAL TRUSTEE FOR AMERICAN INDIANS

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

THE EFFECTIVENESS OF FEDERAL SPENDING ON NATIVE AMERICAN PROGRAMS AND
THE PRESIDENT'S FY 2012 BUDGET REQUEST FOR THE BUREAU OF INDIAN
AFFAIRS AND THE OFFICE OF THE SPECIAL TRUSTEE FOR AMERICAN INDIANS

=======================================================================

OVERSIGHT HEARING

before the

SUBCOMMITTEE ON INDIAN AND
ALASKA NATIVE AFFAIRS

of the

COMMITTEE ON NATURAL RESOURCES
U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

Tuesday, March 8, 2011

__________

Serial No. 112-6

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Natural Resources

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.fdsys.gov
or
Committee address: http://naturalresources.house.gov

U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
65-117                    WASHINGTON : 2011
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing Office,
http://bookstore.gpo.gov. For more information, contact the GPO Customer Contact Center, U.S. Government Printing Office. Phone 202�09512�091800, or 866�09512�091800 (toll-free). E-mail,
[email protected]
.

COMMITTEE ON NATURAL RESOURCES

DOC HASTINGS, WA, Chairman
EDWARD J. MARKEY, MA, Ranking Democrat Member

Don Young, AK                        Dale E. Kildee, MI
John J. Duncan, Jr., TN              Peter A. DeFazio, OR
Louie Gohmert, TX                    Eni F.H. Faleomavaega, AS
Rob Bishop, UT                       Frank Pallone, Jr., NJ
Doug Lamborn, CO                     Grace F. Napolitano, CA
Robert J. Wittman, VA                Rush D. Holt, NJ
Paul C. Broun, GA                    Raul M. Grijalva, AZ
John Fleming, LA                     Madeleine Z. Bordallo, GU
Mike Coffman, CO                     Jim Costa, CA
Tom McClintock, CA                   Dan Boren, OK
Glenn Thompson, PA                   Gregorio Kilili Camacho Sablan,
Jeff Denham, CA                          CNMI
Dan Benishek, MI                     Martin Heinrich, NM
David Rivera, FL                     Ben Ray Lujan, NM
Jeff Duncan, SC                      John P. Sarbanes, MD
Scott R. Tipton, CO                  Betty Sutton, OH
Paul A. Gosar, AZ                    Niki Tsongas, MA
Raul R. Labrador, ID                 Pedro R. Pierluisi, PR
Kristi L. Noem, SD                   John Garamendi, CA
Steve Southerland II, FL             Colleen W. Hanabusa, HI
Bill Flores, TX                      Vacancy
Andy Harris, MD
Jeffrey M. Landry, LA
Charles J. ``Chuck'' Fleischmann,
TN
Jon Runyan, NJ
Bill Johnson, OH

Todd Young, Chief of Staff
Lisa Pittman, Chief Counsel
Jeffrey Duncan, Democrat Staff Director
Rick Healy, Democrat Chief Counsel
------

SUBCOMMITTEE ON INDIAN AND ALASKA NATIVE AFFAIRS

DON YOUNG, AK, Chairman
DAN BOREN, OK, Ranking Democrat Member

Tom McClintock, CA                   Dale E. Kildee, MI
Jeff Denham, CA                      Eni F.H. Faleomavaega, AS
Dan Benishek, MI                     Ben Ray Lujan, NM
Paul A. Gosar, AZ                    Colleen W. Hanabusa, HI
Raul R. Labrador, ID                 Edward J. Markey, MA, ex officio
Kristi L. Noem, SD
Doc Hastings, WA, ex officio

------
CONTENTS

----------
Page

Hearing held on Tuesday, March 8, 2011...........................     1

Statement of Members:
Boren, Hon. Dan, a Representative in Congress from the State
of Oklahoma................................................     3
Prepared statement of....................................     4
Gosar, Hon. Paul A., a Representative in Congress from the
State of Arizona, Prepared statement of....................    18
Young, Hon. Don, the Representative in Congress for the State
of Alaska..................................................     1
Prepared statement of....................................     2

Statement of Witnesses:
Echo Hawk, Larry, Assistant Secretary--Indian Affairs, U.S.
Department of the Interior.................................     5
Prepared statement of....................................     7
Joseph, Ray A., Principal Deputy Special Trustee for American
Indians, U.S. Department of the Interior...................    11
Prepared statement of....................................    13

OVERSIGHT HEARING ON ``THE EFFECTIVENESS OF FEDERAL SPENDING ON NATIVE
AMERICAN PROGRAMS, AND ON THE PRESIDENT'S FY 2012 BUDGET REQUEST FOR
THE BUREAU OF INDIAN AFFAIRS AND THE OFFICE OF THE SPECIAL TRUSTEE FOR
AMERICAN INDIANS.''

----------

Tuesday,, March 8, 2011

U.S. House of Representatives

Subcommittee on Indian and Alaska Native Affairs

Committee on Natural Resources

Washington, D.C.

----------

The Subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 11:00 a.m. in
Room 1334, Longworth House Office Building, The Honorable Don
Young [Chairman of the Subcommittee] presiding.
Present: Representatives Young, McClintock, Denham, Gosar,
Labrador, Kildee, Pallone, Boren, Lujan, and Hanabusa.
Mr. Young. The Committee will come to order.
The Chairman notes the presence of a quorum. The
Subcommittee on Indian and Alaska Native Affairs is meeting
today to hear testimony on the effectiveness of Federal
spending on Native American programs, and on the President's
Fiscal Year 2012 request for the Bureau of Indian Affairs and
the Office of the Special Trustee for American Indians.
Under Committee Rule 4[f], opening statements are limited
to the Chairman and Ranking Member of the Subcommittee, so we
can hear from my witnesses more quickly. However, I ask
unanimous consent to include other Members' opening statements
in the hearing record if submitted to the clerk by the end of
business today. Hearing no objection, so ordered.
Also, I don't see him here, but later on I ask unanimous
consent that the gentleman from New Jersey, Mr. Pallone, may be
allowed to join us on the dais. Without objection, so ordered.

STATEMENT OF THE HONORABLE DON YOUNG, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF ALASKA

Mr. Young. Today, the newly established Subcommittee on
Indian and Alaska Native Affairs meets at its first hearing of
the 112th Congress. The purpose of today's hearing is to review
the President's Fiscal Year 2012 budget request for Native
American programs administered by the Bureau of Indian Affairs,
and by the Office of the Special Trustee for American Indians.
In this hearing, the Subcommittee intends to review the
effectiveness of Federal spending on programs concerning
recognizing Indian tribes. Today the government borrows money
at the same time that it imposes obstacles for creation of new
wealth, such as through the administration of the oil and gas
leases on the Outer Continental Shelf. As a result, jobs are
destroyed and the power of the dollar gets weaker and weaker.
Indian tribes and individual Indians own about 56 million
acres of land held in trust. In my State of Alaska, another 44
million acres of land is owned by the Alaska Native
Corporations. That is a total of 100 million acres of land, the
size of California. Together these lands contain abundant
resources of conventional renewable energy and hard rock
minerals and aggregates, and timber, farming, grazing, fish and
wildlife resources.
So, through responsible development of these resources
tribes and individual Indians are well positioned to provide
good jobs to tribal members and revenue for the tribal
governments. It can also restore the manufacturing base of
America that has been lost to the recent radical expansion of
government regulations. The problem is outdated Federal
policies stand in the way of tribal development and their
resources. Examples are abundant, but a recent one that comes
to mind is when this government denied an Indian tribe with 50
percent unemployment from building a new power plant, all in
the name of pleasing the special interests.
The one goal of the hearing today is to examine whether or
not the budget requested by the President reflects the policy
of Congress to promote genuine tribal self-determination, not
the kind of self-determination defined by special interests.
Another purpose of today's hearing is the question of budget
priorities the President has as Congress faces the unavoidable
task of reducing the government's massive deficit and debt.
As we attack the budget deficit, it is imperative for
Congress to ensure to uphold Indian treaties and solemn
promises made to tribes through acts of Congress. It also means
ensuring money is spent wisely and effectively for these
purposes, not waste it on things like excessive attorney fees
and Indian claim settlements. In this effort, it is my intent
to work on a bipartisan basis with my colleagues on the
Committee, and to work with the Administration to ensure the
government is properly consulting with Indian Country to ensure
the budget choices made by the House work for the benefit of
American Indians.
With that, I look forward to hearing from the witnesses
today.
[The prepared statement of Chairman Young follows:]

Statement of The Honorable Don Young, Chairman,
Subcommittee on Indian and Alaska Native Affairs

Today the newly established Subcommittee on Indian and Alaska
Native Affairs meets in its first hearing of the 112th Congress. The
purpose of today's hearing is to review the President's fiscal year
2012 budget request for Native American programs administered by the
Bureau of Indian Affairs, and by the Office of the Special Trustee for
American Indians. In this hearing, the Subcommittee intends to review
the effectiveness of federal spending on programs concerning recognized
Indian tribes.
Today, the government borrows money at the same time as it imposes
obstacles to the creation of new wealth, such as through the
Administration's inaction on oil and gas leasing in the Outer
Continental Shelf. As a result, less jobs are created, and the power of
the dollar gets weaker and weaker. Fewer places in America feel the
effects of America's decline in the production of new wealth and in the
strength of the dollar, than Indian Country.
Indian tribes and individual Indians own about 56 million acres of
land held in trust. In my state of Alaska, another 44 million acres of
land are owned in fee by Alaska Native Corporations.
Together these lands contain abundant resources in conventional and
renewable energy, in hard rock minerals and aggregates, and in timber,
farming, grazing, and fish and wildlife resources. Through responsible
development of these resources, tribes and individual Indians are well-
positioned to provide good jobs to tribal members and revenues to
tribal governments. They can also help restore the manufacturing base
of America that has been lost through the recent, radical expansion of
government regulation.
The problem is that outdated federal policies stand in the way of
tribal development of their resources. Examples are abundant, but a
recent one that comes to mind was when this government denied an Indian
tribe with 50 percent unemployment from building a new power plant--all
in the name of pleasing special interests.
One goal of today's hearing is to examine whether or not the budget
request of the President reflects the policy of Congress to promote
genuine tribal self-determination, not the kind of self-determination
as defined by special interests.
Another purpose of today's hearing is to question the budget
priorities of the President as Congress faces the unavoidable task of
reducing the government's massive deficit and debt.
As we attack the budget deficit, it is imperative for Congress to
ensure it upholds its end in treaties and solemn promises made to
tribes through Acts of Congress. It also means ensuring money is spent
wisely and efficiently for these purposes--not wasted on things like
excessive attorney fees in Indian Claims settlements.
In this effort, it is my intent to work on a bipartisan basis with
my colleagues on the Committee, and to work with the Administration, to
ensure the government is properly consulting with Indian Country to
ensure the budget choices made by the House work for the benefit of
Native Americans.
______

Mr. Young. With that, I now recognize my good friend, Mr.
Boren, the Ranking Member of this Subcommittee, to make a
statement.

STATEMENT OF THE HONORABLE DAN BOREN, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF OKLAHOMA

Mr. Boren. Thank you, Chairman Young, for holding this
hearing today and for your bipartisan communication on this
issue and many others. I am very encouraged by your willingness
to work with me and our entire staff of this Committee, and I
look forward to working with you in the future.
I want to say a special word about the gentleman to my
left, Dale Kildee, the champion for Indian Country. Thank you
for again allowing me to be in this position, and I look
forward to working with you as well, Mr. Kildee.
Finally, I would like to thank the Bureau of Indian
Affairs, Bureau of Indian Education, and the Office of the
Special Trustee for American Indians for taking part in the
hearing to discuss the Fiscal Year 2012 budget and its effect
on Indian Country. I am very pleased to be part of the newly
formed Subcommittee. I think it is long overdue. I look forward
to finally addressing some of the issues facing Native
Americans that have been left unresolved.
There are very many important topics that I hope to uncover
during the coming months but none of which can move forward
until the budget is dissected. Looking at the Administration's
proposed budget for 2012, I would like to second Chairman
Young's emphasis on tribal sovereignty and the importance of
removing the Federal Government from their development. We need
to build a budget that creates jobs and opportunities for
tribal nations without creating more bureaucratic regulation.
This budget should strengthen the programs that allow tribes to
act in their own best interest. It must also balance
responsibilities to ensure every promise we make we can and
will keep. With this in mind, there is no doubt that sacrifices
must be made so that we can get the nation's budget under
control.
I am pleased to see many positive changes in the proposed
budget that reflect both the need for cuts while maintaining
the integrity of the much needed programs. As a strong believer
in the self-determination of tribal entities, I am glad to see
the budget allows for additional funding to provide newly
recognized tribes with a start-up cost. With 17 Federally
recognized tribes in my district, many of which are small,
Oklahoma will benefit greatly from the additional funding for
small and needy tribes.
On the other hand, this budget provides an example of ways
to cut money with the least impact. For example, the budget
cuts $450,000 by eliminating excess printing, and another $2.5
million was saved by adopting departmental IT deficiencies.
These are the kind of cuts that need to be made. This is the
wasteful spending that we all talk about, and these cuts are
the way that we can keep programs in Indian Country strong
while remaining fiscally responsible. Overall, this is a good
start. We must, however, maintain focus upon sovereignty and
economic development so that our Indian communities can
continue to grow and to govern. I look forward to discussing
with everyone here today how the President's budget can or may
address these issues.
I yield back.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Boren follows:]

Statement of The Honorable Dan Boren, a Representative in Congress
from the State of Oklahoma

Thank you Chairman Young for holding our hearing today and for your
bipartisan communication on this issue and others. I am very excited
about the representation we have on this committee and look forward to
working with you.
I would also like to thank Dale Kildee for his continued leadership
and efforts on the behalf of Native Americans. He is a real champion
for Indian Country. I am proud to be a part of his team.
Finally, I'd like to thank the Bureau of Indian Affairs, Bureau of
Indian Education, and the Office of the Special Trustee for American
Indians for taking part in the hearing to discuss the Fiscal Year 2012
budget and its affect on Indian Country.
I'm very pleased to be a part of this newly-formed subcommittee. It
is long overdue. I look forward to finally addressing some of the
issues facing Native Americans that have been left unresolved.
There are many very important topics that I hope to uncover the
coming months, but none of which can move forward until the budget is
dissected.
Looking at the Administration's proposed budget for 2012, I would
like to second Chairman Young's emphasis on tribal sovereignty and the
importance of removing government from their development.
We need to build a budget that creates jobs and opportunities for
our tribal neighbors without creating more bureaucratic regulation.
This budget should strengthen the programs that allow tribal
nations to act in their own best interests.
It must also balance responsibilities to ensure every promise we
make, we can and will keep.
With this in mind, there is no doubt that sacrifices must be made
so that we can get the nation's budget under control.
I'm pleased to see many positive changes in the proposed budget
that reflect both the need for cuts while maintaining the integrity of
much needed programs.
As a strong believer in the self-determination of tribal entities I
am glad to see the budget allows for additional funding to provide
newly-recognized tribes with the start-up costs.
With 17 federally recognized tribes in my district, many of which
are small, Oklahoma will benefit greatly from the additional funding
for small and needy tribes.
On the other hand, this budget provides an example of ways to cut
money with the least impact. For example, the budget cut $450,000 by
eliminating excess printing. And another $2.5 million was saved by
adopting Departmental IT efficiencies.
These are the kinds of cuts that need to be made. This is the
wasteful spending we talk about. And these cuts are the way that we can
keep programs in Indian Country strong while remaining fiscally
responsible.
Overall, this is a good start. We must, however, maintain focus
upon sovereignty and economic development so that our Indian
communities can continue to grow and to govern.
I look forward to discussing with everyone here how the President's
budget can or may not address these issues.
______

Mr. Young. I thank the gentleman, and with that I will call
the two witnesses, Larry Echo Hawk. Assistant Secretary for
Indian Affairs, and Ray Joseph, the Principal Deputy Special
Trustee for American Indians.
Welcome both of you. I am sure you have done this before
but you will be limited to five minutes, but I will tell you
that sometimes I am more lenient if you cannot finish your
statement at that time do so. But answering questions you can,
both of you, try to make them as concise as possible, and that
goes for the questions, too, and smack me up alongside the head
if I don't ask concise questions, too. You know how the timing
lights work. You have five minutes, but again, I will be a
little lenient, and again, welcome to the Committee, and I will
start, I believe, with Mr. Echo Hawk.
And first let me say, Mr. Echo Hawk, I want to thank you
for going to Alaska. I have spoken to you before about my
interests in developing legislation that will be beneficial. We
expect you, hopefully, will volunteer--this will not be an
adversarial position--to try to improve the Bureau of Indian
Affairs and how it serves its constituents. I know you have
some suggestions. If you can't say them out loud, you can say
them quietly on paper as I know how this system works. But my
goal in this period of time, and I am sure Mr. Boren, the
Ranking Member, and the other Members is to try to make sure
that we can progress forward with Indian Country and Alaska
Natives and make sure they have an opportunity to improve their
lot.
So, again, thank you, and welcome aboard and you are up
first.

STATEMENT OF THE HONORABLE LARRY ECHO HAWK, ASSISTANT SECRETARY
FOR INDIAN AFFAIRS, BUREAU OF INDIAN AFFAIRS, U.S. DEPARTMENT
OF THE INTERIOR

Mr. Echo Hawk. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and Ranking Member
Boren, and Subcommittee Members. Thank you for the opportunity
extended to me to provide the Department of the Interior
statement on the President's 2012 budget request for Indian
Affairs. As the Assistant Secretary for Indian Affairs, I
oversee the Office of the Assistant Secretary and also the
Bureau of Indian Affairs, and the Bureau of Indian Education.
With me today are Mike Black, the Director of the Bureau of
Indian Affairs, and Keith Moore, the Director of the Bureau of
Indian Education.
The President has requested $2.5 billion for Indian Affairs
within the Department of the Interior. Through the work of the
Tribal Interior Budget Council for Indian Affairs, this budget
has been crafted after careful consultation with American
Indian and Alaska Native government representatives. The
President has called upon members of his administration to meet
important objectives while also exercising fiscal
responsibility. Consistent with that directive, difficult
choices have been made in formulating the Fiscal Year 2012
request for Indian Affairs.
The Fiscal Year 2012 request is $118.9 million below the
Fiscal Year 2010 enacted budget level. This is a reduction of
4.5 percent. The majority of the reductions are due to one-time
program increases provided in prior appropriations, completion
of projects and completion of payments to settlements. Still,
Indian Affairs had to make tough decisions that reflect the
President's commitment to fiscal responsibility. Nevertheless,
this proposed budget has $89.6 million targeted increases for
tribal programs, and I would like to highlight some of those
targeted increases which are a part of the President's
strengthening tribal nations initiative.
Under the category of advancing nation-to-nation
relationships, there is a $42.3 million increase, which
includes contract support cost of $25.5 million. I note that
this is the top priority of the Tribal Interior Budget Council.
That Council is made up of two tribal representatives from all
12 regions of the country.
Also included within this category is $4 million for the
Indian Self-Determination Fund, and this is to assist tribes to
contract and compact new programs. There is also a provision
here for support of small and needy tribes at the level of $3
million, and this would help small tribes carry out basic
services as tribal governments. This will affect 114 tribes, 86
of which are in the State of Alaska.
The second category is protecting Indian communities and we
are requesting an increase of $20 million which includes $5.1
million for our tribal law enforcement operations, a total of
$11.4 million for the operation and maintenance of detention
centers and $2.5 million for tribal courts.
In the third category, improving trust land management,
there is an increase requested of $18.4 million, which includes
$2 million for renewable energy projects on tribal trust lands,
and $1 million for conventional energy development. In trust
natural resource management, there is a request for a $7.7
million increase which covers a variety of things, including
development of the former Bennett Freeze area on the Navajo
reservation in Arizona, also implementation of off-reservation
treaty rights for conservation and management, and also
management of on-reservation fish and wildlife resources. It
also includes, as an example, $1 million for forestry programs
on approximately 292 reservation areas.
And in the fourth category, improving Indian education,
there is an increase requested of $8.9 million. This includes
an initiative on safe and secure schools of $3.9 million which
will implement safety and security programs at 10 schools to
mitigate issues identified by the Inspector General last year.
There is also a request of $2 million to meet settlement
terms with regard to an EPA--EPA violations found in 2008, and
then $3 million for tribal support, grant support cost for--
that is $3 million to fund administration and indirect costs
for 124 controlled schools and residential facilities.
There are significant program decreases, and just highlight
that in the operation of Indian programs there would be a
decrease of $43.3 million, construction would be $65 million,
and there are program eliminations of $7.9 million, program
completions of $64.4 million, and administrative reductions of
$22.1 million.
This budget will serve more than 1.7 million American
Indians and Alaska natives, and I note that almost 90 percent
of all appropriations are expended at the local level, 63
percent of appropriations are provided directly to tribes.
There are great needs in Indian Country, but President Obama's
administration has faithfully sought to meet those needs by
following the priorities set by tribal leaders. We would be
happy to respond to questions. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Echo Hawk follows:]

Statement of Larry Echo Hawk, Assistant Secretary--Indian Affairs,
U.S. Department of the Interior

Good morning Chairman Young and Ranking Member Boren, and members
of the Subcommittee on Indian and Alaska Native Affairs. Thank you for
the opportunity to provide the Department of the Interior's
(Department) statement on the fiscal year (FY) 2012 President's Budget
request that was released on February 14, 2011 for Indian Affairs'
programs. The FY 2012 budget request for Indian Affairs programs within
the Department totals $2.5 billion in current appropriations. This
reflects $118.9 million, a 4.5 percent decrease, from the FY 2010
enacted level. The budget includes a reduction of $50.0 million to
eliminate the one-time forward funding provided in 2010 to Tribal
Colleges and Universities; a reduction of $41.5 million for detention
center new facility construction due to a similar program within the
Department of Justice; and a reduction of $22.1 for administrative cost
savings and management efficiencies.
Overall, the 2012 Indian Affairs budget reflects a fiscally
responsible balance of the priorities expressed by the Tribes during
consultation and broader objectives of the Administration, as well as
demonstrated program performance, and realistic administrative
limitations. The 2012 budget focuses on core responsibilities to
American Indians and Alaska Natives through programs and services that
are vital to Indian Country and that benefit the greatest number of
Indian people on a nationwide basis. The budget focuses on priority
areas in Indian Country and honors the Federal Government's obligations
to tribal nations in a focused and consulted manner.
As the Assistant Secretary for Indian Affairs, I have the
responsibility to oversee the numerous programs within the Bureau of
Indian Affairs (BIA) and the Bureau of Indian Education (BIE), along
with other programs within the immediate office of the Assistant
Secretary for Indian Affairs. The Office of the Assistant Secretary for
Indian Affairs, BIA, and BIE programs expend over 90 percent of
appropriations at the local level. Of this amount, at least 62 percent
of the appropriations are provided directly to tribes and tribal
organizations through grants, contracts, and compacts for tribes to
operate government programs and schools. Indian Affairs' programs serve
the more than 1.7 million American Indian and Alaska Natives living on
or near the reservation.
The Indian Affairs FY 2012 budget request provides funding for
three of the Department's priority initiatives: Strengthening Tribal
Nations, New Energy Frontier, and Cooperative Landscape Conservation.
Strengthening Tribal Nations
The Strengthening Tribal Nations initiative is a multi-faceted
approach to enhance Nation-to-Nation relationships, improve Indian
education, protect Indian communities, and reform trust land
management, with the ultimate goal of greater tribal self-
determination. This initiative was highlighted over a year ago when
President Obama and his Administration engaged in direct dialogue with
Tribal Nations in November 2009 at the White House Tribal Nations
Conference held at the Department's Yates Auditorium, with over 400
tribal leaders in attendance. The President held a second successful
conference in December 2010 to continue dialogue and work with tribal
nations.

Nation-to-Nation Relationship
The Administration, in believing that investing in Indian Country
is the key to advancing our Nation-to-Nation relationship, seeks $42.3
million in programmatic increases for contract support, self
determination contract specialists, and social workers. At the
forefront of this investment is contract support, which was identified
by many tribal nations as their top priority.
Funding contract support costs encourages tribal contracting and
supports Indian self-determination. Contract support funds are used by
Tribes that manage Federal programs to pay a wide range of
administrative and management costs, including finance, personnel,
maintenance, insurance, utilities, audits, communications, and vehicle
costs.
The requested FY 2012 increases will also allow the BIA to fund
Self-Determination Specialist positions to ensure proper contract
oversight. In addition, it will allow the BIA to add more social
workers to assist tribal communities in addressing problems associated
with high unemployment and substance abuse. Through this assistance,
and by addressing these problems, there will be positive indirect
impacts on public safety and education in these tribal communities. We
also plan for $3.0 million of this request for approximately 86 Alaska
and 17 ``lower-48'' Small and Needy Tribes that both have populations
below 1,700 and receive less than the recommended threshold for base
funding. These funds will bring these Tribes to the minimum funding
necessary to strengthen their tribal governments ($160,000 in the
lower-48 and $190,000 in Alaska).
In addition, reflecting a top priority of President Obama,
Secretary Salazar and I, the budget request includes language
confirming the Department of the Interior's authority to acquire land
in trust for all federally recognized tribes. Taking land into trust is
one of the most important functions that the Department undertakes on
behalf of Indian tribes. Since 2009, the Department has acquired more
than 34,000 acres of land in trust on behalf of Indian nations. Tribal
homelands are essential to the health, safety and welfare of American
Indians and Alaska Natives.

Protecting Indian Country
For the past several years, tribal nations have consistently
identified public safety as one of their top priorities. The BIA
supports 193 law enforcement programs throughout the nation; within the
193 programs, there are 6 district offices and 187 programs performing
law enforcement services consisting of: 36 BIA-operated programs and
151 tribally-operated programs. Approximately 78 percent of the total
BIA Office of Justice Services (OJS) programs are outsourced to tribes.
President Obama, Secretary Salazar and I have prioritized public
safety based on feedback from the respective tribes. The FY 2012 budget
request seeks an additional $20.0 million in public safety funding over
the FY 2010 enacted level. Within the increase, $5.1 million is for
tribal and bureau law enforcement operations and $10.4 million for
tribal and bureau detention facilities operations. The funding will be
used for staffing, training, implementation of the Tribal Law and Order
Act, and equipment to increase staffing capacity for law enforcement
and detention programs and ensure communities can support efforts to
combat crime in Indian Country. The budget requests an additional $1.0
million, for a total of $13.8 million in funding for detention
facilities operations and maintenance throughout Indian country.
The budget includes $2.5 million for tribal courts to support the
enhanced capabilities given to tribal courts in the Tribal Law and
Order Act. The increases to tribal courts and corrections will augment
recent increases to the size of the tribal police forces over the last
several years, which is part of a multistep plan to strengthen tribal
justice systems.
The budget also includes $1.0 million for tribal Conservation Law
Enforcement Officers. The CLEO's primary responsibility is the
protection of tribal natural resources; however, officers are often
cross-deputized with local law enforcement agencies providing CLEOs
with the authorization to enforce criminal law.

Advancing Indian Education
The BIE is one of only two agencies in the Federal government that
manages a school system, the other being the Department of Defense.
Education is critical to ensuring a viable and prosperous future for
tribal communities and American Indians. It is this Department's goal
to improve Indian education and provide quality educational
opportunities for those students who attend the 183 BIE funded
elementary and secondary schools and dormitories located on 64
reservations in 23 states and serving approximately 41,000 students.
The FY 2012 request maintains the President's, Secretary Salazar's,
and my ongoing commitment to improve Indian education for students in
bureau-funded schools and tribally controlled colleges. The budget
provides an increase of $8.9 million to improve the state of BIE
schools. We plan to use $3.9 million to promote safe and secure schools
by implementing safety and security measures at 10 schools and 2
dormitories. This request also includes an increase of $2.0 million,
which will provide funds for additional professionals to conduct
environmental audits at BIE schools.
Another component of BIE funding is Tribal Grant Support Costs,
which cover administrative and indirect costs at 126 tribally
controlled schools and residential facilities. Tribes operating BIE-
funded schools under contract or grant authorization use these funds to
pay for the administrative overhead necessary to operate a school, meet
legal requirements, and carry out other support functions that would
otherwise be provided by the BIE school system. The budget increases
funding for these activities by $3.0 million.

Improving Trust Land Management
In addition to the human services components of Indian Affairs, the
United States holds 55 million surface acres of land and 57 million
acres of subsurface mineral estates in trust for Tribes and individual
Indians. Trust management is vital to tribal and individual economic
development. The management of Indian natural resources is a primary
economic driver in many regions within the country. For example, some
of the larger forested tribes operate the only sawmills in their region
and are major employers of not only their own people, but of the non-
tribal members who live in or near their communities
This Administration seeks to continue advancing the Strengthening
Tribal Nations initiative by assisting Tribes in the management,
development and protection of Indian trust land, as well as natural
resources on those lands. The FY 2012 budget request includes $18.4
million in programmatic increases for land and water management
activities. Those activities include: $1.2 million for land development
in the former Bennett Freeze area in Arizona on the Navajo Nation
reservation and $1.0 million for the Forestry program.
The 2012 budget provides $2.0 million for the Rights Implementation
program and the Tribal Management and Development program to support
fishing, hunting, and gathering rights on and off reservations. The
request provides $2.0 million for Fish, Wildlife, and Parks programs
and projects to support fisheries management at BIA and tribal levels.
The budget also provides an additional $500,000 for the Invasive
Species/Noxious Weed Eradication program to provide weed control on
20,000 acres.
The budget proposes an additional $1.0 million for the Water
Management and Pre-Development program to assist Tribes in the
identification and quantification of water resources; $1.0 million for
Water Rights/Litigation to defend and assert Indian water rights. The
budget also provides an increase of $3.8 million to help BIA address
dam safety deficiencies and ensure public safety near high hazard dams
in Indian Country.
Additional increases for Improving Trust Land Management are
included in the New Energy Frontier and the Cooperative Landscape
Conservation initiatives.

New Energy Frontier Initiative
The Office of Indian Energy and Economic Development (IEED) works
closely with Tribes to assist them with the exploration and development
of tribal lands with active and potential energy resources. These lands
have the potential for renewable and conventional energy resource
development. The FY 2012 budget includes an increase of $3.5 million in
Indian Affairs for conventional and renewable energy projects as part
of the Department's New Energy Frontier initiative, which will allow
Indian Affairs and Tribes to explore and develop 1.8 million acres of
active and potential energy sources on tribal land. The IEED provides
funding, guidance, and implementation of feasibility studies, market
analyses, and oversight of leasehold agreements of oil, gas, coal,
renewable and industrial mineral deposits located on Indian lands.
This increase includes $2.0 million in the Minerals and Mining
program to provide grants directly to Tribes for projects to evaluate
and develop renewable energy resources on tribal trust land, a vital
first step before energy development can begin. The budget also
contains a $1.0 million increase for conventional energy development on
the Fort Berthold Reservation. To further expedite energy development
on the Fort Berthold Reservation, Indian Affairs, the Bureau of Land
Management, Bureau of Ocean Energy Management, Regulation and
Enforcement, and the Office of the Special Trustee for American Indians
created a ``virtual'' one-stop shop. The IEED--Division of Energy and
Mineral Development, at the one-stop shop, has been proactive in using
technology and technical assistance to process permits on the Fort
Berthold Reservation. In 2010, the number of wells went from zero wells
at the start of 2010 to over 100 producing wells at the end of 2010. It
is anticipated that in 2011 this number will double to over 200
producing wells on Indian trust lands. The budget includes a $500,000
increase to support staff onsite, as well as provide on-call access to
the full range of the Department's operational and financial management
services.
In addition, IEED supports economic growth in Indian Country and
assists Indian Tribes in developing economic infrastructure, augmenting
business knowledge, increasing jobs, businesses, capital investment, as
well as developing energy and mineral resources on trust lands. IEED
has initiated many programs, projects, technical conferences and
training programs to address the lack of employment, and intends to
continue these efforts.

Cooperative Landscape Conservation Initiative
Indian Affairs will co-lead the North Pacific Landscape
Conservation Cooperative (LCC) with the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service
and support tribal outreach efforts of other LCCs, particularly those
in the northwestern U.S. In the North Pacific Cooperative, Indian
Affairs will seek tribal input and perspective from Tribes with
traditional ecological knowledge; and both Indian Affairs staff and
local tribal members will be involved to develop strategies to address
adaptation.

Requested Decreases
The initiatives described above, and the related increases in the
Administration's request, mark a continued step toward the advancement
of the Federal government's relationship with tribal nations. These
initiatives focus on those programs geared toward strengthening tribal
nations and reflect the President's priorities to support economic
development in Indian Country.
The President has also called upon members of his Administration to
meet important objectives while also exercising fiscal responsibility.
Consistent with that directive, we made several difficult choices in
the FY 2012 appropriations request for Indian Affairs.
The 2012 request includes $43.3 million in program decreases for
the Operation of Indian Programs account including administrative
central office reductions of $14.2 million for streamlining and
improving oversight operations and to correspond to other programmatic
cuts within the 2012 request. The budget reduces Real Estate Projects
by $10.9 million; the remaining funds will be used to focus program
operations on cadastral surveys as a catalyst for economic development
for Tribes. The budget reduces Land Records Improvement by $8.5
million; the remaining funds will maintain core operations for the
Trust Asset and Accounting Management System. The budget reduces the
Probate Backlog by $7.5 million as over 18,000 cases are expected to be
completed.
The Indian Affairs 2012 budget includes $32.9 million for ongoing
Indian land and water settlements, which includes a reduction of $14.5
million reflecting completion of the Pueblo of Isleta, Puget Sound
Regional Shellfish, and Soboba Band of Luiseno Indians settlements. The
budget includes $9.5 million for the sixth of seven required payments
for the Nez Perce/Snake River Settlement. The Omnibus Public Land
Management Act of 2009 authorized payments to Shoshone-Paiute Tribes of
the Duck Valley Reservation; this budget includes $12.0 million for the
third payment for that settlement. The Act also authorized settlement
payments to the Navajo Nation; the budget includes $6.0 million for
Navajo Nation Water Resources Development Trust Fund and $4.4 million
for the San Juan Conjunctive Use Wells and San Juan River Navajo
Irrigation Rehabilitation Project which are part of the Navajo-Gallup
Settlement.
The Construction program contains program reductions of $65.0
million. Of this programmatic decrease, $41.5 million for Public Safety
and Justice new facility construction has been reduced from the
Construction budget. The budget is reduced by $8.9 for Education
Replacement Facility Construction, $5.0 million for Public Safety and
Justice Employee Housing; the Department has taken a strategic approach
to not fund new construction in 2012. At the requested level, the
Education Construction budget redirects funding from new construction
activities to Facility Improvement and Repair to achieve greater
flexibility in maintaining existing facilities and employee housing.
The budget includes a reduction of $9.0 million for the Navajo
Indian Irrigation Project. Indian Affairs is evaluating continuing
construction on the Navajo Indian Irrigation Project. Additionally,
$57.3 million was transferred from Construction to the Operation of
Indian Programs account so to better align and consolidate operations
and maintenance funding.
The request takes into consideration the $285.0 million that was
provided to Indian Affairs for school and detention center construction
activities and $225.0 million provided to the Department of Justice for
detention center construction in Indian Country under the American
Recovery and Reinvestment Act (Recovery Act). With funding from the
Recovery Act, Indian Affairs will complete a number of high priority
projects.
Although there are decreases to the construction programs in the
appropriations request, the appropriations request does contain the
following construction items: $52.1 million for Education, $11.3
million for Public Safety and Justice, $33.0 million for Resource
Management, and $8.5 million for Other Program Construction.
The budget provides $3.1 million for the Indian Guaranteed Loan
program, a reduction of $5.1 million from the 2010 Enacted level. The
program will undergo an evaluation, develop a comprehensive performance
metric framework, and improve efforts to work with other Federal
agencies that assist Tribes in loans.
The 2012 budget includes a reduction of $3.0 million for the Indian
Land Consolidation Program. The Claims Resolution Act of 2010 included
the Cobell v. Salazar settlement agreement. The agreement includes $1.9
billion for land consolidation within the Office of the Secretary. This
new funding will utilized to consolidate fractionalized land interests
to be more economically viable for Tribes.

Conclusion
We are aware of the current fiscal challenges our nation faces.
This Administration understands the need to take fiscal responsibility,
and also understands the need to strengthen tribal nations, foster
responsible development of tribal energy resources, and improve the
Nation-to-Nation relationship between tribal nations and the United
States. It is our sincere belief that we have struck a balance in this
FY 2012 budget request for Indian Affairs that achieves the President's
objectives of fiscal discipline while at the same time meeting our
obligations to tribal nations with which our Federal government has a
Constitutionally-based government-to-government relationship.
Mr. Chairman and members of the subcommittee, thank you for the
opportunity to appear before you today. I am happy to answer any
questions you may have.
______

Mr. Young. Thank you, Mr. Echo Hawk. Mr. Joseph, you are up
next.

STATEMENT OF THE HONORABLE RAY A. JOSEPH, PRINCIPAL DEPUTY
SPECIAL TRUSTEE FOR AMERICAN INDIANS, OFFICE OF THE SPECIAL
TRUSTEE FOR AMERICAN INDIANS, U.S. DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR

Mr. Joseph. Good morning, Chairman Young, Ranking Member
Boren, and Members of the Subcommittee. My name is Ray Joseph.
I am the Principal Deputy Special Trustee for American Indians.
I have with me the Associate Principal Deputy Special Trustee
for American Indians, Donna Erwin with me today.
I am pleased to be before the Subcommittee today to discuss
Interior's Fiscal Year 2012 budget for the Office of the
Special Trustee for American Indians. I have submitted my full
statement to the Subcommittee, which I ask be made part of the
hearing record.
Mr. Young. Without objection.
Mr. Joseph. OST's Fiscal Year 2012 budget request is
consistent with the President's goal to reduce the deficit but
remain sufficient to meet our fiduciary responsibilities and to
provide quality services to Indian beneficiaries. OST was
initially tasked by Congress with department-wide oversight for
the reform of Indian Trust management, and the implementation
of new fiduciary accounting systems. OST's oversight role
expanded in 1996 to include operational responsibility for
financial trust management, including the receipt, investment
and disbursement of beneficiary funds. The Office of Appraisal
Services, which appraises Indian Trust lands, was move to OST
in 2002. The Office of Historical Trust Accounting was
realigned in 2007, to report directly to the Special Trustee.
The President's Fiscal Year 2012 budget request for the
Department of the Interior's Office of the Special Trustee for
American Indians is $152.3 million. This is reflecting a $24.7
million decrease from the 2010 enacted 2011 resolution. OST's
2012 budget request reflects program reductions of $22.6
million, and $3.3 million in administrative savings from the
2010 enacted 2011 continuing resolution. The only proposed
increase in funding is for fixed costs, which includes space,
utilities, and other overhead expenses which is increased by
$1.2 million.
I would like to highlight five areas in the 2012 budget
request. The Office of Special Trustee requests a $31.2 million
budget for the Office of Historical Trust Accounting. This is a
reduction of $16 million from the Fiscal Year 2010 base level.
The 2012 budget request reflects the enactment of a settlement
for the Cobell v. Salazar lawsuit, and assumes the approval of
the settlement in 2011. This settlement does not address
pending tribal cases, a total of $27.2 million will be used to
support and analyze tribal claims in coordination with the
Department of Justice. There are currently 96 tribal cases
pending involving 114 tribes. A total of $4 million will be
used to resolve proper ownership of residual balances in
special deposit accounts and to distribute the account balances
to tribes, individual Indians, and non-trust entities.
The 2012 budget request also eliminates the Office of
Engineering, which is a savings of $2.1 million. This office
worked to consolidate prior fiduciary trust reform plans. The
bulk of trust reform projects that this office impacted are
currently in production, therefore this office's operations are
now deemed to be a lower priority. This program will be
eliminated through attrition and reassignment.
The budget also requests a $1.9 million reduction on the
Office of Trust Records. In Fiscal Year 2009, the Office of
Trust Records completed the indexing of trust records collected
in previous fiscal years from BIA. In future years the Office
of Trust Records will continue to use in-house staff rather
than contractors to maintain and update the trust records
database and as trust records are retired. OTR will be using
less Federal personnel in the base contract level, and there
should be a minimal impact on workload and performance.
The Fiscal Year 2012 budget request also request s
reduction of $1 million in Data Quality and Integrity Program.
This is a trust asset and account management system data clean-
up project that validates or corrects critical data elements.
The TAAMS leasing model, post conversion cleanup efforts are
projected to be completed in Fiscal Year 2011, therefore in
Fiscal Year 2012, DQ&I will have decreased workload.
In support of the President's commitment to fiscal
discipline and spending restraint, OST is participating in an
aggressive department-wide effort to curb non-essential
administrative spending. The staff of OST was able to design a
more efficient operational management structure which accounts
for $3.3 million in administrative savings in this budget
request.
This 2012 budget request includes reductions that reflect
that reflect the accountable government imitative to curb non-
essential administrative spending in support of the President's
commitment on fiscal discipline and spending restraint. The
staff has also implemented an accounting process that ensures
today's Indian Trust financial operations are transparent and
efficient. Our beneficiaries can be assured OST will continue
to manage their funds with proficiency and care.
Mr. Chairman, once again I would like to thank you for the
opportunity to appear before you today, and I will be happy to
answer any questions that you may have.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Joseph follows:]

Statement of Ray A. Joseph, Principal Deputy Special Trustee
for American Indians, U.S. Department of the Interior

Good morning, Chairman Young, Ranking Member Boren and Members of
the Subcommittee. My name is Ray Joseph, and I am the Principal Deputy
Special Trustee for American Indians.
I am pleased to be before the Subcommittee today to discuss
Interior's fiscal year (FY) 2012 budget for the Office of the Special
Trustee for American Indians. I have submitted my full statement to the
Subcommittee, which I ask be made part of the hearing record.
OST's FY 2012 budget request is consistent with the President's
goal to reduce the deficit, but remains sufficient to meet our
fiduciary responsibilities and provide quality services to Indian
beneficiaries.

OST Purpose
OST was initially tasked by Congress with Department-wide oversight
for the reform of Indian trust management and implementation of new
fiduciary accounting systems. OST's oversight role expanded in 1996 to
include operational responsibility for financial trust fund management,
including receipt, investment and disbursement of beneficiary funds.
The Office of Appraisal Services, which appraises Indian trust lands,
was moved to OST in 2002. The Office of Historical Trust Accounting was
realigned in 2007 to report directly to the Special Trustee.

FY 2012 Budget Request
The President's fiscal year 2012 budget request for the Department
of the Interior's Office of the Special Trustee for American Indians
(OST) is $152.3 million, reflecting a $24.7 million net decrease from
the 2010 Enacted/2011 CR. OST's 2012 budget request reflects program
reductions of $22.6 million and $3.3 million in administrative savings
from the 2010 Enacted/2011 CR level. The only proposed increase is in
funding for fixed costs--space, utilities, and other overhead
expenses--which increased by $1.2 million.
I would like to highlight five areas in OST's FY 2012 budget:

OHTA
The OST request also includes $31.2 million for the Office of
Historical Trust Accounting (OHTA), a reduction of $16.0 million from
the FY 2010 base level. The 2012 budget reflects the enactment of a
settlement for the Cobell v. Salazar lawsuit and assumes court approval
of the settlement in 2011. The settlement does not address pending
tribal cases. A total of $27.2 million will be used to support analysis
of tribal claims in coordination with the U.S. Department of Justice.
There are currently 96 tribal cases pending involving 114 Tribes. A
total of $4.0 million will be used to resolve the proper ownership of
residual balances in special deposit accounts and distribute account
balances to Tribes, individual Indians, and non-trust entities.

Reengineering
OST's FY 2012 request eliminates the Office of Reengineering, a
savings of $2.1 million. This office worked to consolidate prior
fiduciary trust reform plans. The bulk of the trust reform projects
that the Reengineering staff impacted are currently in production--
therefore this office's operations are now deemed a lower priority. The
program will be eliminated through attrition and reassignment.

OTR
This budget also requests a reduction of $1.9 million for the
Office of Trust Records. In FY 2009, OTR completed the indexing of
trust records collected in previous fiscal years from BIA. In future
years OTR will continue to use in-house staff, rather than contractors,
to maintain and update the database as records are retired. OTR will be
using less federal personnel than the base contract personnel and there
should be minimal impact on workload and performance.

DQ&I
The FY 2012 budget requests a $1 million reduction in the Data
Quality and Integrity (DQ&I) program. This is a Trust Asset and
Accounting Management System (TAAMS) data cleanup project that
validates or corrects Critical Data Elements. TAAMS Leasing Module
post-conversion cleanup efforts are projected to be completed by FY
2011--therefore in FY 2012 DQ&I will have a decreased workload.

Administrative Cost Savings and Management Efficiencies
In support of the President's commitment to fiscal discipline and
spending restraint, OST is participating in an aggressive Department-
wide effort to curb non-essential administrative spending. The staff of
OST should be commended for the efficient management of operations
which accounts for $3.3 million in administrative savings in this
budget request.
The 2012 budget request includes reductions that reflect the
Accountable Government Initiative to curb non-essential administrative
spending in support of the President's commitment on fiscal discipline
and spending restraint. In accordance with this initiative, the OST
budget includes $3.0 million in savings in 2012 against actual 2010
expenditures in the following activities: $267,111 for travel and
transportation of persons, $25,270 for transportation of things,
$20,940 for printing and reproduction, $2.5 million for advisory and
assistance services, and $147,010 for supplies and materials. Actions
to address the Accountable Government Initiative and reduce these
expenses build upon management efficiency efforts proposed in 2011
totaling $332,000 in travel and relocation, information technology, and
strategic sourcing and bureau-specific efficiencies totaling $2.6
million.
The staff has also implemented a dynamic accounting process that
ensures today's Indian trust financial operations are transparent and
efficient. Our beneficiaries can be assured OST will continue to manage
their funds with proficiency and care.
Conclusion
Mr. Chairman, once again, I would like to thank you for the
opportunity to appear before you today, and I will be happy to answer
any questions you may have.
______

Mr. Young. Thank you, Mr. Joseph. I appreciate that.
Mr. Boren.
Mr. Boren. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I have a couple
questions here, some general questions first to Mr. Echo Hawk.
Your budget documents claim that the budget request was
developed in extensive consultation with Indian tribes. I think
that is very important and I appreciate that, that consultation
did take place, and that your budget request tells us what you
propose to fund based on these consultations.
Can you tell us in your meetings and in your consultations
with tribes something that was not included in the budget that
maybe tribes proposed during these consultations that maybe you
just decided, well, that may be a good idea but we can't put it
in our budget document? What are some things that didn't
actually make it, you know, the old cutting room floor analogy
in a film? What are some things that didn't make it that some
of the tribes proposed that may be something the Committee
needs to look at?
Mr. Echo Hawk. Thank you, Congressman Boren.
With regard to the consultation process, we meet about four
times a year with the Tribal Interior Budget Council. That is
previously been called the Tribal Budget Advisory Council. So
you know, it has moved from that word ``advisory'' to just a
joint Tribal Interior Council, and you know, they go through a
process each year of establishing their priorities. In fact, we
have a meeting next week to start working on the 2013
priorities.
So, not only do they establish those priorities that we try
to work into the budget, but we also, when we got the OMB
guidance about reducing spending levels, we included the Tribal
Interior Budget Council in those discussions as well. We are
just trying to think about anything in particular that didn't
make it into the budget, and you know, I think it probably goes
down just to the level of funding for the tribal priority
allocations. These are the core programs of tribes, they would
have requested higher levels of funding pretty much across the
board.
Mr. Boren. As a follow up to that let me ask you a question
about one of the programs. We talk about economic development.
The Chairman has said one of the key goals of this Subcommittee
is for economic development in Indian Country. With this in
mind, there is a budget cut for the Indian Loan Guarantee
Program of $5.1 million. That is a budget reduction of about 60
percent. Is that something that you all talked about in these
meetings? What is the reason for that cut? It may be a good
reason. I just kind of want to scratch into that a little bit.
Mr. Echo Hawk. Congressman Boren, as I said, you know, the
tribes would have been requesting more dollars in some of these
core programs that we were able to come up with in this
request, and with regard to the Loan Guarantee Program, this
has been something that tribal leaders support greatly We have
utilized those funds in the past, we think effectively, but the
budget realities that we are in right now requires some
reductions, and this is one of the areas that was reduced.
We are going to be working to evaluate that program to see
how we can connect with other loan guarantee programs in the
Federal Government. I think there was also some concern that
with money that was allocated through the American Recovery and
Reinvestment Act we were not able to get that money out the
door as rapidly as we had hoped. That, to some extent, had to
do with not just decisions that were being made by tribal
leaders or Indian Affairs and Interior, but it had to do with
whether or not financial institutions were willing to back the
loans that are leveraged through this program. But, you know,
in the long term going back we think that this has been a very
effective program; just not as much as tribal leaders had hoped
that we would be able to fund it this year.
Mr. Boren. Thank you for your response.
Mr. Chairman, it looks like we have run out of time over
here, but got tons of questions or a lot of things that we
could delve into.
Mr. Young. We will have sounds rounds if you wish to do so.
Mr. Denham.
Mr. Denham. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The first question I have it about priorities. You know,
the purpose of the BIA is to help tribes facilitate self-
sufficiency and develop their economies. Would you agree with
that, that that is the main purpose of the BIA?
Mr. Echo Hawk. Yes, Congressman.
Mr. Denham. Then why are we putting a higher priority on
fish and wildlife over economic develop in this year's budget?
Mr. Echo Hawk. Excuse me. Would you repeat that question?
Mr. Denham. Why are we putting a greater priority on fish
and wildlife protections rather than on economic development?
You have a 20 percent decrease in economic development, and yet
we have higher funding levels for fish and wildlife
protections. And specifically in California, well, let me stop
there first.
Mr. Echo Hawk. Congressman, the funding for the fish and
wildlife programs, a lot of those increases are driven by off-
reservation treaty rights. These have been court cases that
have been brought in the Great Lakes area as well as the
Northwest, in particular, and it established the right of
tribal people to do this for subsistence and ceremonial
purposes, but also very importantly for commercial enterprises.
Many tribal people in those regions rely on off-reservation
treaty fishing rights for their jobs and their economy.
So, in order to make those viable rights it is necessary to
spend money for habitat conservation and taking care of the
fish and wildlife, and also meeting its responsibilities for
management and enforcement so that those economies can
continue.
Mr. Denham. And shouldn't a sovereign entity do what is
best for them on their lands rather than having our budget
dictate to them? Again, specifically I am looking at the
lawsuit in California.
Mr. Echo Hawk. Could you mention what specific lawsuit you
are talking about?
Mr. Denham. Dealing with energy production and--I will get
back to you on what tribe specifically it is, but I know that
they have already expressed their concern with government
overreach and have already filed a lawsuit in this particular
matter. I guess, specifically it is frustrating to me to see a
shift in priorities. I am not specifically just looking at this
one case, but specifically in the budget there is--you know,
economic development seems to be one of the biggest areas that
the tribes that I have talked to wants to focus on, yet that is
where we are seeing a decrease.
And further in that on the administration side, we are
talking cuts to the administration side while we are still
seeing a backlog of permits.
Mr. Echo Hawk. Congressman, just as a follow up, you know,
I would assure you that there is very strong support for
providing funding for the fish and wildlife activities, both
off-reservation and on-reservation. I have already addressed
the off-reservation importance. I have just a very brief
comment about on-reservation.
In the big picture, tribes, you know, gave up substantial
acreage of land in the United States, and as a part of that
process the United States made commitments back to the tribes
that the remaining lands would be their permanent homelands and
the United States would assist them in making these prosperous
homelands, and fish and wildlife resources within reservation
boundaries are important for the economy and subsistence of
native people. And so tribal leaders feel very strongly about
those programs.
Mr. Denham. Thank you. I yield back.
Mr. Young. Mr. Kildee.
Mr. Kildee. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I would like to point out Michigan went through a struggle
on the fishing rights and the Indians basically won on the
basis of a treaty. There are a couple of treaties: Treaty of
Detroit. I read those treaties myself. For example, the treaty
always says that we promise education for the Indians in return
for taking their land, and I introduced a bill 40-some years
ago in the State Legislature that any Michigan Indian can go to
a public college in Michigan and the state pays the tuition,
and that is still the law, and I have known many a person who
has gone to college because of that.
But it is really based upon the fact that the constitution
says this constitution and the laws of the United States shall
be made in pursuance thereof and all treaties made or which
shall be made under the authority of the United States shall be
the supreme law of the land, and that judges in every state
shall be bound thereby anything in the constitutional laws of
any state to the contrary notwithstanding. So, Michigan tried
to stop the Indians, but they weren't able to stop them because
of the treaty right which is protected here in the
constitution.
Just as a little aside, I was talking to an 80-year-old
Indian up in Bay Mills, and he said he was out fishing one time
when this controversy was going on, and he said the DNR came
out to arrest me, and I knew I had my rights. My grandfather
and great grandfather had taught me that, he said, but I hid
out in the reeds and the weeds so the DNR couldn't physically
grab a hold of me, and he said but the mosquitos kept biting
me, he said, but the only thing that gave me constellation is
that I knew the mosquitos were also biting the DNR.
[Laughter.]
Mr. Kildee. But you know, the constitution is extremely
important and we are bound by those treaties and John Marshall
has said these Indian treaties are as valid as treaties with
France or Germany.
We read in Article I, Section 8, that the Congress shall
have the power to regulate commerce with foreign nations and
among the several states and with the Indian tribes. Puts all
those on inequality. So we don't give France its sovereignty,
we recognize it.
John Marshall made it very clear that the sovereignty of
the Indian tribes is a retained sovereignty, and that retained
sovereignty is protected by the constitution, not granted by
the constitution. So I come to that because we mentioned the
fishing here, and fishing is a very important right in
Michigan, and the natives have done well under their fishing
rights.
In your testimony you mention the importance of improving
trust land management. A major issue now is the Carcieri v.
Salazar decision of the U.S. Supreme Court. They don't base
that upon anything in the constitution, they base it on a
faulty interpretation of a 1934 statute. What is the Department
doing to work with the Congress or try to modify or set aside
that Carcieri decision?
Mr. Echo Hawk. Congressman Kildee, first of all, with
regard to the off-reservation treaty fishing rights, I had the
opportunity this past summer to travel to Michigan to Bay
Mills, and part of my time spent up there was to go out in the
waters, I think it is near the Apostle Islands, and to
experience and to see how the tribal fishermen are making a
living off their treaty fishing rights. And it is much more
important than just subsistence. It is the way that they make
their living, and it was nice to see that firsthand.
With regard to the Carcieri case, right after I became
Assistant Secretary of Indian Affairs I held consultation with
tribal people across the country attended, I think we had three
or four sessions. I attended each of the sessions in different
parts of the country. And the strong message that I received
from tribal leaders is that Indian tribes should be treated
alike. There should not be any second class citizens out there
when it comes to having the Secretary of the Interior exercise
authority to bring land into the trust, and they also said that
this problem created by this Supreme Court decision should be
fixed by the Congress. And so the Obama Administration has
taken a position in support of a legislative fix. We did that
in the last Congress, and within the President's budget for
2012 is a provision to support that fix in legislation.
Mr. Kildee. And I thank you. I thank you for all your help
and I thank you for the find way in which you are carrying out
your responsibilities. Thank you.
Mr. Young. The gentleman yields back? Mr. Gosar.
Dr. Gosar. Mr. Chairman, I would like to submit an opening
statement for the record.
Mr. Young. Without objection.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Gosar follows:]

Statement of The Honorable Paul A. Gosar, a Representative in Congress
from the State of Arizona

Chairman Young and Ranking Member Boren, thank you for holding this
important hearing today. And to Assistant Secretary Echo Hawk and to
Mr. Joseph, thank you for spending time with us this morning to delve
into the important questions we face, as we navigate the President's
Budget Request for next fiscal year.
Native tribes are sovereign nations, yet the United States
Government has a special trust obligation to these tribes, given the
treaties we entered into with each tribe many decades ago. The history
of this trust has been complicated to say the least. In 1975, President
Nixon signed into law the Indian Self Determination and Education
Assistance Act, capping a hard fought effort by native tribes to win
the right for maximum native participation in the government and
education of the Native American people. And indeed, the 1975 law
contained promising provisions to allow individual tribes to negotiate
with the Bureau of Indian Affairs to administer their social service
programs, and empower native parents to be involved in their children's
education.
Native tribes have responded in kind, across the country clamoring
for the flexibility to maintain their own infrastructure with BIA. But
I can't help but remark that there is far more work, far more
cooperation, and far more learning to do when it comes to empowering
tribes to manage their own affairs.
Given that over one fifth of my constituents are Native Americans,
I have undertaken an effort to meet with representatives from native
tribes both in my district and around the Southwest. And the feedback
from this diverse group of folks is strikingly similar: The BIA is
widely resented for inefficiency, stonewalling, and micromanaging
tribal affairs. As one who believes that local control is the key to
effectiveness and responsiveness, I find this trend troubling.
Tribal leaders have expressed a strong desire for BIA to move more
towards awarding block grant funding to the tribes, with as little
strings attached as possible. This will enable tribes to use their
federal monies with an eye towards efficiency and service to their
people, not towards jumping through bureaucratic hoops and red tape. I
look forward to hearing our witness's testimony today, and their
thoughts on the progress of self determination and how BIA can partner
with tribes on this endeavor.
In particular, I am anxious to hear more from the witnesses about a
long term plan to address the Former Bennett Freeze Area. For 40 years,
the U.S. Government prohibited the Navajo and Hopi tribes from
developing any further infrastructure on disputed land, about 700,000
acres worth in the Black Mesa Region of Arizona. This ban affected
8,000 members of the Navajo Nation across nine communities, and remains
today the most depressed area by far on the Navajo Reservation.
A recent study commissioned by BIA found that 77% of the homes in
the Bennett Freeze area are not suitable for residence, and that nearly
40% are without electricity. This isn't the result of anything but pure
government inaction, at the expense of my constituents. I am distressed
at the apparent lack of action on the part of the current government to
address this blight on our society. While none of us present here today
took part in the initial Bennett Freeze in 1966, the fact is staring us
all in the face that it is our responsibility to redress these grievous
and unfair wounds.
Again, thank you to the witnesses and I eagerly await your
testimony.
______

Dr. Gosar. Secretary Echo Hawk, there is a part of the
Navajo Nation that is an open wound on the conscious of this
country. I am referring to the former Bennett Freeze area.
Almost 40 years of government neglect, government indifference
and government incompetence, this area is a hollow shell almost
unfit for human inhabitation, but people do live there, and
they want to live there. These determined Navajo want to stake
their future in this land that Washington, D.C. almost
destroyed.
What has the BIA done since the Bennett Freeze was lifted
last year to help the Navajo, and what is the BIA proposing?
Mr. Echo Hawk. Congressman, first of all just as a side
note, I am a member of the Pawnee Nation, the Pawnee people
originally from Nebraska, relocated into Oklahoma, but I
actually grew up in Farmington, New Mexico, which is right
across the river, the San Juan River, from the largest
reservation in the Nation that is Navajo, and I am familiar
with the Navajo reservation because I spent about 17 years
living in that area, and I am well aware of the controversy
that the Hopi and the Navajo Nations had, you know, for several
years, and it appears that most of that has been resolved
today.
But we, unfortunately, had the Bennett Freeze which pretty
much stopped development in a large portion of lands that area,
and the administration does offer up in the budget, I think it
is $1.2 million for development of the Bennett Freeze. That is
in this 2012 budget proposal of the President, which is meant
to do several things to improve range land management and
agricultural land use.
We are going to be pushing for sustained effort because a
lot of work needs to be done to make those lands productive for
the people that are living there.
Dr. Gosar. There just doesn't seem to be the urgency at the
BIA to rebuild the FBFA. If a flood or a hurricane had
destroyed this area, we would declare a national emergency and
send help. Well, I am here to tell you this area is a disaster.
It is a national disaster created by an act of the government
instead of an act of God, but a natural disaster just the same.
Will you help persuade the President to declare this area a
national emergency so we can expedite assistance?
Mr. Echo Hawk. Congressman, I note your request and we will
take that under consideration. We will be happy to work with
you on that.
Dr. Gosar. Thank you. And looking at that I have met with
representatives of numerous native tribes both inside my
district and out. They express a strong resentment at the BIA
in micro managing their issues, stonewalling and inefficiency.
I am grounded in the principle that people at the local level
know a lot more on how they have to appropriate need than does
the bureaucrats in D.C.
The tribal representatives tell me they would prefer block
grants that would allow them to prioritize their needs and set
in motion the projects they deem important in the time and
manner they choose. Since we are having to do more with less
due to our financial crisis, what are your thoughts about block
grants?
Mr. Echo Hawk. Congressman, we would be interested in
looking at alternatives like that. Block grants, that is not
something that presently is done in full force within the realm
of our responsibilities, but you know, I would like to note
some interesting things that have occurred since the mid-1970s.
Oftentimes people say that we are not paying attention to self-
determination, but I am just looking at a chart here that goes
back to 1973 when the Bureau of Indian Affairs had 18,285
employees, 18,285, and today that has dropped down to just a
little over 8,000, so there has been a constant decline in the
number of Federal employees, and what this really means is that
the responsibilities have been transferred to tribes, and I
note that today about one-half of all BIA programs are operated
and administered and managed by tribes, one-half of all BIA
programs. And when it comes to the Bureau of Education, it is
two-thirds of all BIA BIE activities.
So, this chart and those figures indicate that we do pay
attention to self-determination, and I note that the self-
determination policy was initiated 40 years ago under the Nixon
Administration where that was followed up in 1975 by the
enactment of the Indian Self-Determination Act. So once that
foundation was put in place you have seen a gradual development
of recognizing greater authority and autonomy for tribal
governments, and we will continue to pursue that course.
Dr. Gosar. Thank you.
Mr. Young. I thank the gentleman, and when we introduce the
American Indian, Alaska Native Economic Empowerment Act, I hope
to have some input from you.
Mr. Lujan.
Mr. Lujan. Mr. Chairman, thank you very much, and along
those lines, Mr. Chairman, I appreciate the questioning
regarding the block grants. Mr. Secretary, one question that I
have, and we can review this later as we look to see what can
happen for infrastructure on tribal lands, in New Mexico I am
proud to say that the state created a tribal infrastructure
fund, recognizing the need to work closer with our tribes where
there is the ability to leverage Federal funds as well as state
funds and tribal funds, and I think this would be another area
where we could seriously consider opportunities to be able to
help establish something similar as was done within the Water
Rights Act as well, so I would just offer that suggestion, Mr.
Secretary.
BIA schools are a critical component of the education of
Native American studies, and in New Mexico we have a
significant number of children who rely on funding from the
Department of the Interior to get their first years of
education, and I have had many concerned tribal leaders, tribal
members and teachers visit my office, visit with me back in New
Mexico as well as when I am honored to visit their council or
with their tribal leaders, that have expressed concerns of dire
conditions of our BIA school.
Many times these schools don't meet normal inhabiting
conditions and get condemned, leaving children with no place to
go to school. In addition, my Native American constituents have
brought to my attention that the process for obtaining support
for funding for improvements for BIA schools is virtually
impossible. Many times schools are approved to receive funding
and it takes years, even decades to get the funds, meanwhile
putting students and teachers out on the streets.
I notice that the 2012 budget request cuts funding for new
construction. Appreciating that only 10 percent of our students
maybe attend BIA schools, but those 10 percent are attending
schools in crumbling conditions.
Mr. Secretary and Trustee Deputy Joseph, can you tell me
what the BIA is doing to make certain BIA schools are
maintained and constructed in a timely manner, and if there is
a particular part in the process for maintaining BIA schools
that the Department has identified as a problem so that it can
be fixed, and what is your plan to address many other critical
health and safety issues that remain in BIA schools today?
Mr. Echo Hawk. Congressman Lujan, I will make some comment
and then perhaps I ought to invite, with your permission, our
BIA director to make follow-up comments. But I believe the
statistic is accurate, and I will check that, but in my mind
going back to 2001, about 74 percent of all BIE schools were
rated to be in poor condition. We have made progress over the
years in lowering that figure. One of the principal means
recently of addressing the condition of schools and replacing
schools was the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act, which I
think my recollection has infused about 286 million additional
dollars which meant we were able to build some new schools and
significantly repair schools that were in bad condition. So
that has lowered that figure of you know how many are in poor
condition.
But we still have a backlog in construction need of over $2
billion, and I note that in the President's budget for 2012 we
actually have a cut in construction, so this is the kind of
thing that keeps me awake at night knowing that we have that
significant backlog and not being able to make progress with
this particular budget, but we have made progress in recent
years. We just have to have a more sustained effort.
Now, I would like to see if Keith Moore would like to make
any additional comment.
Mr. Moore. Thank you, Mr. Secretary, thank you, Congressman
Lujan. Keith Moore, Director of Bureau of Education.
I would add, you know, we obviously have the same concern
that you do as the director of our school construction,
maintenance work that we do. We made the decision really in the
budget, we invested tens of millions as the Assistant Secretary
alluded to in school construction the RL funding. So we took
the dollars that we had there and increased our O&M, operation
and maintenance budgets to be able to at least keep our school
at the current level, knowing that we face a tough situation
here in terms of the budget decisions and where we prioritize
our line items.
So, we made the decision to beef up the O&M side of it to
be able to maintain the new schools and the current
improvements that we have done in the news schools and the
current school. So, that was one of our steps that we took in
terms of looking at the budget.
Second, through the FEMA system, the Facilities Management
Information System we track all of our issues that we have in
our schools that are critical in terms of safe and secure and
maintenance issues, so we have that information. We could get
that to you. That is what we pay attention to each year when we
on a formula basis prioritize what we are going to put our
dollars to make improvements in schools. So, we also have that
information and that is where our dollars go in terms of
addressing that issue.
Last, we have put in $3.9 million in Fiscal Year 2012 for
school safety, so we want to improve in that area in terms of
the issues that we are trying to work on with school safety.
There was a hearing last year on the issues within our schools
in terms of school safety, and we are trying to address those
issues as well.
So, thank you for your question and the chance to respond.
Mr. Young. Thank the gentleman.
Mr. Lujan. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Young. Who do we have here? Mr. Labrador from Idaho.
Idaho.
Mr. Labrador. Mr. Chairman, I have no questions. I just
want to welcome the good gentleman from Idaho. It is always
good to see him here.
Mr. Young. Wait a minute. He said he was down in New Mexico
and he said he was a Pawnee, and now he is in Idaho, in
Oklahoma? I mean, a jack of all trades.
Mr. Echo Hawk. Mr. Chairman, I was born in Wyoming so I
have the West pretty much covered.
Mr. Young. The lady from Hawaii.
Ms. Hanabusa. Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank
you, Mr. Secretary for being here.
Mr. Secretary, I am interested in that part of your
testimony that talks about basically strengthening the nation-
to-nation relationship, but in particular where you make the
statement that investing in Indian Country, that you believe
that is probably the most essential part of strengthening the
nation-to-nation relationship.
So, can you explain to me what you mean when you say
``investing in Indian Country'' other than the acquisition of
lands in trusts?
Mr. Echo Hawk. That is a good question, Congressman, and
you know, I emphasized in some of my comments already that we
try very, very hard to consult with tribal nations and to
listen very carefully. We have a formal mechanism to do that,
the Tribal Interior Budget Council, and they are the ones that
give us the direction about what we should be doing in terms of
offering up requests for increases in the budget, and in this
budget, you know, there are several decreases that have been
made in order to meet the tribal priorities, so we listened
very carefully, and we are listening to what the tribal leaders
think are the ways that we ought to fashion the Indian Affairs
budget in Interior to figure out their objections. Most of
these things connect with economic development.
Ms. Hanabusa. You are requesting $42.3 million programmatic
increases for contract support, self-determination, contract
specialist and social workers, and that is all in the context
of Indian Country. So how exactly contract support part of
investing in Indian Country?
Mr. Echo Hawk. This is the top priority of the Tribal
Interior Budget Council because it strengthens the tribal
capacity to manage Federal programs and gives them flexibility
once these allocations are made to be able to manage the money
that they receive for these core programs, and this $25.5
million request for increase will help to get that contract
support up to about 90 percent. Tribal leaders, of course,
would like that to be all the way up to 100 percent because,
you know, they receive money for Federal programs, but they
don't have--without contract support they don't have the
administrative capability to really take care of those, and so
they end up taking money from the actual programs in order to
administer. So, one of these days we hope to be able to reach
that 100 percent level, and this is the top priority of the
tribal leaders that we consult with.
Ms. Hanabusa. The energy initiative that you touched upon,
I guess that is the economic development portion of it in the
Office of Indian Energy and Economic Development I guess is
where it is going to be found. I am just curious, if you can
give us a quick rundown of exactly what types of energy
initiatives that is going on and whether or not these are
exportable, salable types of ventures outside of Indian County.
Mr. Echo Hawk. Well, the Office of Indian Energy and
Economic Development, they work with tribes to--well, they
listen to tribal leaders express their desire to develop their
lands and resources, and provide professional and expert
counsel to be able to connect them up, for instance, with other
Federal programming, and we have some money available to help
start some of those projects.
We would be happy to provide the Committee with a detailed
explanation of the various activities of this program within
the Office of the Assistant Secretary.
Ms. Hanabusa. Thank you very much. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Young. Thank you. We will have a second round for all
the Members.
Mr. Echo Hawk, I don't really have a big argument with the
budget. I do think some of the areas that concern me, like I
think it was $2 million in answering an EPA violation deeply
disturbs me because it is taking the money hand from one group
and hand it to another group, take it away from you, it helps
the Native groups, which brings me--one of my goals is to make
sure that as other agencies are interfering with your
operations or with the operations of the tribal lands, and
projects cannot be completed, how do you respond to those
agencies? What is your role?
Mr. Echo Hawk. Mr. Chairman, you know, I oftentimes hear as
I travel across Indian Country and that has been a lot of
travel because I have been in 38 states in the last 21 months
visiting with tribal leaders, that they want me to be their
voice back here in Washington, D.C. in dealing with other
departments and agencies of the Federal Government, and
sometimes that is even within--in fact a lot of times even
within Interior because Indian Affairs, tribal nations
sometimes have conflicts with other agencies and departments,
so I am supposed to be their advocate and I try my best to do
that.
Mr. Young. What I am suggesting is in this legislation as a
nation dealing with another nation I don't think we have the
right to implement laws that don't benefit that nation. We
don't do it to Canada, we don't do it to India, we don't do it
to Japan, we don't do it to Russia, and I am thinking that
maybe we ought to expedite or at least streamline the ability
for a tribe to develop energy resources if they wish to do so
instead of delaying it because your voice may be strong, but
the other agencies they will thumb their nose at you, as they
have a habit of doing.
So, as we work together I would like to work with you and
see if there is some way that we can write legislation that
will expedite that process instead of slowing it down and
giving reason to lawsuits could occur because they can never
get anything done on these lands, and I go back to the is
concept the highest poverty level, the highest alcoholism, the
highest drug use, the highest unemployment, the highest dental
problems, the highest lack of education problems reside in our
reservations.
Now, there has been some successes. Some of those successes
like the Seneca Tribe in New York is because they are outside
of the trust relationship, and I just think that we have to
open this box up to make sure that we have an opportunity to
give them the opportunity. My opening statement was that there
are 100 million acres of land, bigger than the State of
California, and yet we have those high records of what I call
Third World poverty, and so I want you to put your thinking cap
on and we will work on this together.
Which reminds me, unemployment rate in the reservations are
what? Do you have any idea?
Mr. Echo Hawk. Mr. Chairman, overall the unemployment rate
as I recall for Indian tribes is in the neighbor of 60 percent,
as high as 85 percent in some communities, so we are facing a
very challenging situation. In the United States we are alarmed
when we have unemployment near 9 percent, but it is not
uncommon to see those unemployment rates higher than 80 percent
in Indian Country.
Mr. Young. If you were to take out the BIA jobs, the
government jobs, the government supported job, it would
probably be around 90 percent.
Mr. Echo Hawk. Congressman, it may be that case.
Mr. Young. Well, see, again, I want to emphasize that
because we have not done a good job, and by the way, Mr. Echo
Hawk, you are just the last horse in this parade. I have
watched all the horses before for the last 40 years, so don't
feel bad. You just have to walk through all that other stuff
they left behind, you know, but be careful and try to miss it,
but this is why I am so excited about trying to do something
that will make them raise above all those terrible numbers I
just recited so that you will be able to achieve, I think, a
great step forward if we do this together.
There will be people that object to this, you and I know
that, but there may be ways that we can work together to make
sure the agencies don't keep putting their foot on top of their
heads, special interest don't put their foot on top of their
head and they allow them to come up and do the things I think
they are capable of doing.
I am going to start another round--sorry, he is late. His
first question could be his deal, but Mr. Pallone, if you would
like to go ahead. You are going to wait a minute, we are
starting the second round?
Mr. Pallone. I will do whatever you want.
Mr. Young. Go ahead, you have to five minutes for the first
round.
Mr. Pallone. All right, thank you. Let me thank you,
Chairman Young, and also our Ranking Member Boren for holding
the hearing and allow me to ask a few questions, and I just
wanted to say I am glad that we have this newly formed
Subcommittee, and I think it is a place where you can have a
lot of new innovative solutions to the challenges that face
Indian Country, and I know that both of you are certainly long-
time friends of Indian Country.
The first question is that I believe that strong and stable
tribal governments that establish self-determination are
fundamental to the success of Indian Country. However, a major
obstacle has been placed in the way of improving the trust
relationship with the Carcieri decision. And since, you know,
we fixed it in the House but it did not pass the Senate. A
major concern of mine is that states and localities in some
cases have begun to extend the reach of the regulations and
taxes to newly acquired non-trust Indian lands.
So, first, what actions are being taken to prevent states
and localities from taxing sovereign tribes on these lands? And
second, is there room in the budget request to provide
assistance to tribes that are affected by the negative
consequences that have resulted from Carcieri? Talking about
tribes that purchase lands now own lands but because of
Carcieri they are not in trust. We are hearing a lot of things
are happening where the states and the towns are trying to tax
them, regulate them. Is there anything to prevent that? Is
there anything we can do to help out when those circumstances
arise? I ask either of you, and I hope it hasn't been asked
already; otherwise you can tell me that, too.
Mr. Echo Hawk. Congressman, I have previously commented
about the Carcieri decision and noted that the Obama
Administration has stood up strong in support of the
legislative fix.
Mr. Pallone. Well, I know we all want to fix it and I
appreciate that, but what I am asking you absent that I am
being told by some tribes, and you know, we had NCAI, USET,
NAGA, everybody has been in town in the last few weeks, and
some of them have said to me that the states and the towns are
not taxing those lands because they are not in trust,
regulating those lands that is contrary to sovereign
relationship because they think they can do it because they are
not in trust.
I guess, is there anything we can do to prevent that or is
there anything we can do to help out with the budget or
something in those cases, or maybe you are not even aware that
these things have arisen but I am hearing that they have?
Mr. Echo Hawk. Congressman, actually when the USET
organization met here just recently, I appeared in front of
them and spoke and answered questions, and they brought this
issue up with me, and we committed to work with them to try to
see what we could do on that issue, and I would be happy to
meet with you and see what we can work on together.
Mr. Pallone. If you could get back to me. I am not a member
of the Subcommittee, so I have to ask through the Chairman. If
you want to get back to me, I would appreciate it, but I know
that is a concern.
Does Mr. Joseph want to respond to that?
Mr. Joseph. Thank you, Congressman Pallone. At this time I
am not really up to speed on this matter. I have only been in
place about two months, but I am more than happy to work with--
--
Mr. Pallone. Well, then let me get back to the two of you
with the permission of the Chair, Mr. Boren.
The second thing I wanted to ask is, I will as this of
Assistant Secretary Hawk, and I think this did come up about
the reduction in the budget for the Indian Guarantee Loan
Program, the $5.1 million that has been suggested. I mean, this
is one of the few avenues for financing a lot of tribal
economic development activities which obviously are so
important with the recession.
Are there any other loan guarantee or financing programs
that exist that could improve upon or replace the guaranteed
loan program and fill this gap? I mean, obviously, you know, I
don't like to see that kind of reduction, but are there other
types of economic development opportunities that can fill the
void of this program? That would be my second question.
Mr. Echo Hawk. Indian Country feels very strongly that this
is a good program. It has been used very well in the last few
years. There are some concerns that have been raised about
whether or not it is duplicative with other resources within
the Federal Government. There has been a cut in funding this
year, but there is a resolve to try to evaluate this.
Mr. Pallone. Well, what are the other things that could
replace it or that could help them with economic development of
a similar nature? You say it may be redundant, but what are the
other things that are available?
Mr. Echo Hawk. I believe there is the SBA, and also I think
something in the Department of Agriculture that has money
available for development.
Mr. Pallone. Now, it seems to me that is--I mean, look,
again, my time is up, but it seems to me that if you are
talking about eliminating or significantly reducing it, you
know, there is going to be a void, and either you should keep
it or come up with something else that is specific to tribes.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Young. Thank you, Mr. Pallone. Mr. Boren.
Mr. Boren. Thank you, Mr, Chairman. I am going to go back
to Mr. Joseph since a lot of attention has been toward
Secretary Echo Hawk.
Since the passage of Cobell, the Cobell settlement, it is
clear that land probating and fractionated interest costs the
U.S. Government far more money than the land is worth. It is
just a real issue. What is being done to prevent fractionated
interest from continuing to accrue such costs? That is the
first question.
Is the small amount of funding available enough to make a
dent in the number of fractionalized land interests, and what
kind of oversight is put into place to ensure the problem is
handled effectively?
This reminds me of an issue, this is a separate--we have in
our district right now the Corps of Engineers is trying to
transfer like 20 acres of land that they don't want to some
economic development entity. Anyway, the land is only worth
about $100,000, but it is going to cost a million dollars to
transfer it. That makes us all look bad. That makes government
look bad. And so what are you all doing again with this small
amount of money? How is this all going to work out and would be
happy to hear your response?
Mr. Joseph. Thank you, Congressman Boren. The Cobell case,
it remains in active litigation at this time, and it is under
the U.S. District Court of District of Columbia under Justice
Hogan. Currently we are looking at evaluating certain issues
dealing with fractionation internally but until the final
settlement is approved we are just in that pattern. We are not
allowed to proceed any further than that. We also need to
consult before that as well.
So, at this time there isn't any plan related to Cobell.
You asked several questions so I wanted to make sure I answered
that piece first.
And then we also looked at buying it probate on an ongoing
basis to deal with fractionation in the traditional sense in an
ongoing every day basis, but there are two parts to your
question, correct?
Mr. Boren. That is correct. Let me go back then again. So
let us say that everything gets worked out, there is a final
settlement. Do you feel like you have enough resources to do
this from your position?
Mr. Joseph. At this time we are still in very preliminary
early stages on planning for this internally. I wouldn't be in
a position to comment on that at this time. I wouldn't want to
misrepresent any ideas or concepts because we haven't
identified all the things that need to be addressed.
For example, when you are purchasing land it is appraisals,
titles, survey, and ownership. There are a lot of different
pieces that need to be addressed. So I think it is important
that we look at it in a comprehensive manner and come back with
a comprehensive plan.
Mr. Boren. Well, this is going to be an ongoing issue that
we are probably going to be dealing with in the Subcommittee,
so if you could keep us informed, keep my office and the
Chairman's staff informed that would be great.
In the interest of time let me go to one other question.
Then I will turn it back to the Chairman. This is for Secretary
Echo Hawk.
I have seen the budget. There are many increases in funding
that provide for more personnel among many agencies. There is
money to hire social workers, natural resource specialists,
police officers and administrative acquisition staff, among
others. What, if any, measures are taken to ensure that Native
Americans are recipients of these new jobs?
Mr. Echo Hawk. With the jobs that are created in these
initiatives that have increased funding, these would be jobs
that fall under the auspices of Indian preference. So, you
know, whatever jobs are out there if there are qualified
Indians they will be hired.
Mr. Boren. I mean, do you feel like at the Bureau that it
is adequately addressed, that you have, you know,
percentagewise, I mean, could you give us some facts and
figures? I know you don't have it off the top of your head but
maybe you could share with our staffs so that we could know.
Again, this is my first time to really delve into some of these
matters, and we do this in a lot of different agencies, but it
would be great to have some of those numbers and to know what
Indian Country, as I am sure it is represented, the numbers
which tribes from across the Nation are represented in these
portions of the budget.
Mr. Echo Hawk. Congressman Boren, I would be happy to give
you some detailed information that we may be able to come up
with in response to your question. In the travels that I have
done across the Indian Country since we have had some funding
increases in--just recently I have actually been on site where
I have heard from tribal leaders express appreciation for the
jobs that have been created in their communities.
Mr. Boren. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Mr. Young. Thank you. I am going to use discretion of the
Chair. Mr. Joseph, I understand, or Mr. Echo Hawk, I understand
the Department is informing tribal leaders that a court order
prevents departmental officials from discussing the settlement
and its elements, including the land consultation plan, until
the judge approves the settlement.
What court order are you referring to? Anybody want to
answer that?
Mr. Echo Hawk. Congressman Young.
Mr. Young. We have the lawyers now.
Mr. Echo Hawk. Congressman Young, for myself, I am recused
from the Cobell issues, so that is the primary reason I cannot
respond, but perhaps someone----
Mr. Young. Mr. Joseph can answer. I need to find out what
Court we are--yes?
Mr. Joseph. Chairman Young, it is the no contact order.
Mr. Young. It is a what?
Mr. Joseph. It is the no contact order.
Mr. Young. See, you are going to be $1.8 billion eventually
to consolidate these lands. You have to have a plan.
Mr. Joseph. I understand.
Mr. Young. And I will tell you I will make sure before this
goes any further I am going to see that plan because that is a
lot of money. The leaders don't know what is going to happen.
Nobody knows anything. You guys are running around in
transparency with an iron suit on. I mean, why can't you guys
answer that question?
All right, go ahead, Mr. Joseph. How long have you been the
job, by the way?
Mr. Joseph. Two months, sir.
Mr. Young. I am not going to pick on you so go right ahead.
Mr. Joseph. Thank you. Until the judge issues the
settlement, there is a no contact order, and there is currently
a period right now until April 20th where it is the opt-out
period, so we aren't contacting any of the class members for
that reason. Plaintiffs are response for doing that at this
time.
Mr. Young. Well, is there a timeframe on this settlement as
far as the judge?
Mr. Joseph. I believe the date is June 20th is the fairness
hearing date.
Mr. Young. Hearing date, but that won't be the settlement
date.
Mr. Joseph. No, sir, I believe--well, let me check with the
attorney just to be sure.
Chairman Young, after the June 20th date the judge at his
discretion will be issuing his final order.
Mr. Young. So it is up to him. What I am going to do is,
you know, I want you gentlemen to keep us informed because I am
not about to disburse $1.8 billion without a plan, and who is
going to receive what, how it is going to be done because this
is important. I believe there is about 4.1 million fractionated
cases and 100,000 fraction tracts and this is something that we
are going to have to be looking at. I hope the lawyers in this
room are representative once that huge amount of money, $223
million, and still not settled, so that is another question
were going down the line. When that gets done, they may be
excited with me.
You are good? Jeff, have you got some questions?
Mr. Denham. Yes, I just wanted to follow up again.
Certainly I have concerns with the fish and wildlife
protections and the funding levels that those are at, but
specifically I want to go back to the economic development
portion of this. You have a 20 percent cut there.
Will all the cuts in the administrative budget slow down
and further hinder tribes from acquiring the permits and
approval they are required to sustain their communities? And do
you have any timeline on the length of time it takes to get the
majority of these different permits, whether they be housing
permits or lease agreements?
Mr. Black. Good morning. Thank you, Congressman. I am Mike
Black, Director of the BIA.
I would be happy to get back with you on the exact number
and figures, about approximate times it takes for a lease, and
that is going to vary, dependent upon the type of lease that we
are dealing with or permit; whether it be a home site lease, an
oil and gas permit, or agricultural or grazing permit type
situation.
Mr. Denham. Thank you. I would like to see the different
types of permits but also to see if they vary from state to
state.
Mr. Black. That is right.
Mr. Denham. And then specifically on this cut itself do you
have the procedures in place so that it does not get any worse
that it already is today?
I think we all recognize that it is not good, but is it
going to get worse with the 20 percent cut?
Mr. Black. I don't believe the cuts that are in that area
really pertain or are particular to that area dealing with our
leases and our agricultural programs for the most part, and I
don't believe what is there will directly affect our ability to
carry out those missions.
Mr. Denham. And are there steps in place to remove
unnecessary burdens and bureaucratic blockages that currently
cause slow downs in this area?
Mr. Black. We are currently undergoing a number of
different initiatives to look at our processes, and also in our
regulations with business leasing, that would hopefully
expedite and streamline some of those processes.
Mr. Denham. Thank you. I would like to see some specifics
on that.
And one issue that is of concern to me as somebody from
California, we have a lot of duplication in the different
regulations that you must go through, and we wonder if
specifically in this area if the Administration would be
willing to look at waiving NEPA when SEQA is involved. You have
to go through the SEQA process which is obviously much more
onerous than the NEPA process. Would NEPA be able to be waived
in those cases? And you can get back to me on that one.
Mr. Denham. Thank you.
Mr. Echo Hawk. Mr. Chairman and Congressman, just a brief
comment on your question.
We presently are looking at a revision of the leasing
regulations. It is Part 162, and it does touch on business
leases, and the aim of this revision or amendment would be to
streamline the process for purpose of advancing economic
development and energy development, and consultations on the
lease revisions are going to start next week, so tribal leaders
all across the country will be able to give comment on the
proposed changes which have already been sent to them.
Mr. Denham. Thank you.
Mr. Young. Mr. Kildee.
Mr. Kildee. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
First of all, just looking around this Committee today I
feel very encouraged. You know, we are all kind of new on this
Committee. This is a slightly new Committee. We haven't had one
for a long time. But I am encouraged when I see the makeup of
the Committee. It is very, very good.
While Mr. McClintock is not really new, he is kind of new.
We are all new on this Committee, and I look forward to working
with Mr. Denham on issues that we have mutual interest in, and
Ms. Hanabusa from Hawaii, but I just feel encouraged that we
have put together a very good working Committee on this issue.
Let me ask one question. On your nation-to-nation program
where you have funding of $42.3 million, what activities or
mission do you foresee them being involved in, and how will it
be able to help particularly the smaller tribe who don't have
the resources very often to get involved in these various
programs?
Mr. Echo Hawk. Within the nation-to-nation initiative where
we are asking for a $42.3 million increase, the centerpiece or
foundation of that initiative is the contract support, and this
is the top priority, as I mentioned, from our tribal leaders
that we consult with, and we have been told, you know, in those
meetings that the tribes would be interested in contracting or
compacting additional programs. I think we have about 3,200
programs that have already been contracted, but the tribes
would like to do more of that so within this initiative there
is $4 million that is requested to go into the Indian Self-
Determination Fund that would allow more tribes to contract or
compact.
And with regard to the small tribes, our concern there is
that all tribes should be able to operate the very basic
programs of the tribal government, and oftentimes if you are
real small you cannot do that, so we give special attention to
those tribes that have populations of less than 1,700 or tribal
priority allocation of under $160 for the lower 48 and I think
it is 200,000 for the Alaska tribes. So, we are putting more
money into that fund to try to raise those tribes up to a
certain threshold.
Mr. Kildee. Thank you very much. I am very encouraged by
that. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Young. Mr. Lujan.
Mr. Lujan. Mr. Chairman, thank you.
Mr. Secretary, over 90 percent of the Jicarilla Apache
Nation's government operations are funded with revenues from
production of their oil and gas resources. Most of the oil and
gas leasing activity on the Jicarilla Reservation is conducted
in accordance with the Indian Mineral Leasing Act of 1938.
The IMLA sets forth responsibilities on the Federal
Government, specifically on the Secretary of the Interior, to
manage and regulate mineral leasing so as to ensure maximum
benefit to the tribes. Despite the fact that there are at least
three separate agencies within the Department of the Interior's
jurisdiction over Indian leasing--Bureau of Indian Affairs,
Bureau of Land Management, and Minerals Management Service--the
Jicarilla Apache Nation has suffered tremendous losses because
they have not been informed of non-compliance by operators of
leasees until months or years after non-compliance has
occurred.
If non-compliance is not addressed, leasees go into
bankruptcy, and use tribal leases as leverage. Tribes then have
to spend valuable and sparse resources to battle leasees in
Bankruptcy Court.
I want to elevate this issue to your level because these
are Federal leases and the Department has the trust
responsibility to the tribes. This affects the nation's ability
to collect due revenues, royalties, taxes which directly
impacts the Jicarilla Nation's ability to provide essential
government services to tribal members and reservation
residents.
In the budget I notice there are program reductions for
real estate services and minerals and mining projects. My
questions are, will these budget reductions prevent BIA from
adequately addressing the notification of non-compliance issues
and what is the Agency doing to address the issue of non-
compliance, and will you be willing to work with the Jicarilla
Apache Nation to resolve this issue?
Mr. Echo Hawk. Congressman Lujan, with the Chairman's
permission I would like to ask the Bureau of Indian Affairs
director to respond.
Mr. Young. I have no objection.
Mr. Black. Thank you, Congressman.
In response to the budgetary questions, we did an
evaluation of the Jicarilla agency budget, and the cuts that
are made in those certain areas won't have an effect on our
ability to carry out our responsibilities under the oil and gas
leasing.
In response or in regards to the compliance with the
contracts and the leases, that is a shared responsibility
between ourselves and Office of Natural Resource Revenue,
formerly MMS, and we rely on MMS to notify us in times when a
leasee is non-compliant in their payments, and we are going to
have to be working closer with ONRR in order to ensure that we
get timely notification of those things so that we can fully
enforce our compliance requirements.
In addition, we are going to work--we need to work closer
with the Jicarilla Apache Tribe regarding bonding issues to
determine if that is a factor involved here, and then looking
at any other best course of action that we can.
Mr. Lujan. Thank you. Mr. Chairman, what I would hope is
that if this is another aspect of MMS that is broken, that we
fix it because not notifying them and then forcing them to go
into litigation, wasting valuable resources is not the way to
encourage being responsible when it comes to our resources, so
I hope that is something we can look at.
One other project that I am concerned about is on the
Navajo Nation Indian Irrigation Project. This is a project
where we are seeing a reduction of $9 million in the 2012
budget, and as you know, after years of intense negotiations
between the United States and the Navajo Nation, in 1962 the
Congress enacted the Navajo Indian Irrigation Project to
fulfill in part the U.S. treaty obligation with regard to water
supplies.
I am not sure why this project is being reduced, but I
would certainly encourage that in light of the legal
obligations still in place that we pursue equitable resolutions
from the Department, and Mr. Chairman, I am respectful of our
time as well, this is something that I, without any objection,
would gladly submit it for the record so we can get a response
a little bit later.
Mr. Young. That is good. Without objection.
The young lady from Hawaii.
Ms. Hanabusa. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Chairman, I
would like to thank you for your very strong statements of true
nation-to-nation relationship.
Mr. Secretary, as I understand it and you mentioned it
prior in response to someone about the statements regarding the
schools that were built under the ARRA funds. Now, it is also
my understanding from the report compiled by the Council of
Environmental Quality that NEPA actions for projects under the
ARRA was also part of that review, and there were 113 schools,
190 housing projects, and 379 road projects, and they were all
reviewed under NEPA as I understand it,and still the
constructions were able to go forward.
Can you tell us whether there was any problems with that or
how did that process work so successfully?
Mr. Black. Congresswoman, in response to that, you know,
the NEPA process was basically the standard process we follow
with all of our construction projects regardless of the type,
whether it be road maintenance, road construction or facilities
construction, and we were just essentially able to do that
somewhat in an expedited fashion I think in some cases, but
generally it fell under our normal processes which in some
cases is somewhat different in construction that we are dealing
with in the area of leases.
Ms. Hanabusa. But this is standard modus operandi for all
of you for all of the projects that are covered under the AARA.
You didn't have anything special in some footnote under AARA
that allowed you to ignore it or anything like that?
Mr. Black. No, ma'am, not that I am aware of.
Ms. Hanabusa. But you did use the word ``expedited''. What
was that?
Mr. Black. We put additional resources where necessary in
some of those program areas in order to get these dollars out
on the street.
Ms. Hanabusa. So it was more expedited by yourself than----
Mr. Black. Yes.
Ms. Hanabusa.--then process itself?
Mr. Black. Yes.
Ms. Hanabusa. Thank you.
Mr. Secretary, there is something that I was interested in
from your prior testimony. I am also a strong advocate of the
nation-to-nation relationship. You said something in response
to my question, that that is a priority for Indian Country, and
we were talking about the contract aspects. When you say that
is a priority for Indian Country, can you define for me who do
you mean when you say Indian Country, and what is the
consultation process that you go through so that you can speak
for Indian Country?
Mr. Echo Hawk. Congresswoman Hanabusa, it is probably the
law professor part of me coming out when I say Indian Country
because that is a legal term of art that actually describes the
jurisdiction of the United States that comes with special
obligations, and we have 565 tribes that are Federally
recognized, so that is the nation-to-nation relationship that
we have.
Ms. Hanabusa. But when you speak on behalf of Indian
Country who are you speaking on behalf of? Are you speaking on
behalf of the majority of 565 tribes or are you just surmising
from your conversations with 565 tribes that this particular
issue is their number one priority?
Mr. Echo Hawk. Well, you know, Congressman Hanabusa, I need
to be more careful in probably some words that I say, but a few
minutes ago I said that I try to advocate the positions from
Indian Country, and oftentimes tribal leaders ask me to do
that, but I was going to make a follow-up comment to the
Chairman that those tribes are very capable of speaking for
themselves, and you know, they may ask me to be their advocate,
but you know, I need to always recognize that their voices is
the more important voice when they communicate nation to
nation. It is not the Assistant Secretary's voice that really
counts as much as their own.
Ms. Hanabusa. Mr. Chairman, what I would like to know, and
you can respond to me in writing if the Chairman permits this,
is what if there is a conflict among the tribes? Who then
speaks for Indian Country or what is the position if you come
before us and you tell us this is Indian Country's position?
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Echo Hawk. Congressman, I would simply go back to that
same comment that their voice is the more important, especially
if there is conflict because I cannot speak for both sides.
Mr. Young. I thank all the Members. We are going to bring
this meeting to a halt. I will say one thing for the lady from
Hawaii. There will always be conflict in Indian politics. That
is one of the most difficult things we face, and my urging to
them is not to be too much of a conflict to work together to
achieve goals. I have seen it work. It can be fantastic. Where
there is division you are going to die, and when you are a
unity you are going to really survive and progress and that is
very important.
I want to thank the two witnesses. There will be written
questions submitted to you. We hope you get the answers back as
soon as possible and, for the rest of the Members, keep in mind
this is a proposal of the President's and these people have
been speaking for the President and presented their points of
view, and our job is to write the budget. That is our job now
to convey what we believe is correct to the appropriate
appropriations committee so we will write a budget to try to
solve the problems, and where there is a difference with the
President, we will solve that problem. This is not Democrat and
Republican. We only have one constituency to represent, and I
believe we can do that.
With that, this meeting is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 12:33 p.m., the Subcommittee was adjourned.]


