- IMPACTS TO ONSHORE JOBS, REVENUE, AND ENERGY: REVIEW AND STATUS OF SEC. 390 CATEGORICAL EXCLUSIONS OF THE ENERGY POLICY ACT OF 2005

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

IMPACTS TO ONSHORE JOBS,
REVENUE, AND ENERGY:
REVIEW AND STATUS OF SEC. 390
CATEGORICAL EXCLUSIONS OF
THE ENERGY POLICY ACT OF 2005

=======================================================================

OVERSIGHT HEARING

before the

SUBCOMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND
MINERAL RESOURCES

of the

COMMITTEE ON NATURAL RESOURCES
U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

Friday, September 9, 2011

__________

Serial No. 112-58

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Natural Resources

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.fdsys.gov
or
Committee address: http://naturalresources.house.gov

U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
68-267                    WASHINGTON : 2012
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing Office,
http://bookstore.gpo.gov. For more information, contact the GPO Customer Contact Center, U.S. Government Printing Office. Phone 202�09512�091800, or 866�09512�091800 (toll-free). E-mail,
[email protected]
.

COMMITTEE ON NATURAL RESOURCES

DOC HASTINGS, WA, Chairman
EDWARD J. MARKEY, MA, Ranking Democrat Member

Don Young, AK                        Dale E. Kildee, MI
John J. Duncan, Jr., TN              Peter A. DeFazio, OR
Louie Gohmert, TX                    Eni F.H. Faleomavaega, AS
Rob Bishop, UT                       Frank Pallone, Jr., NJ
Doug Lamborn, CO                     Grace F. Napolitano, CA
Robert J. Wittman, VA                Rush D. Holt, NJ
Paul C. Broun, GA                    Raul M. Grijalva, AZ
John Fleming, LA                     Madeleine Z. Bordallo, GU
Mike Coffman, CO                     Jim Costa, CA
Tom McClintock, CA                   Dan Boren, OK
Glenn Thompson, PA                   Gregorio Kilili Camacho Sablan,
Jeff Denham, CA                          CNMI
Dan Benishek, MI                     Martin Heinrich, NM
David Rivera, FL                     Ben Ray Lujan, NM
Jeff Duncan, SC                      John P. Sarbanes, MD
Scott R. Tipton, CO                  Betty Sutton, OH
Paul A. Gosar, AZ                    Niki Tsongas, MA
Raul R. Labrador, ID                 Pedro R. Pierluisi, PR
Kristi L. Noem, SD                   John Garamendi, CA
Steve Southerland II, FL             Colleen W. Hanabusa, HI
Bill Flores, TX                      Vacancy
Andy Harris, MD
Jeffrey M. Landry, LA
Charles J. ``Chuck'' Fleischmann,
TN
Jon Runyan, NJ
Bill Johnson, OH

Todd Young, Chief of Staff
Lisa Pittman, Chief Counsel
Jeffrey Duncan, Democrat Staff Director
David Watkins, Democrat Chief Counsel
------

SUBCOMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND MINERAL RESOURCES

DOUG LAMBORN, CO, Chairman
RUSH D. HOLT, NJ, Ranking Democrat Member

Louie Gohmert, TX                    Peter A. DeFazio, OR
Paul C. Broun, GA                    Madeleine Z. Bordallo, GU
John Fleming, LA                     Jim Costa, CA
Mike Coffman, CO                     Dan Boren, OK
Glenn Thompson, PA                   Gregorio Kilili Camacho Sablan,
Dan Benishek, MI                         CNMI
David Rivera, FL                     Martin Heinrich, NM
Jeff Duncan, SC                      John P. Sarbanes, MD
Paul A. Gosar, AZ                    Betty Sutton, OH
Bill Flores, TX                      Niki Tsongas, MA
Jeffrey M. Landry, LA                Vacancy
Charles J. ``Chuck'' Fleischmann,    Edward J. Markey, MA, ex officio
TN
Bill Johnson, OH
Doc Hastings, WA, ex officio
------
CONTENTS

----------
Page

Hearing held on Friday, September 9, 2011........................     1

Statement of Members:
Lamborn, Hon. Doug, a Representative in Congress from the
State of Colorado..........................................     1
Prepared statement of....................................     2
Holt, Hon. Rush D., a Representative in Congress from the
State of New Jersey........................................     7
Prepared statement of....................................     8

Statement of Witnesses:
Bolles, Randy, Manager, Regulatory Affairs Western Division,
Devon Energy Corporation...................................     9
Prepared statement of....................................    11
Response to questions submitted for the record...........    12
Coleman, W. Jackson, Managing Partner and General Counsel,
EnergyNorthAmerica, LLC....................................    20
Prepared statement of....................................    22
Response to questions submitted for the record...........    24
Gaffigan, Mark, Managing Director, Natural Resources and
Environment, U.S. Government Accountability Office.........    26
Prepared statement of....................................    27
GAO Highlights...........................................    34
Response to questions submitted for the record...........    35
Pool, Mike, Deputy Director, Bureau of Land Management, U.S.
Department of the Interior.................................     4
Prepared statement of....................................     5
Response to questions submitted for the record...........    51
Sgamma, Kathleen M., Director of Government & Public Affairs,
Western Energy Alliance....................................    15
Prepared statement of....................................    16
Response to questions submitted for the record...........    18

OVERSIGHT HEARING ON ``IMPACTS TO ONSHORE JOBS, REVENUE, AND ENERGY:
REVIEW AND STATUS OF SEC. 390 CATEGORICAL EXCLUSIONS OF THE ENERGY
POLICY ACT OF 2005.''

----------

Friday, September 9, 2011

U.S. House of Representatives

Subcommittee on Energy and Mineral Resources

Committee on Natural Resources

Washington, D.C.

----------

The Subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 10:00 a.m., in
Room 1324, Longworth House Office Building, Hon. Doug Lamborn
[Chairman of the Subcommittee] presiding.
Present: Representatives Lamborn, Duncan, Johnson, Flores,
Costa, and Holt.

STATEMENT OF HON. DOUG LAMBORN, A REPRESENTATIVE IN CONGRESS
FROM THE STATE OF COLORADO

Mr. Lamborn. The Subcommittee will come to order. The
Chairman notes the presence of a quorum, which under Committee
Rule 3(e) is two Members, and I note that the Ranking Member,
Representative Holt of New Jersey, is detained because he is
presenting an amendment on the Floor. He will be here as soon
as he is able, and when he comes, he will be given discretion
to give his opening statement whenever it fits his schedule the
best.
The Subcommittee on Energy and Mineral Resources is meeting
today to hear testimony on an oversight hearing on the
``Impacts to Onshore Jobs, Revenue, and Energy: The Review and
Status of Section 390 Categorical Exclusions of the Energy
Policy Act of 2005.''
Under Committee Rule 4(f), opening statements are limited
to the Chairman and Ranking Member of the Subcommittee.
However, I ask unanimous consent to include any other Members'
opening statements in the hearing record if submitted to the
clerk by close of business today. Hearing no objection, so
ordered.
And I now recognize myself for 5 minutes. Today the
Subcommittee is meeting to examine the use of categorical
exclusions for onshore oil and natural gas development. In 2005
the Energy Policy Act of 2005 was signed into law. In order to
expedite the development of domestic energy production and the
creation of American jobs, Section 390 of the Energy Policy Act
directed the Bureau of Land Management to use categorical
exclusions to expedite energy supplies by limiting redundant
environmental analysis and red tape. Categorical exclusions are
only used on land where the environmental impact is minor, the
fields have already been developed, or where drilling was
already analyzed under the National Environmental Policy Act.
In order to lessen our dependence on foreign oil, create jobs
for Americans, and secure our energy future, Congress should
take steps to streamline the process and enable energy projects
to move forward without being subject to unnecessary
bureaucratic delays as well as costly litigation and a
burdensome permitting process.
Categorical exclusions are just one tool Congress has given
the Bureau of Land Management in order to accomplish this goal.
Western States, such as Wyoming, Utah, and New Mexico, have
greatly benefited from the use of categorical exclusions. A
2009 GAO report showed that Section 390 categorical exclusions
were used to approve approximately 6,100 of 22,000 applications
for drilling permits. In Wyoming alone, 87 percent of new gas
wells drilled in the Upper Green River Basin from 2007 to 2010
qualified for expedited development under categorical
exclusions. Each of these wells brought increased domestic
energy production and American jobs to the region.
Categorical exclusions have been successful in expediting
American energy production and are an essential part of
streamlining an already overly burdensome bureaucratic energy
permitting process. The Obama Administration took full
advantage of categorical exclusions after passing the $787
billion American Recovery and Reinvestment Act when the
Administration used more than 179,000 categorical exclusions
for projects funded by stimulus money. Oddly enough, while
categorical exclusions were good enough to use to quickly make
the Administration's taxpayer-funded stimulus projects shovel
ready, the Obama Administration apparently does not find them
acceptable for American oil and natural gas energy projects.
In 2010, conceding to pressure from environmental groups,
the Obama Administration adopted new rules to essentially halt
the use of Section 390 categorical exclusions for energy
projects, and they reinstated the burdensome and duplicative
review process that has plagued the energy industry with
delays, lengthy review processes, and onerous lawsuits.
Fortunately, these rules were overturned by a U.S. district
judge that rejected the Obama Administration's arguments and
reinstated the categorical exclusion provisions.
Today's hearing will focus on the use of categorical
exclusions and their impacts on onshore jobs, revenue, and
American energy production. I want to thank the witnesses for
taking the time to appear before our Committee today, and I
look forward to your testimony.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Lamborn follows:]

Statement of The Honorable Doug Lamborn, Chairman,
Subcommittee on Energy and Mineral Resources

Today the Subcommittee is meeting to examine the use of categorical
exclusions for onshore oil and natural gas development.
In 2005, the Energy Policy Act of 2005, or EPAct, was signed into
law. In order to expedite the development of domestic energy production
and the creation of American jobs, section 390 of EPAct directed the
Bureau of Land Management to use categorical exclusions to expedite
energy supplies by limiting redundant environmental analysis and red
tape. Categorical exclusions are only used on land where the
environmental impact is minor, the fields have already been developed
or where drilling was already analyzed under the National Environmental
Policy Act.
In order to lessen our dependence on foreign oil, create jobs for
Americans, and secure our energy future, Congress should take steps to
streamline the process and enable energy projects to move forward
without being subject to bureaucratic delays, costly litigation, and a
burdensome permitting process. Categorical exclusions are just one tool
Congress has given the Bureau of Land Management in order to accomplish
this goal.
Western states such as Wyoming, Utah, and New Mexico have greatly
benefitted from the use of categorical exclusions. A 2009 GAO report
showed that Section 390 categorical exclusions were used to approve
approximately 6,100 of 22,000 applications for drilling permits. In
Wyoming alone, 87% of new gas wells drilled in the Upper Green River
Basin from 2007 to 2010 qualified for expedited development under
categorical exclusions. Each of these wells brought increased domestic
energy production and American jobs to the region. Categorical
exclusions have been successful in expediting American energy
production and are an essential part of streamlining an already overly
burdensome, bureaucratic, energy permitting process.
The Obama Administration took full advantage of categorical
exclusions after passing the $787 billion American Recovery and
Reinvestment Act, when the Administration used more than 179,000
categorical exclusions for projects funded by stimulus money.
While categorical exclusions were good enough to use to quickly
make the Administration's taxpayer funded stimulus projects ``shovel
ready,'' the Obama Administration apparently did not find them
acceptable for American oil and natural gas energy projects. In 2010,
conceding to pressure from environmental groups, the Obama
Administration adopted new rules to essentially halt the use of section
390 categorical exclusions for energy projects and reinstated the
burdensome and duplicative review process that has plagued the energy
industry with delays, lengthy review processes, and onerous lawsuits.
Fortunately, these rules were overturned by a US District judge
that rejected that Obama Administration's arguments and reinstated the
categorical exclusion provisions.
Today's hearing will focus on the use of categorical exclusions and
their impacts on onshore jobs, revenue, and American energy production.
I want to thank the witnesses for taking the time to appear before our
committee today and look forward to your testimony.
______

Mr. Lamborn. We will now hear from our witnesses, and for
the sake of consolidating the time because we are going to
unfortunately have a series of votes from about 10:30 or 10:40,
as late as possibly to noon, so I want to ask that we have all
the witnesses come forward. There are a total of four. They
will include Mr. Mike Pool, Deputy Director of the Bureau of
Land Management; Mr. Randy Bolles, Manager, Regulatory Affairs
of Devon Energy; Miss Kathleen Sgamma, Director of Governmental
Affairs, Western Energy Alliance; Mr. W. Jackson Coleman,
Managing Partner and General Counsel of EnergyNorthAmerica LLC;
and Mr. Mark Gaffigan, Managing Director, Natural Resources and
Environment Division of the U.S. Government Accountability
Office. Excuse me, I guess that is five total.
Like all our witnesses, your written testimony will appear
in full in the hearing record, so I ask that you keep your oral
statement to 5 minutes, as outlined in our invitation letter to
you, and under Committee Rule 4(a).
Our microphones are not automatic, so you have to press the
button to turn them on. I will explain how the timing lights
work. When you begin talking, we will start the timer and a
green light will appear. After 4 minutes, a yellow light comes
on, and after 5 minutes a red light comes on. You may complete
your sentence, but at that time I ask that you stop.
Mr. Pool, you may begin. Thank you for being here.

STATEMENT OF MIKE POOL, DEPUTY DIRECTOR,
BUREAU OF LAND MANAGEMENT

Mr. Pool. Mr. Chairman and members of the Subcommittee,
thank you for the opportunity to discuss the Bureau of Land
Management's use of categorical exclusions established by
Section 390 of the Energy Policy Act of 2005. The Mineral
Leasing Act of 1920 establishes the statutory framework to
promote the exploration and development of oil and natural gas
from the Federal onshore mineral estate. Secretary of the
Interior Ken Salazar has emphasized that as we move forward
toward the new energy frontier, the development of conventional
energy resources from BLM-managed public lands will continue to
play a critical role in meeting the Nation's energy needs.
Facilitating the safe, responsible, and efficient
development of these domestic oil and gas resources is the
BLM's responsibility, and part of the Administration's broad
energy strategy to protect consumers and help reduce our
dependence on foreign oil.
The BLM is responsible for protecting the resources and
managing the uses of our Nation's public lands. In Fiscal Year
2010, onshore oil production from public lands increased by 5
million barrels from the previous fiscal year as more than 114
million barrels of oil were produced from BLM managed mineral
estate, the most since 1997. At the same time, the nearly 3
trillion cubic feet of natural gas produced from public lands
made 2010 the second most productive year in natural gas
production on record. In 2010 conventional energy development
from public lands produced 14.1 percent of the Nation's natural
gas and 5.7 percent of its domestically produced oil.
The Energy Policy Act of 2005 was enacted in part to
promote and expedite oil and gas development. Section 390 of
the Energy Policy Act establishes statutory authority for the
use of categorical exclusions for five types of oil and gas
development activities. The purpose of Section 390 CXs is to
streamline approval of exploration and development of oil and
gas on public lands and U.S. Forest Service managed lands by
allowing designated actions to proceed without the need for
further environmental analysis.
In 2009, the Government Accountability Office issued a
report entitled ``Energy Policy Act of 2005: Greater Clarity
Needed to Address Concerns with Categorical Exclusions for Oil
and Gas Development under Section 390 of the Act.'' The report
found that use of Section 390 CXs by BLM field offices was
inconsistent and recommended that the BLM issue detailed and
explicit guidance to address the gaps and shortcomings in its
Section 390 guidance. The report also recommended that Congress
consider amending the Act to clarify Section 390 of the Energy
Policy Act. According to the GAO, whether or not the Energy
Policy Act required the BLM to conduct an extraordinary
circumstances review for applications for permit to drill
remains an open question.
On October 21st, 2010, the Western Energy Alliance filed
suit against BLM, challenging its guidance on the application
of Section 390 CXs. Without deciding the merits of WEA's
challenge to BLM's interpretation of Section 390 of the Energy
Policy Act, the U.S. District Court for Wyoming did decide on
August 12, 2011, that the BLM had failed to give the public
notice and an opportunity to comment on the proposed changes
before making the May 2010 guidance effective.
The court's order directed BLM to stop using the May 2010
guidance when considering an applicant's request to undertake
activities described in Section 390. This guidance had directed
BLM field offices to determine whether further environmental
reviews were required. The BLM informs its field offices of the
court's direction on August 19, 2011, effectively reverted back
to the 2008 policy.
In the near term, BLM plans to initiate a rulemaking effort
to establish guidelines for using the Section 390 CXs as part
of the BLM's oil and gas regulations. The regulatory process
includes public notice and opportunity for comment.
Consistent with the framework presented by the President's
blueprint for a secure energy future, the BLM is working to
secure our energy future by ensuring that potential oil and gas
development on our public lands is realized.
Mr. Chairman, thank you for the opportunity to testify on
BLM's use of the Energy Policy Act of 2005, Section 390 CX
authorities. I will be pleased to answer any questions you may
have.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Pool follows:]

Statement of Mike Pool, Deputy Director, Bureau of Land Management,
U.S. Department of the Interior

Mr. Chairman and Members of the Subcommittee, thank you for the
opportunity to discuss the Bureau of Land Management's (BLM) use of
Categorical Exclusions (CX) established by Section 390 of the Energy
Policy Act of 2005 (EPAct). These CXs establish a rebuttable
presumption that certain oil or gas exploration and development
activities conducted under the Mineral Leasing Act are categorically
excluded from additional National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA)
review.
Background
The Mineral Leasing Act of 1920 establishes the statutory framework
to promote the exploration and development of oil and natural gas from
the Federal onshore mineral estate. Secretary of the Interior Ken
Salazar has emphasized that as we move toward the new energy frontier,
the development of conventional energy resources from BLM-managed
public lands will continue to play a critical role in meeting the
Nation's energy needs. Facilitating the safe, responsible, and
efficient development of these domestic oil and gas resources is the
BLM's responsibility and part of the Administration's broad energy
strategy--outlined in the President's Blueprint for a Secure Energy
Future--that will protect consumers and help reduce our dependence on
foreign oil. Well-paying jobs are often associated with oil and gas
exploration and development, and provide needed revenues and economic
activity in many communities. Royalties from onshore public land oil
and gas development exceeded $2.5 billion in Fiscal Year 2010.
Approximately half of that total was paid directly to the states in
which the development occurred.
The BLM is responsible for protecting the resources and managing
the uses of our nation's public lands, which are located primarily in
12 western states, including Alaska. The BLM administers over 245
million surface acres and approximately 700 million acres of onshore
subsurface mineral estate throughout the Nation. In fiscal year 2010,
onshore oil production from public lands increased by 5 million barrels
from the previous fiscal year as more than 114 million barrels of oil
were produced from the BLM-managed mineral estate--the most since 1997.
At the same time, the nearly 3 trillion cubic feet of natural gas
produced from public lands made 2010 the second-most productive year of
natural gas production on record. In 2010, conventional energy
development from public lands produced 14.1 percent of the Nation's
natural gas and 5.7 percent of its domestically-produced oil.
As of August 1, 2011, the BLM processed more applications for
permit to drill (APD) than had been received during the year, thereby
continuing to reduce the number of pending applications. Approximately
7,000 APDs on BLM and Indian lands have been approved by BLM, but have
not yet been drilled by industry. We are achieving these permitting
milestones by continuing to work to process APDs in a timely fashion.
Fundamental to all of the BLM's management actions--including
authorization of oil and gas exploration and development--is the
agency's land use planning and NEPA processes. These open, public
processes are ones in which proposals for managing particular resources
are made known to the public in advance of taking action. The BLM is
committed to providing the environmental review and public involvement
opportunities required by NEPA for proposals for the use of BLM-managed
lands. As required under the Federal Land Policy and Management Act,
the BLM strives to achieve a balance between oil and gas production and
development of other natural resources and protection of the
environment; the land-use planning and NEPA processes are vital tools
used to achieve this statutory mandate.
Energy Policy Act
The Energy Policy Act of 2005 was enacted in part to promote and
expedite oil and natural gas development. Section 390 of the Energy
Policy Act establishes statutory authority for the use of ``categorical
exclusions'' (CXs) from further analysis under NEPA for five types of
oil and gas development activities. The purpose of Section 390 CXs is
to streamline approval of exploration and development of oil and gas on
BLM public lands and U.S. Forest Service lands, by allowing designated
actions to proceed without further environmental analysis.
On September 30, 2005, the BLM issued formal guidance (IM 2005-247)
directing field offices that the use of these Section 390 CXs was
mandatory. This guidance was issued without providing public notice and
an opportunity to comment. The guidance specified that unlike
categorical exclusions administratively established under NEPA, the new
Section 390 CXs were established by statute and not subject to the
Council on Environmental Quality's (CEQ's) NEPA implementing
regulations. Additionally, the guidance stated that no review for
``extraordinary circumstances'' was required--i.e., circumstances when
further review under NEPA would still be warranted despite the activity
falling into a category that is otherwise excluded from such review.
In 2008, the policy was modified to clarify that use of the Section
390 CXs under the EPAct is discretionary, rather than mandatory. This
policy was incorporated into the BLM's 2008 NEPA Handbook. However, the
2008 NEPA Handbook retained a provision that eliminates the requirement
to conduct an ``extraordinary circumstances'' review when applying CXs
to these statutorily-identified oil and gas development activities.
In 2009, the Government Accountability Office (GAO) issued a report
entitled ``Energy Policy Act of 2005: Greater Clarity Needed to Address
Concerns with Categorical Exclusions for Oil and Gas Development under
Section 390 of the Act'' (GAO-09-872). The report found that the use of
Section 390 CXs by BLM field offices was somewhat inconsistent and
recommended that Congress consider clarifying Section 390 of EPAct. The
GAO also recommended that the BLM issue detailed and explicit guidance
to address the gaps and shortcomings in its Section 390 guidance.
Commenting specifically on the use of extraordinary circumstances
reviews, the GAO report noted that, although EPAct does not state
whether Section 390 CXs are subject to extraordinary circumstances
review, the lack of direction in EPAct has led to ``differing
interpretations, debate, and litigation, and more generally, led to
serious concerns that BLM is using section 390 categorical exclusions
in too many--or too few--instances.''
Court Actions
In 2008, the Nine Mile Canyon Coalition, together with the Southern
Utah Wilderness Alliance and the Wilderness Society, challenged the
BLM's decision to issue 30 permits to drill gas wells in Utah without
requiring further environmental review, consistent with agency's 2005
Section 390 CX guidance. The BLM settled this litigation, agreeing, in
part, to issue guidance directing its field offices to consider whether
a particular proposal covered by a Section 390 CX presented
``extraordinary circumstances'' that would require further
environmental analysis.
Further, the BLM agreed that the agency would not use a Section 390
CX in Utah until it issued the guidance directing field offices to
consider whether a proposal covered by a Section 390 CX presented
``extraordinary circumstances.'' The BLM included these terms, as well
as more specific provisions, in its May 17, 2010 guidance to its field
offices (IM 2010-118). In response, the Western Energy Alliance (WEA)
sued to prevent the BLM from implementing its May 2010 guidance.
Without deciding the merits of WEA's challenge to BLM's
interpretation of Section 390 of the Energy Policy Act, the U.S.
District Court for Wyoming did decide on August 12, 2011, that the BLM
had failed to give the public notice and an opportunity to comment on
the proposed changes before making the May 17, 2010, changes effective.
The Court's order directed the BLM to stop using the May 2010 guidance
when considering an applicant's request to undertake activities
described in Section 390--guidance that directed BLM field offices to
determine whether further environmental reviews were required. The BLM
issued the Court's direction to its field offices on August 19, 2011.
Current Status
In the near term, the BLM plans to initiate a rulemaking effort to
establish guidelines for using the Section 390 CXs as part of the BLM's
oil and gas regulations. The regulatory process includes public notice
and opportunity for comment, and we anticipate a high level of interest
and participation. We look forward to a continued dialogue with many
interested parties.
Conclusion
The BLM remains committed to encouraging the safe, responsible, and
efficient development of energy resources on public lands. Mr.
Chairman, thank you for the opportunity to testify on the BLM's use of
the Energy Policy Act of 2005 Section 390 CX authorities. I will be
pleased to answer any questions you may have.
______

Mr. Lamborn. Thank you for your testimony. I would now like
to recognize the Ranking Member for his opening statement.

STATEMENT OF HON. RUSH D. HOLT, A REPRESENTATIVE IN CONGRESS
FROM THE STATE OF NEW JERSEY

Mr. Holt. I thank the Chair for his courtesy, and by way of
explanation I should point out that I had an amendment on the
Floor of the House at exactly the time this Committee convened.
It just happened that way. So I thank the witnesses for
appearing today, and I just wanted to set the hearing in some
context.
The National Environmental Policy Act allows all interested
Americans to have their voices heard on how their public lands
are managed and allows for agencies like the Bureau of Land
Management to make informed decisions about potential
environmental impacts of their actions. When Congress takes
steps to limit NEPA review, what often results is environmental
harm, less public participation, and more litigation, which
everyone should want to avoid.
Section 390 of the Energy Policy Act of 2005 is an example
of this kind of policy. The categorical exclusions established
in Section 390 to expedite the approval of oil and gas drilling
permits were unnecessary and unwise. They are unnecessary
because the industry is producing oil and gas on really a small
fraction, less than 30 percent, of the public lands that are
under lease on shore. In 2010, for example, BLM approved
approximately 4,100 new permits to drill, but the oil and gas
industry only drilled 1,500 wells. There is no shortage of
places where the oil and gas industry could be drilling or
could start drilling right away.
Section 390 was also unwise because oil and gas exploration
has real environmental impacts. There is no question that the
industry has made great strides in safety and environmental
sensitivity. Under NEPA the BLM has the authority to establish
categorical exclusions for activities that don't, quote,
individually or cumulatively have a significant effect on the
human environment.
However, in Section 390 of the bill, of the Act, Congress
established a set of legislative categorical exclusions for
activities that have been documented by the Government
Accountability Office to have environmental impacts, such as
ozone levels that have reached or exceeded allowable levels,
habitat fragmentation that have clearly harmed wildlife.
The GAO has documented that BLM's implementation of Section
390 was inconsistent from one office to another, often resulted
in violations of NEPA. The previous Administration also
actually prohibited the BLM from considering extraordinary
circumstances, which they are supposed to consider when
deciding whether a categorical exclusion applies.
So as a result of the deficiencies found by the GAO and
others, the current Administration in 2010 issued a new policy
on Section 390 that vastly improved the BLM's implementation of
that provision of the law. The 2010 policy required the BLM to
make sure that no extraordinary circumstances are present like
threats to public health--we would all hope they would consider
such things--or threats to endangered species prior to granting
a categorical exclusion under NEPA for a drilling permit.
Now, where extraordinary circumstances exist, the BLM is
required to conduct a more rigorous review, as we should want.
As a result of the Obama Administration's policy and better
planning from the start, protests of leases have declined. Only
12.5 percent of tracts have been contested in 2011 as opposed
to 47 percent in 2009 and 40 percent in 2010. So this is what I
was saying before. If we do it right and by the book, we will
have less litigation.
However, earlier this year the Obama Administration's
policy was struck down by a Federal Court for procedural
reasons, and I am pleased that the BLM is announcing today that
it will conduct a formal rulemaking process for using Section
390 categorical exclusions.
I am concerned that the BLM must now revert to using the
previous policy which the GAO had concluded was inadequate in
ensuring that BLM meets its obligations under NEPA. As a
result, today Ranking Member Markey and I are sending a letter
to the Department of Justice urging an appeal of this decision.
An appeal and a stay of the court's ruling would remove any
uncertainty while the BLM completes its rulemaking which will
ensure that BLM can conduct oil and gas drilling in an
environmentally responsible way.
I thank the Chair. I hope that puts this hearing in some
perspective.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Holt follows:]

Statement of The Honorable Rush D. Holt, Ranking Member,
Subcommittee on Energy and Mineral Resources

Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA) allows Americans from
all across the Nation to have their voices heard on how their public
lands are managed and allows for agencies like the Bureau of Land
Management to make informed decisions about potential environmental
impacts of their actions. When the Congress takes steps to limit NEPA
review, what often results is unanticipated environmental harm, less
public participation in land management decisions, and more litigation
challenging agency decisions.
Section 390 of the Energy Policy Act of 2005 is an example of this
kind of bad policy. The categorical exclusions established in Section
390 to expedite the approval of oil and gas drilling permits were
unnecessary and unwise. They are unnecessary because industry is
producing oil and gas on less than 30 percent of the public lands under
lease onshore. For example, in 2010, the BLM approved approximately
4,100 new permits to drill, but the oil and gas industry only drilled
1,500 wells. There is no shortage of places where the oil and gas
industry could start drilling right now.
Section 390 was also unwise because oil and gas exploration has
real environmental impacts. Under NEPA, the BLM has the authority to
establish categorical exclusions for activities that do not
``individually or cumulatively have a significant effect on the human
environment.'' However, in section 390 of EPACT, Congress established a
set of legislative categorical exclusions for activities that have been
documented by the Government Accountability Office (GAO) to cause
environmental impacts, such as ozone levels that have reached or
exceeded allowable levels and habitat fragmentation that has harmed
elk, antelope and other wildlife in the West.
The GAO has documented that BLM's implementation of Section 390 was
inconsistent from one office to another and resulted in violations of
NEPA. The Bush Administration also actually prohibited the BLM from
considering ``extraordinary circumstances'' when deciding whether a
categorical exclusion applies.
As a result of the deficiencies found by the GAO, the Obama
administration in 2010 issued a new policy on Section 390 that vastly
improved the BLM's implementation of that provision of the law. The
2010 policy required the BLM to make sure that no extraordinary
circumstances are present, like threats to public health or threats to
endangered species, prior to granting a categorical exclusion under
NEPA for a drilling permit. Where extraordinary circumstances exist,
the BLM is required to conduct a more rigorous environmental review.
As a result of the Obama Administration's policy, and better
planning from the start, protests of leases have declined. Only 12.5
percent of tracts have been contested in 2011 as compared with 47
percent in 2009 and 40 percent in 2010.
However, earlier this year Obama Administration's policy was struck
down by a Federal Court for procedural reasons. I am pleased that the
BLM is announcing today that it will conduct a formal rulemaking
process for using the Section 390 categorical exclusions. However, I am
concerned that the BLM must now revert to using the Bush
administration's policy, which the GAO had concluded was grossly
inadequate in ensuring that the BLM meets its obligations under NEPA,
while that rulemaking is ongoing.
As a result, today Ranking Member Markey and I are sending a letter
to the Department of Justice urging an appeal of this decision. An
appeal and stay of the court's ruling would remove any uncertainty
while the BLM completes its rulemaking, which will ensure that the BLM
can conduct oil and gas drilling in an environmentally responsible
manner.
I look forward to hearing from our witnesses.
______

Mr. Lamborn. OK, thank you, Mr. Holt. We will now go to the
next witness, Mr. Randy Bolles, Manager of Regulatory Affairs,
Devon Energy.

STATEMENT OF RANDY BOLLES, MANAGER,
REGULATORY AFFAIRS, DEVON ENERGY

Mr. Bolles. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member Holt,
members of the Subcommittee. My name is Randy Bolles, I am an
employee of Devon Energy Corporation, headquartered in Oklahoma
City, Oklahoma. I am pleased to be here today to share my
perspective on how Section 390 categorical exclusions can help
preserve the environment while also benefiting local, State,
and Federal economies. More specifically, I will discuss how
Devon has used categorical exclusions in the Washakie Basin in
Wyoming and how Devon's drilling efforts there have been
affected by the Bureau of Land Management's May 2010 guidance.
As this Subcommittee knows, the 2005 Energy Policy Act
provided five specific exclusions from review under the
Environmental Policy Act. In 2010, BLM provided guidance that
virtually eliminated categorical exclusions Devon used to drill
over 260 wells in Wyoming. When categorical exclusions are
utilized, each well is still subject to public notice and
comment procedures and site specific reviews that are conducted
by BLM resource staff. In addition, categorical exclusions
encourage multi-pad well drilling which reduces surface
disturbance, and as you can see, Mr. Chairman, categorical
exclusions provide BLM with the ability to offer a practical
environmental review while avoiding a lengthy and often
duplicative NEPA effort that had previously been completed.
Simply put, it is a common sense approach.
Let me give you an example of our activity as it relates to
categorical exclusions. In 2009, before BLM restricted
categorical exclusions, the Rawlins field office authorized 75
applications for permit to drill submitted by Devon based on
Section 390 categorical exclusions. Devon was able to obtain
timely BLM approval of those applications because of
categorical exclusions. If they had not existed, the BLM would
have been required to conduct a NEPA analysis on all 75
applications, and those applications would have taken much more
time and might have led Devon to consider dedicating its
resources to more timely projects in other areas of the
country.
Even within Devon there is major competition to deploy
capital, and we are going to deploy that capital in areas where
we have the least likelihood or burdensome environment to work
in. That result ends up in less Federal royalties and less
taxes being paid to the local, State, and Federal economies.
When considering not only the 75 wells that we drilled in
2009 but the more than 260 wells that Devon drilled since EPAct
was approved in 2005, the economic impact is significant. A
report released by a consulting firm called SWCA extrapolated
the 260 wells that we drilled translates into about 6,838 jobs,
about $598 million in employment earnings, and over the life of
the well about $35 million in annual government revenue. While
these numbers are significant, so is the toll that is taken
when drilling comes to a standstill.
Following the BLM guidance that restricted Devon's ability
to use congressionally approved categorical exclusions, Devon
reassigned one of its two rigs drilling in the Washakie Basin
to other areas where we are drilling on fee and State lands.
This is just one of the BLM restrictions that make it
difficult, extremely difficult for Devon to drill, produce, and
maintain its wells. Burdensome wildlife stipulations and timing
restrictions, when coupled with the prohibition on the use of
categorical exclusions, make it almost impossible to develop
the resources in an economic fashion.
Devon believes in environmental stewardship, and believe me
I live it every day, and it is a core value of our company, and
has been recognized for its efforts to protect and preserve
habitat and wildlife. However, BLM should give consideration to
practical aspects of developing Federal resources.
In conclusion, Mr. Chairman, Devon Energy Corporation works
to do its part to preserve and protect the areas in which we
operate, and we truly wish to see them grow. As I mentioned
earlier, the jobs and revenue that occur with new well
development can leave a significant hole in local economies if
they are not considered in the regulatory process.
Devon is dedicated to production on Federal lands and will
continue to produce on Federal lands. However, the level of
regulatory burden will determine not only our activity but also
the economic benefit received by Federal, State, and local
economies.
Again, thank you very much for allowing me to testify
today. It is truly an honor, and I stand for any questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Bolles follows:]

Statement of Randy Bolles, Manager, Regulatory Affairs--Western
Division, Devon Energy Corporation

Chairman Lamborn, Ranking Member Holt, and members of the
Subcommittee, my name is Randy Bolles, and I am employed by Devon
Energy Corporation. I am pleased to share my perspective on how Section
390 categorical exclusions can help preserve the environment while
benefiting local, state and federal economies. More specifically, I
will discuss how Devon has used categorical exclusions in the Washakie
Basin of Wyoming and how Devon's drilling efforts there have been
affected by the Bureau of Land Management's May 2010 guidance.
Devon Energy Corporation is an Oklahoma City-based independent
energy company engaged in oil and natural gas exploration and
production. Devon is a leading U.S.-based independent oil and gas
producer and is included in the S&P 500 Index. I am responsible for
regulatory affairs in Montana, Wyoming, Colorado, New Mexico, Utah and
West Texas. My staff and I spend our time working with local, state and
federal agencies to resolve issues related to regulation so that Devon
may gain access to minerals on fee, state and federal lands. To the
point of today's topic, I am part of the management team responsible
for all aspects of the permitting process in the Washakie Basin.
Mr. Chairman, Devon works hard to be a good neighbor and maintain a
strong relationship with all landowners. Because about 26 percent of
Devon's leased minerals in the Western Division are on federal lands,
Devon's relationship with the federal government is particularly
important to us. As a result, Devon strives to comply with or exceed
all environmental regulations and seek all necessary approvals to
drill. To Devon, it is not just about complying with regulations. It's
about taking meaningful environmental steps and assuring the
communities where we work that Devon wants to partner in their growth.
As this Subcommittee knows, the 2005 Energy Policy Act (EPAct)
provided five specific exclusions from review under the National
Environmental Policy Act. In 2010, the BLM provided guidance that
virtually eliminated categorical exclusions Devon had used over 260
times prior to the regulatory action by BLM.
When categorical exclusions are utilized, each well is still
subject to public notice and comment procedures and site-specific
reviews to ensure other resources are adequately protected. The
exclusions allow Devon to drill multiple wells from an existing pad, or
to drill directionally in a field previously approved for vertical
wells. This practice reduces surface disturbance. The categorical
exclusion provides BLM with the ability to offer a practical
environmental review while avoiding a lengthy, often duplicative NEPA
effort that was previously completed. Simply put, it is a common-sense
approach.
Let me provide an example of our activity and applications using
categorical exclusions: In 2009--before BLM restricted categorical
exclusions--the BLM field office in Rawlins, Wyoming, authorized 75
applications for permits to drill submitted by Devon based on the
section 390 categorical exclusions. Devon was able to obtain timely BLM
approval of those applications because of the categorical exclusions.
If the exclusions had not existed in 2009, and BLM was required to
prepare NEPA analyses on those 75 applications, the applications would
have taken much more time. As a result, it would have taken Devon more
than an additional year to develop the leases. Many of the applications
simply involved drilling additional wellbores from existing well pads.
In these cases, the delay would have been unreasonable and might have
led Devon to consider dedicating its resources to more timely projects
in other areas of the country.
When considering not only the 75 wells drilled in 2009, but the
more than 260 wells Devon drilled since EPAct was approved in 2005, the
economic impact is significant. A report released by SWCA Environmental
Consultants this past March, when extrapolated to the more than 260
wells Devon drilled under section 390, translated to 6,838 jobs, $598
million in employment earnings and, over the life of the well, $35
million in annual government revenue. A copy of this study is attached
to my prefiled written testimony.
While these numbers are significant, so is the toll that is taken
when drilling comes to a standstill. Following the BLM guidance that
restricted Devon's ability to use the Congressionally-approved
categorical exclusions, Devon reassigned one of its two drilling rigs
in the Washakie field to other areas where that rig could be used.
This is just one of the BLM restrictions that make it extremely
difficult for Devon to drill, produce and maintain its wells.
Burdensome wildlife stipulations and timing restrictions, when coupled
with a prohibition on the use of categorical exclusions, make it almost
impossible to develop the resources in an economic fashion. Devon
believes in environmental stewardship and has been recognized for its
efforts to protect and preserve habitat and wildlife. However, BLM
should give consideration to the practical aspects of developing
federal resources.
In conclusion, Mr. Chairman, Devon Energy Corporation works to do
its part to preserve and protect the areas we operate. Moreover, Devon
is an active part of the communities in which we operate, and we truly
wish to see them grow. As I mentioned earlier, the jobs and revenue
that occur with new well development can leave a significant hole in
local economies if they are not considered in the regulatory process.
Devon is dedicated to production on federal lands and will continue to
produce on federal lands. However, the level of regulatory burden will
determine not only our activity, but also the economic benefit received
by federal, state and local governments.
Thank you very much for your time.
[NOTE: The study has been retained in the Committee's official
files. It can be found at http://westernenergyalliance.org/wp-content/
uploads/2011/10/SWCA-Report-Wyoming-NEPA-delay-impacts.pdf]
______

Devon Energy Corporation
20 North Broadway
Oklahoma City, OK 73102-8260
Phone 405 228 8588
www.devonenergy.com

August 17, 2012

Honorable Doug Lamborn, Chairman
Subcommittee on Energy and Mineral Resources
Attn: Tim Charters, Staff Director
1324 Longworth House Office Building
Washington, DC 20515

Dear Chairman Lamborn:

Per your request, included are the supplemental answers to the
testimony I offered on September 9, 2011 at the oversight hearing on
``Impacts to Onshore Jobs, Revenue, and Energy: Review and Status of
Sec. 390 Categorical Exclusions of the Energy Policy Act of 2005.''

Sincerely,

Randy Bolles
Regulatory Affairs Manager
Devon Energy Corporation

cc: Sophia Varnasidis via email:
[email protected]

______

Response to questions submitted for the record by Randy Bolles,
Regulatory Affairs Manager, Devon Energy Corporation

1.  Mr. Bolles, in your testimony you say that in 2009 75 applications
for permits to drill have been approved using categorical
exclusions. Can you explain the difference in the approval
timeline when categorical exclusions are used versus when you
have to go through the usual approval process? Can you discuss
the job creation and energy production that accompany the
expedited approval process?
It is important to reiterate that oil and gas operators must submit
the same type, quality and quantity of information to the BLM when
preparing an Application for Permit to Drill (APD) package. The use of
statutory categorical exclusions to streamline this permitting process
is an internal decision made by the BLM.
Ultimately, execution of the categorical exclusions process is an
internal BLM process. The BLM determines whether valid, existing
environmental analyses are appropriate, in which case, Thus, Devon
cannot state with specificity or quantify exactly how use of the
categorical exclusions expedited the approval timeframe for certain oil
and gas operations that qualified for one of the statutory exclusions.
By way of example, in Wyoming, if an APD is submitted and the BLM
conducts a standard, non-categorical exclusion review, that process
could take from 60 to 360 days. If, however, a statutory categorical
exclusion can be utilized, the APD review process can be reduced to 45
to 90 days. Time efficiencies are gained because the BLM is able to
utilize valid, existing environmental, archeological and wildlife
analyses instead of requiring duplicative and overlapping documentation
of certain areas, much of which is often unnecessary. These statutory
categorical exclusions helped Devon continue our drilling program.
Without these approvals, Devon would have been forced to release
drilling rigs and terminate the jobs that follow the drilling and
completion process. In fact, as was mentioned in testimony Devon
reassigned a rig in Wyoming at least in part due to BLM guidance that
restricted Devon's ability to use the Congressionally-approved
categorical exclusions. That particular rig has since been release and
is no longer drilling for Devon.
It is difficult to quantify energy production that accompanies the
expedited approval process but it does assist in obtaining approved
APDs and retaining rigs and preparing a continuous drilling program.
This in turn creates jobs related to drilling, completion, development
and production operations. For example, in Wyoming, each oil or gas rig
creates about 125 jobs on average. These jobs include--in addition to
the drilling, completion, and oilfield service contractors--jobs such
as welders, waste management companies, roustabouts, electricians, food
service contractors, and truck drivers, just to name a few. Each well
in the Washakie area of Wyoming costs about $3 million to drill,
complete and hook up to the sales pipeline. However, this cost is not
the norm; Washakie is an established field and drilling efficiencies
have been maximized. Newer, developing areas can see drilling and
completion costs that are closer to $5-8 million per well.
2.  Mr. Bolles, in your testimony you say that the categorical
exclusion are just one of the BLM restrictions that make it
difficult to drill and produce. Can you elaborate on some of
the other restrictions that make it difficult for you to
conduct your business and what impact these restrictions have
on job creation and energy production?
BLM has many policies and regulations in place that affect
companies' ability to access, develop and produce federal minerals. \1\
For example, BLM created a new leasing policy in 2010 that requires
additional and redundant NEPA analyses to determine if leasing should
occur. [BLM Instruction Memorandum 2010-117 (May 17, 2010).] Currently,
BLM has Resource Management Plans (RMP) in place that went through a
rigorous Environmental Impact Statement (EIS) analysis. This analysis
determines areas within the field office's jurisdiction that are
available for leasing, and if the area is available for leasing, which
stipulations or other restrictions should be included within the lease.
In addition to the EIS analysis, BLM Instruction Memorandum 2010-117
also requires the BLM develop repetitive and duplicative second NEPA
analyses prior to each lease sale, regardless of whether new or
additional information is available or whether a secondary analysis
will facilitate the BLM's leasing process. This additional
Environmental Assessment (EA) \2\ or even an EIS \3\ for a Master
Leasing Plan could take several years to prepare.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ To illustrate the complex regulatory requirements mandated by
BLM, see attachment entitled ``Federal Onshore Oil and Gas Leasing and
Permitting Process,'' prepared by the American Petroleum Institute.
\2\ An Environmental Analysis, or EA, is required by the National
Environmental Policy Act (NEPA) 40 C.F.R. Part 1501. An agency conducts
an EA to determine whether the action will cause a significant impact.
If the finding of the EA shows that there will not be a significant
impact, then the EA is sufficient, and the agency issues a Finding of
No Significant Impact (FONSI). 40 C.F.R. Sec. Part 1501. If the EA
determines that the action will cause a significant impact, then a full
EIS is required. For an oil and gas project, an EA typically takes
anywhere from 60 days to five years to conduct.
\3\ An Environmental Impact Statement, or EIS, is also required by
NEPA 42 U.S.C. 4332. An EIS is mandated if the EA determines that the
action will cause a significant impact. An EIS is a more detailed and
time consuming process. An EIS typically has four sections:
Introduction, which includes a statement of the Purpose and Need of the
Proposed Action, a description of the Affected Environment, a Range of
Alternatives to the proposed action, including a ``No Action''
alternative, and a robust analysis of the environmental impacts of each
of the possible alternatives, including impacts to threatened or
endangered species, air and water quality, historic and cultural sites,
and a cost analysis for each alternative, including costs to mitigate
expected impacts. A contractor is secured to complete the EIS, which
typically takes several years to complete.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
While requiring this duplicative analysis may not seem overly
burdensome, in reality, the BLM removes lease parcels within these
areas from inclusion on the lease sale while the NEPA analysis is being
conducted. Thus, new areas may be prohibited from being leased
permanently, or at a minimum, delayed considerably, which hurts
companies' ability to lease and access those areas for development.
Since the implementation of the new leasing process in 2010, the
BLM's leasing has dramatically slowed across most of the United States.
According to recently released information, Federal onshore oil and
natural gas leasing was down significantly in the Rocky Mountain region
in Fiscal Year 2011, which ended on September 30th. According to the
Western Energy Alliance, the number of lease parcels offered has
declined by 70% the total amount of acreage leased has decreased by
81%, and revenue generated by Federal onshore oil and gas lease sales
has declined by 44% since 2008. Because almost half of the revenue
generated from Federal onshore oil and gas lease sales is returned to
state in which the lands are located, the Federal government and state
and local governments are all suffering as a result of these declines.
In addition, the cumulative impacts of overlapping stipulations for
the protection of wildlife makes it extremely difficult to manage a
comprehensive and year-round drilling plan. For example, in Wyoming,
many overlapping wildlife stipulations can occur on a lease from
November 15 through August 1 if an area has Big Game Winter Range
Stipulations (November 1--April 30) or Sage Grouse and Raptor
Stipulations (February 1--August 1). These restrictions leave companies
only a three month drilling or completion window--August 1--November
15--to conduct operations. These policies and stipulations make it
increasingly difficult to conduct energy operations on federal lands.
Additionally, special interest groups further delay lease development
by protesting and appealing the BLM's decisions, generally with the
sole purpose of delaying or preventing oil and gas development on
public lands.
The timeframes necessary for the BLM to approve oil and gas
development projects and field-wide NEPA analysis for oil and gas
projects is also a significant concern. Currently, there are six oil
and gas projects proposed on lands managed by five Wyoming BLM field
offices. EISs are being prepared for each of the six projects. The NEPA
planning processes (and Record of Decision (ROD) that follows the
completion of the EIS) for each of the projects are currently
experiencing delays. On average the planning process for each EIS was
originally estimated to take two to three years. However, due to a
range of issues that have arisen with each project, the RODs have been
delayed one to five years. The Table below highlights the six EISs
currently under development with the Wyoming BLM. These delays are
significant, prevent operators from committing the resources necessary
to begin operations, and delay the development of new high-paying jobs.

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T8267.002

Additionally, Devon is concerned that BLM budgets have been or
will be significantly reduced in the near future, while at the same
time, the agency is required to respond to an ever-increasing workload
and other ``national priorities.'' Staff shortages and an inability to
hire or retain quality employees is a constant problem in multiple BLM
offices. Employees are often prevented from working on oil and gas
related projects to comply with other priorities set by the national
office, including preparing additional and often duplicative
documentation and reports for the national office.
3.  Mr. Bolles, can you provide any examples where CXs enabled your
company to continue development and create jobs that it would
not otherwise created?
In an area of development for our company, statutory categorical
exclusions enabled Devon to continue drilling operations where while a
project-level NEPA analyses were delayed. This area that had already
heavily developed and the appropriate level of NEPA analysis had
occurred in order to meet the criteria of the statutory categorical
exclusion. The categorical exclusion permitted Devon to continue a
modest drilling program while additional project level NEPA was
underway.
______

Mr. Lamborn. OK, thank you for your testimony. The next
witness is Ms. Kathleen Sgamma, Director of Government and
Public Affairs for Western Energy Alliance.

STATEMENT OF KATHLEEN M. SGAMMA, DIRECTOR OF GOVERNMENT &
PUBLIC AFFAIRS, WESTERN ENERGY ALLIANCE

Ms. Sgamma. Good morning, Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member
Holt, and members of the Committee. Thank you for the
opportunity to appear before you.
Section 390 categorical exclusions, cat exes, are important
tools for encouraging domestic energy production, thereby
creating jobs, growing Federal revenue, and spurring American
economic activity. Western Energy Alliance represents more than
400 small businesses and independent producers that operate on
public lands in the West.
Our members are proud to provide 27 percent of the Nation's
natural gas and 14 percent of the Nation's oil production while
disturbing only 0.07 percent of public lands. Our Blueprint for
Western Energy Prosperity finds that by 2020 we could produce
as much oil and natural gas in the West as the U.S. currently
imports from Russia, Iraq, Kuwait, Saudi Arabia, Venezuela,
Algeria, Nigeria, and Colombia combined, while creating an
additional 70,000 jobs and $3.5 billion in government revenues,
just in six producing States in the West alone. We hope to
achieve that potential if government red tape doesn't stand in
the way.
Oil and gas has a small and temporary impact on the land,
and operators comply with thousands of very detailed
regulations under the Clean Air Act, Clean Water Act, Safe
Drinking Water Act, Endangered Species Act, and National
Historic Preservation Act, to name just a few, as well as State
and local regulations and numerous BLM regulations.
With EPAct 2005, Congress intended to ensure jobs for our
future with secure, affordable, and reliable energy. Cat exes
are an important part of achieving those goals by encouraging
domestic oil and gas development in very limited ways. By
eliminating the requirement for redundant environmental
analysis in five specific circumstances in which the
environmental impact is minimal and/or where development was
previously analyzed in an environmental document, Congress
hoped to create jobs and encourage domestic energy. Companies
must still comply with all other regulations when using a CX.
Almost all the criticism of categorical exclusions has been
about missing a layer of environmental analysis, no matter how
redundant, as if oil and gas development is not highly and
aggressively constrained and regulated. Despite the limited
scope of cat exes and their success in reducing environmental
impact, cat exes have been under attack from day one. That
criticism would be highly appropriate if cat exes absolved
companies from all environmental regulations, but they do not.
They merely remove a redundant layer of NEPA analysis.
A 2009 GAO report found that BLM regularly did not use cat
exes in many situations even to the point that five BLM offices
refused to use them. However, GAO didn't highlight that breach
of the law or the impact on jobs, the economy, and government
revenue. Rather, GAO highlighted a very few examples where BLM
incorrectly uses cat ex. There was no systematic look at the
energy development and job creation prevented from the
government's refusal to use categorical exclusions.
While there is coordinated outrage from the environmental
lobby about the fact that one layer of redundant analysis has
been removed, where is the loud response about the fact that
government reluctance to utilize a legal tool has prevented
economic activity and jobs? History has shown again and again
that wealthy societies are best able to protect the environment
and poor countries are the ones with the most devastating
environmental conditions. The best way to ensure we continue to
improve our environment is to grow the economy and create high-
paying jobs. American development of oil and natural gas is a
proven path to that prosperity.
It is important to note that the use of cat exes doesn't
mean less protection for the environment. It just means less
redundant analysis and bureaucratic process. In fact, effective
use of cat exes can enable BLM staff to spend less time behind
a desk and more time in the field monitoring and inspecting.
According to a study from the Western Organization of Resource
Councils, an environmental advocacy group, BLM doubled the
number of environmental inspections after the implementation of
cat exes in 2006. A recent analysis by SWCA, a respected
environmental consulting firm, finds that delays from just six
oil and gas projects in Wyoming are preventing the creation of
over 30,600 jobs, $2.6 billion in labor earnings, and $157
million in annual royalty and tax revenue. Those numbers are
stark evidence of how redundant red tape can prevent jobs and
revenue. Cat exes are one solution to that problem.
Thank you very much.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Sgamma follows:]

Statement of Kathleen Sgamma, Director of Government & Public Affairs,
Western Energy Alliance (formerly IPAMS)

Mr. Chairman and Members of the Committee--thank you for the
opportunity to appear before you today. Section 390 Categorical
Exclusions (CX) are important tools for encouraging domestic energy
production, thereby creating jobs, growing federal revenue and spurring
American economic activity.
Western Energy Alliance (formerly the Independent Petroleum
Association of Mountain States IPAMS) represents 400 companies engaged
in all aspects of environmentally responsible exploration and
production of oil and natural gas across the West. Alliance members are
small businesses and independent producers that operate on public lands
in the West.
Our members are proud to produce 27% of America's natural gas and
14% of its oil production while disturbing only 0.07% of public lands.
Our Blueprint for Western Energy Prosperity finds that by 2020 we could
produce as much oil and natural gas in the West as the U.S. currently
imports from Russia, Iraq, Kuwait, Saudi Arabia, Venezuela, Algeria,
Nigeria, and Colombia combined, while creating an additional 70,000
jobs and $3.5 billion in government revenue. We hope to achieve that
potential if government red tape doesn't stand in the way.
Oil and natural gas development has a small and temporary impact on
the land, and operators comply with thousands of very detailed
regulatory requirements under the Clean Air Act, Clean Water Act, Safe
Drinking Water Act, Endangered Species Act, National Historic
Preservation Act, Occupational Safety & Health Act, Emergency Planning
and Community Right to Know Act, Environmental Response, Compensation &
Liability Act, and Toxic Substances Control Act, to name a few, as well
as state and local regulations and numerous Bureau of Land Management
(BLM) policies and procedures.
With the Energy Policy Act of 2005, Congress intended ``to ensure
jobs for our future with secure, affordable, and reliable energy.''
Section 390 CXs are an important part of achieving those goals by
encouraging domestic oil and natural gas development in very limited
ways. By eliminating the requirement for redundant environmental
analysis in five specific circumstances in which the environmental
impact is minimal, and/or in which oil and gas development was analyzed
previously in a NEPA document, Congress hoped to create jobs and
increase government revenue while encouraging domestic production.
Companies must still comply with all other regulations when a CX is
used.
Almost all the criticism directed at CXs has been about missing a
layer of environmental analysis, no matter how redundant, as if oil and
gas development is not highly and aggressively constrained and
regulated. Despite the limited scope of Section 390 CXs and their
success in reducing environmental impact, CXs have been under attack
from day one. That criticism would be highly appropriate if CXs
absolved companies from all environmental compliance, but they do not--
they merely remove a redundant layer of National Environmental Policy
Act (NEPA) analysis in specific situations where the impact is minimal
or where environmental analysis has already been done.
A 2009 Government Accountability Office report (Energy Policy Act
of 2005: Greater Clarity Needed to Address Concerns with Categorical
Exclusions for Oil and Gas Development Under Section 390 of the Act,
GAO-09-872, September 2009) found that BLM regularly did not use CXs in
many situations, even to the point that five BLM field offices simply
refused to use them at all. However, GAO didn't highlight that breach
of the law, or the impact on jobs, the economy and government revenue.
Rather, GAO highlighted a very few examples where BLM incorrectly used
a CX. While GAO recognized they were unintentional errors from
implementing a new program that are easily corrected administratively,
there was no systematic look at all the energy development and job
creation prevented from the government's refusal to use CXs.
Where's the criticism of the government's failure to use CXs which
discourages energy development? While there's coordinated outrage from
the environmental lobby about the fact that one layer of redundant
analysis has been removed, where's the loud response about the fact
that government reluctance to utilize a legal tool has prevented
economic activity and job creation? History has shown again and again
that wealthy societies are best able to protect the environment, and
poor countries are the ones with the most devastating environmental
conditions. The best way to ensure we continue to improve our
environment is to grow the economy and create high-paying jobs.
American development of oil and natural gas is a proven path to that
prosperity.
Developing oil and natural gas from federal lands is a very time
consuming and expensive process compared to development on state and
private lands. The normal regulatory requirements mentioned above are
augmented with a lengthy federal bureaucratic process and requirements
under the NEPA. NEPA requires detailed analysis of environmental
impacts at several stages of the process--the land use planning
process, leasing, seismic exploration, project planning, and
permitting. NEPA analysis for large projects can take seven years, and
even small projects of a few wells can be held up for a few years by
analysis.
Furthermore, permitting times are extremely long for drilling
federal wells. While states take about a month on average to process
and approve a drilling permit, the federal government routinely takes
six months to two years, depending on the field office. Timely
permitting enables rigs to keep running, thus enabling companies to
execute efficient development programs and create jobs. And each rig
running creates about 125 jobs. When companies cannot get federal
permits in a timely manner, they must move onto state and private lands
or lay down rigs and send jobs elsewhere. Either way, the federal
government has denied itself considerable royalty revenue.
CXs are a means to eliminate redundant analysis in certain
circumstances. By using CXs, BLM can approve permits in a more timely
manner, putting more people to work and creating government revenue. A
recent analysis by SWCA, a respected environmental consulting firm that
regularly conducts NEPA and other analysis for the federal government,
finds that delays from just six oil and natural gas projects are
preventing the creation of over 30,600 jobs, $2.6 billion in labor
earnings and $157 in annual royalty and tax revenue in Wyoming alone.
However, this Interior Department has slowed development of oil and
natural gas, and last year issued BLM Instruction Memorandum 2010-118
that rewrote the criteria for Section 390 CXs, rendering them virtually
ineffective. Fortunately, Judge Nancy Freudenthal in Wyoming Federal
District Court overturned the policy in our successful lawsuit. Western
Energy Alliance is hopeful that as a result of her imposition of a
nationwide injunction of IM 2010-118, BLM will again use CXs more
effectively, thereby creating more jobs and economic growth.
The use of CXs doesn't mean less protection for the environment--it
just means less redundant analysis and bureaucratic process. In fact,
effective use of CXs can enable BLM and Forest Service staff to spend
less time behind a desk pushing paper and more time in the field
monitoring and inspecting. According to a study from the Western
Organization of Resource Councils (WORC), an environmental advocacy
group, the number of environmental inspections performed by BLM
generally increased over the last decade until 2006 to 2008, when
inspections more than doubled. It's no coincidence that the dramatic
increase in BLM inspections corresponded with full implementation of
CXs in 2006. Furthermore, CXs only remove the need for a redundant
layer of NEPA analysis. They do not remove any other regulatory
requirements or tools like BMPs and voluntary measures to protect
natural resource values.
In conclusion, we can use limited, balanced tools like CXs to
develop American oil and natural gas on public lands, or we can
continue to make it more difficult for producers to operate on federal
lands and forego economic activity and job creation. Thank you for the
opportunity to testify today.
______

Response to questions submitted for the record by Kathleen Sgamma,
Western Energy Alliance

Questions from Subcommittee Chairman Lamborn
Can you elaborate on the usual NEPA process and how exactly categorical
exclusions streamline this process?
Attached is a flowchart from API showing the Standard Onshore Oil &
Gas Leasing Process. This concisely shows all the points in the process
that NEPA is conducted at.
Leasing Process (shown in Blue)
1)  Actually, the first NEPA analysis is done during the
Resources Management Planning before the leasing process can
even be started, although it's shown in the flowchart under the
blue leasing section. The Environmental Impact Statements (EIS)
that are done along with RMPs can take several years, at least
five years usually.
2)  The second is a Master Leasing Plan (MLP) that is a new
requirement as of May 17, 2010. BLM may determine that some
areas should have an MLP, which will result in an amendment to
an RMP. Although an MLP has not been completed yet, I estimate
at least three years will be added to the process, since
amendments to RMPs can also take several years.
3)  If an MLP is not required, BLM conducts a leasing NEPA
analysis, usually an EA. I believe this is largely redundant
with the EIS done as part of the RMP. At the leasing stage it
is not known what type of project might be proposed, the number
of wells, infrastructure required and many other details, or
even whether the lease parcel contains economic quantities of
oil or gas. Therefore, the leasing EA is not site specific and
largely just duplicates the work done for the RMP EIS.
APD Process (shown in Peach, the section under ``BLM/FS Initiates
NEPA Review'').
4)  In the flowchart, the project NEPA is included in the
overall Application for Permit to Drill (APD) process, but it
could be thought of as another full section of NEPA Project
Approvals. Companies propose projects of a few wells to
hundreds of thousands of wells. Smaller projects usually
require an Environmental Assessment, and larger projects
require an EIS document, both prepared according to NEPA. EAs
are supposed to take about six months, but there are many cases
where they can take three to five years. EISs are supposed to
take about three years, but many outstanding EISs are taking
the government over seven years. Sometimes, even if a project
EIS is in place, BLM may require further NEPA analysis that may
result in an EA.
5)  If an APD is submitted for a well within a Master
Development Plan EA or project EIS, BLM makes a determination
of NEPA adequacy and approves the APD. If not but there's NEPA
from a land use plan or the well is from an existing pad, for
example, a categorical exclusions (CX) should be issued.
6)  If 4) or 5) are not applicable, BLM determines whether an
EA or EIS is necessary, and begins to conduct that NEPA
analysis. Often, BLM will require an EA even if the APD meets
the criteria for a CX.
As you can see from the flowchart and the steps outlined above,
there are up to six points at which NEPA analysis is conducted in the
process. CXs are designed to eliminate NEPA analysis at simply one or
two of those six points. In addition to NEPA, the flowchart shows many
other steps that must be complied with such as cultural surveys under
the National Historic Preservation Act, and consultation under the
Endangered Species Act. Despite all the intricacies of the process
illustrated by the flowchart, it simplifies other regulatory processes.
Various actions required to comply with federal, state and local
regulations, such as air and water permits are all grouped together in
just one box.
Out of the entire multi-step process for operating on federal
lands, CXs eliminate just one or two levels of NEPA, but not all the
other regulatory requirements. The only instance where they may
eliminate two levels of NEPA is very limited--in cases where an EIS
completed as part of an RMP is less than five years old. That CX was
crafted to take advantage of the years of effort that go into RMP EISs,
which include analysis of what lands are appropriate for oil and gas
development, but only for a limited time. In that case, a CX will
eliminate site-specific NEPA
Do you have an approximation of the time saved in the permitting
process?
Unfortunately the actual time saved is often opaque to industry
because of generally long permitting times. BLM is not complying with
notification requirements specified in Section 366 of the Energy Policy
Act of 2005, so operators often don't know why their permits are taking
so long. Often operators don't even know whether an APD was approved
with a CX or if BLM conducted a single well EA even if the well met one
of the criteria for a CX. We do know that even small EAs can take years
and open companies to legal challenge under NEPA, so the time savings
could be potentially significant. Many single well EAs are fairly
perfunctory and do not take BLM lots of time, but even a small savings
of time and paperwork should be welcome by an agency that struggles to
meet all its obligations, especially at a time of tight budgets. CXs
can help reduce the time spent pushing paper, and free up time for in-
the-field monitoring.
Questions from Committee Ranking Member Markey
In 2005, the Bush administration published Instruction Memorandum No.
2005-247. This memorandum went through the exact same process
within BLM as the 2010 Instruction memorandum. Under Judge
Freudenthal's reasoning, would the 2005 instruction memorandum
also be illegal since the BLM failed to undertake a formal
rulemaking process with notice and comment pursuant to the
Administrative Procedures Act (APA)?
Judge Freudenthal issued a very balanced judgement which was not
meant to be so sweeping and expansive that it would require all
instruction memoranda (IM) to undergo public notice and comment. If so,
not just the original Bush Administration IM 2005-247 but all IMs
issued by the Obama administration Interior Department would have to
undergo public notice and comment.
One of the main points ruled on by the judge when she overruled the
Obama administration's CX policy IM 2010-118 was whether it constitutes
a ``legislative'' rule or an ``interpretive'' rule which can be adopted
without public notice and comment. I quote directly from the judge's
ruling
``If a challenged agency action creates a `legislative rule,'
then full compliance with the APA's notice and comment
processes is required. . .For the reasons that follow, the
court agrees with WEA and concludes the issuance of the 2010
Instructions violated 5 U.S.C. Sec. 553 (requiring that
legislative rules be issued only after public notice and an
opportunity for comment).''
The reason the judge found IM 2010-118 to be legislative and not a
standard interpretive rule was because it was an obvious rewrite of the
plain language of Section 390 of EPAct. In her words:
``. . .there is no path from Section 390 to the 2010
Instructions and in some instances there is no obvious
consistency between Section 390 and the 2010 Instructions. As
legislative rules, the Federal Respondents had no authority to
issue the 2010 Instructions without public notice and an
opportunity for comment.''
Whereas there was a direct ``path'' from the statute to the
guidance issued in IM 2005-247, there was no direct path in IM 2010-118
because the federal government simply rewrote the plain language of
Section 390 which Congress had carefully crafted to be precise and
limited in scope. This is the key difference and why IM 2005-247 does
not need public notice and comment, nor do the majority of IMs issued
under this and other administrations that conform to the laws passed by
Congress.
Do you believe that the 2005 Instruction Memorandum was procedurally
deficient and should also be repealed?
The 2005 IM was not procedurally deficient for the same reasons
presented in the answer to the question immediately above--because it
follows the plain language of the law. 2005-247 and the majority of IMs
issued under this and other administrations that conform to the laws
passed by Congress are not procedurally deficient and should not be
repealed.
______

Mr. Lamborn. Thank you for your testimony, and I think we
have time for one more of the remaining two witness statements.
No matter how we structured this, it was not possible to get
either of the original panels done before the break, and we
can't do the combined panel before the voting break, either. So
we will come back. This is an important topic. Thank you for
your indulgence while we go over there for 60 to 90 minutes.
There is a lengthy series of votes, so it is probably closer to
at least 60-plus minutes. So thank you for your patience while
we do that.
We will hear one more witness, but when I hear the GAO
witness at the end when we come back, I will want to hear the
response to what Ms. Sgamma said about the report that was
issued earlier.
So the next witness will be Mr. Coleman.

STATEMENT OF W. JACKSON COLEMAN, MANAGING PARTNER AND GENERAL
COUNSEL, ENERGYNORTHAMERICA, LLC

Mr. Coleman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member Holt,
and members of the Subcommittee. My name is Jack Coleman, I am
Managing Partner and General Counsel of EnergyNorthAmerica, an
energy consulting firm in Washington, D.C., and Denver,
Colorado. About 2 years ago I retired from the Federal
Government after 27 years, the last 6 years of which was spent
working for this Committee, and my last 2 years I was
Republican General Counsel of the Committee. However, in 2005
with the passage of the Energy Policy Act, I was the Energy and
Minerals Counsel for the Committee, and I was directly involved
in the deliberations and the negotiations and drafting of
Section 390, which became Section 390.
My work in the House followed 14 years as a Senior Attorney
at the Interior Department, first as the Senior Attorney for
Environmental Protection for the Department for about 3-1/2
years, and then Senior Attorney for Offshore Minerals.
In my written testimony I detailed the history of this
provision. It started as a provision in H.R. 6, which passed
the House on April 21st, 2005. It originated as a Member
amendment in the markup of the Resources Committee. Congressman
Peterson from Pennsylvania put this forward as an amendment,
and the staff and the Members of the Committee thought it was a
very outstanding amendment, and we supported and worked toward
its passage from that point.
There have been many, many, I think, misunderstandings
unfortunately or maybe intentional misunderstandings or stated
misunderstandings of this provision. The House passed it with
seven categories. I think it is best to go through the history
of how this was dealt with in the conference report. Staff in
the House and Senate worked together to try to resolve
differences between the House and Senate bills. If they were
not able to resolve these differences at the staff level, then
these differences were kicked up to what is called the Big
Four, Gang of Four, whatever you want to call them, and that
was the Chairman and Ranking Member of the Energy and Commerce
Committee in the House and the Chairman and Ranking Member of
the Senate Energy Committee. And so they were not able to get
staff agreement on this provision that was in the House bill,
and so it was moved to the four leaders of the conference.
This is where a tremendous amount of review took place. I
was designated to be the staff person to represent the
Committee on Resources in these discussions, and an attorney
for Senator Bingaman represented the Democrat staff. We had
basically a moot court frankly, several hours of discussion of
the law back and forth in front of all of these two Congressmen
and two Senators and with other staff present. This was, as I
said, hours of discussion. Finally, the decision was made by
these four leaders that a provision based on the House
provision should be included in the conference report, and the
Senate staffer and I were sent out of the room, told to try to
come up with a negotiated agreement that we both could
recommend back to the leaders, and that is what we did.
So we eliminated two of the provisions, two of the
categories, cut back from seven to five, and there were some
other changes that were made. As I stated in my written
testimony, we went over every word, every word. If a word is in
there, it is meant to be in there. If it is not in there, it is
meant not to be there.
So that is what has been irritating to me, frankly, by the
BLM's recent reinterpretation of this language and also the
GAO's report. Both of them have done a disservice to the work
of the Congress. Frankly, they seem to be thinking they can
write what should have been. This was closely analyzed, and
these words were determined to be, and one of the things I will
point out, this is mandatory, the whole question of rebuttable
presumption, it is a question as to whether or not the activity
that you are proposing fits within the category. That is what
can be rebutted. The whole idea, and I know there has been this
discussion about extraordinary circumstances review. Let me
point out, I have been a NEPA law practitioner since 1978 when
I became a lawyer in the Army JAG Corps. I was the
environmental law officer for Fort Meade, Maryland. This is not
something I am new to. Categorical exclusions that are
administrative have an extraordinary circumstances review. That
is the way it is under the NEPA regulations. That is not
necessary for a statutory categorical exclusion that Congress
decides to set up, and no extraordinary circumstance review was
included in this statute. So people should not read into this
statute what is not there.
Thank you for the opportunity to testify.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Coleman follows:]

Statement of W. Jackson Coleman, Managing Partner and General Counsel,
EnergyNorthAmerica, LLC

I. Introduction
Chairman Lamborn, Ranking Member Holt, and Members of the
Subcommittee, my name is Jack Coleman and I am Managing Partner and
General Counsel of EnergyNorthAmerica, LLC, a energy consulting firm
with offices in Washington, DC, and Denver, CO. I appreciate the
invitation to present my views at this hearing on ``Impacts to Onshore
Jobs, Revenue, and Energy: Review and Status of Sec. 390 Categorical
Exclusions of the Energy Policy Act of 2005.'' Early in 2009 I retired
after a career of almost 27 years in the federal government--the last
six of which were spent working in the House of Representatives. From
February 2007 until March 2009, I was the Republican General Counsel of
the House Committee on Natural Resources, and prior to that I served
from May 2003 until late 2006 as the Energy and Minerals Counsel for
the House Committee on Resources. While working in the House, I drafted
many bills, including the Deep Ocean Energy Resources Act passed by the
House in 2006, and significant parts of the Energy Policy Act of 2005.
Relevant to today's hearing, I was the House staff member most directly
involved in the conference deliberations, negotiations, and other
activities related to the decision to include Section 390 in the Energy
Policy Act of 2005. I will explain that in significant detail later in
this testimony.
My work in the House followed my previous fourteen years as a
senior attorney at the Department of the Interior. From September 1992
until May 2003, I served as a senior attorney in the Office of the
Solicitor with the Minerals Management Service (MMS) as my primary
client, and prior to that, from January 1989 until September 1992, I
served as Senior Attorney for Environmental Protection and legal
advisor to the Department's Office of Environmental Affairs. My first
work on offshore oil and gas issues began during the period from March
1982 until August 1985 when I was Special Assistant to the Associate
Administrator of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration.
Prior to my service at NOAA, I served on active military duty as an
Army Judge Advocate General's Corps Captain from June 1978 until March
1982. My post-secondary education was completely at the University of
Mississippi, except for graduate work in legislative affairs at the
George Washington University. I received a Juris Doctor degree from the
University of Mississippi School of Law in 1978 and a Bachelor of
Business Administration in Accountancy degree from the University of
Mississippi in 1975. I am a member of the Mississippi Bar.
II. History of Section 390 Provisions.
The focus of this hearing is on Section 390 of the Energy Policy
Act of 2005. The House of Representatives passed HR6, its version of
the Energy Policy Act of 2005, on April 21, 2005. Included within HR6
was a provision from the House Committee on Resources, Section 2055,
which was the precursor of Section 390 which was enacted into law. The
Senate bill did not contain a corresponding provision. Section 2055
follows directly below and may be found on page 975 of the enrolled HR6
as passed by the House:
``SEC. 2055. LIMITATION ON REQUIRED REVIEW UNDER NEPA.
(a)  LIMITATION ON REVIEW.--Action by the Secretary of the
Interior in managing the public lands with respect to any of
the activities described in subsection(b)shall not be subject
to review under section 102(2)(C) the National Environmental
Policy Act of 1969 (42 U.S.C.4332(2)(C)), if the activity is
conducted for the purpose of exploration or development of a
domestic Federal energy source.
(b)  ACTIVITIES DESCRIBED.--The activities referred to in
subsection (a) are the following:
(1)  Geophysical exploration that does not require road
building.
(2)  Individual surface disturbances of less than 5
acres.
(3)  Drilling an oil or gas well at a location or well
pad site at which drilling has occurred previously.
(4)  Drilling an oil or gas well within a developed
field for which an approved land use plan or any
environmental document prepared pursuant to the
National Environmental Policy Act of 1969 analyzed such
drilling as a reasonably foreseeable activity.
(5)  Disposal of water produced from an oil or gas
well, if the disposal is in compliance with a permit
issued under the Federal Water Pollution Control Act.
(6)  Placement of a pipeline in an approved right-of-
way corridor.
(7)  Maintenance of a minor activity, other than any
construction or major renovation of a building or
facility.''
A comparison of House Section 2055 (hereinafter Section 2055) and
the language enacted as EPACT Section 390 (hereinafter Section 390)
reveals a number of differences. First, in Subsection (a) of Section
390:
1.  The Conference Committee expanded the section to apply to
the Secretary of Agriculture in managing the National Forest
System Lands. As passed by the House, Section 2055 had only
applied to the Secretary of the Interior in managing the public
lands.
2.  The Conference Committee added the qualifier that
application of the statutory categorical exclusions under (b)
would ``be subject to a rebuttable presumption that the use of
a categorical exclusion under the National Environmental Policy
Act of 1969 (NEPA) would apply.'' Section 2055 had merely said
that the activity would not be subject to any type of review
under NEPA.
3.  The Conference Committee added the limitation that the
activity on public lands subject to the categorical exclusion
must be conducted under the Mineral Leasing Act. This change
eliminated activities taking place under the authority of other
laws authorizing energy production activities on public lands.
For example, this change excluded the use of the section 390
categorical exclusions from the National Petroleum Reserve-
Alaska.
4.  The Conference Committee added the limitation that the
activity on public lands subject to the categorical exclusion
must be for ``the purpose of exploration or development of oil
and gas.'' Section 2055 had been broader and would have applied
to ``exploration or development of a Federal energy resource.''
This would have applied to other energy resources, including
alternative energy.
Second, in Subsection (b) of Section 390 the Conference Committee
made a number of changes, including reducing from seven (7) to five (5)
the number of categories of activities which would be subject to the
statutory categorical exclusions:
1.  The Conference Committee deleted Section 2055 categories
(b)(1) (geophysical exploration) and (b)(5) (disposal of
produced water).
2.  Section 2055 category (b)(2) became Section 390 category
(b)(1), but a limitation was added--``so long as the total
surface disturbance on the lease is not greater than 150 acres
and site-specific analysis in a document prepared pursuant to
NEPA has been previously completed.''
3.  Section 2055 category (b)(3) became Section 390 category
(b)(2), but the Conference Committee added a limitation--
``within 5 years prior to the date of spudding the well.''
4.  Section 2055 category (b)(4) became Section 390 category
(b)(3), but the Conference Committee added a limitation--``so
long as such plan or document was approved within 5 years prior
to the date of spudding the well.''
5.  Section 2055 category (b)(6) became Section 390 category
(b)(4), but the Conference Committee added a limitation--``so
long as the corridor was approved within 5 years prior to the
date of placement of the pipeline.''
6.  Section 2055 category (b)(7) became Section 390 category
(b)(5) without change.

III. Discussion.
As I stated earlier, at the time of the passage of the Energy
Policy Act of 2005, I was the Energy & Minerals Counsel for the House
Committee on Resources. I was directly involved in the action on
Section 2055 at the committee level prior to consideration by the
House. This provision was offered as an amendment by a member at mark-
up. The Committee adopted it. Then the Committee defended this
provision during passage by the House. The reason--it is a commonsense
provision which has the effect of focusing the attention of limited
staff on matters that really matter. We also believed that this
provision would prevent trivializing of NEPA and would likely encourage
drilling from an already used drill site, reducing environmental
impacts. The intent of NEPA is to review actions that may have a
``significant'' impact on the environment. It is clear to me, and was
apparently clear to the Conference Committee, that these 5 categories
included in Section 390 are highly unlikely to ever cause a
``significant'' impact on the environment.
The EPACT Conference Committee worked like this--the staff would
consider provisions in the House and Senate bills which were not
identical. If the staff could not come to a resolution of the
differences, the matter was reserved for the ``Gang of Four''--the
Chairman and Ranking Member of the House Energy and Commerce Committee
and the Chairman and Ranking Member of the Senate Energy Committee. The
staff could not agree on House Section 2055, so the matter of NEPA
categorical exclusions was kicked-up to the Gang of Four. During
consideration of this matter by the Gang of Four, I was the only
Majority staff member present for the discussions/deliberations. In
addition, no Member of the Resources Committee was present or
participated in these discussions--not even the Chairman. I and a
Democrat Senate staff counsel were asked to discuss/debate, in front of
the Gang of Four, the legal issues related to House Section 2055. These
discussions/debate between myself, the Senate staff counsel, and the
members of the Gang of Four took several hours over several sessions.
The Gang of Four finally decided to include Section 2055 in the
Conference Report, but with changes to the language. The Senate staff
counsel and I were directed to negotiate changes that we could agree to
and bring them back to the Gang of Four for approval. We did this and
those negotiations resulted in the changes that I outlined above.
Other than removing the two categories related to geophysical
surveys and disposal of produced water, most of the other changes
involved limitations on House-passed language, such as 5-year
limitations on some, and an acreage limitation on another. Each one of
these five categories was extensively debated and discussed by staff
and the members of the Gang of Four. Every word was considered. When
words were left out of some categories but included in others, this was
intentional. As someone who was the House staff most involved in the
derivation of these provisions, I have been very disappointed by the
GAO report and by recent actions by the current Administration to, in
essence, legislate words into or out of these provisions through
implication and/or settlement of litigation.
This section is mandatory as written, not optional. After
enactment, this right to the use of these categorical exclusions became
part of the bundle of rights that lessees acquire upon obtaining a
lease from the government. Discussion of why that is so is beyond the
scope of this hearing.
There has been much discussion about the meaning of the term
``rebuttable presumption'' as used in Section 390. Let me make clear,
my understanding of this term when it was added in negotiations with my
Senate counterpart was the same interpretation that BLM adopted in its
first implementing instructions. That is, it is presumed that an
activity that fits the description of the activity listed within the
category is the activity that is subject to the categorical exemption.
However, whether or not the subject activity fits the description is
subject to be rebutted. The rebuttal would only address whether or not
the subject activity fit the categorical exemption, not whether or not
the activity would cause significant impacts. If it had meant the
latter, then a NEPA document would need to be developed which would
defeat the purpose of the section.
In addition, there has been much discussion about whether these
Section 390 categorical exclusions should be subject to an
extraordinary circumstances review. First, there is no mention of the
need for an extraordinary circumstances review in Section 390. Second,
what would be the purpose of Congress legislating a categorical
exclusion which was really still just a regulatory categorical
exclusion? I have practiced NEPA law since 1978. Other staff and
counsel involved in negotiating this provision were very aware of NEPA
law. The intent of Congress in negotiating these statutory categorical
exclusions was to fast-track approvals for this very limited number of
categories. Congress has long been concerned about extensive
unwarranted delays because of NEPA litigation. Certainly we knew that
extraordinary circumstances reviews lead to litigation. This is why the
Congress legislated these exclusions rather than leaving them to the
agency to promulgate through regulations.
Thank you for the opportunity to testify and I would be pleased to
answer any questions.
______

Response to questions submitted for the record by W. Jackson Coleman,
Managing Partner and General Counsel, EnergyNorthAmerica, LLC

Questions from Chairman Doug Lamborn

1.  Mr. Coleman, can you explain for the Committee the permitting,
economic, and domestic energy production scenario the Committee was
facing in 2005 that led to the Committee putting the categorical
exclusions in EPAct and if you believe these provisions have improved
the situation?
Answer: The Committee has long known that lands owned by the
Federal Government, both onshore and offshore, are endowed with vast
quantities of oil and natural gas. I reference the Committee to a long
line of resource assessments and reports by the United States
Geological Survey and the former Minerals Management Service which
document these resources. These assessments and reports document
resource numbers which are limited, however, by the lack of sufficient
seismic data upon which to provide higher resource assessment volumes.
Given the great energy needs of the Nation and the large contribution
that these Federal lands can provide to help meet these energy needs,
the Congress has acted a number of times to expedite energy production
on these lands, while taking care to guard against unwarranted impacts
on the environment.
In 2005, the Committee was cognizant of a number of things which
caused the Committee to initiate enactment of statutory NEPA
categorical exclusions. First, for a number of years prior to 2005 the
relationship of the Nation's supply of natural gas and the demand for
it had become very tight. This caused swings in prices with a
significant upward trend. Second, environmental groups had become very
aggressive in challenging leasing and permits to drill for oil and gas
exploration and production on public lands, even though expansive
environmental reviews had been conducted for leasing and permitting,
and much greater environmental protections had been placed on such
exploration and production. This was having an adverse effect on the
potential for energy production from public lands, particularly for
natural gas, thereby unnecessarily exacerbating the natural gas price
upward trend. Environmental groups almost always included a challenge
to NEPA review in their challenges. Third, the frustration level among
Members of Congress and Committee staff had continued to rise for
several years prior to 2005. More and more the desire to effect
rational policy changes that would increase energy production from
public lands, while providing for essential environmental protections,
had grown.
So, in 2005 the Committee included a number of reform provisions in
the House precursor to the Energy Policy Act of 2005 having the
objective of expediting leasing and permitting of all types of public
lands energy resources. One of them was Section 390--NEPA statutory
categorical exclusions related to oil and gas production. As stated in
my testimony at the hearing, the purpose of these categorical
exclusions was to describe categories of activities for which
significant impacts would not reasonably be foreseeable, and therefore
no further environmental analysis would be necessary. This action would
expedite production in a number of ways--shortening the time required
for issuing a permit and eliminating litigation about the adequacy of
environmental reviews.
Prior to the decision of the current Administration not to
implement Section 390 as written by the Congress, it had significantly
achieved the objectives that the Committee had for it. However, the
Administration's implementation of the provision had in essence
repealed it.
______

Mr. Lamborn. OK, thank you for your testimony. I stated
earlier we will be in recess for 60 to 90 minutes. Thank you
for your patience, and we will see you soon. This is such an
important subject, we will have multiple rounds of questioning.
We will be in recess.
[Recess.]
Mr. Lamborn. The Subcommittee will please come back to
order. I want to thank the witnesses and everyone else in
attendance for your patience while we did that series of votes.
It was lengthy, like I thought it was. But we should be done
with any interruptions. So we will finish with our testimony
and then have time for a lot of questions. I hope a lot of
Members can rejoin us. I apologize for the delay and how some
had to now start their travel plans, going back to their
families and their districts. But those of us who are here are
going to have a lot of questions because this is such an
important topic.
So now we will hear from the gentleman from the GAO and you
may continue.

STATEMENT OF MARK GAFFIGAN, MANAGING DIRECTOR, NATURAL
RESOURCES AND ENVIRONMENTAL DIVISION, U.S. GOVERNMENT
ACCOUNTABILITY OFFICE; ACCOMPANIED BY JEFF MALCOLM, ASSISTANT
DIRECTOR, NATURAL RESOURCES AND ENVIRONMENT, U.S. GOVERNMENT
ACCOUNTABILITY OFFICE

Mr. Gaffigan. Chairman Lamborn, thank you. And with 10
minutes to spare, let me say good morning. I won't think of
myself so much as being the last batter but maybe delude myself
with, you have saved the best for last. Thank you.
I am pleased to be here to discuss Section 390, categorical
exclusions, or cat exes, for oil and gas development. My
testimony today is based on our 2009 report on this issue and
some notable events since then; namely, BLM's subsequent
response to our report's recommendations and some recent court
decisions.
In 2009, as you pointed out at the beginning, we have
reported that BLM had used the Section 390 cat exes to approve
about 6,100 of the 22,000 applications that had come through
between Fiscal Year 2006 and Fiscal Year 2008. That is about 28
percent of the whole total. BLM reported benefits of increased
efficiency that varied across offices depending on a number of
different factors, but those benefits were not easy for us to
quantify. But we did find that not unexpectedly for a new law
there were some instances of noncompliance with either the law
or agency guidance. Now our findings reflect what appear to be
honest mistakes with a new law. And while many were technical
in nature, they may thwart NEPA's twinnings of ensuring that
BLM and the public are fully informed of the potential
environmental impact of oil and gas development.
We noted that a lack of clarity in the law and lack of BLM
guidance and oversight contributed in large part to the
inconsistencies that we found and raised cautions amongst all
the stakeholders, including industry, environmental groups and
BLM. Regarding the law, four key questions were raised about
Section 390 CXs: Are they subject to extraordinary
circumstances? Two, are they mandatory? And Ms. Sgamma was
talking about whether GAO noted violations of the use of these
as not being mandatory. The reason we did not do that is it
wasn't clear to us that the law said this was mandatory.
The third question was, what does rebuttable presumption
mean? And fourth, what level of public disclosure is required?
Regarding the BLM guidance and oversight, the concerns
included three things: One, the need to issue more detailed and
explicit guidance for some of the terminology that is undefined
in the law; two, the need for some standardized guidance,
including some documentation required to justify the
categorical exclusion use; and, three, the need for BLM to
implement an oversight plan for ensuring compliance with the
law and guidance in a consistent manner.
Accordingly, our report suggested that Congress might want
to clarify the law and resolve the questions raised. In
addition, we recommend that BLM issue more detailed guidance,
provide some standard templates or checklists for each of the
categorical exclusions that at a minimum specifies what kind of
justification is required to be documented, and last that BLM
develop an oversight plan.
Since our report 2 years ago, despite efforts to address
the need for clarity in the law and BLM attempts to provide
additional guidance, the bottom line is that today the
situation is unchanged. The law, with its questions, remains
unaltered. And BLM's attempt to provide further guidance in a
May 2010 instruction memorandum has been recently blocked by a
court decision that held that this guidance constituted a
regulation that was adopted without using proper procedures. In
short, today we are right back where we were 2 years ago when
we issued our report.
In conclusion, no matter where it occurs, oil and gas
development can be a high risk, high reward endeavor with
numerous potential benefits and costs for the economy and
ecosystems. For years oil and gas development under Federal
jurisdiction has faced challenges in its efforts to strike the
balance between development and environmental protection. While
the challenges that may be brought are largely out of its
control, the Federal Government can control the quality and
integrity of its permitting environmental analysis process.
Uncertainty and questions about this process only increases the
vulnerability to challenges from all sides. Anything that can
be done to reduce this uncertainty and resolve questions
decreases this vulnerability and enhances the government's
credibility among all stakeholders, as it strives to achieve
the balance between oil and gas development and environmental
protection.
Mr. Chairman, thank you for your time. This concludes my
opening statement. I am happy to answer any questions you might
have.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Gaffigan follows:]

Statement of Mark Gaffigan, Managing Director, Natural Resources and
Environment, United States Government Accountability Office (GAO)

Chairman Lamborn, Ranking Member Holt, and Members of the
Subcommittee:
I am pleased to be here today to participate in your hearing on the
categorical exclusions established by section 390 of the Energy Policy
Act of 2005. As you know, oil and natural gas production from federal
lands is critical to meeting our nation's energy needs. From fiscal
year 2006 through fiscal year 2010, the Department of the Interior's
Bureau of Land Management (BLM) approved more than 30,600 new oil and
gas drilling permits across 24 states, largely in the mountain West.
Like many projects on federal land with possible environmental impacts,
oil and gas development activities are typically subject to
environmental review under the National Environmental Policy Act of
1969 (NEPA). \1\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Pub. L. No. 91-190, 83 Stat. 852 (1970). NEPA has two principal
purposes: (1) to ensure that the agency carefully considers detailed
information concerning significant environmental impacts and (2) to
ensure that this information will be made available to the public. See,
for example, Robertson v. Methow Valley Citizens Council, 490 U.S. 332,
349 (1989). It does not, however, require any particular substantive
result. See, for example, Department of Transportation v. Public
Citizen, 541 U.S. 752, 756 (2004).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Under NEPA, federal agencies evaluate the likely environmental
effects of projects they are proposing by preparing either an
environmental assessment or, if projects are likely to significantly
affect the environment, a more detailed environmental impact statement.
If, however, the agency determines that activities of a proposed
project fall within a category of activities the agency has already
determined has no significant environmental impact--called a
categorical exclusion--then the agency generally need not prepare an
environmental assessment or environmental impact statement. \2\ The
agency may instead approve projects that fit within the relevant
category by using one of the predetermined administrative categorical
exclusions, rather than carrying out a project-specific environmental
assessment or environmental impact statement.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ Throughout this testimony, we refer to categorical exclusions
developed under the NEPA regulations as administrative categorical
exclusions.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
To address long-term energy challenges, Congress enacted the Energy
Policy Act of 2005, in part to expedite oil and gas development within
the United States. \3\ This law authorizes BLM, for certain oil and gas
activities, to approve projects without preparing the new environmental
analyses that would normally be required by NEPA. Section 390 of the
Energy Policy Act of 2005 established five categorical exclusions
specifically for oil and gas development. \4\ These categorical
exclusions--referred to in this testimony as section 390 categorical
exclusions--define specific conditions under which BLM need not prepare
any new NEPA analysis, such as an environmental assessment or
environmental impact statement, which would ordinarily be required for
oil and gas projects. For a project to be approved using an
administrative categorical exclusion, the agency must determine whether
any extraordinary circumstances exist under which a normally excluded
action or project may have a significant effect. As originally
implemented, projects approved with section 390 categorical exclusions
were not subject to any screening for extraordinary circumstances,
according to BLM officials. \5\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ Pub. L. No. 109-58, 119 Stat. 594 (2005).
\4\ Pub. L. No. 109-58, Sec.  390, 119 Stat. 747 (2005), codified
at 42 U.S.C. Sec.  15942.
\5\ Bureau of Land Management, "Instruction Memorandum No. 2005 -
247: National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA) Compliance for Oil, Gas,
and Geothermal Development," attachment 2 (Sept. 30, 2005), and BLM,
National Environmental Policy Act Handbook H-1790-1 (Washington, D.C.:
2008).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
In September 2009, we reported on BLM's first 3 years of
experience--fiscal years 2006 through 2008--using section 390
categorical exclusions. \6\ My testimony today will summarize the
finding of our September 2009 report, along with some recent updates.
Specifically, I will discuss (1) the extent to which BLM used section
390 categorical exclusions each fiscal year from 2006 through 2008 and
the benefits, if any, associated with their use; (2) the extent to
which BLM used section 390 categorical exclusions in compliance with
the Energy Policy Act of 2005 and internal BLM guidance; (3) key
concerns, if any, associated with section 390 categorical exclusions;
and (4) how BLM has responded to the recommendations in our September
2009 report and other recent developments.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\6\ GAO, Energy Policy Act of 2005: Greater Clarity Needed to
Address Concerns with Categorical Exclusions for Oil and Gas
Development under Section 390 of the Act, GAO-09-872 (Washington, D.C.:
Sept. 16, 2009).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
For our report, we reviewed relevant laws, regulations, and
Interior and BLM guidance. We also reviewed BLM headquarters and field
office documents and data for each fiscal year from 2006 through 2008.
We interviewed officials in BLM headquarters and in the 11 BLM field
offices (and their associated state offices) that processed the most
applications for permit to drill (APD) from fiscal year 2006 through
fiscal year 2008. We also interviewed representatives from industry,
historic preservation groups, and environmental groups about benefits
and concerns--both actual and potential--associated with section 390
categorical exclusions. Other recent developments are based on our
review of court decisions that have been decided since we issued our
September 2009 report. The report was a performance audit conducted in
accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards. A
detailed description of our scope and methodology in presented in
appendix I of the September 2009 report.
Background
Under the Federal Land Policy and Management Act of 1976, as
amended (FLPMA), \7\ BLM manages about 250 million acres of federal
land for multiple uses, including recreation; range; timber; minerals;
watershed; wildlife and fish; and natural scenic, scientific, and
historical values, as well as for the sustained yield of renewable
resources. In addition, the Mineral Leasing Act of 1920 charges
Interior with responsibility for oil and gas leasing on federal and
private lands where the federal government has retained mineral rights.
BLM is responsible for managing approximately 700 million mineral
onshore acres, which include the acreage leased for oil and gas
development. To manage its responsibilities, BLM administers its
programs through its headquarters office in Washington, D.C.; 12 state
offices; 45 district offices; and 128 field offices. BLM headquarters
develops guidance and regulations for the agency, while the state,
district, and field offices manage and implement the agency's programs.
Thirty BLM field offices, located primarily in the mountain West, were
involved in oil and gas development.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\7\ Pub. L. No. 94-579, 90 Stat. 2743 (1976), codified as amended
at 43 U.S.C. Sec.  1701 et seq.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
To drill for oil or natural gas on leased lands, a company must
submit an APD to BLM. \8\ APDs are used to approve drilling and all
related activities on land leased by a company, including road
building; digging pits to store drilling effluent; placing pipelines to
carry oil and gas to market; and building roads to transport equipment,
personnel, and other production-related materials. \9\ After an APD is
approved, operators can submit proposals to BLM, in the form of a
sundry notice, for modifications to their approved APD. Sundry notices
may involve activities like changing the location of a well, adding an
additional pipeline, or adding remote communications equipment.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\8\ 43 C.F.R. Sec.  3162.3-1(c).
\9\ Companies may also be required to submit a right-of-way
application for related activities, such as adding pipelines, that take
place on land for which they do not own a lease. See 43 C.F.R. Sec.
2881.7.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Interior and BLM have administrative categorical exclusions in
place for numerous types of activities, such as constructing nesting
platforms for wild birds and constructing snow fences for safety. To
use such an administrative categorical exclusion in approving a project
on BLM land, the agency screens each proposed project for extraordinary
circumstances, such as significant impacts to threatened and endangered
species, historic or cultural resources, or human health and safety or
potentially significant cumulative environmental effects when coupled
with other actions. When one or more extraordinary circumstances exist,
BLM guidance precludes staff from using an administrative categorical
exclusion for the project.
Section 390 of the Energy Policy Act of 2005 authorizes BLM to
forgo environmental assessments and environmental impact statements for
oil and gas projects under certain circumstances. Specifically,
subsection (a) states:
``NEPA Review.--Action by the Secretary of the Interior in managing
the public lands or the Secretary of the Agriculture in managing
National Forest System Lands, with respect to any of the activities
described in subsection (b) shall be subject to a rebuttable
presumption that the use of a categorical exclusion under the National
Environmental Policy Act of 1969 (NEPA) would apply if the activity is
conducted pursuant to the Mineral Leasing Act for the purpose of
exploration or development of oil and gas.'' \10\ [emphasis added]
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\10\ Pub. L. No. 109-58, Sec.  390(a), 119 Stat. 747 (2005),
codified at 42 U.S.C. Sec.  15942(a). Although the Energy Policy Act of
2005 authorizes both BLM and the Department of Agriculture's U.S.
Forest Service to use section 390 categorical exclusions, our September
2009 report examined only BLM's use of section 390 categorical
exclusions.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Subsection (b) outlines five new categories of activities to be
considered categorical exclusions. These section 390 categorical
exclusions (referred to in this testimony as section 390 CX1, CX2, CX3,
CX4, and CX5) include:
``(1) Individual surface disturbances of less than 5 acres so long
as the total surface disturbance on the lease is not greater than 150
acres and site-specific analysis in a document prepared pursuant to
NEPA has been previously completed.
(2) Drilling an oil or gas well at a location or well pad site at
which drilling has occurred previously within 5 years prior to the date
of spudding the well.
(3) Drilling an oil or gas well within a developed field for which
an approved land use plan or any environmental document prepared
pursuant to NEPA analyzed such drilling as a reasonably foreseeable
activity, so long as such plan or document was approved within 5 years
prior to the date of spudding the well.
(4) Placement of a pipeline in an approved right-of-way corridor,
so long as the corridor was approved within 5 years prior to the date
of placement of the pipeline.
(5) Maintenance of a minor activity, other than any construction or
major renovation or [sic] a building or facility.''
In its process for approving oil or gas projects, BLM's original
guidance provided that the agency can use a section 390 categorical
exclusion when a project meets the conditions set forth for any of the
five types of section 390 categorical exclusions. BLM guidance still
directs staff to document their decision and rationale for using a
specific section 390 categorical exclusion. Furthermore, BLM guidance
directed its staff when using section 390 categorical exclusions to
comply with the Endangered Species Act and the National Historic
Preservation Act; to conduct on-site reviews for all APDs; and to add
site-specific restrictions or conditions of approval if deemed
necessary to protect the environment or cultural resources.
BLM Field Offices Used Section 390 Categorical Exclusions for More Than
One-Quarter of Their APDs, Although Benefits of Use Varied
Widely across Field Offices
In September 2009, we reported that 26 of the 30 field offices with
oil and gas activities used almost 6,900 section 390 categorical
exclusions to approve oil-and-gas-related activities from fiscal year
2006 through fiscal year 2008. Of these, BLM field offices used section
390 categorical exclusions to approve nearly 6,100 APDs (about 28
percent of approximately 22,000 federal wells approved by BLM) during
this period. Three BLM field offices (Pinedale, Wyoming; Farmington,
New Mexico; and Vernal, Utah) accounted for almost two-thirds of
section 390 categorical exclusions used to approve APDs. Section 390
CX3 accounted for more than 60 percent of the section 390 categorical
exclusions used to approve APDs. BLM also used section 390 categorical
exclusions to approve more than 800 nondrilling projects from fiscal
year 2006 through fiscal year 2008. These approvals were for a wide
range of activities, such as changing a well location, adding new
pipelines, and doing road maintenance. The Buffalo, Wyoming, field
office was the most prominent user of section 390 categorical
exclusions for these purposes, approving more than 250 nondrilling
projects with section 390 categorical exclusions.
The vast majority of BLM officials we spoke with told us that using
section 390 categorical exclusions expedited the application review and
approval process, but the amount of time saved by field offices
depended on a variety of factors and circumstances influencing the
extent to which field offices used the exclusions. A frequently cited
factor contributing to these efficiency gains was the extent to which
proposed projects fit the specific conditions set forth in each section
390 categorical exclusion. BLM officials also identified other factors
that contributed to their ability to use section 390 categorical
exclusions, including the field office resource specialists'
familiarity with the area of the proposed action, the area's
environmental sensitivity, the extent of the area's cultural resources,
and the proposed action's extent of surface disturbance. Specifically,
BLM officials told us that section 390 categorical exclusions were
regularly used to approve projects in areas where sensitive
environmental or cultural concerns were few (e.g., no threatened or
endangered species, or limited cultural resources in the area), where
the resource specialists were familiar with the location of the
proposed action, or where the proposed project was not unusual or was
likely to have minimal impact on the local environment. Additionally,
field office policies could contribute to how often section 390
categorical exclusions were used. The differences in office policies
result from field office managers' comfort with the use of section 390
categorical exclusions and their interpretations of appropriate use.
Because it is not always clear how oil and gas development would
have proceeded in the absence of section 390 categorical exclusions,
BLM officials told us that estimating the amount of time saved by using
the exclusions was difficult. In field offices where section 390
categorical exclusions were seldom used to approve APDs or nondrilling
actions, officials told us that a typical section 390 categorical
exclusion approval document saved a few hours of total staff time. In
contrast, in field offices where section 390 categorical exclusions
were used more often, the time savings were cumulatively more
significant, although officials could not quantify them. Officials in
these field offices told us that while the savings for a single APD did
not by itself mean that the APD was approved in fewer calendar days,
the total number of APDs processed in the office in a given period was
probably larger because of the cumulative time saved by using section
390 categorical exclusions.
Industry officials with whom we spoke also agreed that BLM's use of
section 390 categorical exclusions had generally decreased APD-
processing times and that this increased efficiency was more pronounced
in some field offices than in others. Acknowledging that the type of
development and the availability of NEPA documents were both critical
factors, they also stressed that differences in field office policies,
field office operations, and field management personalities generally
influenced how readily a given BLM field office used section 390
categorical exclusions. For example, according to industry officials,
some field offices were conservative and cautious and therefore
reluctant to use section 390 categorical exclusions if even minimal
environmental or cultural resource concerns existed. This tendency ran
counter to what some industry officials told us was their
interpretation of the law--namely, that they believed that section 390
categorical exclusions should be used whenever a project meets the
required conditions. Industry officials told us that in some cases BLM
was overly cautious in applying section 390 categorical exclusions, in
part because BLM feared litigation from environmental groups. Industry
officials commented on the lack of consistency among BLM field offices
in how section 390 categorical exclusions were used but overall told us
that section 390 categorical exclusions were a useful tool and have
contributed to expedited application processing. They applauded the
exclusions for reducing redundant and time-consuming NEPA documentation
and making APD application processing more predictable and flexible.
BLM's Use of Section 390 Categorical Exclusions from Fiscal Year 2006
through Fiscal Year 2008 Often Did Not Comply with Either the
Implementing Statute or Agency Guidance
In September 2009, we reported that BLM's field offices used
section 390 categorical exclusions to approve oil and gas activities in
violation of the law and also failed to follow agency guidance.
Specifically, we found six types of violations of the Energy Policy Act
of 2005 and fives types of noncompliance with BLM guidance (see table
1).
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T8267.001

Overall, we found many more examples of noncompliance with
guidance than violations of the law. We did not find intentional
actions on the part of BLM staff to circumvent the law; rather, our
findings reflected what appear to be honest mistakes stemming from
confusion in implementing a new law with evolving guidance.
Nevertheless, even though some of the violations of law--such as
approving multiple wells with one decision document--were technical in
nature, they must be taken seriously. In some instances, violations we
found may have thwarted NEPA's twin aims of ensuring that both BLM and
the public were fully informed of the environmental consequences of
BLM's actions. For example, approval of multiple wells on one or more
well pads could have required an environmental assessment or
environmental impact statement, which would likely have provided
additional information on the environmental impacts of approving
multiple wells. According to BLM officials, the outcome of the NEPA
process likely would have yielded the same result. Nevertheless, the
purpose of NEPA is to provide better information for decision making,
not necessarily to alter the decisions ultimately made. The projects
would likely have been approved, but the specific location and
conditions of approval might have differed, and BLM and the public
might have had more detailed information on the environmental impacts
of the approvals.
A lack of definitive and clear guidance from BLM, as well as lack
of oversight of field offices' actions, contributed to the violations
of law and noncompliance with BLM's existing guidance. At the time of
our report, BLM had provided several key guidance documents; we found,
however, that this guidance did not contain the specificity and
examples needed to clearly direct staff in the appropriate use and
limits of section 390 categorical exclusions. Specifically, BLM's
guidance at the time said little, if anything, about (1) the
documentation needed to support a decision to use a section 390
categorical exclusion or (2) the proper circumstances for using section
390 categorical exclusions to approve modifications to existing APDs
through ``sundry notices.'' Furthermore, BLM headquarters and state
offices we spoke with had generally not provided any oversight or
review of the field offices' actions in using section 390 categorical
exclusions that could have ensured compliance with the law or BLM
guidance.
Lack of Clarity in the Law and in BLM Guidance Raised Serious Concerns
about Section 390 Categorical Exclusions
We reported in September 2009 that the lack of clarity in section
390 of the Energy Policy Act of 2005 and in BLM's implementing guidance
led to serious concerns on the part of industry, environmental groups,
BLM officials, and others about when and how section 390 categorical
exclusions should be used to approve oil and gas development.
Specifically, these concerns included the following:

Key elements of section 390 of the Energy Policy Act
of 2005 were undefined, leading to fundamental questions about
what section 390 categorical exclusions were and how they
should be used. This lack of direction left these elements open
to differing interpretations, debate, and litigation, leading
to serious concerns that BLM was using section 390 categorical
exclusions in too many--or too few--instances. BLM officials,
environmental groups, industry groups, and others raised
serious concerns with the law as a whole. These concerns
related to four key elements: (1) the definition of
``categorical exclusion'' and whether the screening for
extraordinary circumstances was required, (2) whether the use
of section 390 categorical exclusions was mandatory or
discretionary, (3) the meaning of the phrase ``rebuttable
presumption,'' and (4) the level of public disclosure required
for section 390 categorical exclusions.

The law's descriptions of the five types of section
390 categorical exclusions prompted more specific concerns
about how to appropriately use one or more of the five types of
section 390 categorical exclusions. These concerns related to
(1) the adequacy of NEPA documents supporting the use of a
particular section 390 categorical exclusion, (2) consistency
with existing NEPA documents, (3) the rationale for the 5-year
time frame used in some but not all types of section 390
categorical exclusions, and (4) the piecemeal approach to
development fostered by using section 390 categorical
exclusions.

Concerns about how to interpret and apply key terms
that describe the conditions that must be met when using a
section 390 categorical exclusion. In particular, each of the
five types of section 390 categorical exclusions contain
terminology that is undefined in the law and for which BLM had
not provided clear or complete guidance. Specifically, the
ambiguous terms included (1) ``individual surface
disturbances'' under section 390 CX1, (2) ``maintenance of a
minor activity'' under section 390 CX5, (3) ``construction or
major renovation or [sic] a building or facility'' under
section 390 CX5, (4) ``location'' under section 390 CX2, and
(5) ``right-of-way corridor'' under section 390 CX4. Vague or
nonexistent definitions of key terms in the law and BLM
guidance led to varied interpretations among field offices and
concerns about misuse and a lack of transparency.
In September 2009, we reported that the failure of both the law and
BLM guidance to clearly define key conditions that projects must meet
to be eligible for approval with a section 390 categorical exclusion
caused confusion among BLM officials, industry, and the public over
what activities qualified for section 390 categorical exclusions. As a
result, we suggested that Congress consider amending section 390 to
clarify and resolve some of the key issues that we identified,
including but not limited to (1) clearly specifying whether section 390
categorical exclusions apply even in the presence of extraordinary
circumstances and (2) clarifying what the phrase ``rebuttable
presumption'' means and how BLM must implement it in the context of
section 390. In addition, to improve BLM field offices' implementation
of section 390 categorical exclusions, we recommended that BLM take the
following three actions:

issue detailed and explicit guidance addressing the
gaps and shortcomings in its guidance;

provide standardized templates or checklists for each
of the five types of section 390 categorical exclusions, which
would specify, at minimum, what documentation is required to
justify their use; and

develop and implement a plan for overseeing the use
of section 390 categorical exclusions to ensure compliance with
both law and guidance.
BLM Took Actions in Response to Litigation and Our Report, but These
Actions Have Been Affected by a Recent Court Decision
While we were working on our September 2009 report, the exact
meaning of the phrase ``shall be subject to a rebuttable presumption
that the use of a categorical exclusion under the National
Environmental Policy Act of 1969 (NEPA) would apply'' was in dispute in
a lawsuit in federal court. \11\ In Nine Mile Coalition v. Stiewig,
environmental groups sued BLM, alleging that the phrase meant that BLM
was required to avoid using a section 390 categorical exclusion in
approving a project where extraordinary circumstances were present. BLM
settled the case in March 2010, agreeing, among other things, to issue
a new instruction memorandum stating that the agency would not use
section 390 categorical exclusions where extraordinary circumstances
were present.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\11\ Nine Mile Canyon Coalition v. Stiewig, Civ. No. 08-586, D.
Utah (filed August 6,2008).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
In May 2010, BLM issued ``Instruction Memorandum No. 2010-118,''
\12\ which was the first in a series of guidance documents BLM planned
to issue to address the recommendations in our September 2009 report.
BLM's May 2010 instruction memorandum announced several key reforms to
the way BLM staff can use section 390 categorical exclusions. These
reforms substantially addressed the gaps and shortcomings in BLM's
guidance that we identified in our report, directing that, for example,
section 390 CX2 or CX3 no longer be used to approve drilling wells
after the law's allowed 5-year time frame or that section 390 CX3 not
be used to approve drilling a well without sufficient supporting NEPA
documentation. The memorandum explicitly identified the types of NEPA
documents needed to adequately support the use of section 390
categorical exclusions to approve new wells and directed that any
supporting NEPA analysis must be specific to the proposed drilling
site. The memorandum also directs BLM field offices to ensure that all
oil and gas development approved with a section 390 categorical
exclusion conform to the analysis conducted in the supporting land use
plan and come within the range of environmental effects analyzed in the
plan and associated NEPA documents. In addition, the May 2010
instruction memorandum implemented the settlement in Nine Mile
Coalition v. Stiewig by requiring BLM field offices to screen for the
presence of extraordinary circumstances--such as for cumulative impacts
on air quality or critical habitat--whenever considering the use of a
section 390 categorical exclusion.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\12\ Bureau of Land Management, "Instruction Memorandum No. 2010-
118: Energy Policy Act Section 390 Categorical Exclusion Policy
Revision" (May 17, 2010).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
According to BLM officials, the agency developed a second
instruction memorandum in 2011 to address our recommendation that it
standardize templates and checklists its field offices use in approving
each of the five types of section 390 categorical exclusions to
specify, at a minimum, the documentation required to justify their use.
This draft second instruction memorandum was undergoing review by the
department when, on August 12, 2011, a decision was reached in Western
Energy Alliance v. Salazar. \13\ In this case, an oil and gas trade
association sued BLM, alleging, among others, that the agency issued
its May 2010 instruction memorandum without following proper rule-
making procedures and that the instruction memorandum's provision
concerning extraordinary circumstances violated section 390. The court
held that the instruction memorandum constituted a regulation that BLM
adopted without following proper rule-making procedures, and the court
issued a nationwide injunction blocking implementation of the
memorandum. The court did not address whether the instruction
memorandum was consistent with section 390; neither did it address the
meaning of the phrase ``rebuttable presumption'' in section 390.
According to a BLM official, the ruling has prevented BLM from
implementing the parts of the May 2010 instruction memorandum directly
related to extraordinary circumstances and the use of section 390 CX2
and CX3 and also called into question the issuance of the second
instruction memorandum aimed at further addressing our recommendations.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\13\ Civ. No. 10-237F (D. Wyo. 2011).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
In conclusion, it is now uncertain what actions BLM may take in
response to the most recent court decision. These actions could
include, but are not limited to, moving forward and issuing the May
2010 instruction memorandum as a regulation or possibly appealing the
decision.
Chairman Lamborn, Ranking Member Holt, and Members of the
Subcommittee, this completes my prepared statement. I would be pleased
to answer any questions that you may have at this time.
GAO Contacts and Staff Acknowledgments
For further information about this testimony, please contact Mark
Gaffigan or Anu K. Mittal at (202) 512-3841 or
[email protected]
and

[email protected]
, respectively. Contact points for our Offices of
Congressional Relations and Public Affairs may be found on the last
page of this testimony. In addition to the contact named above, Jeffery
D. Malcolm (Assistant Director), Mark A. Braza, Ellen W. Chu, Heather
E. Dowey, Richard P. Johnson, Michael L. Krafve, and Tama R. Weinberg
made key contributions to this testimony.
GAO's Mission
The Government Accountability Office, the audit, evaluation, and
investigative arm of Congress, exists to support Congress in meeting
its constitutional responsibilities and to help improve the performance
and accountability of the federal government for the American people.
GAO examines the use of public funds; evaluates federal programs and
policies; and provides analyses, recommendations, and other assistance
to help Congress make informed oversight, policy, and funding
decisions. GAO's commitment to good government is reflected in its core
values of accountability, integrity, and reliability.
Obtaining Copies of GAO Reports and Testimony
The fastest and easiest way to obtain copies of GAO documents at no
cost is through GAO's Web site (www.gao.gov). Each weekday afternoon,
GAO posts on its Web site newly released reports, testimony, and
correspondence. To have GAO e mail you a list of newly posted products,
go to www.gao.gov and select ``E-mail Updates.''
Order by Phone
The price of each GAO publication reflects GAO's actual cost of
production and distribution and depends on the number of pages in the
publication and whether the publication is printed in color or black
and white. Pricing and ordering information is posted on GAO's Web
site, http://www.gao.gov/ordering.htm.
Place orders by calling (202) 512-6000, toll free (866) 801-7077,
or TDD (202) 512-2537.
Orders may be paid for using American Express, Discover Card,
MasterCard, Visa, check, or money order. Call for additional
information.
To Report Fraud, Waste, and Abuse in Federal Programs
Contact: Web site: www.gao.gov/fraudnet/fraudnet.htm
E-mail:
[email protected]

Automated answering system: (800) 424-5454 or (202) 512-7470
Public Affairs
Chuck Young, Managing Director,
[email protected]
, (202) 512-4800
U.S. Government Accountability Office, 441 G Street NW, Room 7149
Washington, DC 20548
______

GAO Highlights
September 9, 2011
ENERGY POLICY ACT OF 2005
BLM's Use of Section 390 Categorical Exclusions for Oil and Gas
Development
Why GAO Did This Study
The Energy Policy Act of 2005 was enacted in part to expedite
domestic oil and gas development. Section 390 of the act authorized the
Department of the Interior's Bureau of Land Management (BLM) to use
categorical exclusions to streamline the environmental analysis
required under the National Environmental Policy Act of 1969 (NEPA)
when approving certain oil and gas activities. Numerous questions have
been raised about how and when BLM should use these section 390
categorical exclusions. In September 2009, GAO reported on BLM's first
3 years of experience--fiscal years 2006 through 2008--using section
390 categorical exclusions.
This testimony is based on GAO's September 2009 report (GAO-09-872)
and updated with information on court decisions that have been reached
since the report was issued. The testimony focuses on (1) the extent to
which BLM used section 390 categorical exclusions and the benefits, if
any, associated with their use; (2) the extent to which BLM complied
with the Energy Policy Act of 2005 and agency guidance; (3) key
concerns, if any, associated with section 390 categorical exclusions;
and (4) how BLM has responded to GAO's recommendations and other recent
developments. For its September 2009 report, GAO analyzed a
nongeneralizable random sample of 215 section 390 categorical exclusion
decision documents from all BLM field offices that used section 390
categorical exclusions and interviewed agency officials and others.
GAO is making no new recommendations at this time.
What GAO Found
GAO's analysis of BLM field office data showed that section 390
categorical exclusions were used to approve almost 6,900 oil-and-gas-
related activities from fiscal year 2006 through fiscal year 2008.
Nearly 6,100 of these categorical exclusions were used for drilling
permits and the rest for other nondrilling activities. Most BLM
officials GAO spoke with said that section 390 categorical exclusions
increased the efficiency of certain field office operations, but it was
not possible to quantify these benefits.
GAO reported that BLM's use of section 390 categorical exclusions
through fiscal year 2008 often did not comply with either the law or
BLM's guidance. First, GAO found several types of violations of the
law, including approving projects inconsistent with the law's criteria
and drilling a new well after mandated time frames had lapsed. Second,
GAO found numerous examples where officials did not correctly follow
agency guidance, most often by failing to adequately justify the use of
a categorical exclusion. A lack of clear guidance and oversight
contributed to the violations and noncompliance. Many instances of
noncompliance were technical in nature, whereas others were more
significant and may have thwarted NEPA's twin aims of ensuring that BLM
and the public are fully informed of the environmental consequences of
BLM's actions.
In September 2009, GAO reported that a lack of clarity in section
390 and BLM's guidance had caused industry, environmental groups, BLM
officials, and others to raise serious concerns about the use of
section 390 categorical exclusions. First, fundamental questions about
what section 390 categorical exclusions were and how they should be
used led to concerns that BLM might have been using these categorical
exclusions in too many--or too few--instances. Second, specific
concerns were raised about key concepts underlying the law's
description of certain section 390 categorical exclusions. Third, vague
or nonexistent definitions of key terms in the law and BLM guidance
that describe the conditions to be met when using a section 390
categorical exclusion led to varied interpretations among field offices
and concerns about misuse and a lack of transparency. As a result, GAO
suggested that Congress may want to consider amending the act to
clarify section 390, and GAO recommended that BLM clarify its guidance,
standardize decision documents, and ensure compliance through more
oversight. The Department of the Interior concurred with GAO's
recommendations.
In May 2010, in response to a court settlement and GAO's
recommendations, BLM issued a new instruction memorandum substantially
addressing the gaps and shortcomings in BLM's guidance that GAO had
identified. In addition, BLM was developing a second instruction
memorandum to address GAO's recommendation that it standardize decision
documents when, on August 12, 2011, a decision was reached in Western
Energy Alliance v. Salazar. The court held that the May 2010
instruction memorandum constituted a regulation that BLM adopted
without using proper rule-making procedures and issued a nationwide
injunction blocking the memorandum's implementation. According to a BLM
official, the ruling has prevented BLM from implementing key parts of
the memorandum and called into question the issuance of the second
memorandum aimed at further addressing GAO's recommendations.
______

Response to questions submitted for the record by Mark Gaffigan,
Managing Director, Natural Resources and Environment, GAO

Questions for the Record Submitted by Ranking Member Edward J. Markey
Question 1: During the period between now and when the rulemaking is
complete, BLM must now revert to the Bush Administration's 2005
policy on categorical exclusions. What might be the
implications of returning to the Bush Administration's policy?
Will it lead to uncertainty and inconsistency among BLM field
offices regarding the implementation of Section 390?
GAO Response:
In the absence of the clarifying guidance and templates that we
recommended in our September 2009 report,\1\ and in the absence of
clarifying amendments to section 390 of the Energy Policy Act of 2005,
the implementation of section 390 categorical exclusions will likely
continue to raise the same questions and concerns that we identified in
our report. We reported that BLM field offices had frequently
implemented section 390 categorical exclusions in a manner inconsistent
with the law and BLM's 2005 guidance. We recommended that BLM issue
additional guidance and conduct vigilant oversight to ensure that
section 390 categorical exclusions are used appropriately--neither
over- nor under-used.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ GAO, Energy Policy Act of 2005: Greater Clarity Needed to
Address Concerns with Categorical Exclusions for Oil and Gas
Development under Section 390 of the Act, GAO-09-872 (Washington, D.C.:
Sept. 16, 2009).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Question 2: Will going back to the Bush Administration's policy in the
interim lead to the possibility of additional habitat
fragmentation or harm to wildlife?
GAO Response:
The environmental effects of oil and gas development can vary based
on a number of site-specific factors. For example, adding a new well to
an existing well-pad is unlikely to cause additional habitat
fragmentation or harm to wildlife. In contrast, drilling a well in a
new location could possibly lead to additional habitat fragmentation or
harm to wildlife. Going back to BLM's 2005 guidance on the use of
section 390 categorical exclusions, however, may not have a substantive
affect on habitat fragmentation or wildlife because as we reported in
September 2009, according to BLM officials the applications for permit
to drill (APD) not approved using a section 390 categorical exclusion
would likely have been approved under BLM's regular approval process
following the National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA).
Question 3: Could returning to the Bush Administration's Section 390
policy make it more likely that there could be additional
damage to Native American cultural sites throughout the West?
GAO Response:
As stated above, the environmental effects of oil and gas
development can vary based on a number of site-specific factors. An
important factor in this case would be the level of official status or
recognition that a particular Native American cultural site may have,
if any. We reported in September 2009 that BLM guidance directs its
staff when using section 390 categorical exclusions to comply with the
Endangered Species Act and the National Historic Preservation Act; to
conduct on-site reviews for all APDs; and to add site-specific
restrictions or conditions of approval if deemed necessary to protect
the environment or cultural resources. BLM's overturned May 2010
instruction memorandum directed BLM field office staff to screen for
the presence of extraordinary circumstances--such as significant
impacts on (1) such natural resources and unique geographic
characteristics as historic or cultural resources and (2) properties
listed, or eligible for listing, on the National Register of Historic
Places--whenever considering the use of a section 390 categorical
exclusion.\2\ The overturned guidance sought to prevent the use of a
section 390 categorical exclusion when an extraordinary circumstance
was present.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ Bureau of Land Management, ``Instruction Memorandum No. 2010-
118: Energy Policy Act Section 390 Categorical Exclusion Policy
Revision'' (May 17, 2010). On August 12, 2011, in a decision in the
Western Energy Alliance v. Salazar case, the court held that the
instruction memorandum constituted a regulation that BLM adopted
without following proper rule-making procedures, and the court issued a
nationwide injunction blocking implementation of the memorandum. Civ.
No. 10-237F (D. Wyo. 2011).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Question 4: The GAO found that three field offices--the Pinedale,
Wyoming office, the Farmington, New Mexico office, and the
Vernal, Utah office--accounted for almost two-thirds of section
390 categorical exclusions used to approve APDs. In these three
areas, the Environmental Protection Agency found that ground
level ozone levels exceeded EPA air quality standards in these
three areas. Could returning to the Bush Administration's 2005
Section 390 policy lead to adverse air quality impacts where
cumulative impacts are not analyzed?
GAO Response:
Yes. We reported in September 2009 that of the various
extraordinary circumstances, concerns about the cumulative impacts of
additional oil or gas development--especially adverse effects of such
development on air quality--have been among the most widespread and
potentially serious. We reported that environmental groups and
government agencies alike had raised concerns that section 390
categorical exclusions exacerbate air quality problems and threats by
not subjecting projects to screening for extraordinary circumstances
such as cumulative impacts. To the extent that new decisions by BLM to
approve APDs with section 390 categorical exclusions do not consider
cumulative impacts such as air quality, the concerns we cited in our
report would persist. Moreover, as we noted in our report, certain
projects erroneously approved as section 390 categorical exclusions may
have required more rigorous environmental analyses--such as
environmental assessments or environmental impact statements--which
could have assessed the need to mitigate potentially adverse effects on
natural resources like wildlife and air quality. Without the additional
guidance we recommended, the potential for similar errors would
persist.
Question 5: Given the ambiguities in Section 390's statutory language,
would it be important for BLM to develop a consistent policy
that allows for the consideration of extraordinary
circumstances such as the cumulative impacts of drilling?
GAO Response:
We have not taken position on whether the use of section 390
categorical exclusions should be subject to a screening for the
presence of extraordinary circumstances. However, this issue is subject
to interpretation and, as our September 2009 report noted, there are
conflicting interpretations of section 390 of the Energy Policy Act of
2005 with respect to this issue. Furthermore, in our report we
suggested that Congress should consider amending section 390 to clarify
and resolve some of the key issues that we identified in the report,
including, but not limited to, clearly specifying whether section 390
categorical exclusions apply even in the presence of extraordinary
circumstances.
Question 6: Another concern identified by GAO regarding Section 390 was
the large amount of variation among BLM field offices in how
they each implemented this section. Do you think it's important
to standardize the application of Section 390 as part of BLM's
new rule?
GAO Response:
Yes. BLM field offices should be consistently implementing section
390 of the Energy Policy Act of 2005 in accordance with the law and
BLM's internal agency guidance. Specifically, in our September 2009
report, we recommended that BLM

issue detailed and explicit guidance that addresses
the gaps and shortcomings in its guidance;

provide standardized templates or checklists for each
of the five types of section 390 categorical exclusions, which
would specify, at minimum, what documentation is required to
justify their use; and

develop and implement a plan for overseeing the use
of section 390 categorical exclusions to ensure compliance with
both law and guidance.
Question 7: Please explain the problems BLM has had in interpreting
each of the five categorical exclusions contained in Section
390 due to ambiguities in the statutory language of the Act.
GAO Response:
Section 390 of the Energy Policy Act of 2005 authorizes BLM to
forgo environmental assessments and environmental impact statements for
oil and gas projects under certain circumstances. Specifically,
subsection (b) outlines five new categories of activities to be
considered categorical exclusions. These section 390 categorical
exclusions (which we refer to as section 390 CX1, CX2, CX3, CX4, and
CX5) include:
``(1) Individual surface disturbances of less than 5 acres so
long as the total surface disturbance on the lease is not
greater than 150 acres and site-specific analysis in a document
prepared pursuant to NEPA has been previously completed.
(2)  Drilling an oil or gas well at a location or well pad site
at which drilling has occurred previously within 5 years prior
to the date of spudding the well.
(3)  Drilling an oil or gas well within a developed field for
which an approved land use plan or any environmental document
prepared pursuant to NEPA analyzed such drilling as a
reasonably foreseeable activity, so long as such plan or
document was approved within 5 years prior to the date of
spudding the well.
(4)  Placement of a pipeline in an approved right-of-way
corridor, so long as the corridor was approved within 5 years
prior to the date of placement of the pipeline.
(5)  Maintenance of a minor activity, other than any
construction or major renovation or [sic] a building or
facility.''
We reported in September 2009 that the lack of clarity in section
390 of the Energy Policy Act of 2005 and in BLM's implementing guidance
led to serious concerns on the part of industry, environmental groups,
BLM officials, and others about when and how section 390 categorical
exclusions should be used to approve oil and gas development.
Specifically, some of those concerns included the following:

The law's descriptions of the five types of section
390 categorical exclusions prompted concerns about how to
appropriately use one or more of the five types of section 390
categorical exclusions. These concerns related to (1) the
adequacy of NEPA documents supporting the use of a particular
section 390 categorical exclusion, (2) consistency with
existing NEPA documents, (3) the rationale for the 5-year time
frame used in some but not all types of section 390 categorical
exclusions, and (4) the piecemeal approach to development
fostered by using section 390 categorical exclusions.

Concerns about how to interpret and apply key terms
that describe the conditions that must be met when using a
section 390 categorical exclusion. In particular, each of the
five types of section 390 categorical exclusions contain
terminology that is undefined in the law and for which BLM had
not provided clear or complete guidance. Specifically, the
ambiguous terms included (1) ``individual surface
disturbances'' under section 390 CX1, (2) ``maintenance of a
minor activity'' under section 390 CX5, (3) ``construction or
major renovation or [sic] a building or facility'' under
section 390 CX5, (4) ``location'' under section 390 CX2, and
(5) ``right-of-way corridor'' under section 390 CX4. Vague or
nonexistent definitions of key terms in the law and BLM
guidance led to varied interpretations among field offices and
concerns about misuse and a lack of transparency.
Question 8: Please explain the difficulties in enacting Section 390 of
the Energy Policy Act with respect to the phrase ``subject to
rebuttable presumption''? How should a BLM field office decide
whether a rebuttable presumption exists if that office cannot
consider extraordinary circumstances?
GAO Response:
The exact meaning of the phrase ``shall be subject to a rebuttable
presumption that the use of a categorical exclusion under the National
Environmental Policy Act of 1969 (NEPA) would apply'' was in dispute in
a lawsuit in federal court during the preparation of our report.\3\ The
court in the Nine Mile case did not reach a decision on this issue, but
the government still could appeal the ruling. Accordingly we are not in
a position to interpret this language.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ Nine Mile Canyon Coalition v. Stiewig, Civ. No. 08-586, D. Utah
(filed August 6, 2008).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
However, in terms of the ``rebuttable presumption'' language, we
reported in September 2009 that it was unclear what presumption was
rebuttable and how that presumption was to be rebutted. Consequently,
we stated that Congress should consider amending section 390 to clarify
and resolve some of the key issues identified in our report, including,
but not limited to clarifying what the phrase ``rebuttable
presumption'' means and how BLM must implement it in the context of
section 390.
Moreover, in our September 2009 report we noted that the language
in a House version of the bill would have specifically exempted from
additional NEPA analysis activities similar to those meeting the
conditions for a section 390 categorical exclusion--meaning that use of
the new provisions would have been mandatory. The law as enacted,
however, contained no such specific exclusion, and instead included the
rebuttable presumption language.\4\ Whatever this language means, it
certainly differs from the mandatory exemption language that existed in
the House bill.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\ During Senate floor debates on the conference version of the
bill, which ultimately became law, one of the bill's supporters stated
that the bill ``does not include categorical waivers for NEPA for oil
and gas developments.'' 151 Cong. Rec. S9340 (daily ed. July 29, 2005)
(statement of Senator Akaka).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Question 9: During its investigation, GAO discovered that BLM had
actually used Section 390 categorical exclusion over 6,100
times, while BLM believed that it had only used these
exclusions about 5,000 times. Has BLM implemented a system yet
to fully track the uses of these categorical exclusions?
GAO Response:
We are not aware that BLM has implemented such a system.
Question 10: Please explain the benefits of a standardized checklist
for all BLM offices to follow with respect to these categorical
exclusions? Do you believe that BLM could still develop a
standardized checklist on how to use Section 390 exclusions?
GAO Response:
As we stated above in our response for Question 6, we believe BLM
field offices should be consistently implementing section 390 of the
Energy Policy Act of 2005 in accordance with the law and BLM's internal
agency guidance. In our September 2009 report, we recommended that BLM

issue detailed and explicit guidance that addresses
the gaps and shortcomings in its guidance;

provide standardized templates or checklists for each
of the five types of section 390 categorical exclusions, which
would specify, at minimum, what documentation is required to
justify their use; and

develop and implement a plan for overseeing the use
of section 390 categorical exclusions to ensure compliance with
both law and guidance.
We still believe that it is important that BLM continue to pursue
implementing these recommendations.
Question 11: The 2006 BLM guidance did not address the documentation
needed to support the use of a section 390 categorical
exclusion or even whether BLM field offices had to disclose how
often these categorical exclusions were used. What did GAO
recommend with respect to documenting the use of these
categorical exclusions?
GAO Response:
With regard to documenting the use of section 390 categorical
exclusions, we recommended in our September 2009 report that BLM
provide standardized templates or checklists for each of the five types
of section 390 categorical exclusions, which would specify, at a
minimum, what documentation is required to justify their use.
Question 12: GAO also recommended the development of a BLM oversight
plan to ensure compliance with EPACT, NEPA, and agency guidance
documents. Has BLM done this yet?
GAO Response:
As far as we know, BLM has not yet developed an oversight plan as
we recommended in our September 2009 report. As we noted in our
testimony,\5\ BLM was in the process of developing a second instruction
memorandum in 2011 when the court overturned their May 2010 instruction
memorandum. BLM has had to adjust their plans as a result of the August
12, 2011 court decision.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\ GAO, Energy Policy Act of 2005: BLM's Use of Section 390
Categorical Exclusions for Oil and Gas Development, GAO-11-941T
(Washington, D.C.: Sept. 9, 2011).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
______

Mr. Lamborn. Thank you for your testimony. We will now go
to our rounds of questions. And because yet another one of the
Members of the Committee is on a tighter time schedule for
traveling back to the district, I am going to defer to Mr.
Flores and let him go first. So I recognize the gentleman from
Texas.
Mr. Flores. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I will try to get
through as many questions as I can as quickly as I can.
Mr. Coleman, you were I think fairly adamant that the law
was very clear, that the legislative intent and legislative
history of EPAct '05 was very clear. But your friend to the
right of you is saying that it wasn't. Can you guys reconcile
this for me? Mr. Gaffigan, I am going to ask you for your
comments. Why don't you give me your comments first? Mr.
Gaffigan.
Mr. Gaffigan. I think in general when we talked to a lot of
people when we did this study, and we tried to look through the
legislative history, and we are GAO auditors. We are trying to
understand what went behind some of the words that are in
there. A lot of folks are not sure what some of the key terms
in the law referred to. And in searching the legislative
history we couldn't find much evidence of that. I know Mr.
Coleman is pretty clear that he felt it was clear as to what
was intended. And I think that if you talk to some others who
were involved--because he did have some other friends who were
helping him with the legislation, you will probably hear a
different version of what might have been clear.
All we are pointing out is that a lot of folks have raised
this question. It has already been subject to litigation, and
we suspect that it probably will be in the future, no matter
what the outcome of further guidance is.
Mr. Flores. Mr. Coleman.
Mr. Coleman. I appreciate you asking that question. As we
talked, Mr. Gaffigan and I have and others, these issues that
were raised in the GAO report, some of them about lack of
clarity I didn't think were really appropriate. Congress does
not define every term that is in a bill. These have to be
interpreted based on their common usage or experience. The
whole question is--and I go back to the testimony that I gave
earlier, what has been attempted is to read some words into
this bill which were not in there, like extraordinary
circumstances; and read some words out of there that are
clearly in there, like having a categorical exclusion for NEPA
based on a land use plan. That is clearly in there. We have
went over that in great detail.
Frankly, there was only one other person that really
negotiated this. Now I am not sure if she would agree with me
on everything. But that one she would have to agree that we
went over every one of those words. So I know we can't have a
disagreement on that. Every one of these words is what we
intended to be in there. As a lawyer, we have certain rules of
statutory construction that we use to interpret statutes. We do
not have to write all that out. And as I mentioned to others,
at one time the Congress used to have a habit of writing
detailed report language. This is not what we were doing in
EPAct 2005. So we tried to write in terms that were going to be
clearly understood. And I think the people who were against
this law, mostly environmental groups, wanted to raise these
issues to create a problem which didn't really exist.
Mr. Flores. OK. More questions for Mr. Gaffigan. Were there
any substantive problems? It sounds like we had paperwork
problems, inconsistencies. Were there substantive problems?
Mr. Gaffigan. I would say no. Most of them were sort of
technical in nature, but we felt they were serious enough to
point out. As you know, lawsuits can be lost or criminal cases
when they are brought can be lost in terms of a technicality.
So we wanted to make clear that to put us in the best position
of not being vulnerable to challenges that all these things
were important to address.
Mr. Flores. Was NEPA violated at any time?
Mr. Gaffigan. Not in anything that we have found, no.
Mr. Flores. So as far as we know, none of these mistakes or
inconsistencies caused a pollution incident or a loss of life
or damage to property or anything of that nature?
Mr. Gaffigan. Well, there was a challenge and there were
some in the Nine Mile Canyon case that were challenged that
there was a categorical exclusion brought there. Some
environmentalists brought a lawsuit challenging that. And that
is what sort of led to a settlement where BLM came out with
more further detailed guidance.
Mr. Flores. That doesn't answer my questions. Was there any
pollution incident or loss of life or damage or injury or
anything because of the inconsistencies in the way the
paperwork was processed?
Mr. Gaffigan. Not in the paperwork.
Mr. Flores. OK. Ms. Sgamma, your testimony was pretty
compelling to me. And Mr. Chairman, may I have a couple more
minutes?
Mr. Lamborn. Yes. I will recognize myself now, but I will
yield to you.
Mr. Flores. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Ms. Sgamma, you went
through some metrics pretty quickly. You talked about this SWCA
analysis or study. You gave us some numbers, jobs, payrolls,
government revenues, things like that. Can you repeat those
quickly for me?
Ms. Sgamma. Sure. In Wyoming, because of delays to six NEPA
documents, six environmental impact statements, 30,600 jobs
have been prevented, $2.6 billion in labor earnings, and $157
million in annual royalty and tax revenue. And that is just in
Wyoming. If you would like, I can leave that study.
Mr. Flores. OK. And this is just because the
environmentalists felt like there was a missing layer of NEPA
analysis which the law provides that that could be subject to a
categorical exclusion, is that right?
Ms. Sgamma. Well, I was actually bringing up merely to make
the point that NEPA can take a long time. In the case of these
six EISs, they are over 6 years. They are at about the 6-year
mark with no draft in sight. So when we look at categorical
exclusions once that EIS is done, they are a way to enable one
additional layer of redundant NEPA to be avoided. So my point
was that NEPA does, indeed, cost and delays to doing NEPA can
cost time, money, and more importantly, jobs and government
revenue.
Mr. Flores. And to continue on the jobs and government
revenue for a minute. You talked about small businesses and
producers. If they were allowed to continue I guess under the
older rules, the original interpretation of the CXs, that we
could be producing what percentage of our domestic oil and gas
and using what percentage of public lands?
Ms. Sgamma. Well, currently we provide in the West--and by
the West, I mean basically the Rocky Mountain States, not
including California. But just in the Rocky Mountain States, we
are producing 27 percent of the Nation's natural gas, 14
percent of the oil production, and we are disturbing less than
0.1 percentage of public lands. So of the 700 million acres of
Federal mineral estate, there is about, as best we know--
because the last time BLM put out a number was 2007--as best we
know there are about 500,000 acres of actual surface
disturbance and that equates to less than a tenth of a
percentage.
Mr. Flores. OK. And 70,000 jobs is part of that. And what
was the government revenue as well?
Ms. Sgamma. Well, we did our blueprint study which finds
that by 2020, we could produce as much in the West--and I can
leave a copy of that as well--as we import from several nations
such as Saudi Arabia, the Middle East, and Venezuela. And if
government policies don't get in the way, we are able to
produce that by 2020 and create about 70,000 jobs and $58
billion worth of additional investment in the West.
Mr. Flores. And I think the answer to my next question is
obvious, we can do that without any government stimulus, is
that correct?
Ms. Sgamma. That is correct. That is pretty much a
projection that doesn't look at high, medium and low levels of
additional regulations. That is kind of the status quo now. Or
if we can use things like categorical exclusions.
Mr. Flores. Essentially we get government out of the way
and then Main Street America can do its job and create revenues
and grow payrolls and produce more revenues to the Federal
Government?
Ms. Sgamma. Absolutely.
Mr. Flores. As well as State and local governments. Thank
you. That is the end of my question. I yield back to you, Mr.
Lamborn.
Mr. Lamborn. Thank you. We will now start our second round
of questions. And thank you for allowing us to do multiple
rounds of questions. And whoever is here will have that
opportunity. This is such an important topic.
Deputy Director Pool, I would like to go straight to you
because you hold a very important position in the
Administration. And first of all, just a simple, hopefully a
yes or no answer--and I think I know what you are going to say.
The purpose of categorical exclusions are to streamline the
permitting process and expedite American energy production and
job creation. And do you believe that we accomplish this goal
with categorical exclusions?
Mr. Pool. I think generally speaking we do.
Mr. Lamborn. Thank you. Now more specifically, this is a
technical question, and I know you will be able to follow it. I
don't know if everyone will be able to follow it but
nevertheless your answer is critical to this question.
In light of the court's recent ruling that was discussed
earlier and the statement that we heard this morning that BLM
plans to issue a rulemaking process for categorical exclusions,
can you tell us if you intend on putting IM 2010 118--that is
BLM's 2010 policy that includes the extraordinary circumstances
provision and a rewrite of two of the five categorical
exclusion categories and that would reinstate duplicative
regulatory reviews for energy projects, which as we know, the
President said that is one of the things we should guard
against in his speech last night, burdensome regulations. Do
you intend to put this out for notice and comment? Or do you
plan on putting out a policy that complies with Section 390 as
it was originally passed into law in 2005?
Mr. Pool. Chairman, in reference to the two CXs that we had
readdressed in the IM that was rescinded by the courts in
addition to the application of extraordinary circumstances,
those three items will be taken into consideration in terms of
a rulemaking process, and that rulemaking process will involve
public notification and comment.
Mr. Lamborn. So it will be put out for public notice and
comment?
Mr. Pool. That is correct.
Mr. Lamborn. OK. Let me shift to Mr. Bolles. Can you
provide any examples where categorical exclusions enabled your
company to continue development and create jobs that would not
otherwise have been created?
Mr. Bolles. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Yes, as I mentioned in
my testimony, Devon Energy is involved in a field in Wyoming
called Washakie Basin where we have an active drilling program
as well as a production going on there. We have used in the
past categorical exclusions to gain applications for permit to
drill in that field. We had a situation--I think as I mentioned
where we had two what we call fit for purpose rigs, drilling
wells in this basin, and those two rigs were drilling basically
the same amount of footage or wells as seven rigs prior to
these new generation rigs. And so we kind of created an
efficient machine, if you will, of infield drilling within this
particular field. And in order to keep those rigs busy, in
order to keep them--because we are paying $25,000 to $30,000 a
day to keep these rigs busy, whether they are working or
whether they are not, that alone equates to a number of jobs.
Not just Devon employees but jobs, the local welder, the road
grader, the local restaurants that are all helping to provide
services to all of these people. We had to at one point--at
least part of the reason for us to eliminate the use of one of
those rigs on these particular lands in Carbon County, Wyoming
was related to the BLM's decision to not grant APDs using
categorical exclusions. Obviously part of the reason was also
the price of natural gas declined. But that rig has moved on,
and it is currently working on fee lands in another part of
Wyoming and soon will be not employed by Devon any longer.
Mr. Lamborn. OK. Thank you.
Mr. Gaffigan, in your written testimony you say that in
some cases, ``BLM was overly cautious in applying Section 390
categorical exclusions in part because BLM feared litigation
from environmental groups.'' Could you elaborate on that,
please?
Mr. Gaffigan. Well, I think, again, because of some of the
uncertainty in the language of both the law and their guidance,
if they could see a situation where they could approve an APD
without using a categorical exclusion they would go that route
rather than jeopardize potential challenge under the
uncertainty associated with categorical exclusions. I think
that is the basic mindset that they were going through.
Mr. Lamborn. OK. Thank you. I would now recognize the
gentleman from California, Mr. Costa, the former Chairman of
this Subcommittee in the previous Congress, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Costa. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. Thank you for
holding today's hearing, as we try to deal with the host of
challenges on increasing our opportunities for energy
development of all kinds, as we use all the energy tools in our
energy toolbox. It is our proposal to discuss the impacts of
the regulatory framework that is involved in our energy policy
in total because there is a very important hand-in-glove, I
think, relationship there.
Let me first ask Mark Gaffigan, in yesterday's Natural
Resources Committee hearing on jobs and offshore energy
development, I learned of Scott Mitchell's comments from Wood
McKenzie, who mentioned that slowing activities in drilling
comes at great cost. Now we know if we look at the last 11-year
cycle from drilling domestically to a decrease in the mid part
of the last decade to what has been a very rapid increase in
the last 2 years that these changes--and from those changes,
you could draw examples. But he talked about the Gulf of Mexico
that showed that if permitting paces were restored to the
prelevel Macondo levels, the estimation is it would create an
additional 200,000-plus jobs in 2012, or $8.4 million. And I am
not sure that number is correct. When we look at the royalty
structure, it must be billion, I would think and roughly
additional significant revenues to States. What is your
assessment, Mr. Gaffigan, of jobs that might be recovered if
the Administration were to again use categorical exclusions?
Mr. Gaffigan. You know it is very difficult to quantify
that. But there is no doubt there has always been a boom and
bust cycle in oil and gas development. And there have always
been a lot of reasons for why development--as far as
categorical exclusions go, in our work, we did see some
benefit. We focused on the permitting process in the offices. I
think what is hard to quantify is what would have happened if
the categorical exclusion were----
Mr. Costa. Let me ask the question this way then, because I
think you ought to provide the Committee with a detailed
response, notwithstanding the various circumstances. We would
like to have that. I think I would like to have that. With the
President's desire, both last night and in previous statements
that have been made by both he and the Secretary, are you going
to focus on removing various regulatory burdens? And do they
include categorical exemptions as a part of that consideration?
Mr. Gaffigan. At GAO, I don't think we are going to be
making any decisions.
Mr. Costa. No, I know that. I would like the Administration
to--Mr. Pool, you are representing the Administration?
Mr. Pool. Yes, sir, I am.
Mr. Costa. And that question was noted more appropriately
placed toward you.
Mr. Pool. Sure. Thank you. Well, let me just add that BLM
has used categorical exclusions for many, many years. We use
about 80 administrative CXs that cover, you know, nine BLM
program areas which also includes other aspects of oil and gas
and geothermal development. We think the CXs are a valuable
tool in terms of managing land surface activities.
Mr. Costa. You are saying in contrary that you think the
use of categorical exclusions has added significant delays to
leasing lands in intermountain West?
Mr. Pool. I don't think it has added significant delays. I
think that--some of the challenges we have in various provinces
of the West depends on the environmental considerations that
are being addressed through NEPA. Many of these planned well
developments on a much larger scale does require more extensive
NEPA evaluation.
Mr. Costa. My time is running out. I want to ask this same
question to the other witnesses here. So you are going to do it
on a case-by-case basis? How are you going to approach
regulatory reform in this instance?
Mr. Pool. I think that the leasing reforms that have been
initiated by this Administration, as previously mentioned in
the early part of this hearing, that prior to the leasing
reforms, many of our oil and gas leases were being protested,
appealed, or litigated, as high as 50 percent. It wasn't
serving the public interest. It wasn't serving industry's
interest. So as a result of leasing reforms, we are up front,
the BLM, in cooperation with industry and the conservation
community and State and local governments, were spending more
time in evaluating landscapes such that when we offer them for
lease that we receive fewer protests. And prior to the leasing
reform, our protests were as high as 50 percent bureau-wide.
Mr. Costa. And so how much have they been reduced?
Mr. Pool. We think they have been reduced down to 12 to 14
percent, and that is because of the quality up front work.
Mr. Costa. Could you provide the Subcommittee with that
information, please?
Mr. Pool. Yes. I would be a glad to.
Mr. Costa. My time has expired. Mr. Chairman, I don't know
if you think it is warranted but whether or not the private
sector participation here would want to respond to----
Mr. Lamborn. We will have a second round of questions,
another round of questions.
I would like to ask either Ms. Sgamma or Mr. Coleman, if
BLM issues IM 2010 118 that we discussed earlier for public
comment, do you feel that that would be in compliance with the
recent court ruling? Either one of you.
Ms. Sgamma. Well, I believe that Mr. Pool said just now
that they would not just simply turn around and issue 118 for
comments but actually consider the judge's ruling as far and
that rewrite of the two CXs. So it didn't sound, if I was
understanding Mr. Pool correctly, that they are just going to
turn around and issue that 118 for public comment. Well, we
would have a problem with that. If you looked at the judge's
ruling--and although she didn't rule on the merits
specifically, she did say that there was not a direct path from
the statute to the regulation that was put out--that 2010 118.
So I thought Mr. Pool's answer was encouraging, that they are
not just going to turn around and issue that.
Mr. Lamborn. Mr. Pool, was that a correct understanding?
Mr. Pool. That is a correct understanding. And in fact that
directive has been vacated and currently we have gone back to
the standards in our NEPA handbook of 2008. And based on the
judge's decision, we will reconsider some of the areas that we
readdressed in that directive, including two of the CX
modifications in addition to the review of extraordinary
circumstances in a rulemaking, and that will be designed for
public notice and comment.
Mr. Lamborn. OK. Thank you. And Mr. Coleman.
Mr. Coleman. I think that is what it calls for. Hopefully
BLM will have an open mind on these now, particularly in view
of the legal issues of changing their interpretation of the
statute. They had had a pretty clear interpretation early on of
what this statute said and then they did an about-face that has
real legal problems with doing that. So I hope they will go
back to the previous version and work from there.
Mr. Lamborn. Thank you. And Ms. Sgamma, I have another
question for you. As you have heard discussed to date, BLM
offices are sometimes hesitant to use categorical exclusions--
this is what we heard from the GAO--due to a fear of litigation
by environmental groups. Is this fear of environmental
litigation something that your members are often faced with
when developing energy projects?
Ms. Sgamma. Absolutely. There are several points at which
an energy project can be litigated. And we face litigation at
almost any one of those points, at the R&D stage, at the
leasing stage. There are protests at the project stage,
project-level NEPA and even sometimes at the APD level, the
permit level. So that certainly is a valid concern.
However, I sometimes think that the interpretation of
Interior on the validity of some of these suits is unwarranted.
A lot of times we see environmental lawsuits that are cut-and-
paste from one to the next, cut-and-paste language that doesn't
apply or that case law clearly supports the BLM's decision. So
often we would wish that BLM would stand up for their decisions
that they make rather than continuing to delay making those
decisions in the hopes of bulletproofing every decision that
they make.
For example, what we are seeing now with all those jobs
being delayed in Wyoming, for example, because of delays to
NEPA, we are seeing BLM take a long time because they are
trying to--they are almost practicing preventive medicine. They
are trying to bulletproof their decisions so that they don't
get sued.
Well, they are going to get sued because there is a group
out there that is going to sue them no matter how frivolous the
lawsuit or how specious the grounds or how shaky the grounds.
So case law does support responsible oil and gas
development on public lands. For example, the categorical
exclusions. So we would just hope that we could get on, move
on, and not let that litigation bog down the entire process.
Mr. Lamborn. Thank you. Mr. Coleman?
Mr. Coleman. Mr. Chairman, I just wanted to add that one of
the reasons that the committee was interested in doing the
statutory categorical exclusions was, with the administrative
categorical exclusions, which BLM has talked about how they
have used for such a long time for various things, you still
get to litigate that. What you do is, you litigate whether or
not that extraordinary circumstances document. You do an
extraordinary circumstances review. And the environmentalists
litigate whether that has done an adequate look of whether
there were extraordinary circumstances. That is one of the
reasons the Congress wanted to pass a statutory categorical
exclusion, so we did not have these extraordinary circumstances
review lawsuits.
Mr. Lamborn. All right. Thank you. I would like to
recognize the gentleman from California for up to 5 minutes.
Mr. Costa. I don't think I will take that long, but maybe
the witnesses might in their response. The question that I
asked earlier to the private sector participants, I would like
the three of you to give me your take on whether or not you
think the exclusion of the use of categorical exclusions adds
significant delays to interleasing mountains and I guess,
Kathleen, you just spoke of that in your last response as an
example. Obviously you have a lot of real hands-on experience
on this kind of stuff.
And I concur with your comment. There is a group out there
in many instances that will sue as a pro forma because it is
part of the agenda that they have and their philosophy. And I
think we should do due diligence to make all of our permitting
process as bulletproof as possible and obey the law and protect
the environment in that process. But clearly that is not going
to prevent folks who just don't believe we ought to be using
public lands in this fashion from suing.
So would you please, the three of you, respond on the
categorical exclusions. How much do they add in delays, if they
do?
Ms. Sgamma. Do you mean how much is not using them adding
to delays?
Mr. Costa. Right.
Ms. Sgamma. Well, I mean we have put together several
instances where companies clearly met the criteria in one or
more of the criteria in Section 390. And rather than using it,
a CX, the BLM, the field office said, no, go ahead and do an
EA, an environmental assessment. And sometimes that can take a
couple of years. I mean usually an EA for a couple of wells
doesn't take that long or shouldn't take that long, but there
are cases where it can take years. And so time is money. And
what happens also is you might have to lay down a rig. You
might not be able to go and create jobs, about 125 per rig
running, if you have to lay down that rig because you can't get
a permit.
But I guess Randy has probably some better examples.
Mr. Bolles. Yes, sir. I think I mentioned before that in
this particular--I am just using it as an example--this
particular field in Wyoming in Washakie Basin, where we had a
situation where we utilized--or BLM approved applications for
permit to drill utilizing categorical exclusions. That
particular area called the Washakie Basin is under an extensive
EIS review right now, environmental impact statement, that
began in 2004 for Devon. And to date--what are we, September of
2011--we still don't have a draft document.
Mr. Costa. Are there some distinctions here--and this is
way out of my realm here--but between natural gas fields and
oil fields in some of the areas? I know in Colorado we rely
heavily on California on a lot of our natural gas because of
our air quality issues. It is the energy de jure. Is it more
problematic in some instances versus others?
Mr. Bolles. I am not sure I understand your question, sir.
Mr. Costa. With pursuing these efforts in natural gas
fields versus oil, are the delays--are they the same, I guess,
is what I am trying to get to.
Mr. Bolles. I think there are different instances or
different issues in developing oil versus developing gas. And
in the particular situation I am talking about, it is actually
a development of both. It is oil and gas coming from the same
stream. So I don't know that it makes any difference whether it
is oil or gas. The NEPA work is done on Federal lands, whether
they are oil fields or gas fields.
Mr. Costa. So the delays--the bottom line--relate to months
and years?
Mr. Bolles. Yes, sir. I was going to give the example of
this particular environmental impact statement. We don't have a
draft document. It is almost 8 years. It worked well for a
company like Devon who used categorical exclusions to be able
to continue to develop that field and drill--it is an infield
drilling project where we are drilling--maybe we had six wells
in a particular section and we needed to drill three or four
more wells in order to--our reservoir engineers had determined
that would fully drain that particular reservoir in that
particular area. In order for us to do that, we were able to
use categorical exclusions to get permits to drill those
additional three wells inside of this field. And that allowed
us to have--and we had less surface disturbance because
technology allowed us to drill off of one pad instead of three
or four different pads. So those delays--I guess that is an
example of----
Mr. Costa. Yeah. It doesn't make any sense.
Mr. Bolles. Right.
Mr. Coleman. And I would just add, Congressman, that just
as a fundamental matter of how the litigation takes place,
frankly, we normally don't get--we should not get a litigation
on the statutory--and we do have some. But we did not have a
lot of litigation on these statutory categorical exclusions,
yet we do on these regulatory ones because, as I said earlier,
that delays things--the regulatory ones do--because you get to
litigate whether or not that extraordinary circumstance review
has been done properly. And certainly if you do an EA, if you
are forced to do an EA, then that takes a whole lot longer from
an administrative processing point of view before you get your
permits.
Mr. Costa. Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Lamborn. OK. I will now recognize myself.
Mr. Pool, earlier this year Director Bob Abbey and
Secretary Ken Salazar announced that BLM would be increasing
oil and gas permits by 44 percent this year to 7,200 from 5,000
in 2010. Is BLM on track to meet that goal for Fiscal Year
2011?
Mr. Pool. Are we talking about applications for permit to
drill?
Mr. Lamborn. Yes.
Mr. Pool. Yeah. Currently we have issued APDs approved from
7/10 to 6/30 of 2011 is around 4,156. So we are a little bit
shy of that goal. But I also might add that we have issued
7,000 APDs that have yet to be drilled, and we have been able
to really address some of our backlog situation. We only have
680 plus APDs from backlog status, and most of those reside in
Utah. They are a planned development scale involving maybe
several hundred wells. The same may hold true in Colorado. But
I just want to point out that there have been 7,000 APDs that
have yet to be drilled.
Mr. Lamborn. Thank you. Mr. Gaffigan, the GAO's categorical
exclusion report discussed concerns with CXs from an
environmental standpoint only. Why didn't GAO address the lack
of utilization of CXs and the impact on jobs and the economy?
Mr. Gaffigan. In terms of our objectives as far as benefits
go, we try to address the benefits of actually using those for
BLM's use of the categorical exclusions. And we did talk about
the benefits of reduced time and efficiency that the BLM
offices were achieving through their use of categorical
exclusions.
Mr. Lamborn. OK. Mr. Coleman, do you have any theories why
BLM would not make greater use of categorical exclusions and
thereby stand in the way of more job and revenue creation?
Mr. Coleman. Mr. Chairman, I don't know what would go
through individual BLM office directors' minds on this. I find
it very curious that you had various offices that made
extensive use of these statutory categorical exclusions and
others who didn't do anything with them. It points out a
problem that I have had with BLM of not really having good
strong central management sometimes to make sure that you have
proper implementation across BLM of policies. I will say again,
as I said in my testimony, the use of these categorical
exclusions is not optional. And yet it should have been made
mandatory by oversight from BLM management to make sure that
the agency was implementing this across the board as it should
have been.
Mr. Lamborn. OK. And Ms. Sgamma, in your testimony, you
discussed the redundant and overlapping environmental analysis
that categorical exclusions are supposed to eliminate.
Can you elaborate on the usual NEPA process and how CXs
streamline the process and do you have an approximation of time
saved in the permitting process when they are used versus when
they are not used?
Ms. Sgamma. It is hard to give specific statistics on time
saved because often a company doesn't even know whether an APD
was approved under a categorical exclusion or not. We have
members telling us about instances where they know they have
met the criteria and didn't get a CX because they were asked to
do an EA. So I mean I have some anecdotal evidence but it is
hard to get at the specific time saved. I actually haven't seen
categorical exclusion numbers in a couple of years now. So I
don't even know how many have been issued in the last couple of
years, and I am hoping that BLM will issue those numbers soon.
But I am sorry, Chairman, I don't have a specific date on that.
Mr. Lamborn. OK. Thank you. And Ms. Sgamma, you I believe
live in Colorado, and so you are familiar with along the Front
Range where there is more development, private residential
development, when there is oil and gas exploration or
development, there can be friction between the surface owner
and the mineral rights owner. And the more densely populated an
area, that is more of an issue, especially when we are talking
about private lands versus public lands.
Is it a fair statement to say that the less that public
lands are able to be used for oil and gas development, that
puts more pressure on the need to find private land places for
development, hence increasing the friction between the surface
owners and the mineral rights owners?
Ms. Sgamma. What happens with companies when they can't get
permits from the BLM but they can get a State permit in about
30 days versus up to years in some cases from the BLM. Often
companies will go to adjacent private or State lands. So often
adjacent private and State lands see more development than
public lands because the process is just more burdensome on
Federal lands. If you look at areas--you mentioned the Front
Range, Congressman. You look at, for example, the Niobrara in
Colorado and Wyoming. I don't think we would be seeing the
production and the job creation there in eastern Colorado as
much if that had been primarily public lands. I think we are
seeing more development today because most of that is private
lands. So it does enable us to develop oil in this case much
faster than if it were on public lands, just like the Bakken in
North Dakota. That is primarily private lands. We weren't able
to develop that area, nor the Niobrara even just 5 years ago.
And we are able to explore and develop and produce that and
increase American oil production in such a quick and timely
fashion because that has been primarily on private lands.
Mr. Lamborn. All right. Thank you. And then as we wrap up
here, do any of you have any comments that you want to make as
we conclude here based on what anyone else has said or you
think is needed to complete the record for our hearing today?
And I will open this up to any one of the five of you.
Ms. Sgamma. I would just like to make one correction from
something that was said earlier by a Member. And that is that
incorrectly stated that we are developing on less than 30
percent of the leases. That is incorrect information. In March
of this year, Interior did a leasing utilization report and
they found that in fact companies are producing on 43 percent
of the Federal leases, not less than 30 percent, as was said
earlier. And that equates to about--of the 38 million acres
currently under lease about 16 million are in production. And
we continue to hear the old numbers on that which are just
false. So I am just hoping that those corrections can be made.
Mr. Lamborn. OK. Thank you. Anyone else before we conclude?
Mr. Coleman.
Mr. Coleman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And I want to say, I
congratulate you on having this hearing. I want to reiterate,
if NEPA is trivialized by continuing to have to have
environmental assessments over very minor activities and minor
impacts, then you will just bog everything down. And that is
not what NEPA was intended to do. It is supposed to focus on
the potential for significant impacts. And we felt very
strongly when we were working on this legislation that these
were categories that did not have that kind of risk of having
significant impacts and something that the Congress could do on
its own, not wait on an Administration, any Administration. You
could clarify these things because we knew that these things
would not have significant impacts. So otherwise you risk
trivializing NEPA and bogging everything down in litigation.
Mr. Lamborn. OK. Thank you. Any final comments? Mr. Pool,
Mr. Bolles, or Mr. Gaffigan? If not, thank you all for being
here. This has been a very important subject. I appreciate your
travel and your time here.
I would note that it is about 12:35. Had we not had our 80-
minute delay for voting--we started at 10:00. We would have
been done by, I think, 11:15. So it is spread out longer than
we had to, but we were only here apparently about 80 minutes or
so. Thank you very much for your testimony. And if there is no
other business to come before the Subcommittee, seeing none, we
will be adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 12:38 p.m., the Subcommittee was adjourned.]

[Additional material submitted for the record follows:]

Response to questions submitted for the record
by BLM Deputy Director Mike Pool

Questions submitted by Chairman Doug Lamborn (CO)
1.  Deputy Director Pool, BLM has, in the past, made significant
modifications to administrative requirements to which oil and
natural gas operators on public lands are subject, without
recourse to formal rulemaking processes with provision for
notice and comment. This was the case with IM 2010-117,
describing revisions to BLM land use planning and lease parcel
reviews, and with IM 2010-118, describing revisions to BLM
policy regarding use of EPAct05 Section 390 Categorical
Exclusions. Please explain the agency's rationale for pursuing
this course of action. How does the agency make a distinction
between subject matter that merits an administrative rulemaking
process, and subject matter that may be addressed by internal
guidance to agency staff in the form of an instructional
memorandum.
Response to 1:
The BLM engages in rulemaking when it is imposing a requirement or
revising a requirement previously imposed, that confers a new privilege
or duty upon a member of the public. In general, an instruction
memorandum is used to direct BLM employees how to perform their program
work, as in this case NEPA analysis, or to provide clarification and
interpretation of existing regulations.
2.  Deputy Director Pool, the purpose of categorical exclusions are to
streamline the permitting process and expedite American energy
production and job creation. Do you believe that categorical
exclusions accomplish this goal?
Response to 2:
Certain actions are categorically excluded from NEPA review because
the class of actions has been determined to typically not raise the
potential for significant environmental impacts. Categorical exclusions
can, when appropriately applied to a specific proposed action, provide
an efficient tool to reduce paperwork and potential delay by
eliminating the BLM's need to conduct and prepare further, more
detailed, environmental analysis and documentation--EA/FONSIs or EISs--
to support the authorization of specific Federal activities. This tool
is used by the local office where appropriate and where it makes sense.
BLM line managers have the best information to make decisions that
match the appropriate level of NEPA review for a proposed activity to
the conditions on the ground.
Some BLM field offices have made use of Section 390 CXs more than
others. The differences stem from a variety of factors and
circumstances, such as whether an office has recently completed any
site-specific NEPA documentation, the level of confidence the
authorized officer has in using a Section 390 CX, and the level of
understanding the resource specialist has about the environmental
sensitivity in the area where the project would take place. While a
particular use of a Section 390 CX does not, in most cases, save
substantial time, the cumulative time savings from processing multiple
actions with Section 390 CXs can be significant.
3.  Deputy Director Pool, despite the fact that the GAO report on
categorical exclusions did not recommend their elimination, but
instead recommended simply that clarification be provided on
how they would be used. Why did BLM then choose to essentially
eliminate of the use of categorical exclusions?
Response to 3:
The BLM's Section 390 CX reform policy did not eliminate the
agency's ability to use the Section 390 CXs. The policy made the
process for using Section 390 CXs consistent with the agency's existing
environmental review process for using administrative CXs, including
the need to conduct a review for extraordinary circumstances. If
extraordinary circumstances associated with an action are identified,
there is an indication that this particular proposed action could raise
significant environmental impacts and therefore it is not appropriate
to use an administrative categorical exclusion and further NEPA review,
either an Environmental Assessment or and Environmental Impact
Statement, is required. The BLM's policy to review the potential for
significant impacts based on the site and project specific
circumstances before proceeding with the Section 390 CX, aligned the
use of Section 390 CX with all other BLM CXs, was supported by the
Council on Environmental Quality and was responsive to a legal
challenge, concerns raised by members of Congress, and information
identified in the GAO's report which recommended that the BLM issue
detailed and explicit guidance that addresses the gaps and shortcomings
in its Section 390 guidance.
As part of BLM's multiple-use mission, the BLM seeks to protect all
resource values as it administers the development of domestic energy
resources such as oil and gas on public lands. This is achieved, in
part, by ensuring that adequate reviews are conducted before
authorizing oil and gas development activities, including the
identification of appropriate mitigation measures. Environmental
analysis documents associated with land use plans do not generally
include an analysis that adequately evaluates the effects of specific
oil and gas development proposals.
For these reasons, the BLM issued a policy in 2010 that required a
review of extraordinary circumstances to help ensure impacts that may
be significant were adequately evaluated before authorizing the
development of federal oil and gas resources.
4.  Deputy Director Pool, as I'm sure you know, the Administration used
categorical exclusions over 179,000 times to advance the
progress of taxpayer funded stimulus projects. Can you please
explain to the Committee why the Administration found
categorical exclusions acceptable to use for stimulus projects,
but categorical exclusions were not acceptable for oil and gas
projects that have previously gone through extensive
environmental reviews?
Response to 4:
The Department of the Interior and the BLM are able to
categorically exclude some types of activities (most of which are
unrelated to federal oil and gas development) from the preparation of
an environmental analysis document. Stimulus projects covered a wide
array of activities that fit into one or more of the categories that
could qualify for an administrative categorical exclusion. All
categorical exclusions used for an American Recovery and Reinvestment
Act (ARRA) project were reviewed for extraordinary circumstances, and
in the absence of extraordinary circumstances the project proceeded
based on the CX. The range of categorical exclusions used for ARRA
projects was much broader than the five types of narrowly defined oil
and gas activities that may be categorically excluded by a Section 390
CX. Also, criteria used to identify projects appropriate for stimulus
funding included the need for proposed projects to be ``shovel ready.''
Essentially these projects were prescreened to determine if they raised
potentially significant environmental concerns and would therefore
merit additional, more extensive environmental analysis, before they
could be undertaken. Most projects that had a potential for significant
environmental issues were not selected for stimulus funding in the
first place.
5.  Deputy Director Pool, can you explain whether the agency's
experience with implementation of the Energy Leasing Reforms
indicates staffing and budget are adequate at Field, District
and State Offices to execute the new Reform plan and to fulfill
other agency mandates.
Response to 5:
The Secretary's oil and gas reforms, announced in 2010, establish a
more orderly, open, consistent, and environmentally sound process for
developing oil and gas resources on public lands. The BLM continues to
implement these key policy changes that include an upfront investment
in site visits, environmental documentation, and public participation.
This has strengthened the BLM's ability to document its decision-making
process. Initial indications are that protests for oil and gas leasing
are decreasing but not eliminated. We continue to create these and
other efficiencies.
In these times of increasing fiscal constraint, the BLM is
initiating its reforms within current budgets to the extent practical
by adjusting program funding and priorities. The BLM is committed to
doing its part to implement these policy changes within appropriated
funding levels for 2012.
a.  Are backlogs developing in BLM Offices with respect to required
pre-lease or leasing actions, with respect to issuance of
permits, or with respect to other agency actions?
Response to 5a:
No. The BLM issued 2,188 leases during fiscal year (FY) 2011. This
is 116 more than were issued in FY 2009 and 880 more than were issued
in FY 2010. Using the Leasing Reform Policy, the BLM continues to
process expressions of interest and issue leases in areas where oil and
gas development is appropriate. At the end of FY 2011, there were more
than 7,000 APDs approved for operations on BLM and tribal lands, but
not yet drilled by industry. At the end of FY 2011, there were 730 APDs
pending longer than 30 days for a BLM decision to approve or deny the
application.
b.  What are the potential impacts of these backlogs to the public
lands and resources, and how and when will these backlogs be
eliminated?
Response to 5b:
With over 7,000 APDs approved, but not yet drilled, opportunities
remain to develop resources on the public lands. Nonetheless, the BLM
continued to process more applications for permit to drill than had
been received during the year, thereby continuing to reduce the number
of pending applications, including those that are in ``backlog''
status.
c.  Do you believe that using categorical exclusions would be a
sufficient way to eliminate some of these backlogs?
Response to 5c:
There are a variety of options the BLM utilizes to fulfill its NEPA
requirements. The Section 390 CXs are one of those options that are
beneficial in circumstances where they are applicable. However, in
order to use a Section 390 CX, activities must meet the particular
criteria of a given category, such as proposing to drill a new well on
an existing well pad or proposing surface disturbance that is no
greater than 5 acres.
The design features of projects to develop federal oil and gas
resources are not driven by the criteria associated with the Section
390 CXs. Therefore, not all proposals to develop federal oil and gas
resources fall within the criteria of the Section 390 CXs. For example,
many proposals do not entail drilling a new well on an existing well
pad or disturbing less than 5 surface acres and, therefore, do not
qualify for a Section 390 CX. Compliance with NEPA would need to be
accomplished through other means, such as the preparation of an
Environmental Assessment and Finding of No Significant Impact (EA/
FONSI) or an EIS as appropriate.
6.  Deputy Director Pool, can you please provide the Committee with a
full set of numbers of categorical exclusions (CX) issued by
field office and state beginning with 2006 when the statutory
CXs were first implemented through the end of fiscal year 2011?
This includes, for each field office, total CXs used by type
(#1, #2, #3, #4, and #5), total APDs approved, the percentage
of total CXs used, and total APD's approved.
Response to 6:
The data presented in the table below is from periodic data
requests that did not always coincide with a fiscal year, is not
maintained in a database that can be queried or manipulated, and is
complete through June 30, 2011. The table summarizes the number of
categorical exclusions (CXs) issued by each field office and state
beginning with FY 2006 through June 30, 2011 to approve APDs. The
percentage of total Section 390 CXs used to approve APDs is calculated
using the sum of approvals that relied on CX#1 (individual surface
disturbance less than five acres), CX#2 (drilling at a location at
which drilling has previously occurred within the last five years), and
CX#3 (drilling in a developed field for which an environmental
document, approved within the last five years, analyzed drilling as a
reasonably foreseeable activity). This is because these three CXs are
the only CXs that may be used to support the BLM's APD approval.
Section 390 CX#4 (placement of a pipeline within a right of way
corridor approved within the last five years) and CX#5 (maintenance of
a minor activity) may be used to support the approval of other
authorizations provided for under the Mineral Leasing Act (MLA), such
as MLA Rights-of-Way (ROW) and Sundry Notices (SN).

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T8267.003

Questions submitted by Ranking Member Edward J. Markey
1.  Can you please explain how the 2010 policy guidance issued by the
Obama Administration addressed some of the problems with the
Bush Administration's policy for implementing the categorical
exclusions for some oil and gas permits under Section 390?
Response to 1:
As part of BLM's multiple-use mission, the BLM seeks to protect all
resource values as it administers the development of oil and gas
resources on public lands. This is achieved, in part, by ensuring that
adequate NEPA reviews are conducted prior to authorizing oil and gas
development activities, and appropriate mitigation measures are
identified. Environmental analysis documents associated with land use
plans cover broad areas and do not generally include an analysis that
adequately evaluates the effects of site-specific oil and gas
development proposals.
The BLM's policy to review the potential for significant impacts
based on the site and project specific circumstances before proceeding
with the Section 390 CX, aligned the use of Section 390 CX with all
other BLM CXs, was supported by the Council on Environmental Quality
and was responsive to a legal challenge, concerns raised by members of
Congress, and information identified in the GAO's report which
recommended that the BLM issue detailed and explicit guidance that
addresses the gaps and shortcomings in its former Section 390 guidance.
For these reasons, the BLM issued a new policy that requires a review
of extraordinary circumstances to help ensure impacts that may be
significant are adequately evaluated before authorizing the development
of federal oil and gas resources.
2.  The BLM announced on September 9th that it would be moving forward
with a formal rulemaking. However, given the August 12 court
decision, it is my understanding that the BLM will be operating
under the Bush administration's policy for Section 390
categorical exclusions, while the rulemaking is ongoing. How
will BLM operations in its field offices during the period
between now and when the rulemaking is completed?
Response to 2:
On August 19, the BLM complied with the Court's Order to stop using
the Section 390 CX guidance in Instruction Memorandum (IM) 2010-118 to
the extent it limited the application of Section 390 CXs in specific
ways. The BLM directed its field offices to resume following the
guidance outlined in the 2008 BLM NEPA Handbook when considering the
application of Section 390 CXs. This includes:

Documenting, and incorporating into the well file or
case file, the decision-maker's rationale as to why one or more
Energy Policy Act CXs apply;

Not conducting a review for extraordinary
circumstances when considering the use of a Section 390 CX; and

Clarifying that other procedural requirements still
apply, such as consultation under the Endangered Species Act
and National Historic Preservation Act.
It is still the BLM's policy to maintain a structured, multi- or
interdisciplinary permit review and approval process, conduct onsite
exams for 100 percent of proposed well and road locations, comply with
other procedural requirements required by other environmental statutes,
such as the National Historic Preservation Act and the Endangered
Species Act, and apply appropriate mitigation and BMPs to all permitted
actions even when using a Section 390 CX.
3.  Your testimony states that BLM plans to initiate rulemaking in
``the near term.'' How quickly do you anticipate BLM being able
to begin the rulemaking process and how quickly do you
anticipate finalizing the rulemaking?
Response to 3:
When the BLM determines how best to address the Court's order and
implement Section 390 of the Energy Policy Act of 2005 (EPAct), it will
initiate a rulemaking effort. The BLM expects the rulemaking process to
take approximately 18 months.
4.  The GAO has found that the implementation of the Bush
Administration's policy was inconsistent amongst BLM offices
and documented harm to air quality and wildlife habitat as a
result of over-use of these exclusions. Will returning to the
Bush Administration's policy while the rulemaking process is
ongoing lead to the same problems?
Response to 4:
The BLM's policy is still to maintain a structured, multi- or
interdisciplinary permit review and approval process, conduct onsite
exams for 100 percent of proposed well and road locations, comply with
other procedural requirements required by other statutes, such as the
Federal Land Policy and Management Act, Clean Air Act, Clean Water Act,
and Endangered Species Act, and apply appropriate mitigation and BMPs
to all permitted actions even when using a Section 390 CX.
The BLM's interim direction is to follow the guidance outlined in
the 2008 BLM NEPA Handbook when considering the application of Section
390 CXs. .
5.  The Bush Administration policy prevented BLM from even considering
whether there were extraordinary circumstances, such as threats
to public health and safety, impacts to endangered species or
cumulative impacts that would warrant additional environmental
review when a Section 390 exclusion was utilized. Do you think
it's important for BLM's rule to allow for a review of
extraordinary circumstances? If so, why?
Response to 5:
The review of extraordinary circumstances helps to identify those
circumstances where other substantive environmental requirements, such
as the Clean Air Act and the Endangered Species Act, must be satisfied
before the proposed action can proceed. As previously mentioned during
the Deputy Director Mike Pool's testimony, one of the options the BLM
will be considering as part of the agency's rulemaking effort would be
those elements of its 2010 guidance the Court vacated, which include a
review of extraordinary circumstances. The BLM will provide notice and
an opportunity for the public to comment, consistent with the
Administrative Procedure Act (APA), as part of its rulemaking effort.
6.  Another concern raised by the GAO regarding Section 390 was the
large amount of variation among the BLM field offices in how
they each implemented Section 390. This led to a great deal of
uncertainty, and a large number of protests challenging BLM's
actions. Do you think it's important to standardize the permit
application process of Section 390 as part of the new rule?
Response to 6:
The Section 390 CXs are used to support decisions to authorize
specific oil and gas permits issued by the BLM. An example of such a
permit includes an Application for Permit to Drill (APD). Unlike
decisions to issue a federal oil and gas lease, which may be protested
administratively, decisions to issue a specific permit to develop
federal or Indian oil and gas resources are subject to legal appeal
under procedures outlined in 43 CFR Part 4.
The application for a permit to drill is a standardized process.
The BLM Authorized Officer has the final decision-making authority with
respect to the appropriate form of analysis needed before a decision
can be made on a drilling application. BLM application review policies
provide a framework for management. These policies are not site-
specific prescriptions but guide responsible energy and mineral
development. The policies enable local review to account for site
specific resources, resource uses, industry interests, and community
needs. This flexibility is needed to be responsive to different
combinations of these factors. Nonetheless, the APD outcomes may vary
somewhat when compared regionally because of accounting for specific
local conditions. The outcomes, however, comply with laws, regulations,
and policy.
7.  The GAO's 2009 report noted that significant impacts to air quality
and wildlife habitat had occurred in areas where Section 390
categorical exclusions were heavily utilized, especially in
Wyoming, Utah, and New Mexico. How does the BLM plan on
reviewing drilling permits where these environmental impacts
have occurred in light of the current court ruling?
Response to 7:
On August 19, the BLM complied with the Court's Order by directing
its field offices to stop using the Section 390 CX guidance in IM 2010-
118 and resume using the guidance outlined in the 2008 BLM NEPA
Handbook when considering the application of Section 390 CXs.
It is still the BLM's policy to maintain a structured, multi- or
interdisciplinary permit review and approval process, conduct onsite
exams for 100 percent of proposed well and road locations, comply with
other procedural requirements required by other environmental statutes,
such as the Clean Air Act and the Endangered Species Act, and apply
appropriate mitigation and BMPs to all permitted actions even when
using a Section 390 CX.
8.  Does BLM still plan on developing a standardized checklist for the
review and use of Section 390 categorical exclusions, as the
GAO recommended? Or will this be part of a new rulemaking
process?
Response to 8:
The BLM is considering long-term options for regulations to address
the Court's order, which range from reverting to the previous policy
outlined in the 2008 BLM NEPA Handbook to proposing those elements of
IM 2010-118 the Court vacated and enjoined the agency's ability to
implement. The BLM's rulemaking effort will address the Court's concern
that BLM provide notice and an opportunity for the public to comment
before BLM adopts procedures that would bind the agency and impose or
affect individual rights and duties.


