- JOBS AT RISK: COMMUNITY IMPACTS OF THE OBAMA ADMINISTRATION'S EFFORT TO REWRITE THE STREAM BUFFER ZONE RULE

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

JOBS AT RISK: COMMUNITY IMPACTS OF THE OBAMA ADMINISTRATION'S EFFORT
TO REWRITE THE STREAM BUFFER ZONE RULE

=======================================================================

OVERSIGHT FIELD HEARING

before the

SUBCOMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND
MINERAL RESOURCES

of the

COMMITTEE ON NATURAL RESOURCES
U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

Monday, September 26, 2011, in Charleston, West Virginia

__________

Serial No. 112-66

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Natural Resources

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.fdsys.gov
or
Committee address: http://naturalresources.house.gov

----------
U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE

68-511 PDF                       WASHINGTON : 2012

For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800;
DC area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104 Mail: Stop IDCC,
Washington, DC 20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON NATURAL RESOURCES

DOC HASTINGS, WA, Chairman
EDWARD J. MARKEY, MA, Ranking Democrat Member

Don Young, AK                        Dale E. Kildee, MI
John J. Duncan, Jr., TN              Peter A. DeFazio, OR
Louie Gohmert, TX                    Eni F.H. Faleomavaega, AS
Rob Bishop, UT                       Frank Pallone, Jr., NJ
Doug Lamborn, CO                     Grace F. Napolitano, CA
Robert J. Wittman, VA                Rush D. Holt, NJ
Paul C. Broun, GA                    Raul M. Grijalva, AZ
John Fleming, LA                     Madeleine Z. Bordallo, GU
Mike Coffman, CO                     Jim Costa, CA
Tom McClintock, CA                   Dan Boren, OK
Glenn Thompson, PA                   Gregorio Kilili Camacho Sablan,
Jeff Denham, CA                          CNMI
Dan Benishek, MI                     Martin Heinrich, NM
David Rivera, FL                     Ben Ray Lujan, NM
Jeff Duncan, SC                      John P. Sarbanes, MD
Scott R. Tipton, CO                  Betty Sutton, OH
Paul A. Gosar, AZ                    Niki Tsongas, MA
Raul R. Labrador, ID                 Pedro R. Pierluisi, PR
Kristi L. Noem, SD                   John Garamendi, CA
Steve Southerland II, FL             Colleen W. Hanabusa, HI
Bill Flores, TX                      Vacancy
Andy Harris, MD
Jeffrey M. Landry, LA
Charles J. ``Chuck'' Fleischmann,
TN
Jon Runyan, NJ
Bill Johnson, OH

Todd Young, Chief of Staff
Lisa Pittman, Chief Counsel
Jeffrey Duncan, Democrat Staff Director
David Watkins, Democrat Chief Counsel
------

SUBCOMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND MINERAL RESOURCES

DOUG LAMBORN, CO, Chairman
RUSH D. HOLT, NJ, Ranking Democrat Member

Louie Gohmert, TX                    Peter A. DeFazio, OR
Paul C. Broun, GA                    Madeleine Z. Bordallo, GU
John Fleming, LA                     Jim Costa, CA
Mike Coffman, CO                     Dan Boren, OK
Glenn Thompson, PA                   Gregorio Kilili Camacho Sablan,
Dan Benishek, MI                         CNMI
David Rivera, FL                     Martin Heinrich, NM
Jeff Duncan, SC                      John P. Sarbanes, MD
Paul A. Gosar, AZ                    Betty Sutton, OH
Bill Flores, TX                      Niki Tsongas, MA
Jeffrey M. Landry, LA                Vacancy
Charles J. ``Chuck'' Fleischmann,    Edward J. Markey, MA, ex officio
TN
Bill Johnson, OH
Doc Hastings, WA, ex officio

------

CONTENTS

------
Page

Hearing held on Monday, September 26, 2011.......................     1

Statement of Members:
Capito, Hon. Shelley Moore, a Representative in Congress from
the State of West Virginia.................................     5
Prepared statement of....................................     6
Johnson, Hon. Bill, a Representative in Congress from the
State of Ohio..............................................     7
Prepared statement of....................................     9
Lamborn, Hon. Doug, a Representative in Congress from the
State of Colorado..........................................     1
Prepared statement of....................................     3

Statement of Witnesses:
Bostic, Jason D., Vice-President, West Virginia Coal
Association................................................    70
Prepared statement of....................................    72
Carey, Michael, President, Ohio Coal Association.............    66
Prepared statement of....................................    68
Clarke, Thomas L., Director, Division of Mining and
Reclamation, West Virginia Department of Environmental
Protection.................................................    15
Prepared statement of....................................    17
Corra, John, Director, Wyoming Department of Environmental
Quality....................................................    42
Prepared statement of....................................    46
Fredriksen, Katharine A., Senior Vice President,
Environmental Strategy & Regulatory Affairs, CONSOL Energy.    77
Prepared statement of....................................    79
Gunnoe, Maria, Community Organizer...........................    88
Prepared statement of....................................    90
Horton, Roger D., Co-Founder, Mountaintop Mining Coalition...    60
Prepared statement of....................................    62
Lambert, Bradley C., Deputy Director, Virginia Department of
Mines, Minerals and Energy.................................    31
Prepared statement of....................................    37
Manchin, Hon. Joe, a Senator in Congress from the State of
West Virginia..............................................    14
Tomblin, Hon. Earl Ray, Governor, State of West Virginia.....    10
Prepared statement of....................................    11
Webb, Bo, President/Current Member, Coal River Mountain Watch    82
Prepared statement of....................................    84

Additional materials supplied:
Alabama Surface Mining Commission; Indiana Department of
Natural Resources; Kentucky Department of Natural
Resources; Railroad Commission of Texas; Utah Division of
Oil, Gas and Mining; Virginia Department of Mines, Minerals
and Energy; and Wyoming Department of Environmental
Quality, Letter to The Honorable Joseph Pizarchik dated
November 23, 2010, submitted for the record................   110
Interstate Mining Compact Commission (IMCC), Statement
submitted for the record...................................   114
McDonnell, Hon. Robert F., Governor, Commonwealth of
Virginia, Letter to The Honorable Ken Salazar dated March
8, 2011, submitted for the record..........................    33
Pizarchik, Hon. Joseph G., Director, Office of Surface
Mining, Reclamation and Enforcement, Response to Virginia
Governor Robert McDonnell dated May 6, 2011................    35
``Rahall Welcomes Monday Hearing on Stream Buffer Zone,''
Press release submitted for the record.....................   109
Western Governors' Association, Letter to The Honorable Ken
Salazar dated February 27, 2011, submitted for the record..    43

OVERSIGHT FIELD HEARING ON ``JOBS AT RISK: COMMUNITY IMPACTS OF THE
OBAMA ADMINISTRATION'S EFFORT TO REWRITE THE STREAM BUFFER ZONE RULE.''

----------

Monday, September 26, 2011

U.S. House of Representatives

Subcommittee on Energy and Mineral Resources

Committee on Natural Resources

Charleston, West Virginia

----------

The Subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 9:00 a.m., in
the Historical Courtroom 4, 407 Virginia Street, East,
Charleston, West Virginia, The Honorable Doug Lamborn [Chairman
of the Subcommittee] presiding.
Present: Representatives Lamborn and Johnson.
Also Present: Representative Capito.
Mr. Lamborn. The Committee will come to order. The Chairman
notes the presence of a quorum, which under Committee Rule 3(e)
is two Members. The Subcommittee on Energy and Mineral
Resources is meeting today to hear testimony for an oversight
hearing on ``Jobs at Risk: Community Impacts of the Obama
Administration's Effort to Rewrite the Stream Buffer Zone
Rule.'' Under Committee Rule 4(f), opening statements are
limited to the Chairman and Ranking Member of the Subcommittee.
However, I ask unanimous consent that Mrs. Capito and Mr.
Johnson be permitted to give an opening statement and to
include any other Members' opening statements in the hearing
record submitted to the Clerk by close of business today.
Hearing no objection, so ordered. I now recognize myself
for five minutes.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. DOUG LAMBORN, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF COLORADO

Mr. Lamborn. Thank you everyone for being here today. I'm
Congressman Doug Lamborn of Colorado, and I am the Chairman of
the House Natural Resources Committee's Subcommittee on Energy
and Mineral Resources.
We are here today to hear testimony on the job and
community impacts stemming from the Obama Administration's
rewrite of the stream buffer zone rule.
All right. Thank you. OK. Thank you for your patience.
Technical glitch there.
In 1996, the National Wilderness Institute published the
American Conservation Ethic, which comprised eight principles
that the nation's policymakers should consider in the
development of environmental policies and associated laws,
rules and regulations. Several of those principles are worth
examining in light of the topic of today's hearing, ``Jobs at
Risk, Community Impacts of the Obama Administration's Effort to
Rewrite the Stream Buffer Zone Rule.''
An independent contractor hired by the Administration found
that the rewritten stream buffer zone rule will result in the
direct loss of over 7,000 jobs nationwide and place an
additional 29,000 people living in the Appalachian Basin below
the poverty level. Some believe that this is a low number. In
any case, the numbers do not even begin to assess the indirect
cost to jobs and to our economy if and when the price of
electricity goes up.
The first principle of the American Conservation Ethic
provides important insight that we should all take to heart--
that is, people are the most important resource. Continuing to
work on a rule that knowingly will directly eliminate thousands
of jobs and will result in 29,000 people living below the
poverty level is inexcusable policy. It is our job as lawmakers
to institute policies that create jobs and make lives better
for Americans. Instead, this Administration is pursuing a rule
that will do exactly the opposite.
However, rather than reinstating the 2008 rule after the
economic impacts of the Administration's preferred alternative
in the proposed rule were leaked to the press, the
Administration instead severed ties with the initial
contractor, Polu Kai, and has continued down this ill-advised
path of rulemaking.
I am deeply concerned that the Obama Administration may be
guilty of suppressing inconvenient facts simply because they
stand in the way of a different agenda. Chairman Hastings and I
have initiated an investigation into the Office of Surface
Mining's attempt to rewrite the 2008 stream buffer zone rule
and the ongoing fiasco resulting from the Administration's
rushed effort to fast track major changes to the nation's coal
mining regulatory program established by the Surface Mining
Control and Reclamation Act of 1977.
Let's examine Principle Four of the American Conservation
Ethic, which states, ``Our efforts to reduce, control and
remediate pollution should achieve real environmental
benefits.'' The environmental benefit of the proposed stream
buffer zone rule is achieved through less mining; that is, less
mining of a vital national resource, coal, a resource that
currently provides thousands of Americans with good-paying jobs
and more than 45 percent of the nation's electrical power.
Twenty-two of the 25 states with the lowest electricity
costs get at least 40 percent or more of their electricity from
coal-fired power plants. And just exactly what are the so-
called benefits of less coal mining? Certainly not monetary.
Reducing coal production nationwide will adversely impact
revenues to Federal, State and local treasuries. It will reduce
monies flowing into the Surface Mining Control and Reclamation
Act Abandoned Mine Land Fund, where some of the interest earned
is used to support the United Mine Workers of America retirees.
Furthermore, reducing the amount of coal available for
power generation will lead to higher electricity costs for
American businesses and families, which lowers our standard of
living, and thousands of Americans will be put out of work.
We have repeatedly seen the unforeseen consequences and job
loss that can follow unnecessary regulatory changes. The final
stream buffer zone rule issued in December of 2008 was the
result of a rulemaking process that took five years and was
supported by 5,000 pages of environmental analysis and included
thirty original research projects.
That brings me to the final principle from the American
Conservation Ethic that I'll share with you this morning.
Principle Seven states, ``Science should be employed as a tool
to guide public policy.'' The 2008 stream buffer zone rule
employed science to guide public policy as exemplified by the
extensive research conducted during the rulemaking process.
The 2008 rule was more protective of the environment than
the original 1983 rule issued during the Reagan Administration,
the rule that is now in effect since the 2008 rule has been
shelved by the current Administration.
We have a full hearing today with ten witnesses, including
Governor Earl Ray Tomblin, regulators from the states of West
Virginia, Virginia and Wyoming, the West Virginia and Ohio Coal
Associations, the Mountaintop Mining Coalition, CONSOL Energy,
Coal River Community Watch and a community organizer.
I look forward to hearing from all of our witnesses. I know
many of you have been involved in the development of the
programmatic mountaintop mining environmental impact statement,
the 2008 stream buffer zone rule and the litigation that
precipitated the production of the environmental impact
statement, the rule in the current rulemaking process.
In closing, I would like to reaffirm my belief that the
United States is a nation of excellence. Our achievements
through the development of our abundant natural resources have
allowed America to prosper and constantly raise the standard of
living for the next generation. Increasing responsible access
to these resources will allow us to be less dependent on
foreign sources of energy and mineral resources, will create
new, private-sector jobs and will add revenue to government
coffers, reducing the national debt and thereby increasing our
national and economic security.
I will now recognize Congresswoman Capito for five minutes
for an opening statement.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Lamborn follows:]

Statement of The Honorable Doug Lamborn, Chairman,
Subcommittee on Energy and Mineral Resources

Thank you everyone for being here today. I'm Congressman Doug
Lamborn, and I am Chairman of the House Natural Resources Committee
Energy and Minerals Subcommittee. We are here today to hear testimony
on the job and community impacts stemming from the Obama
Administration's rewrite of the Stream Buffer Zone Rule.
In 1996, the National Wilderness Institute published the ``American
Conservation Ethic,'' which comprised eight principles that the
Nation's policy makers should consider in the development of
environmental policies and associated laws, rules and regulations.
Several of those principles are worth examining in light of the
topic of today's hearing: Jobs at Risk: Community Impacts of the Obama
Administration's Effort to Rewrite the Stream Buffer Zone Rule.''
An independent contractor, hired by the Administration, found the
rewritten Stream Buffer Zone Rule will result in the loss of over 7,000
direct jobs nationwide and place an additional 29,000 people living in
the Appalachian basin below the poverty level.
The first principle of the American Conservation Ethic provides
important insight that we should all take to heart. And that is:
``People are the most important resource:
Continuing to work on a rule that knowingly will eliminate
thousands of jobs and will result in 29,000 people living below the
poverty level is inexcusable policy It is our job as lawmakers to
institute policies that create jobs and make lives better for
Americans--instead, this Administration is pursuing a rule that will do
exactly the opposite.
However, rather than reinstating the 2008 rule after the economic
impacts of the Administration's preferred alternative in the proposed
rule were leaked to the press,, the Administration instead severed ties
with the initial contractor Polu Kai, and has continued down this ill
advised path of rulemaking.
Chairman Hastings and I have initiated an investigation into the
Office of Surface Mining's attempt to rewrite the 2008 stream buffer
zone rule and the ongoing fiasco resulting from the Administration's
rushed effort to fast track major changes to the Nation's coal mining
regulatory program established by the Surface Mining Control and
Reclamation Act of 1977.
Let's examine Principle Four of the American Conservation Ethic
which states:
``Our efforts to reduce, control and remediate pollution should
achieve real environmental benefits.
The `environmental benefit' of the proposed rule is achieved
through less mining. That is less mining of a vital national resource--
Coal--a resource that currently provides thousands of Americans with
good paying jobs, and more than forty-five percent of the Nation's
electrical power. Twenty-two of the 25 states with the lowest
electricity costs get at least 40 percent or more of their electricity
from coal-fired power plants.
And just exactly what are the benefits of less coal mining?
Certainly not monetary; reducing coal production nationwide will
adversely impact revenues to Federal, State and local treasuries, and
monies flowing into the Surface Mining Control and Reclamation Act
Abandoned Mine Land fund where some of the interest earned is used to
support the United Mine Workers of America retirees.
Furthermore, reducing the amount of coal available for power
generation will lead to higher electricity costs for American
businesses and families and thousands of Americans being put out of
work. We have repeatedly seen the unforeseen consequences and job loss
that can follow unnecessary regulatory changes.
The final Stream Buffer Zone Rule, issued in December of 2008, was
the result of a rulemaking process that took five-years and was
supported by 5,000 pages of environmental analysis and included thirty
original research projects. That brings me to the final principle from
the American Conservation Ethic that I'll share with you this morning.
Principle Seven states: ``Science should be employed as a tool to
guide public policy.
The 2008 Stream Buffer Zone Rule employed `Science' to guide public
policy as exemplified by the extensive research conducted during the
rule making process. The 2008 rule was more protective of the
environment than the original 1983 rule issued during the Reagan
Administration, the rule that is now in effect since the 2008 rule has
been shelved by the current Administration.
We have a full hearing today with ten witnesses, including Governor
Earl Ray Tomblin; regulators from the states of West Virginia, Virginia
and Wyoming; the West Virginia and Ohio Coal Associations; the
Mountaintop Mining Coalition; Consol Energy; coal River Community
Watch; and a Community Organizer.
I look forward to hearing from our witnesses. I know many of you
have been involved in the development of the Programmatic Mountain Top
Mining Environmental Impact Statement, the 2008 Stream Buffer Zone
Rule, and the litigation that precipitated the production of the EIS,
the Rule and the current rulemaking process.
In closing I would like to reaffirm my belief that the United
States is a nation of excellence. Our achievements through the
development of our abundant natural resources have allowed America to
prosper and constantly raise the standard of living for the next
generation. Increasing access to those resources will allow us to
become less dependent on foreign sources of energy and mineral
resources, create new private sector jobs and add revenue to government
coffers reducing the national debt and thereby increasing our national
and economic security.
______

STATEMENT OF THE HON. SHELLEY MOORE CAPITO, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF WEST VIRGINIA

Mrs. Capito. Thank you, Chairman Lamborn and welcome to
West Virginia. For those of you in the audience, most of you
know this is my home county and my hometown and you know me
well, and I would like to just give you a little lay of the
land. This is basically what goes on in our committee hearings
in Washington. Many of you have been to the committee hearings.
We have panels where everybody will give five minutes of
testimony and then questioning from the Members of Congress.
But the whole point is to get the information from you all
to us as we do our policies and make legislative decisions in
Washington. And while we can sit in Washington and listen to
what people are saying, it's so helpful to come out to the
different regions that are most highly impacted to really get a
flavor for the impact of a regulation such as we're talking
about today or any kind of legislative endeavor that we're
engaged in.
Mr. Lamborn is from the Natural Resources Committee,
Chairman of the Subcommittee, and Mr. Johnson is from Ohio,
just drove in from Marietta. They're well aware of energy and
energy production in their own states and the important and
critical economic impacts that regulations can make. I welcome
you on behalf of my fellow West Virginians.
As you know, West Virginia is one of the largest coal
producing states in the nation, and is home to some of the most
valuable coal reserves. But in West Virginia, since I've been
in the Legislature in 1996 and certainly living here, weaving
the balance between the environment and the economy has been a
challenge, as it is for the nation, it has certainly been a
challenge here in West Virginia.
As we know, the West Virginia coal mining industry itself
employs over 50,000 people with some incomes reaching $80,000 a
year, and we're proud of our natural resources here. We're
proud that we have the natural resources that can help bring
this country out of a national recession.
But we do have an issue with the Federal regulatory actions
that have been taking place most recently because I believe
that it inhibits job growth and it sometimes can stymie our
economic development.
So in this hearing we're going to be examining, as you've
heard, the Office of Surface Mining's proposed stream
protection rule. How does that impact our job growth, our
community and economic growth, because I think these are issues
that we need to look at, as we're also looking at the
environmental impacts, as well.
The original rule mining activities of perennial and
intermittent streams and was a clarification of the long-term
regulatory interpretation of a prior rule. However, less than a
year after that rule was finalized, and before the rule would
even be in effect, the Administration tried to vacate the
rulemaking review, but their actions were overturned by a
Federal court.
So what we're looking at now is sweeping changes to OSM's
regulatory programs and expanding the scope of its stream
protection rules. But the Office of Surface Mining's own
analysis says--and Chairman Lamborn mentioned this in his
statement--that this stream protection rule could result in
29,000 hard working American coal miners losing their jobs and
wiping out $650 million in wages, and certainly here in the
Appalachian Basin we take those numbers very seriously. It
could result, and it would result most certainly, I think I've
seen numbers anywhere from a 10 to 20 percent increase in
energy prices. When you think about that, we all live with
neighbors who are on fixed incomes, trying to pay their
electric bills through a cold winter and a hot summer, and we
know that that's difficult, especially with our economy in such
a stagnant pace. And I think it could eliminate as much as
twenty to thirty percent of West Virginia's surface mining
production.
It's important to remember, too, that this rule does
influence, and we'll hear this, I'm sure, in the committee
testimony, does influence the underground mine industry as a
fact.
Now, one of the rules in Congress is when the red light
goes off, you're supposed to stop talking. And so I see the red
light went off when I was not watching, so I don't want to
abuse my privilege. But I do welcome you. I know that there are
many in the audience that we've met in my office who are
opposed to looking at maybe job impacts and are very heavily
influenced by the environmental impacts and very passionate
about that, and your testimony will be a part of the record and
will be heard by all the gentlemen and this is being streamed
on the web, so a lot of people will hear this.
So I want to thank you so much for the opportunity. I also
am going to apologize because I am going to have to leave and
not be able to attend the entire hearing. But thank you for
coming to my hometown. Thanks.
[The prepared statement of Mrs. Capito follows:]

Statement of The Honorable Shelley Moore Capito,
a Representative in Congress from the State of West Virginia

Chairman Lamborn, I would like to welcome you and your subcommittee
to West Virginia. On behalf of my constituents, let me thank you for
your leadership on this issue and your efforts to prevent the Obama
administration from destroying West Virginia jobs.
My home state of West Virginia is one of the largest coal producing
states in the nation, and is home to some of the most valuable coal
reserves in the world. The coal industry is one of the state's largest
sources of jobs and tax revenue. As of 2008, the mining industry
employed over 50,000 West Virginians, with incomes often reaching
$80,000 per year.
West Virginia has the natural resources to help create jobs and
bring this economy out of recession. However, the federal government
continues to take regulatory actions that inhibit job growth, and
prevent West Virginian's from putting food on their tables. In this
hearing, you will be examining the Office of Surface Mining's proposed
Stream Protection Rule. In 2008, OSM's initial Stream Buffer Rule was
finalized after several years of review by multiple federal regulators.
The original rule governed mining activities near perennial and
intermittent streams, and was a clarification of the longstanding
regulatory interpretation of a prior rule with enhanced environmental
protections. However, less than a year after the rule was finalized,
and before the rule could even go into effect, this Administration
attempted to vacate the rule without any rulemaking review, or
opportunity for public comment. The Administration's actions were
rightly ruled a violation of law by a federal court.
The administration subsequently invoked upon a new rulemaking
process that includes sweeping changes to OSM's regulatory programs,
while expanding the scope of its stream protection rules to include
both surface and underground mining activities. Some have claimed that
these rules are of questionable environmental benefit, according to the
West Virginia DEP, the environmental review conducted in support of the
Stream Protection Rule has been universally characterized as junk.
OSM's own analysis says that the Stream Protection Rule will result
in 20,000 hardworking American coal miners losing their jobs, wiping
out $650 million in wages. In the Appalachian basis alone, this rule
would throw nearly 30,000 folks into poverty. The rule would also
necessarily result in increased energy prices, including my
constituent's electric bills, as it would eliminate 20 to 30 percent of
West Virginia's surface mining production, while also eliminating 50%
of West Virginia's underground coal mining activity.
Mr. Chairman, West Virginian's are ready to lead this nation out of
recession while making us more energy independent. Unfortunately, this
cannot happen in the current regulatory environment. Folks I talk to
back here West Virginia keep telling me that they are ready and willing
to create jobs if only the federal government would get off their
backs.
If the administration thinks their policies are helping folks
across the country, I invite them to visit my state to see how their
actions are hurting families across Appalachia. It's time to take
advantage of the resources found right here in America. Doing so will
launch our economy in the right direction and create thousands of good-
paying jobs.
West Virginia is truly blessed to have abundant supplies of natural
resources. As a native West Virginian I enjoy my State's beauty and
appreciate its pristine water, and want to do what is reasonably
necessary to maintain our state's environment. But instead of helping
West Virginian's tap into our full economic potential while
implementing common sense environmental regulations, this
Administration would rather implement its ideologically driven agenda.
It is time for this administration to get off the backs of West
Virginia's job creators by using common sense and not ideology. Thank
you again for holding this very important hearing.
______

Mr. Lamborn. Thank you, Representative. It's an honor to be
here in your district and to be in the great State of West
Virginia, so thank you for your opening statement.
And before we hear our first panel, we'll have one more
opening statement, and this is from Representative Bill Johnson
of Ohio.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. BILL JOHNSON, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF OHIO

Mr. Johnson. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman, for holding
this important hearing on the economic impact that the
Department of the Interior's Office of Surface Mining
Reclamation's rewrite of the stream buffer zone rule could have
on local communities like Charleston and other mining towns
across the country. And I'd like to thank Congresswoman Capito
for hosting us here in her hometown and all the great folks
from West Virginia. It's good to see all of you out here this
morning. Thanks for letting us come in.
I represent eastern and southeastern Ohio and live just 90
miles away in Marietta, Ohio. In the parts of eastern and
southeastern Ohio that I represent, we have double-digit
unemployment, reaching as high as 12.7 percent. There are
entire communities that depend largely on the coal industry
both for direct and indirect jobs and they would be devastated
by this proposed rule change.
According to the Obama Administration's own analysis of the
rule, it would eliminate up to 7,000 direct coal jobs and tens
of thousands of indirect jobs, cut coal mining production by 50
percent and increase the cost of electricity for families and
small businesses.
As most of you may know, OSM, the Office of Surface Mining
and Reclamation in December of 2008 issued a clarification of
the stream buffer zone rules after a five-year process that
included 40,000 public comments, two proposed rules and 5,000
pages of environmental analysis from five different agencies.
The final rule clarified and codified coal surface mining
practices that had been in effect for over 30 years. But on
January 20th, 2009, the Obama Administration decided to reopen
the carefully crafted and properly vetted stream buffer zone
rule.
This proposed sweeping regulatory action would radically
alter the definition of a stream, as well as how the agency
measures material damage outside of the permit area. To date,
the agency has provided no studies, no data or support to
justify these radical changes. A judge later ruled that the
Administration could not reopen the rulemaking process without
cause. So what did the Administration do? They did what we've
seen over and over again when settled rules by the
Administration, if they don't like them. They practically sent
out invitations to environmental groups to sue the Department
of the Interior over the rule. Not surprisingly, they got their
desired result, and before too long, two environmental groups
filed a lawsuit protesting the rule.
Then, instead of fighting the lawsuit in court, they
entered into closed-door negotiations with the
environmentalists and reached a settlement that would allow
them to do what they wanted to do all along, rewrite the stream
buffer zone rule and make it more restrictive.
I don't know about you, but this sounds like collusion to
me. And then in a slap to all tax payers, the same
environmental groups that sued the Department of the Interior
had their legal fees paid back by the taxpayer funded Judgment
Fund. Now, I wish I could say that this is a special
circumstance and that it doesn't happen often, but there are at
least fifteen instances of this so-called practice of sue and
settle that this Administration has participated in, to reopen
rules they don't like. However, that's a problem and a
discussion for a different day.
Let me get back to the Administration's economic analysis
of the rewrite of the stream buffer zone. Like I said, before
this analysis completed by a leading environmental consulting
firm showed that 7,000 direct and tens of thousands of indirect
jobs would be lost if the rule went forward as written. This
firm was paid millions of dollars to conduct this study.
However, once the analysis leaked to the public, OSM fired the
contractor without getting any of the money back. OSM claims
that the contractor miscalculated the job loss, but it seems to
me that they simply didn't like the results of the analysis and
the press reports that came with it.
For these reasons, I offered an amendment to the first
continuing resolution from this year that would have stopped
OSM from going forward with the proposed rewrite, their
revision to the stream buffer zone. The amendment passed the
House on a bipartisan vote of 239 to 186. Unfortunately, the
language did not make the final continuing resolution that
eventually became law. However, I have and I will continue to
fight to have this language included in any new spending bill
passed by Congress.
The President, as you all know, has been touring the
Midwest trying to promote what he calls a jobs bill. I find it
ironic that this Administration has admitted that the rewrite
of the stream buffer zone rule will cost thousands of direct
and indirect jobs. If the President was serious about job
creation, he would direct OSM to stop going forward with a
regulation that will result in thousands of hard-working
Americans losing their jobs.
Thanks again, Mr. Chairman, for hosting this hearing and I
look forward to hearing from the witnesses and their testimony
today and I yield back the balance of my time.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Johnson follows:]

Statement of The Honorable Bill Johnson,
a Representative in Congress from the State of Ohio

Thank you, Mr. Chairman for holding this important hearing on the
economic impact that the Department of Interior's Office of Surface
Mining, Reclamation re-write of the Stream Buffer Zone rule could have
on local communities like Charleston and other mining towns across the
country.
I represent Eastern and Southern Ohio and live just 90 minutes away
from Charleston in Marietta, Ohio.
In the parts of eastern and southeastern Ohio that I represent, we
have double-digit unemployment reaching as high as 12.7%. There are
entire communities that depend largely on the coal industry--both
direct and indirect jobs--that would be devastated by this proposed
rules change.
According to the Obama Administration's own analysis of the rule--
eliminate up to 7,000 direct coal jobs and tens of thousands of
indirect jobs, cut coal mining production by 50%, and increase the cost
of electricity for families and small businesses.
As most of you may know, OSM in December of 2008 issued a
clarification of the stream buffer zone rules after a five-year process
that included 40,000 public comments, two proposed rules, and 5,000
pages of environmental analysis from 5 different agencies. The final
rule clarified and codified coal surface mining practices that had been
in effect for over 30 years.
But on January 20, 2009, the Obama Administration decided to re-
open the carefully crafted and properly vetted stream buffer zone rule.
This proposed sweeping regulatory action would radically alter the
definition of a stream as well as how the agency measures material
damage outside of the permit area.
To date, the agency has provided no studies, data, or support to
justify these radical changes. A judge later ruled that the
Administration couldn't reopen the rulemaking process without cause.
So what did the Administration do? They did what we have seen over
and over again with settled rules the Administration does not like,
they practically sent out invitations to environmental groups to sue
the Department of Interior over the rule.
Not surprisingly they got their desired result and before long two
environmental groups filed a lawsuit protesting the rule.
Then, instead of fighting the lawsuit in court, they entered in
closed-door negotiations with the environmentalists and reached a
settlement that would allow them to do what they wanted all along, to
re-write the stream buffer zone rule.
I don't know about you, but this sounds like collusion to me.
And then in a slap to all taxpayers, the same environmental groups
that sued the Department of Interior had their legal fees paid back by
the taxpayer funded Judgment Fund.
I wish I could say that this is a special circumstance and that
this doesn't happen often, but there are at least 15 instances of this
so called practice of `sue-and-settle' that this Administration has
participated in to reopen rules they don't like. However, that is a
problem and a discussion for a different day.
Let me get back to the Administration's economic analysis of the
rewrite of the rule. Like I said before this analysis, complete by a
leading environment consulting firm, showed that 7,000 direct and tens
of thousands of direct jobs would be lost if the rule went forward as
written.
This firm was paid millions of dollars to conduct the study.
However, once the analysis leaked to the public, OSM fired the
contractor, without getting any of the money back.
OSM claims that the contractor miscalculated the job loss, but it
seems to me that they simply didn't like the results of the analysis
and the press reports that came with it.
For these reasons, I offered an amendment to the first Continuing
Resolution from this year that would have stopped OSM from going
forward with a proposed revision to the `Stream Buffer Zone' rule.
The amendment passed the House on a bipartisan vote of 239--186.
Unfortunately, the language did not make the final Continuing
Resolution that eventually became law.
However, I have and will continue to fight to have this language
included in any new spending bill passed by Congress.
The President as you all know has been touring the Midwest trying
to promote what he calls a jobs bill. I find it ironic that his
Administration has admitted that the rewrite of the Stream Buffer zone
rule will cost thousands of direct and indirect jobs.
If the President was serious about job creation, he would direct
OSM to stop going forward with a regulation that will result in
thousands of hard-working Americans losing their jobs.
Thanks again for the Chairman for hosting this hearing and I look
forward to hearing from our witnesses. I yield back the balance of my
time.
______

Mr. Lamborn. OK. Thank you. We will now hear from our
witnesses. The first panel consists of The Honorable Earl Ray
Tomblin, the Governor of West Virginia. Thank you, Governor,
for being here. It's an honor to be in West Virginia today and
so I welcome you to be our first witness in this important
hearing. Like all of our witnesses, your written testimony will
appear in full in the hearing record, so I ask that you keep
your oral statement to five minutes, as outlined in the
invitation letter. Our microphones are not automatic, so you
need to turn them on when you're ready to begin. And after four
minutes a yellow light will come on, then after five minutes a
red light will come on, and you may complete at that time.
Thank you again for being here, and you may begin, Governor.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. EARL RAY TOMBLIN,
GOVERNOR, STATE OF WEST VIRGINIA

Governor Tomblin. Thank you very much and welcome to West
Virginia. We're pleased to have you here today. I'm Governor
Earl Ray Tomblin and I would like to thank you for the
opportunity to testify today. I'd also like to thank you for
taking time to come to West Virginia and listen to the voices
of people who, perhaps more than anyone, are threatened by the
regulatory philosophy of the Environmental Protection Agency
and the Federal Office of Surface Mining.
Coal mining has always been a vital part of West Virginia
and the national economy. For West Virginia, coal mining
provides a significant number of jobs for our citizens and
substantial tax revenue for the operation of our state and
local governments.
As a lifelong resident of a coal-producing area of southern
West Virginia, I have a deep personal understanding of the
importance of this industry to our state. There are millions of
Americans who are unemployed. Millions more are struggling to
make ends meet, working two or three jobs. Millions more have
lost their homes and have had to declare bankruptcy. American
families are suffering. They don't want a handout. All they
want is a job.
In contrast to most of America, we are fortunate in West
Virginia, we are one of only a small handful of states that
have been able to balance our budget and add to our rainy day
fund reserves. For example, I'm proud to tell you that last
year West Virginia had a surplus of approximately $330 million.
In large part, we owe our current financial health to coal.
We've had a crisis in waiting with implementation of the rule
before you today and other Federal initiatives hanging in the
balance.
Over the past three years the EPA and other regulatory
agencies have relentlessly pursued an ill-advised agenda,
threatening one of our state's leading industries and tens of
thousands of West Virginia jobs. I am deeply concerned about
the direction the Federal agencies, including the EPA and OSM
have recently taken in the regulation of the coal industry. It
has been well-publicized that the preferred alternative for the
stream protection measures rule that OSM identified in a draft
environmental impact statement is one that will cause drastic
reductions in coal production in the Appalachian region.
These impacts are entirely inconsistent with the mandate
Congress gave OSM in the Surface Mining Act and unacceptable to
any type of economic development and job creation for my home
state.
For the good of West Virginia and other coal producing
states, I hope the Energy and Natural Resources Subcommittee
will take appropriate action to force OSM to act within its
Congressional authority.
EPA's obstruction of mining permits and this rule from OSM
threatens the very existence of the coal industry in West
Virginia and across the nation. These actions by the EPA and
OSM are doubly problematic. Not only are they destroying coal
mining and other good paying industrial jobs, but they are also
increasing the cost of electricity and every product made using
electricity. I think the Congress must act to restrain the OSM
and the EPA. You must restore balance to the relationship of
the states and the Federal Government. You must demand an end
to legislation by regulation and restore the proper
constitutional balance between the executive and legislative
branches.
I thank you and I apologize, I've got another appointment I
must go to, but I certainly appreciate you being here today to
listen to comments of the audience today. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Governor Tomblin follows:]

Statement of The Honorable Earl Ray Tomblin,
Governor of West Virginia

Good afternoon. I am Governor Earl Ray Tomblin. I would like to
thank you for the opportunity to testify today. I would also like to
thank you for taking time to come to West Virginia and listen to the
voices of people who, perhaps more than anyone, are threatened by the
regulatory philosophy of the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) and
the federal Office of Surface Mining (OSM).
The EPA's anti-coal agenda is having an extraordinarily negative
effect on the spirit and minds of every hard working West Virginian.
And it should be setting off alarm bells for our Country.
Coal mining has always been a vital part of the West Virginia and
National economy. For West Virginia, coal mining provides a significant
number of jobs for our citizens and substantial tax revenue for the
operation of our state and local governments. As a lifelong resident of
the coal-producing area of Southern West Virginia, I have a deep,
personal understanding of the importance of this industry to our State.
All told, more than 63,000 West Virginians work in jobs provided by
the coal industry. That is 63,000 families. Think about it for a
moment--that means approximately 250,000 people in a state with less
than 2 million citizens are supported, in one way or another by the
mining of coal.
There are millions of Americans who are unemployed. Millions more
are struggling to make ends meet working two or three jobs. Millions
more have lost their homes and have had to declare bankruptcy. American
families are suffering. They don't want a handout. All they want is a
job.
In contrast to most of America, we are fortunate in West Virginia.
We are one of only a small handful of states that have been able to
balance our budget and add to our Rainy Day Reserves. For example, I am
proud to tell you that last year West Virginia had a surplus of
approximately $330 million. In large part, we owe our current financial
health to ``Coal.'' West Virginia has also been successful in
attracting several new businesses to our state due to our aggressive
team of economic development professionals. But we have a ``crisis in
waiting'' with the implementation of the rule before you today and
other federal initiatives hanging in the balance.
Over the past three years, the EPA and other regulatory agencies
have relentlessly pursued an ill-advised agenda, threatening one of our
state's leading industries and tens of thousands of West Virginia jobs.
I am deeply concerned about the direction federal agencies, including
the EPA and the OSM, have recently taken in the regulation of the coal
industry. Since the EPA, the Interior Department, and the Corps of
Engineers signed a Memorandum of Understanding on June 11, 2009, these
agencies have undertaken extraordinary efforts to seize regulatory
authority that legitimately resides with the states and Congress. The
EPA has attempted to re-write the Clean Water Act and regulations to
incorporate new policy judgments, without the benefit of a new mandate
from Congress or at least the transparency and opportunity for public
involvement that would accompany formal rulemaking.
With the OSM Stream Protection Measures Rulemaking that is the
subject of the subcommittee's current focus, I am concerned that OSM is
also acting in contravention of its mandate from Congress. OSM's
actions must be based on the federal Surface Mining Act. One of the
principal purposes Congress established in the Surface Mining Act was
to: ``assure that the coal supply essential to the Nation's energy
requirements and to its economic and social well-being is provided and
strike a balance between protection of the environment and agricultural
productivity and the Nation's need for coal as an essential source of
energy.''
It has been well publicized that the preferred alternative for the
Stream Protection Measures rule OSM identified in the draft
environmental impact statement is one that will cause drastic
reductions in coal production in the Appalachian region.
As I understand it, OSM's draft environmental impact statement
projects the following impacts from its proposed alternative:

A decrease in surface mine coal production in the
Appalachian Basin of approximately 30%;

A loss of approximately 10,00 jobs in the Appalachian
basin under the worst case scenario;

An approximate 13.1% loss in severance tax; and

An approximate 11.7% decrease in income taxes.
These impacts are entirely inconsistent with the mandate Congress gave
OSM in the Surface Mining Act and unacceptable to any type of economic
development and job creation for my home State. For the good of West
Virginia and other coal producing states, I hope the Energy and Natural
Resources Subcommittee will take appropriate action to force OSM to act
within the limits of the authority Congress has given it.
West Virginia's coal miners, the bravest workers in world, should
be confident about their future, enjoying the fruits of their hard
work, building new homes, and saving for their children's education and
their own retirement. They should not be worrying about an overbearing
federal bureaucracy that threatens the very backbone of their lives.
EPA's obstruction of mining permits and this rule from OSM
threatens the very existence of the coal industry, in West Virginia and
across the nation. These actions by the EPA and OSM are doubly
problematic. Not only are they destroying coal mining and other good-
paying industrial jobs, but they are also increasing the cost of
electricity and every product made using electricity.
If enacted, OSM's proposed re-write of the Stream Buffer Zone rule
will drastically reduce coal production in West Virginia and across the
nation. It will apply new standards that have no basis in the law.
Congress must act to restrain the OSM and the EPA. You must restore
balance to the relationship of the states and the federal government.
You must demand an end to legislation by regulation and restore the
proper Constitutional balance between the executive and legislative
branches.
Tens of thousands of coal miners in West Virginia, Appalachia and
across the nation need your help. While our national leaders speak of
stimulating the economy, federal regulatory agencies are erecting
substantial barriers to the continued existence of the mining industry
at every turn.
While national leaders plead their case for more jobs, the agencies
under their authority seem determined to drastically increase
unemployment in our region.
We, here in the great state of West Virginia, do not seek subsidies
or handouts. We just want to continue to work at the jobs we know and
love. To continue doing what we've done for decades--providing our
nation and the world with the energy and industrial fuel it needs to
pull itself out of a global economic recession. Industries fueled by
West Virginia coal provide the wages and taxes that support our states
and communities. I call on you to restore balance in the federal
government--to reign in the out-of-control EPA and OSM--and to give our
great nation a chance to lead the world out of its current economic
downturn. We are leading the nation here in West Virginia with the help
of Coal--let us now take a great step forward and use our Coal to lead
the world forward into a prosperous new era.
Thank you.
______

Mr. Lamborn. I would like to also mention that we've been
joined by the U.S. Senator for West Virginia and former
Governor, Manchin, who's in the back of the room. If he would
like to come up and if the Governor has no objection, and you
have a comment or two to add on this important subject, you're
very welcome to do that. And this is an example of how well the
House and the Senate tries to work together in Washington.
Governor, if you have to go, I have one question for you.
If you have to go right this minute, let me ask you the
question before the Senator speaks.
Governor Tomblin. Sure.
Mr. Lamborn. Some have said, and I happen to share this
concern, so I could be saying this just as well as anyone else
out there, that the Obama Administration seems to be waging a
war on coal. Do you agree with that statement?
Governor Tomblin. Well, I feel that the OSM and EPA are
being completely unrealistic as far as the mining of coal goes.
And obviously, under the previous Administration and my
Administration, we have a lawsuit in the Federal court in
Washington, D.C., questioning their authority and we feel like
they've overstepped their bounds as far as the regulation of
the coal industry.
Mr. Lamborn. Did anyone else on the panel have a question
for the Governor before the Senator speaks?
Mr. Johnson. I actually do, and I'll make it quick because
I know the Governor has got to go. Governor, do you think OSM
is being a good steward of taxpayer dollars after spending
millions on the first contractor, firing them because they
didn't like the answers they got and then spending millions
more on a new contractor?
Governor Tomblin. Well, I feel my focus today is on coal
mining and coal mining jobs in West Virginia, and I feel that
some of the actions they're taking are overstepping the bounds
that Congress has authorized them to have in West Virginia, or
across the country, as far as coal mining goes. And obviously,
my biggest concern is about the jobs of West Virginians here
today and the continued production, responsible production of
coal in the State of West Virginia.
Mr. Johnson. Thank you, Governor.
Mr. Lamborn. Governor, we know you're on a tight schedule,
so at any time that you feel you need to leave, please do so,
and thank you for being here.
Governor Tomblin. Thank you, sir.
Mr. Lamborn. And Senator Manchin, thank you for joining us,
and if you have any comments that you would care to add on this
important subject, we'd love to hear to from you.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. JOE MANCHIN, A SENATOR IN CONGRESS FROM
THE STATE OF WEST VIRGINIA

Senator Manchin. More than happy. Thank you so much for the
courtesy and the kindness, and to all my colleagues, to you all
for coming. I know that our Congresswoman Capito from our
wonderful state here has been a good hostess and I know that
she's very appreciative and, I am, too, of you all bringing
this inquiry down here.
Let me just say that under this Administration it's been
very onerous as far as trying to get a level playing field or a
balance. And all we're saying is this country needs coal. It
can turn its back all it wants to, but the bottom line, when
it's all said and done, there's about 150 million people in
America that depend on the energy that we have produced for a
hundred years and we'll continue for as long as needed. We
don't have a fuel of the future. In West Virginia, people don't
realize we probably have more wind farms east of the
Mississippi than most any other state. We're trying everything
we can to be diverse and be totally independent of foreign oil.
And we believe security of the Nation is the most important
thing. West Virginia has always done the heavy lifting. We're
not afraid of hard work. We've helped build this great country
by producing the coal and make the steel and build the
factories in defense of our country.
So with all that being said, we think it's really
unreasonable the approach that they're taking in making one so
onerous. You've just heard where we have to close maybe five
power plants. I don't think that that's necessary. I think
there's a better way that we could save some of those plants,
giving dependable, reliable and affordable energy. Coal has
been able to do that and it will continue to.
We know that with some of the investments that's been made
in the sake of clean energy, we know that didn't go as well as
it should have gone. Solyndra, I don't need to tell you all
about it, $538 million. It was something that was rushed to
show as the poster child that didn't work. Fine, those things
happen. I understand that. But the bottom line is we could have
used half of that money to complete a commercial operation as
far as coal sequestration, showing that we could take the clear
stream of carbon, sequester it, and also find better uses for
it. We could have finished that project, so we know that has a
payback and guarantee to the American taxpayers.
I know that what you talked about, the amount of money that
was spent in a prior Administration for a three- and four-year
study, then the new Administration comes and rushes it through
in five or six months and they found out that it had a
tremendous, tremendous employment impact; a lot of people would
have been displaced. And I think Congresswoman Capito will tell
you, in West Virginia all we want is a balance between the
environment and the economy. Can we do it better? Absolutely.
But we need government as our partner, not our adversary.
And we'll continue, if you've seen our terrain flying in
here, you know that we have some challenges, but we have been
blessed with the beauty and the natural resources. We can't
build a road in West Virginia without making some adjustments.
And if they take the approach that OSM is willing to take or
wanting to take, it would stop everything as you know it. The
economy would go to ``you-know-what'' in a handbasket and we'd
be in serious trouble.
Can we do it better? Absolutely. Can we do it? I always
said this. If it's unreasonable, it's unattainable. The
approach they're taking--and I've spoken to the OSM officials--
it is totally unreasonable. The aggressive approach they're
taking, it makes no sense at all when we're in such dire need
of the energy that we have in this great country and we've been
blessed with in our state.
I just thank all of you and I thank Shelley for bringing
everybody and for you all coming down. I know that Congressman
Rahall feels the same, Congressman McKinley feels the same,
Senator Rockefeller feels the same. We're all in on this one.
It doesn't have a party here. This is the most bipartisan
approach I think you can take and it's refreshing because we
don't see it too much in Washington. And I appreciate you all
being here.
Mr. Lamborn. Senator, thank you so much for your comments.
Does anyone on the Committee have a comment in response? Thank
you so much for being here. We appreciate it.
Senator Manchin. Thank you for allowing me to say it. I
appreciate it very much. Thank you.
Mr. Lamborn. Thank you. We will now have our second panel
and the witnesses on the second panel, of the three panels that
we'll be hearing from today, and we're going to be getting all
kinds of views on this important subject. But the second panel
will consist of Mr. Thomas L. Clarke, Director of the West
Virginia Division of Mining and Reclamation, Department of
Environmental Protection; Mr. Bradley C. Lambert, Deputy
Director of the Virginia Department of Mines, Minerals and
Energy; and Mr. John Corra, Director of the Wyoming Department
of Environmental Quality.
And I would remind the witnesses as they come forward and
get seated that members of the Committee may have additional
questions for the record. I would ask for you to respond to
these in writing. Like all of our witnesses, your written
testimony will appear in full in the hearing record, so I ask
that you keep your oral statements to five minutes as outlined
in the invitation letter. You have to push a button at the base
of the microphone to get them to work. And if you watch the
light, you'll see that you have five minutes. And the yellow
light comes on when you have one minute. The red light comes on
when your five minutes are over.
We will now begin with Mr. Clarke, and you may begin. Thank
you for being here.

STATEMENT OF THOMAS L. CLARKE, DIRECTOR OF MINING AND
RECLAMATION, WEST VIRGINIA DEPARTMENT OF ENVIRONMENTAL
PROTECTION

Mr. Clarke. Good morning. My name is Tom Clarke. I'm
Director of the West Virginia----
Mr. Lamborn. Could you speak into the microphone, please?
Mr. Clarke. OK. Good morning. My name is Tom Clarke. I'm
Director of the West Virginia Department of Environmental
Protection's Division of Mining and Reclamation. I would like
to welcome the Subcommittee to West Virginia and thank it for
allowing me to talk about the Office of Surface Mining's Stream
Protection measures environmental impact statement and
rulemaking.
What OSM is contemplating is a rewrite of all the rules
governing the way coal mining is conducted in America. The
Federal Surface Mining Act, SMCRA, governs OSM in this
rulemaking. SMCRA was adopted in 1977, after six years of
debate. This was in the midst of the energy crisis. In light of
this, and in spite of the positions of those who advocated
abolition or severe limitations on mining, Congress decided to
strike a balance between environmental protection and meeting
the nation's energy needs.
With stream protection measures rulemaking, OSM is trying
to alter the balance Congress establishment in 1977. This
balance involved increased production of coal with
environmental controls. Against the balance that Congress
struck, consider that OSM's proposal by OSM's own numbers would
radically alter the economy in the Appalachian region. Results
like these are wholly inconsistent with the balance Congress
struck in OSM should not be allowed to defy the intent Congress
expressed in the Act establishing it.
Mining, particularly mountaintop mining has been
controversial. However, instead of abolishing surface mining or
mountaintop mining, as some called for at the time, Congress
authorized both and contemplated expansion of coal mining to
meet the nation's energy needs. If there's political will to
change this, the change needs to come from Congress, not from
OSM. With this EIS and rulemaking, OSM is going to once again
destabilize the regulatory structure for mining. Consider that
every regulation of any significance that OSM originally
promulgated to implement was challenged. Only in the last few
years have legal challenges to the rules implementing some of
its basic concepts been resolved and a degree of regulatory
stability achieved. It took thirty years to get to this point.
OSM's rulemaking will end that and is likely to lead to years
of litigation and the uncertainty that goes with it.
The EIS OSM is conducting has been a debacle. It engaged a
contractor for this that apparently had never done an EIS and
knew nothing about mining or the regulatory structure. On top
of this, OMS expected the EIS to be completed in record time.
It expected a draft EIS in eight months. By comparison, the
draft EIS for the 2008 stream buffer zone rule, which OSM
intends to replace with the stream protection measures rule,
took 26 months, knowing this EIS built upon a previous one.
The stream protection measures EIS is being performed as a
standalone EIS. My agency and other state agencies have been
cooperating agencies on this EIS. As the entities with 30 years
of experience directly applying, we have valuable perspective
to lend if OSM is really interested in taking the hard look at
its proposed actions that NEPA contemplates. Instead, thus far
the process has been conducted so as to effectively deny
meaningful state participation. We were allowed five, four and
nine business days to review and comment on Chapters 2, 3 and
4, respectively. This involved hundreds of pages of material.
There is no indication that OSM paid any attention to our
comments. Under the circumstances, it is not surprising that
the drafts OSM's contractor provided were very poor. My Deputy
Director, who led our effort to review and comment on the
drafts, said that the draft EIS looked like something a college
student put together by cutting and pasting from the Internet.
In SMCRA, Congress recognized that the terrain and climate
vary widely across the country, and accordingly, chose to
assign primary responsibility for implementing it to the
states. Two of the concepts in that most peculiarly warrant the
state specific approach are approximate original contour and
material damage to the hydrologic balance. Contrary to the
expressed purposes of Congress, in this rulemaking OSM intends
to seize the authority to define these terms from the states
and dictate Federal standards for them from Washington.
Several other aspects of OSM's attempt to define material
damage are troubling. One of them is that OSM has indicated it
will include a biologic component in this definition. The
Subcommittee may be aware that an emerging issue in the
regulation of mining has been the extent of the protection
provided for by Biota, an aquatic ecosystem under state water
quality standards issued under the Clean Water Act. It's fair
to say that EPA and states are not quite seeing eye to eye on
this. OSM's entry into this debate by establishing biologic
standards may violate SMCRA. SMCRA states that it does not
supersede, amend or repeal the Clean Water Act. Because of
this, a previous account by OSM to establish what amounted to
water quality standards was rejected by the courts.
There are many more troubling aspects to the proposed
stream protection measures rulemaking. In the interest of
staying within our time limits, I won't go into them further,
but I encourage the Subcommittee to examine my written
submission where I have summarized some of them.
In closing, OSM needs to be held accountable to Congress.
And I thank you again for taking the opportunity and time to
hear from me.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Clarke follows:]

Statement of Thomas L. Clarke, Director, Division of Mining and
Reclamation, West Virginia Department of Environmental Protection

T he Decision as to Where the Balance Between Environmental Protection
and Energy Production Should be Struck is for Congress to Make,
Not OSM
Somewhere along the path that Congress established for it in the
Surface Mining Control and Reclamation Act (``SMCRA'' or the ``Act''),
the Office of Surface Mining Reclamation and Enforcement (OSM) has lost
its way. SMCRA was adopted in the midst of the Energy Crisis in 1977.
Accordingly, a balance between environmental protection and energy
production through coal mining was central to the policy Congress
established in this Act. Thirty four years after Congress established
the guiding principles for OSM's existence in SMCRA, OSM is
disregarding its Congressional charter in favor of an aggressive
regulatory agenda that runs directly contrary to these principles. In
Appalachia, the country's top coal producing region at SMCRA's
adoption, by OSM's own projections, the set of new regulations OSM is
pursuing, the Stream Protection Measures Rule, would cause:

A decrease in surface mine coal production in the
Appalachian Basin of 30%;

A loss of 10,749 jobs in the Appalachian basin under
the worst case scenario;

Lowering an additional 29,000 people in the
Appalachian Basin beneath the poverty level;

A 13.1% loss in severance tax; and,

An 11.7% decrease in income taxes.
Recently, there has been a good deal of public discourse over the
appropriate level of environmental protection that should govern the
coal mining industry. The debate is reminiscent of the issues that were
debated publicly and in Congress in the years leading up to SMCRA's
adoption. In OSM's Stream Protection Measures environmental impact
statement and rulemaking, it is playing to a constituency that, like
their predecessors a generation ago, favors abolishing or greatly
restricting surface coal mining in Appalachia. After at least six years
of debate in the 1970's, Congress rejected this approach and chose to
strike a balance between energy production and environmental
protection. In adopting SMCRA, Congress found, ``expansion of coal
mining to meet the Nation's energy needs makes even more urgent the
establishment of appropriate standards to minimize damage to the
environment and to productivity of the soil and to protect the health
and safety of the public'' 30 U.S.C. Sec. 1201(d). Among the express
purposes Congress set forth in the Act was to:
[A]ssure that the coal supply essential to the Nation's energy
requirements, and to its economic and social well-being is
provided and strike a balance between protection of the
environment and agricultural productivity and the Nation's need
for coal as an essential source of energy. . .
30 U.S.C. Sec. 1202(f). First among the requirements Congress included
in the performance standards section of SMCRA is a mandate that
operators ``conduct surface coal mining operations so as to maximize
the utilization and conservation of the solid fuel source. . .''. 30
U.S.C. Sec. 1265(b)(1). OSM is now trying to significantly alter the
balance struck by Congress in SMCRA and substitute its judgment as the
appropriate level of environmental protection for the well-considered
judgment Congress made on this subject in the Act. Policy judgments
that would radically change the economy of West Virginia and Appalachia
need to be made by Congress or the states and not federal bureaucrats
at OSM.
The Basis for OSM's Decision to Undertake the Stream Protection
Measures Rulemaking
With neither a new mandate from Congress, nor a record developed
over the many years of experience under this Act to support OSM's
regulatory agenda, one might wonder what the impetus behind this
attempt to totally change the rules on how coal mining is conducted in
America might be. The agency's only formal answer is disclosed in two
Federal Register notices it has published. OSM explained:
On June 11, 2009, the Secretary of the Department of the
Interior, the Administrator of the U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency (EPA), and the Acting Assistant Secretary of
the Army (Civil Works) entered into a memorandum of
understanding (MOU) implementing an interagency action plan
designed to significantly reduce the harmful environmental
consequences of surface coal mining operations in six
Appalachian states, while ensuring that future mining remains
consistent with Federal law.
75 Fed. Reg. 34667 (June 18, 2010); 75 Fed. Reg. 22723 (April 30,
2010). The June 11, 2009 MOU committed OSM to making ``[r]evisions to
key provisions of current SMCRA regulations, including the Stream
Buffer Zone Rule and Approximate Original Contour (AOC) requirements''.
In addition to the OSM rulemaking effort that is the subject of the
Energy and Mineral Resources Subcommittee's current focus, this June
11, 2009 MOU has been the genesis of other efforts undertaken by both
OSM and the United States Environmental Protection Agency (``USEPA'')
to unlawfully seize regulatory authority that legitimately resides with
the states and other agencies under SMCRA and the Clean Water Act
(``CWA'') and adopt what amount to new regulations for the regulation
of coal mining that are contrary to these agencies' enabling statutes.
The authors of this MOU apparently understood that accomplishment
of their regulatory goals would fundamentally change and, perhaps,
devastate the economy of the Appalachian region, which has historically
been dependent on coal mining. To address this, the MOU anticipates
that, ``the Federal government will help diversify and strengthen the
Appalachian regional economy. This effort will include the agencies to
this MOU, and other Federal agencies, as appropriate, and will work to
focus clean energy investments and create green jobs in Appalachia.''
Clearly, economic and social engineering is well beyond any legitimate
role Congress has granted to agencies like OSM, EPA and the other
signatories to the June 11, 2009 MOU. These agencies need to be
accountable to Congress and be required to operate within the legal
authority Congress has granted them.
OSM is Promoting Regulatory Uncertainty
SMCRA was adopted thirty four years ago. Through years of
regulatory experience under the Act since then, we have only recently
arrived at a point at which some regulatory certainty exists.
Litigation has been said to follow the promulgation of regulations
under the Act ``as night follows day''. Nearly all of the regulations
promulgated to implement the Act, mostly from the late 1970's and early
1980's, have been challenged in court. Only in the past few years have
challenges to some of the regulations implementing some of the Act's
basic concepts been finally resolved (e.g., ownership and control,
valid existing rights, subsidence impacts). A degree of regulatory
certainty has only recently been achieved under this thirty-plus year
old law. Just as this has happened, and without the benefit of a new
mandate from Congress supporting its actions or even a basis in the
regulatory record developed over years of oversight of state regulatory
programs, OSM is attempting to undertake a radical re-write of nearly
all of the rules governing the manner in which coal mining operations
are conducted. After over thirty years of efforts by OSM leadership,
through administrations of differing political viewpoints, to ``get it
right'' under SMCRA, today's OSM has decided that everyone who has
preceded it has gotten it one hundred percent wrong. In doing so, the
current OSM is boldly making quantum shifts in regulatory policy that
are Congress' business to make.
The EIS Process Has Excluded Meaningful State Participation
OSM correctly realized that its planned Stream Protection Measures
rulemaking was sufficient in scope to require the preparation of an
environmental impact statement (EIS) in accordance with the National
Environmental Policy Act. However, OSM's schedule for completing this
EIS was unrealistically ambitious. When the June 11, 2009 MOU committed
OSM to changing its 2008 stream buffer zone rule, OSM was already in
litigation with environmental groups challenging the 2008 rule. On
March 19, 2010, after OSM was unsuccessful in persuading the court to
allow it to simply cast aside the 2008 rule, OSM entered into a
``friendly'' settlement agreement with the opponents of this rule. In
this settlement, OSM committed to issuance of a proposed regulation
replacing the 2008 rule, i.e., the Stream Protection Measures rule, by
February 28, 2011. This necessarily required OSM to complete the draft
EIS for the Stream Protection Measures rule within the same time frame,
by February 28, 2011. The unreasonableness of the timeframe OSM
targeted for completion of this EIS might be best illustrated by a
comparison with the EIS it conducted for the 2008 stream buffer zone
rule, which it aimed to replace. From OSM's announcement of its intent
to prepare an EIS for the 2008 stream buffer zone rule through issuance
of a draft EIS, a little more than 26 months passed. Importantly, the
EIS for the 2008 rule built upon the more extensive Mountaintop
Mining--Valley Fill EIS that had recently been completed in 2005. In
contrast, the EIS for the Stream Protection Measures Rule has been
conducted as a stand-alone EIS for a much more sweeping regulatory
change than the 2008 stream buffer zone rule. OSM announced its intent
to prepare the Stream Protection Measures EIS in April, 2010 and again
in June, 2010. This allowed OSM only eight months to complete a draft
EIS for the Stream Protection Measures Rule.
OSM's schedule for the Stream Protection Measures EIS was totally
inadequate for the undertaking involved. Cooperating agencies on the
EIS, like the West Virginia Department of Environmental Protection,
were not allowed to comment on Chapter 1 of the preliminary draft EIS
that OSM prepared. The time cooperating agencies were allowed for
comment on hundreds of pages of material in Chapters 2, 3 and 4 was 5,
4 and 9 business days, respectively. OSM has either allowed the time
commitments it made in its settlement with environmental groups to turn
what should be an open, transparent EIS process into a sham or it has
intentionally designed a process so as to avoid a transparent, hard
look at the consequences of its proposed actions. Either way, OSM's
procedure thus far has been a rush to a predetermined result, without
any indication that it has paid attention to the comments of state
agencies that have years of valuable experience directly regulating the
coal industry under SMCRA.
It is difficult to discuss the shortcomings of OSM's process for
the EIS for the Stream Protection Measures Rule without also mentioning
the problems with the content of the portions of the draft EIS
cooperating agencies have been permitted to review. The contractor OSM
engaged to prepare the draft EIS had no experience with coal mining or
the surface mining regulatory program. This lack of experience shows
throughout the drafts OSM has shared. We understand that OSM has been
re-writing the drafts its contractor produced. It is our hope that this
will result in a greatly improved product. However, with the way OSM
has proceeded on the previous drafts of the EIS, we are greatly
concerned about whether we will be given an adequate opportunity to
review and comment on OSM's re-draft of the EIS. Again, the process for
a change as significant as OSM's complete re-write of the rules on how
coal mining is conducted in America should be done in a much more
transparent fashion.
The West Virginia Regulatory Program's Existing Stream Protection
Requirements
The regulatory programs in West Virginia and other states have not
been static. The state programs have evolved over time to deal with
state issues as they have arisen. The current OSM rulemaking will
diminish the regulatory flexibility that states have in favor of
national solutions dictated from Washington. West Virginia has been
successful in addressing new issues as they arise, within SMCRA's
regulatory framework. There are many requirements for the protection of
the hydrologic balance an applicant for a permit must meet before a
surface mining permit will be issued:

Core drilling must be conducted in the area where
surface mining is proposed. Each layer of rock in the core
sample is analyzed for chemical content. The data is used to
determine which rock layers have potential to leach and produce
pollutants. The principal focus has been on prevention of acid
mine drainage (low pH and iron) and selenium pollution. Rock
layers that exhibit this potential are required to be specially
handled and placed, so the opportunity for these materials to
come into contact with water is minimized.

The applicant must conduct extensive water sampling
to establish the pre-mining baseline condition for surface and
ground water quality and quantity in the area of the proposed
mine. The number of samples taken must be sufficient to
establish the seasonal variation in these baseline conditions.

The applicant must perform a detailed analysis of the
likely effects of its proposed mining operation. This analysis
is called a ``PHC'' (prediction of Probable Hydrologic
Consequences).

The applicant must include a Hydrologic Reclamation
Plan (``HRP'') in its application. The HRP must contain
measures the applicant will take to reduce the hydrologic
impact of its proposed mining operation, comply with effluent
limitations imposed under the CWA and a plan for replacement of
the water supply of anyone whose water supply is unexpectedly
contaminated or interrupted by the mining operation.

The applicant must perform a Storm Water Runoff
Assessment (SWROA). In the SWROA, the applicant must model
storm water runoff from the proposed mining operation under
pre-mining, worst case during mining, and post mining
scenarios. The SWROA must demonstrate that the mine has been
designed so as to not allow a net increase in peak runoff in
comparison to the pre-mining condition. There is no federal
counterpart to West Virginia's SWROA requirement.

The application must contain detailed engineering
design information for all drainage control or water retention
structures.

The applicant must demonstrate that it has minimized
the amount of mine spoil it is not using in reclamation (excess
spoil) and placing outside the mined area in a drainway or
stream. West Virginia requires applicants to utilize a modeling
tool called AOC+ (approximate original contour) in making this
demonstration. This modeling tool has been in use for more than
ten years and has been approved by USEPA, the Army Corps of
Engineers and OSM as a legitimate means of demonstrating the
amount of mine spoil returned to the mined-out area for use in
reclamation has been optimized and the size of any fill placed
in a stream outside the mined area has been minimized.

The agency must perform a Cumulative Hydrologic
Impact Assessment (``CHIA'') for the proposed mine and all
other existing or proposed mining in the cumulative impact area
for the proposed operation. A permit will not be issued unless
the agency can make a finding that the applicant has
affirmatively demonstrated that its proposed operation has been
designed to prevent ``material damage to the hydrologic balance
outside the permit area''.

West Virginia is one of a few states that have
promulgated regulations defining ``material damage to the
hydrologic balance''. There is no federal definition of this
term.

The agency performs a Buffer Zone Analysis (``BZA'')
for any permit which contemplates placement of spoil within one
hundred feet of an intermittent or perennial stream. The BZA
involves detailed environmental analyses of the environmental
impacts of spoil placement in such areas and has been relied
upon by the Army Corps of Engineers in its issuance of permits
for mining-related fills in waters of the United States under
section 404 of the Clean Water Act. There is no parallel to the
BZA in federal surface mining regulations. The BZA is described
in more detail in the attached letter from Thomas D. Shope of
OSM to Joseph M. Lovett dated December 8, 2009. This letter
also contains a detailed discussion of how the West Virginia
regulatory program complies with the State stream buffer zone
rule, which the subcommittee may also find to be of interest.

The permit must establish plans for monitoring
surface and ground water quality and quantity during mining, so
predictions in the applicant's PHC can be verified. It must
also include a during-mining monitoring plan for verification
of the predictions of the SWROA it has conducted.

The State recently adopted permitting guidance for
application of its narrative water quality standard for the
protection of the biologic component of the aquatic ecosystem
in NPDES permitting under the CWA. As a result, the Aquatic
Ecosystem Protection Plans required under this guidance for the
NPDES permitting program are now also being included in HRPs
for mining operations. CHIAs the agency performs are also
addressing protection of the aquatic ecosystem.
Beyond the permitting requirements outlined above, the West
Virginia regulatory program includes a number of performance standards
that apply to all aspects of hydrologic protection that are addressed
in permitting. The West Virginia Department of Environmental Protection
inspects all permits on a minimum frequency of once per month to assure
that performance standards and permit conditions are being met.
Enforcement action is taken, including notices of violation and
cessation orders, as appropriate, for a mine operator's failure to
comply. Civil penalties are assessed for non-compliance. Operators
which fail to correct violations on a timely basis are blocked from
receiving future permits. A pattern of violations can result in
suspension or revocation of a mine operator's permit.
Impacts of the Stream Protection Rule
As discussed above, the negative economic impacts OSM projects for
the Appalachian region are quite substantial. Because OSM has yet to
lift the veil on the actual language of its proposed rule, a concise
assessment of the rule's regulatory burden on state agencies cannot be
performed. However, some observations can be made, based on the actions
OSM has otherwise taken since the Interior Department signed on to the
June 11, 2009 MOU and the concepts of the Stream Protection Measures
Rule that state agencies have been able to glean from portions of the
draft EIS and briefings OSM has provided.
If the general direction OSM has taken since the June11, 2009 MOU
is any indication, the regulatory burden the Stream Protection Measures
Rule will impose on state regulatory programs can be expected to be
quite substantial. Nearly every action OSM has taken since the June 11,
2009 MOU has increased the burden on the states. Consider that OSM:

Has unlawfully terminated the Abandoned Mine Lands
emergency program and indicated that it will transfer the
personnel OSM had previously dedicated to this program to
oversight of state programs;

Proposed a draft budget that cuts funding of state
regulatory programs by 15%; and,

Promulgated, without formal rulemaking, three new
policies governing oversight of state regulatory programs, REG-
8, REG-23 and INE-35, which each alter the federal-state
relationship that previously existed and impose substantial new
bureaucratic regulatory burdens on the states.
At the same time OSM is adding more sets of eyes to watch state
regulators and increase the number of federal inquiries to which states
must respond, it is proposing to reduce the amount of money available
to the states to operate their programs and has aggressively increased
the bureaucratic burden it imposes on the states. With a total re-write
of all of the rules on how coal mining is conducted, the changes states
must undergo to implement the Stream Protection Measures Rule may
represent the most significant of any of the new burdens the current
OSM has thrust upon the states.
Another fundamental shift in the federal-state relationship under
SMCRA that will come from the Stream Protection Measures Rule is in the
ability of states to craft their regulatory programs as necessary to
address local state issues. In the thirty four years since SMCRA was
adopted, OSM has left two of the Act's most fundamental concepts
``approximate original contour'' and ``material damage to the
hydrologic balance'', to the states to apply. This was done with good
reason. Application of ``approximate original contour'' in the rugged
Appalachian terrain of eastern Kentucky, southwest Virginia and
southern West Virginia raises far different issues than in the flatter
farmland of Indiana or the western plains. Application of the term,
``material damage to the hydrologic balance'' necessarily involves
vastly different issues in the arid west than in the more humid east.
The Stream Protection Measures Rule will end the authority to deal with
state-specific issues at the state level that states currently enjoy.
It will impose national one-size-fits-all standards from Washington.
This approach runs contrary to one of the express findings Congress
made in adopting SMCRA:
[B]ecause of the diversity in terrain, climate, biologic,
chemical, and other physical conditions in areas subject to
mining operations, the primary governmental responsibility for
developing, authorizing, issuing, and enforcing regulations for
surface mining and reclamation operations subject to this Act
should rest with the States[.]
30 U.S.C. Sec. 1201(f).
There are many other specific issues with concepts that are
expected to be embodied in the Stream Protection Measures Rule that are
troublesome to the West Virginia Department of Environmental
Protection. Some of them are:

SMCRA provides that it is not to be applied in a
manner that will supersede, amend or repeal the federal Clean
Water Act. 30 U.S.C. Sec. 1292(a). This provision of SMCRA has
been applied by the courts to reject a past attempt by OSM to
establish what amounted to water quality standards. At the
present time, several of the Appalachian states, including West
Virginia, are in the process of establishing how narrative
state water quality standards for the protection of biologic
components of the aquatic ecosystem are to be applied in the
context of the regulation of coal mining. This process involves
great potential for conflict between USEPA and the states over
the application the Clean Water Act in this area. OSM intends
to interject itself in the middle of the debate between USEPA
and the states over this issue by including a biologic
component in its material damage definition . There is great
potential for this element of OSM's rules to conflict with the
Clean Water Act. The biologic component of the material damage
definition may be another unlawful attempt by OSM to establish
what amounts to a water quality standard.

A proposed performance standard that would prohibit
adverse impacts to a stream's biologic community. This proposal
suffers from the same defects that affect OSM's proposal to
include a biologic component in its material damage definition,
as discussed in the paragraph above.

The material damage definition is also expected to
include ``quantification methods'' to define what constitutes
material damage. Again, OSM appears to be at risk of
interfering with the Clean Water Act where these quantification
methods amount to de facto numeric water quality standards.

The material damage definition will also include
``corrective action thresholds'' to identify trends and require
correction before the level of material damage is reached.
This, too, presents great potential for conflict with the Clean
Water Act. The NPDES permitting program under the Clean Water
Act has a process to establish effluent limitations for
protection of water resources. Discharges from mines or other
facilities that comply with these limitations are lawful and
discharges that exceed these limitations are unlawful. OSM's
corrective action thresholds would appear to be attaching
regulatory consequences to what would otherwise be lawful
discharges under the Clean Water Act's NPDES program, in
conflict with the Clean Water Act.

The material damage definition is expected to codify
OSM's Acid Mine Drainage Policy. Without getting into an in-
depth discussion of the AMD policy, this probably is a
sufficient enough departure from the statutory language of
SMCRA to require it to be adopted through Congressional action
rather than agency rulemaking.

OSM will propose that approval to mine through
natural drainage ways or streams be ``sequenced''. By this, OSM
means that a mine must completely reclaim a drainway it has
mined through, including restoration of the pre-mining biologic
community in the drainway, before the mine will be allowed to
mine through any subsequent drainway. In as much as drainways
across Appalachian mountain sides may be separated by only a
couple hundred feet, this proposal is entirely unrealistic.

The portion of the Stream Protection Measures Rule
that deals with disposal of excess spoil proposes to require
constructed aquatards within excess spoil fills. Historically,
nearly all of the construction standards that have applied to
excess spoil fills have been oriented toward assuring their
stability. One element of the design has been to assure that
these structures drain freely. An aquatard is a layer of
decreased permeability where water will be forced to drain
laterally through the interior of a fill. This has the
potential to seriously compromise the structural integrity of
these fills. Our engineers refer to the aquatard as a ``failure
plane.'' The failure of such a structure would be a threat to
public safety.

The excess spoil disposal rules will also require the
tops of fills to be sloped to cause drainage to run off instead
of infiltrating the fill. Achieving the goal of promoting
runoff will cause peak flow to increase during rain events,
contributing to offsite flooding.

OSM proposes to place additional restrictions on the
granting of variances from the existing requirement for
restoration of the approximate original contour of mined lands.
This proposal has great potential to conflict with West
Virginia land use planning laws. The coal mining areas of
southern West Virginia have had little economic development
because the terrain is too rugged. The State Legislature has
recognized that mining presents a unique opportunity to provide
a resource that these areas lack, flat land. This is essential
to the future, post-mining economic viability of these areas.
The State has adopted legislation which requires county level
economic development authorities to develop county-wide master
land use plans. These plans are required to be approved by
state government and to meet certain minimum state
requirements. Each plan must be updated and re-approved by the
State at three year intervals so as assure that it remains
current. Under these plans, land that is proximal to supporting
infrastructure, such as four lane highways or other
transportation corridors, is targeted for development while
forestry and comparable land uses are planned for more remote
lands. New mining operations are required to attain a post mine
land use that comports with the county master land use plan.
OSM's proposal to further restrict variances from the
approximate original contour requirement conflicts with these
State land use laws and may foreclose the opportunity to
provide flat land through the mining process, so there can be
economic development of these historically coal dependent areas
after the coal is gone.
Conclusion
I sincerely hope this written statement, the attachment submitted
herewith and the oral testimony presented before the subcommittee are
useful to it. If I can be of further assistance to the subcommittee,
please contact me.

Attachment

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Lamborn. Thank you, Mr. Clarke. Mr. Lambert?

STATEMENT OF BRADLEY C. LAMBERT, DEPUTY DIRECTOR, VIRGINIA
DEPARTMENT OF MINES, MINERALS & ENERGY

Mr. Lambert. Good morning, Mr Chairman and members of the
Subcommittee. My name is Bradley Lambert and I serve as the
Deputy Director of the Virginia Department of Mines, Minerals
and Energy. Thank you for this opportunity to appear before you
today.
The coalfields of Virginia are characterized by steep
slopes and narrow valleys. The mines in Virginia predominantly
consist of underground and contour surface operations. Without
coal surface mining, land uses such as hospitals, schools,
shopping centers, airports, residential development, commercial
and industrial development would not exist.
Virginia obtained primacy from OSM as a regulatory
authority for coal surface mining in December of 1981. OSM's
annual oversight reports for Virginia have not identified any
problems that would necessitate such a drastic rule change as
we're here today to testify about. OSM stated in a 2010 report
that they did not identify any systemic failures within the
Virginia state program.
Mr. Chairman, I'd like to submit for the record a copy of
the 2010 Annual Report from OSM on Virginia.
Mr. Lamborn. If there is no objection, that will be
included in the record.
[NOTE: The reports for Virginia and Wyoming can be found at
http://www.osmre.gov/Reports/EvalInfo/2010/VA10-aml-reg.pdf and
http://www.osmre.gov/Reports/EvalInfo/2010/WY10-reg.pdf]
Mr. Lambert. After implementing years of stellar regulatory
programs, OSM appears to be determined to impose a drastic
change in how states administer our programs. In 2009, three
Federal agencies including OSM, EPA and the Army Corps of
Engineers, signed a MOU that appears to be the basis for the
effort by OSM to change or revise the long-standing stream
buffer zone rule. Early in the development of the draft EIS of
the rule, OSM invited several states to participate as
cooperating agencies. OSM hired a contractor from outside the
coal mining regions who had no coal mining background. State
cooperating agencies voiced their concern about the contractor
and its ability to complete the draft EIS.
OSM set an unreasonable time schedule for the review of
each chapter of the draft and provide comments. In most cases,
only five days were allowed for the review. The cooperating
agencies expressed concerns regarding the timeframes under
which they had to provide comments and many times requested an
extension for the submission of comments. OSM never granted
these requests.
This proposed rulemaking will almost completely revise and
undo 30 years of progress in the developing of regulatory
framework in which primacy states, such as Virginia, administer
their program. It has been learned that OSM dedicated $7
million to completing the draft EIS. After the state
cooperating agencies and other organizations outlined grave
deficiencies in the draft of the EIS from the contractor, OSM
removed the contractor as the lead and stopped their work.
However, the contractor was paid $3.5 million for their
deficient, inaccurate work. Now, it's been learned that OSM has
hired another contractor for an additional $1 million for work
on the draft EIS. To date, $4.5 million has been spent on the
draft with nothing completed.
On March 8, 2011, Virginia Governor Robert F. McDonnell
wrote a letter to the Interior Secretary, Ken Salazar,
expressing deep concerns about the draft EIS and other
regulatory actions taken by OSM. Among those concerns were the
potential significant and negative impacts of these actions on
Virginia's coal industry and the economy. OSM director Joseph
Pizarchik responded on behalf of Secretary Salazar. Mr.
Chairman, I'd like to submit for the record both the letter
from Governor McDonnell and a response letter from OSM Director
Pizarchik.
Mr. Lamborn. If there is no objection, that will be entered
into the record.
[The letters submitted for the record follow:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Lambert. Another major assumption in the draft EIS
is that metallurgical coal production from the Appalachian
Basin, including Virginia, would be offset with production from
other sources. Virginia coal has a higher BTU and lower sulfur
content than the national average. This quality makes Virginia
coal more desirable for metallurgical coke production and
export overseas for the export market.
Finally, in a July 9, 2010 OSM press release titled,
``Reducing the Social Cost of Energy,'' the agency stated that
the intent of their oversight role. The release points out that
the role of OSM is to help states maintain high standards and
maintain a level playing field so that the industry in any one
state does not have an unfair advantage in interstate
competition.
Mr. Chairman, clearly this is not the direction set out in
the draft EIS. As pointed out by the contractor, coal
production would be shifted from the Appalachian Basin to the
western region and, in most cases, metallurgical coal
production would have to be provided from overseas sources.
Thank you for this opportunity this morning and I will be
happy to answer any questions you may have.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Lambert follows:]

Statement of Bradley C. (Butch) Lambert, Deputy Director,
Virginia Department of Mines, Minerals and Energy

My name is Bradley C. Lambert and I serve as Deputy Director of the
Virginia Department of Mines, Minerals and Energy (DMME). I appreciate
the opportunity to present this statement to the Subcommittee regarding
the views of the DMME on the rewrite on the Stream Buffer Zone Rule.
I would like to begin by providing you with some background
information about the Virginia coal industry and DMME. Coal production
has been important to Virginia's economic development since colonial
days. The first commercial coal production in the United States
occurred in 1748 from the Richmond Coal Basin just west of the State
Capital in Richmond, Virginia. Coal production was important to
Virginia until the Civil War during which much of the coal industry was
destroyed. Commercial coal mining later rebounded in Virginia's
southwestern-most counties in the 1880's and has been conducted
continuously through to the present. Today, coal is produced in the
seven extreme southwest Virginia counties.
Virginia first implemented rules to address coal mining and
reclamation issues in 1966. The minimal requirements of the early law
and regulations failed to keep pace with the rapid expansion of surface
mining activities in the Appalachian region. Following the passage of
the 1977 Federal Surface Mining Control and Reclamation Act, Virginia
sought and obtained primacy from the U.S. Office of Surface Mining
(OSM) as the primary regulatory authority for coal surface mining in
December of 1981.
The coalfields of Virginia are characterized by steep slopes and
narrow valleys. The mines in Virginia predominantly consist of
underground and contour surface operations. Other operations include
auger and highwall mining. Presently, Virginia has four mountaintop
removal coal mines. These four operations have post mining land uses
that include farm land, industrial, commercial or residential. Without
mountaintop mining operations, land uses such as hospitals, schools,
shopping centers, airports, and residential and commercial/industrial
development would not exist.
Coal production in Virginia peaked at 47 million tons in 1990.
Expected production for 2011 will reach approximately 23 million tons.
Virginia coal is of a higher British Thermal Unit (BTU) and lower
sulfur content than the national average. This quality has made
Virginia coal more desirable for metallurgical coke production and for
the export market.
Virginia's regulatory program is recognized across the nation as a
leader and an innovator in many areas. Many states have benchmarked
with Virginia on areas such as electronic permitting, underground mine
mapping and the development of a GIS database that includes all surface
mining areas as well as abandoned mined lands. Virginia continues to
work on making this information available for public viewing through an
outward facing web site. Through our electronic permitting system,
other state and federal agencies can access coal mining permit data and
applications and provide comments using the electronic application.
OSM's Draft Environmental Impact Statement for the Proposed Stream
Buffer Zone Rule
The OSM's annual oversight reports for Virginia have not identified
any problems that would necessitate such a drastic rule making. In
fact, in the OSM Annual Evaluation Summary Report for the evaluation
year of 2011, OSM writes ``Since the mid 1990's OSM has focused
oversight on the ``on ground'' results that states are achieving. OSM
is proposing that future oversight will likely include review of state
permitting processes more closely. Yet, even when evaluated with a
slightly different view on oversight, OSM finds that DMLR has
successfully implemented both its regulatory and abandoned mine land
program during the past year. OSM did not identify any systemic
failures within the State program.'' We are submitting for the record a
copy of the OSM's Annual Evaluation Summary Report for the Regulatory
and Abandoned Mine Land Programs Administered by the Commonwealth of
Virginia for 2010.
For years the states have been administering stellar regulatory
programs. Now the OSM appears to be determined to impose a drastic
change in how states administer their programs. The OSM has not
provided any information to the states as to the reason for revising
the Stream Buffer Zone Rule that they have now termed the Stream
Protection Rule. Nothing in the states' Annual Evaluation Report
indicates that the states are doing a poor job of enforcing the current
surface mining laws. The U.S. Department of the Interior, U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) and the U.S. Army Corps of
Engineers (ACOE) signed a Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) in 2009,
that appears to be the basis for the effort by OSM to change/revise the
long standing Stream Buffer Zone Rule. The states were not consulted
about or invited to sign this MOU, which is aimed at altering state
regulatory programs. Yet this MOU is having a direct impact on the
implementation of state programs. One significant item resulting from
the MOU was the proposed the Stream Buffer Zone Rule. Early in the
development of the draft rule OSM invited several states; including
Virginia to participate in the development of the draft Environmental
Impact Statement (DEIS) as cooperating agencies. OSM hired a contractor
from outside the coal mining regions who had no mining background.
Cooperating agency states voiced their concern about the contactor and
its ability to complete the DEIS; however OSM moved forward with the
contract.
OSM set an unreasonable time schedule for cooperating agencies to
review each chapter of the DEIS and provide comments back to OSM. In
most cases only five days were allowed for the review. Due to such
short timeframes for review and comment, meaningful input was made
nearly impossible. In order to comply with these deadlines, states had
to devote considerable staff time to the preparation of their comments
which left less time for review of permit applications, answering
citizen's complaints and completing required permit inspections. The
cooperating agencies expressed concerns regarding the constrained
timeframes under which they had to operate to provide comments and
requested an extension for submission of comments on many occasions.
OSM never granted these requests, even though OSM allowed
additional time for the contractor to complete their work. It was made
clear that if comments were not provided, they would not be accepted.
However, any conflicting or critical statements from the cooperating
agencies were ignored and not addressed in the DEIS. Later it was
learned that other federal agencies that were reviewing the DEIS were
not under the same time constraints for providing comments as were the
states.
The DEIS provided to cooperating agencies for their review and
comments appears to be a document designed to support and rationalize
OSM's decision to promulgate rules to diminish or eliminate Appalachian
surface coal mining. All the action alternatives examined in the DEIS,
other than taking no action, predict that the proposed stream
protection rules would decrease Appalachian surface coal mining
significantly. The predictions of decrease range from 10% to 100%--with
OSM's preferred alternative (Alternative 5 in the DEIS) predicting a
30% decrease.
A major assumption is that metallurgical coal production from the
Appalachian regions would need to be offset with production from other
areas. The DEIS does not identify any other possible sources of
metallurgical coal. This implies metallurgical coal would have to be
obtained outside the United States. As metallurgical coal sale prices
are usually three or four times higher than coal used for electricity
generation, this would have a major economic impact (as inferred in the
DEIS) since there will be a significant loss of coal needed for steel
production.
The DEIS appears to have been developed by individuals who are
unfamiliar with the ecological functions, geology, hydrology, and
mining practices in individual states. The data and impacts identified
are limited to specific states within the Appalachian Region; however,
the requirements contained within this document will pertain to each
state within the entire Region.
Instead of a document designed to support and rationalize a pre-
determined outcome, the DEIS should be a statement of fact-based
alternative environmental results. Furthermore, the alternative
outcomes should seriously consider the single most significant factor
influencing environmental conditions in Virginia's coalfields--old
abandoned mined lands (AML). The DEIS does not address the existing
impacts to watersheds from pre-law mining and other non-point sources
of impairments which affect most streams in the mining areas in
Virginia. Approximately 90 percent of the streams in the Virginia
coalfields have been impacted by water quality degradation, stream
function degradation, loss of riparian habitat, etc. Surface mining has
been used effectively in conjunction with Total Maximum Daily Load
(TMDL) requirements to correct AML features which would never be
addressed with AML funding. In fact, the TMDL implementation plans rely
almost exclusively on remining, TMDL offsets and no-cost agreements to
restore these streams to an unimpaired level.
Reduction/elimination of surface mining in Virginia will severely
impact stream restoration efforts. There are no other resources
available to the coalfield communities to restore impaired streams. The
shift of coal mining to the western United States will also reduce the
AML funding available to restore impacted eastern streams through the
OSM Clean Streams Initiative.
The lack of attention to AML is one of several technical concerns
that our agency has with the information in the DEIS. Other technical
issues include OSM's efforts to define material damage, mandate post
mining land uses, and misrepresent some of the scientific data.
OSM is proposing that material damage to the hydrologic balance be
defined as a measurable adverse impact on water quality and quantity
resulting from degraded biological conditions in the intermittent and
perennial stream network within the watershed. The concept that any
measurable adverse impact be considered ``material damage'' is contrary
to the plain language of SMCRA which states in Section 515 (b):
``General performance standards shall be applicable to all surface coal
mining and reclamation operations and shall require the operation to
minimize the disturbances to the prevailing hydrologic balance at the
mine-site and in associated offsite areas and to the quality and
quantity of water in surface and ground water systems both during and
after surface coal mining operations and during reclamation to the
extent possible using the best technology currently available.'' As can
be seen by this language the intent is to ``minimize'' adverse impacts
to the hydrological balance--not to prevent any adverse impact. It is
impossible to conduct surface disturbance operations such as coal
mining or even underground mining operations, without temporarily
leaving a footprint of some sort on the environment.
The DEIS proposes a mandated post-mining land use. This is contrary
to the spirit of SMCRA. Even though Virginia encourages reforestation,
we recognize the environmental and economical value in a range of post
mining land uses and the landowner's rights to implement land uses that
are approved and properly implemented. Mandatory post mining land use
requirements appear to be designed as simply another general obstacle
to surface mining, as opposed to the idea of improving conditions after
mining in such a way that mined lands properly reclaimed.
Virginia has been a leader in promoting successful reclamation of
mined lands. Working closely with Virginia Tech and other colleges and
universities, Virginia and other Appalachian states and OSM developed a
method for reclaiming mined lands to a reforestation land use. In 2011
in Virginia, 2226.75 acres were planted with a total of 1,475,293
trees. Of that total, 98.20% of the acres were reclaimed using the
method developed. The reforestation method was accomplished in
cooperation with the request of the landowner. The DEIS would not take
into account the landowner's request for a post mining land use. The
statement in the DEIS of post mining land uses going to hay/land
pasture is not true in Virginia. The majority of coal mine reclamation
returns land to an unmanaged forest post mining land use.
Many of the scientific studies referenced throughout this EIS have
been misrepresented and taken out of context. Others were not extracted
from peer reviewed journals and should not be included in a decision
document. Studies involving the effects of total dissolved solids (TDS)
on coalfield streams did not include data collected from Virginia, even
though our agency has been effectively addressing TDS through the TMDL
program since 2005. Yet findings of the cited studies are being broadly
applied to Virginia.
OSM's proposed rulemaking on ``stream protection measures'' appears
to be headed in a direction that will jeopardize the coal mining
industry in Virginia. This proposed rulemaking will almost completely
revise the Surface Mining Control and Reclamation Act (SMCRA) of 1977.
This will undo over 30 years of progress in developing a regulatory
framework in which primacy states, such as Virginia, administer a
state-specific program, approved by the Secretary of the Interior, that
is as effective as and no less stringent than the federal program.
Several proposals in the OSM DEIS regarding ``preferred
alternatives'' (such as not allowing a mine-through of a stream or
drain way) are troubling. The requirements that, before a stream or
drain way could be mined through, there must be a demonstration made by
the applicant that the stream ``form and function'' can be restored,
and that a premining impaired condition of a stream would not be
accepted as the standard for measurement of success fly in the face of
the Clean Water Act Rahall Amendment. This amendment authorizes the
discharge of impaired waters from reclaimed remining operations as long
as it is as good as or better than the premining baseline water
quality.

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Virginia mining operations containing stream channel
reconstructions, such as the one pictured above, have won numerous
awards including the Appalachian Region Reforestation Initiative Award
presented by OSM, the National Association of State Land Reclamationist
Award and the Interstate Mining Compact Commission's Kenes C. Bowling
Award.
OSM does not have the statutory authority to over ride Clean Water
Act provisions such as the Rahall Amendment. The proposed rule contains
numerous statements that OSM does not intend to utilize Clean Water Act
provisions. For instance, in the preferred alternative for stream
definition, OSM's DEIS preferred alternative states, ``This Proposed
Action does not follow. . .Alternative #4's reliance on the CWA
definitions.'' As the Army Corps of Engineers (CORPS) is charged with
designating jurisdictional waters for the purposes of Section 404
mining permits, OSM is establishing a separate stream designation
process that it clearly intends to set up at its own discretion. This
will most likely result in confusion and litigation, allowing second
guessing of Corps' jurisdictional determinations.
Statements in the DEIS lead the readers to believe that underground
mining methods such as longwall mining will not be impacted.
Underground mining can and will in some cases cause subsidence which
will impact surface structures including streams. One statement in the
document says that longwall mining does not cause subsidence even at
depth. Those familiar with this type of mining know that this statement
is not true. In fact, these operations plan for subsidence well in
advance of mining. Underground mining, especially longwall mining,
would be significantly restricted not only in the Appalachian region
but any area where this type of mining is used since streams would be
impacted by subsidence.
Turning to the cost of the EIS, it has been determined that OSM had
dedicated seven million dollars to completing the DEIS. These are funds
that were originally identified for state regulatory programs. After
the state cooperating agencies and other organizations outlined grave
deficiencies in the DEIS from the contractor, OSM removed the
contractor and stopped their work in developing the DEIS. However, the
contractor was paid $3.5 million for their substandard and inaccurate
work. OSM never had any discussions with the cooperating agencies about
the problem with the contractor and were never notified that the
contractor had been removed until after the fact. Now it has been
learned that OSM has hired another contractor for $1 million for
additional work on the DEIS. To date, $4.5 million has been spent on
this DEIS with nothing completed.
The impact of the DEIS alternatives on state regulatory programs
has not been studied. The implications of these alternatives, such as
increased permitting and monitoring requirements would be staggering.
The changes proposed by the DEIS would create changes to the permitting
process, which would mean increased staff for permit review, bonding
review and most of all an increase in required funding for state
programs. OSM's proposed funding for state programs has been decreasing
over the last several years. In April of this year, states appeared
before this subcommittee to express concerns about the potential
federal budget reduction for state programs. At no time in the
development of the DEIS has OSM consulted with states for input
regarding the impact on additional resources and additional permit
review times that the various alternatives would require.
On March 8, 2011, Virginia Governor Robert F. McDonnell wrote a
letter to Interior Secretary Ken Salazar expressing deep concerns about
the DEIS and other regulatory action taken by OSM. (Governor
McDonnell's letter and a response from OSM Director Joseph Pizarchik on
behalf of Secretary Salazar are submitted for the record.) Among those
concerns were the potential significant and negative impacts of these
actions on Virginia's coal industry and economy. One of Virginia's
vital resources, coal is used to produce 48% of the electricity
consumed in the state, and much of Virginia's coals are of high grade
metallurgical grade. Governor McDonnell also noted that coal production
in the southwest region of the state is the primary economic engine for
the region. Coal mining jobs are among the highest paying in the area,
and many small businesses depend on the coal industry for their
livelihood.
The authors of the DEIS did not consider the census data for
population trends. There are continuing out-migrations of people from
the Appalachian coalfields, and any loss of jobs from the coal industry
will only hasten the exodus. The employment in Virginia's mining
industry has continued to decline during the past decade, not grow as
indicated in the DEIS. The authors did not consult with state agencies
for any employment numbers; they only made assumptions. Throughout the
DEIS, the loss of direct service jobs, local retail jobs, as well as
other indirect employment appears not to have been considered. In fact,
projected employment loss is sometimes noted in the DEIS as being
minor. However, local planning agencies in Virginia estimate that the
multiplier effect of one coal mining job is from 4-6 additional jobs.
In addition to the impacts of the stream protection measures on the
industry and economy, Governor McDonnell noted that these requirements
would have a detrimental effect on the remining of previously mined
lands where lower priority abandoned mine land (AML) features continue
to impact the environment. These impacts are not addressed in the DEIS.
Nearly 80% of surface coal mining in Virginia involves some remining,
including the use of no-cost AML projects where mining companies can
reclaim AML features adjacent to permitted active coal mining sites.
Remining has proven to be a viable method of correcting serious
environmental and other problems that would not otherwise be funded
under the Abandoned Mine Land Program.
Finally, Governor McDonnell voiced his concerns that OSM has failed
to follow Administrative Procedures Act and National Environmental
Policy Act requirements in their rulemaking process. This equated to
OSM writing the rule without completing a valid EIS and stating what
the ``answer'' is without defining the ``problem.'' Contrary to OSM's
assertion in OSM Director Pizarchik's response to Governor McDonnell
that such failures did not take place, state agencies learned from
information leaked on OSM's Share Point website that indeed OSM had
developed a draft Stream Protection Rule.
In summary, although the DEIS regarding OSM's proposed Stream
Protection Rule examines the effects of the rulemaking on the 25 coal
producing states, during the review of the document, staff from
Virginia's Department of Mines, Minerals and Energy discovered that the
majority of the adverse impacts will be within the Appalachian Basin.
The effects of this rulemaking would eliminate many jobs and millions
of dollars of revenue in Virginia. Virginia does not agree with the
proposed rulemaking and the findings of the DEIS. Much, if not most, of
the data included in the DEIS are not supported by any actual facts or
figures. The information provided in the DEIS is often and inexcusably
biased against the Appalachian Basin especially, in Virginia. OSM has a
predetermined outcome (elimination of surface coal mining in the
Appalachian Basin) and has not analyzed data nor conducted any studies
to support their conclusions.
Virginia believes that the state's environmental resources are
protected by Virginia's current mining laws and regulations. We also
believe that the economic impacts of the rulemaking are severely
understated. Local level impacts would be intense and a global impact
would be expected. A major assumption in the DEIS is that metallurgical
coal production from the Appalachian Basin, including Virginia, would
be offset with production from other sources. However, high value
metallurgical coal would have to be obtained from outside the United
States which is another example of industries moving overseas to the
detriment of domestic production.
In a July 9, 2002, OSM press release titled, ``Reducing the Social
Cost of Energy,'' the agency stated the intent of their oversight role.
The release points out that the role of OSM is to help states maintain
high standards and maintain a level playing field so the industry in
any one state does not have an unfair advantage in interstate
competition. Clearly, this is not the direction of the DEIS. As pointed
out by the contractor, coal production would be shifted for the
Appalachian Basin to the western region, and in the case of
metallurgical coal, that production may be moved overseas.
One impact that has not been fully explored is the impacts to the
AML program that may see human and health and safety problems go
unabated with the loss of AML taxes on coal production. Employment
opportunities in the Appalachian Basin are very limited and the loss of
over seven thousand jobs as predicted in the DEIS would only increase
the poverty level in the area. Mining provides some of the highest
paying jobs in Southwest Virginia, and many small businesses depend
upon coal companies for the bulk if not all of their income. Coal
mining plays a major role in the opening up of areas for development.
The Virginia Coalfield Economic Development Authority works closely
with the respective county Industrial Development Authorities and coal
companies to locate and acquire reclaimed level land for industrial
development.
It is also of note that the OSM DEIS does not include any changes
to mining and permitting due to EPA's reinterpretation of the Clean
Water Act. The combined impacts of these agencies' actions are
devastating to the nation's economic and energy future. OSM's
rulemaking proposes to shift coal mining production from the eastern
United States to the western region to the detriment of the Appalachian
Basin's economy.
______

Mr. Lamborn. Thank you for your testimony and now to help
us get a national perspective, the gentleman from Wyoming, Mr.
Corra.

STATEMENT OF JOHN CORRA, DIRECTOR,
WYOMING DEPARTMENT OF ENVIRONMENTAL QUALITY

Mr. Corra. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. My name is John Corra.
I'm the Director of the Wyoming Department of Environmental
Quality. And I thank the Subcommittee for inviting us to
testify today.
The OSM has used a court order and an agreement with other
Federal agencies aimed at tackling a problem in Appalachia as
an excuse to impose unnecessary and costly over-regulation
across all coal mining states. OSM's rush for completing the
rulemaking is limited to the thoughtful and reasonable ``hard
look'' as required under NEPA.
The memorandum of understanding between the U.S. EPA, the
Army Corps of Engineers and the Department of the Interior was
specifically targeted at Appalachian coal mining, yet OSM has
launched a nationwide overhaul of its program. As noted in a
Western Governors' Association letter to Secretary Salazar in
February of this year, a copy of which I submit for the record,
we are unaware of any objective data, scientific or otherwise,
that supports this level of change to SMCRA.
Mr. Lamborn. And if there is no objection, we will enter
that into the record, as well.

[The letter from the Western Governors' Association
follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Corra. In fact, there is significant evidence from
OSM's own evaluation reports for Wyoming and other western
states that current regulatory programs are working well. I
would urge the OSM to reexamine the purpose and need for these
rules. Now, if OSM proceeds with this rulemaking, it should be
reminded not only of the MOU but also its own recognition of
differences between east and west, and thereby apply the
proposed regulations only east of the 100th meridian. This
approach would parallel SMCRA's current legal framework and
guidance documents.
For example, alluvial valley floor protection is only west
of the 100th meridian and, likewise, a bond release clock is
only five years east of that line, ten years west of that line.
Also, recognizing differences in water uses, quality and
availability, Clean Water Act regulations have also treated
area of the country west of the 98th meridian differently than
the east. We can't help but think that both the Corps and EPA
had this historical perspective about the nation's waters
outside of Appalachia in mind when they signed the MOU.
This rulemaking may also conflict with state authorities
under the Clean Water Act. OSM does not have the authority to
attempt to broaden a state's water quality standards by
adopting new stream definitions, criteria and other
restrictions. OSM's actions consistently appear to avoid or
limit public and state comment. They have done so throughout
the process. Scoping meetings were a sham because the public
was not even allowed to speak at the agency's public meetings.
The open house meeting in Gillette, Wyoming, for example, which
is the center of 40 percent of the coal production in the
United States, was held on the evening of July 29, 2010. The
comment period ended the next day.
The proposed rules will result in massive increases of
information and data collection that may not even be useful or
practical in improving environmental performance. To elaborate
on just one aspect of those changes, the use of climax
communities as a vegetation standard, it is widely recognized
that periodic drought conditions, grazing impacts, and other
pre-mining land uses make it nearly impossible to determine
what the climax state of vegetation was or might be, let alone
how accurately to measure it in the west.
OSM also appears to be ignoring the substantial resource
implications for these proposed rules. We find this
particularly disturbing in light of the fact that OSM has a
goal of significantly reducing their share of funding for our
regulatory programs, while simultaneously considering adding
significant staff for oversight activities, as well as
significant staff to implement the stream protection rule.
We're hopeful that OSM will comply with its obligations
under NEPA and conduct a genuine EIS process where states are
engaged in meaningful discussions. It must also make the effort
to conduct a thorough economic analysis. What we have seen so
far is inadequate, given the complex decision making process
end users use when they make fuel-switching decisions. Just the
myriad air and water rules that are either published or pending
regarding the utility industry alone is enough to throw into
question any simple assumptions that coal production will
simply shift around the country as a result of OSM's proposal.
Mr. Chairman, in my written testimony I presented some
photographs of how we do it in Wyoming and I'll quickly refer
to those.
On page seven of my written testimony, if you have it in
front of you, is a picture of North Tisdale Creek. It was mined
in the 1990s. It's been restored. That mine received an OSM
Director Award in 2003 and again in 2009 for successful
reclamation and creation of wildlife habitat.
On page eight, you'll see Exhibits 2A and 2B. This is the
Tongue River Stream Restoration Project, which won this year's
OSM Director's Excellence in Surface Coal Mining Award. The
mining operation passed through Goose Creek and the Tongue
River, which are fisheries in that part of Wyoming. Note how
the stream had to be relocated during mining and how it took
care of some post--or pre-mining underground subsidence
features as well.
Last, Exhibits 3A and 3B on page nine show another
restoration project at Caballo Creek, which won the 2007 OSM
Director's Award. Note the preservation of the stream gradient.
Lots of things were done that you can't see below the surface.
Mr. Chairman, we think that the State of Wyoming knows how
to do this. We understand the previous stream buffer zone
rules. We think we did it right and we do not understand the
need for us to have this new rule.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Corra follows:]

Statement of John Corra, Director,
Wyoming Department of Environmental Quality

My name is John Corra. I am the Director of the Wyoming Department
of Environmental Quality. I wish to thank the Subcommittee for inviting
the State of Wyoming to testify at this hearing today. Wyoming coal
mines produced 442 million tons of coal in 2010, over 40% of the
nation's total production. This was accomplished by 6,800 miners
operating some the most advanced equipment at 18 mines across the
state. Production generates over $1.8 billion in taxes, royalties and
fees for use by federal, state and local governments. The economic
impact to the state is much greater. The industry has been recognized
many times for both its superior safety programs and its innovative
reclamation efforts. We have primacy for the administration of the
Surface Mining Control and Reclamation Act (SMCRA) in Wyoming, and year
over year receive high marks from the Office of Surface Mining (OSM)
for our regulatory programs.
I would like to talk with you today about how Wyoming protects its
waters and why this rule has little value for us. I will also speak to
the disappointing process that has been followed to date relative to
the Environmental Impact Statement (EIS) for this rule.
The OSM has used a court order and an agreement with other federal
agencies that were aimed at tackling a problem in Appalachia as an
excuse to impose un-necessary and costly over regulation across all
coal mining states. The action OSM is undertaking is a comprehensive
rewrite of regulations under SMCRA, not just a stream protection rule.
The packaging of this major revision to a law that has served the
country well for over 40 years as a ``stream protection rule'' is
misleading. Some of the changes being contemplated have broad
implications and deserve thoughtful re-evaluation.
We are unaware of any objective data, scientific or otherwise, that
supports this level of change to SMCRA. The agency has not provided any
objective data to support such comprehensive regulatory changes. In
fact, OSM's most recent evaluation reports for 2010 strongly suggest
otherwise. For example, the report for our state says that:''. . .the
Wyoming program is being carried out in an effective manner.'' The
report also shows that we have gained much ground in increasing the
ratio of acres reclaimed to disturbed acres over the past 12 years. The
report also mentions no issues with regard to restoring mined land to
approximate original contour or reclamation bonding. The report goes on
to say that: ``this lack of additional enforcement actions, despite
increased inspection frequency, helps illustrate the effectiveness of
Wyoming's regulatory program.'' And, inspections increased during the
reporting period by a very significant 78%! While we are not perfect,
and OSM does at times ask us to correct deficiencies, there is
significant evidence from the OSM's own evaluation reports for Wyoming
and other western states that current regulatory programs are working.
Wyoming sees no justification for these significant rule changes or for
the necessity of applying them nationwide.
OSM's rush for completing the rulemaking is at the expense of
thoughtful discourse as required by National Environmental Policy Act
(NEPA). This undue haste is limiting the thoughtful and reasonable
``hard look'' as required under NEPA. Although OSM had earlier
identified an option to apply the regulations only to mountaintop
removal and steep slope operations in Appalachia, that alternative
seems to have been dropped. One of the primary justifications put
forward by the agency in its Federal Register notice is a June 11, 2009
memorandum of understanding (MOU) between the U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency, the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers and the Department
of Interior. The MOU was specifically targeted at ``Appalachian Surface
Coal Mining'', and Section 404 of the Clean Water Act (CWA) in the
states of Kentucky, Ohio, Pennsylvania, Tennessee, Virginia and West
Virginia. Despite this clear limitation in the MOU, the OSM rules are
written to apply everywhere, including Wyoming.
NEPA requires an EIS to examine all reasonable alternatives to the
proposal. If OSM proceeds with this rulemaking, it should be reminded
not only of the MOU, but also its own recognition of differences
between east and west and thereby apply the proposed regulations only
east of the 100th Meridian. This approach would parallel SMCRA's (30
CFR Chapter VII 785.19) current legal framework and guidance documents
reflecting recognition of hydrologic and reclamation changes at the
100th Meridian. For example, alluvial valley floor protection is only
applied west of the 100th meridian. Likewise, the bond release clock is
5 years east of this line and 10 years for the west, which is a
recognition of the arid and semi-arid environment in the western U.S.
The Clean Water Act also recognizes the unique differences between
the arid west and the eastern part of the U.S. as noted in the National
Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) surface discharge
regulatory program. This rulemaking may also conflict with state
authorities under both the state SMCRA programs and under the Clean
Water Act (CWA). OSM does not have the authority to attempt to broaden
a state's water quality standards by adding new stream definitions,
criteria, and restrictions such as ``material damage to the hydrologic
balance.'' There are no federal water quality standards in Wyoming and
OSM lacks the authority to establish any. OSM must work through the
State rulemaking process since the authority to establish water quality
standards rests solely with the state. OSM cannot do an end run around
the prohibition against setting water quality standards by requiring
state regulatory authorities to establish more stringent ``corrective
action thresholds'' at the direction of OSM. In addition,
``enhancement'' concepts are likely to conflict with mitigation
requirements under the Corps' Sec. 404 program. OSM's proposals have
serious potential to directly conflict with and/or duplicate CWA
requirements of the state and/or the Corps.
There are good reasons to make a distinction between the management
and regulation of water in the western U.S. as compared to the east.
Recognizing differences in water uses, quality and availability, Clean
Water Act regulations have historically treated the area of the country
west of the 98th meridian (arid west) differently than the eastern
portions. We can't help but think that both the Corps and EPA had this
historical perspective about the nation's waters outside of Appalachia
in mind when they signed the MOU. If OSM insists upon a national
approach, we hope that the parties re-open the MOU and make it
available for public comment.
The resource requirements and associated costs of implementing the
proposed rules are of particular concern to the states. Proposed
concepts regarding stream definitions, expanded biologic criteria,
definition of material damage to the hydrologic balance and the
replacement of Post Mining Land Uses with ``climax communities'' as a
reclamation requirement all trample on effective and time-proven mining
and reclamation efforts by the states. To elaborate on just one of
these changes, the use of climax communities as a standard, it is
widely recognized that the periodic drought conditions, grazing
impacts, and other pre-mining land uses and climatic variables make it
nearly impossible to determine what the state of vegetation was, or
might be, let alone how to accurately measure it given the scale of
variability that exists in the west.
Wyoming has the necessary regulations in place to assure stream
protection and when necessary, stream diversion and reclamation, as
evidenced by successful efforts that have been recognized by OSM over
the years. I would like to review just a few examples.
North Tisdale Creek Stream Restoration, Caballo Coal Mine, Caballo
Mining Company. This area was mined in the 1990's. The mine was
required to record the pre-mining conditions, preserve topsoil, and
reclaim the mining area to an approved post mining land use. As can be
seen by the photo, restoration of a wetlands area has been successful.
In fact the mine received awards in 2003 and again in 2009 for the
successful reclamation of the North Tisdale Creek Wetlands, and the
creation of wildlife habitat. Please see Exhibit 1.
Tongue River Stream Restoration, Big Horn Coal Mine, Big Horn Coal
Company (subsidiary of Kiewit Mining). This project won the OSM 2011
Excellence in Surface Coal Mining Award. The Tongue River in northern
Wyoming is a trout fishery at this location. As can be seen in the
following photos, the mining operation progressed through the
intersection of Goose Creek and the Tongue River. Note that the stream
had to be relocated to accommodate mining. Stream function was modestly
impaired for a period of time until restoration. It is unclear if this
would be allowed under OSM's proposed rules concerning material damage
and biologic thresholds for action. Note the reclaimed grasslands on
both sides of the stream, and how it is beginning to blend in with the
pre-mining vegetation shown in the background. Please see Exhibits 2a
and 2b.
Caballo Creek Restoration, Belle Ayr Mine, Alpha Resources. This
project won the 2007 OSM Reclamation and Enforcement Director's Award.
Note the preservation of the stream gradient to ensure against excess
erosion. Additionally, rock weirs were incorporated in the reclaimed
channel to mimic the pre-mine riffle/pool structure of this
intermittent prairie stream. Please see Exhibits 3a and 3b.
Other projects worth noting, but with no exhibits are:
Wyodak Mine:   1.7 miles of Donkey Creek reclaimed with water flows
returned to reclaimed channel in 2005.
Cordero-Rojo Mine:   3.9 miles of Belle Fourche River reclaimed
with water flows scheduled to be returned to reclaimed channel in
December, 2012. Cordero-Rojo Mine received 2006 Excellence in Surface
Mining and Reclamation Award from the WDEQ for design of this river
channel reconstruction.
Eagle Butte Mine:   2.0 miles of Little Rawhide Creek reclaimed.
Buckskin Mine:  0.90 mile of Rawhide Creek; received the 1997 OSM
Reclamation and Enforcement Director's Award for successful
reclamation.
North Antelope Rochelle Mine:   2.1 miles of Porcupine Creek
reclaimed with water flows returned to two of the three reaches.
There are also cases where we refuse mining through important areas
that, in our belief have key hydrologic issues or would not be capable
of restoration. For example, Wyoming affords a high level of protection
to alluvial valley floors, or stream valleys underlain by
unconsolidated stream-laid deposits which have sufficient water
availability to be important to agriculture.
Each mine application is reviewed carefully and the applicants are
required to accurately describe the pre-mining conditions and land
uses. An approvable mine permit application must contain a reclamation
plan that assures achievement of post mining land uses, and a return of
the land to a use equal to or better than before. We are proud of our
regulatory efforts, and have had a long history of mine regulation and
restoration, even prior to the enactment of SMCRA. We don't believe we
would be the nation's largest coal supplier, as well as one of its most
beautiful places, without the commitment of both our regulators and our
industry. We are perplexed that the EIS process to date has been so
distant from Wyoming.
OSM actions consistently appear to avoid or limit public and state
comment throughout this rulemaking. Initially the agency tried to avoid
rulemaking altogether by asking a federal court to allow it to revise
the stream buffer zone rule through a guidance document. This request
was denied. Next, OSM denied multiple requests for additional time to
comment on their advanced notice of proposed rulemaking on this issue
in December, 2009, providing the bare bones minimum period of time
required by law for one of the most complicated rulemaking efforts in
OSM's history. The agency's initial scoping notice was so deficient
that OSM had to issue a second notice providing more information in
June 2010. Scoping meetings were a sham, because the public was not
even allowed to speak publicly at the agency's public meetings. The
public open house meeting in Gillette, Wyoming, which is the center of
40 percent of the coal production in the US, was held the evening of
July 29, 2010. The comment period ended July 30, 2010. This hardly
represents time for thoughtful discourse.
The EIS documents provided by OSM have-been poorly written, unclear
and sometimes internally inconsistent. The unreasonably complex process
of 5 alternatives with 11 items for each alternative results in 55
options to evaluate. It has been difficult to follow.
Wyoming is a ``cooperating agency'' in preparation of the EIS. Yet,
we do not believe we have been given meaningful opportunity to comment
and participate. Sections of the EIS with 25, 50, and even 100's of
pages were distributed to the States with only a few days to read,
review, and provide comment back to the agency. States were forced to
withdraw staff from permitting and other critical areas in order to
have any opportunity to provide feedback to OSM within the required
timeframe. Even when states take such measures, meaningful comments
could not be provided in an appropriate manner.
OSM appears to be ignoring the resource implications for these
proposed rules. We find this particularly disturbing in light of the
fact that OSM has a goal of significantly reducing their share of
funding for our regulatory program.
The proposed rules will result in massive increases of information
and data collection that may not even be useful or practical in
improving environmental performance. This is a significant resource
burden and suggests that OSM pay close attention to the cost/benefits
of forcing a solution to an eastern problem upon western states, such
as Wyoming. We are hopeful, now that OSM has retained a new contractor
and pressed the pause button on the EIS process, that it will comply
with its obligations under NEPA and conduct a genuine EIS process where
States are engaged in real discussions of the regulatory options and
EIS alternatives. They have committed to do so, and I hope we get the
chance to share Wyoming's expertise.
I also suggest that OSM extend its deadline so that it can re-
examine the ``purpose and need'' for these rules, provide appropriate
scientific and factual information to support a rule change of this
magnitude on a national scale, and engage Wyoming and other states in a
more meaningful way. An extension would also allow enough time to
thoroughly evaluate the economic impacts of the rule. The analysis that
we have seen so far is inadequate especially given the complex decision
making process that a customer using a given type of coal uses in fuel-
switching decisions. The myriad air and water rules that are either
published or pending regarding just the utility industry alone is
enough to throw into question any simple assumptions that coal
production will simply shift around the country as a result of OSM's
proposal.
EXHIBITS

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Lamborn. Thank each of you for being here. Thank you
for your statements and we will now begin questioning. Members
are limited to five minutes, but we may have additional rounds
on this important subject and I recognize myself for five
minutes for questions.
Each one of you have referred to the compressed time
schedule that you were given to respond. Can a state even give
an adequate response in five or ten days? I find that when I
send something to a state, or even worse, maybe a Federal
bureaucracy, it takes them that long to open the envelope and
get it to the right desk. Could any of you care to respond to
that, please? And does this reach the level of making it hard
to respond that creates possible legal challenges to the
process?
Mr. Clarke. I think I'm on. I'm not sure. The light is not
on. But I'll take that, Mr. Chairman. Absolutely, we didn't
have enough----
Mr. Lamborn. Just speak into the microphone. I think it's
on.
Mr. Clarke. Absolutely, we didn't have enough time to
review that. We had to pull in all of our staff for those short
periods of time, three, five and nine days. Even our field
staff we had working on this effort, which took away time from
permit reviews that we couldn't address. We couldn't address
citizen's complaints because we were in such a short time
constraints. Every state was told, if you didn't submit your
comment within this time allowed, your comments would not be
received. So we had a special effort to try to do that with in
mind that we weren't going to be able to fully address hundreds
of pages of documents within such a short timeframe. So to
answer your question--No, we could not.
Mr. Lamborn. Mr. Corra?
Mr. Corra. Mr. Chairman, thank you. I would echo those
remarks, but also note that the State of Wyoming is a
cooperating agency with many Federal partners on many different
EIS's and this one was absolutely different from anything else.
And being a cooperating agency carries with it some access to
both the people that are writing these documents, as well as
people inside the Federal agency that are reviewing them. We
never had that opportunity either.
Mr. Lamborn. What is the normal process for a cooperating
agency, as far as timeframe for making comments on an
environmental impact statement, in your experience?
Mr. Clarke. Mr. Chairman----
Mr. Lamborn. Mr. Clarke.
Mr. Clarke.--I would think that would have to vary with the
complexity of the issues being examined. Here we were
confronted with each of these chapters with many, many pages of
what should have been technically oriented material, and with
that kind of material to be examined, some reasoned amount of
time to respond, which we were not given, should be allowed.
Mr. Lamborn. What would you have preferred?
Mr. Clarke. I think when I saw it, probably applies to
other states, but in West Virginia each person who was involved
in responding with comments on the EIS has a real job aside
from doing that. People were taken away from their real jobs.
Here--three weeks to a month. You know, I don't want to make it
take forever. I don't want to create additional bureaucratic
mechanisms, but that would have been a much fairer amount of
time to really dig into something that is involved in such a
sweeping change as what OSM is proposing to make.
Mr. Lamborn. And how much time were you given?
Mr. Clarke. We had five business days on Chapter 2, four
business days on Chapter 3, and nine business days on Chapter
4.
Mr. Lamborn. OK. Now, changing subjects slightly, do you
believe that the proposed rule may violate SMCRA or the Clean
Water Act? And I know, Mr. Corra, you made a quick reference to
that. Could you elaborate a little bit and then if either one
of you could add to that, I'd appreciate it?
Mr. Corra. Yeah. Mr. Chairman, the Clean Water Act gives--
if the states seek primacy, gives the states the authority and
responsibility for setting water quality standards and
setting--and establishing uses for various streams--well, all
the streams, for that matter. And so we see this as sort of an
end-around to our responsibilities and authorities where they
set them through another Federal statute and come in and set
those standards instead of the state. And we're very unclear as
to whether that would end up being the result from this
rulemaking.
Mr. Lamborn. Either one of you gentlemen?
Mr. Lambert. Yes, Mr. Chairman. In the draft rule, OSM is
proposing to eliminate the Rahall amendment to the Clean Water
Act but not allowing discharges from pre-mining sites to be as
good as or better than what the pre-mining discharge was.
That's specifically what the Rahall amendment to the Clean
Water Act was about. And this proposal by OSM, they would have
eliminated that totally.
Mr. Clarke. I think I'd point to at least three areas at
SMCRA to say that there's significant tension, if not just a
violation of the enabling act that OSM is operating under.
First, as I suggested in both my written and oral statement,
SMCRA envisioned an increase in coal production in the country
after its adoption to meet the nation's energy needs, which was
a significant concern at the time in light of the energy crisis
that was prevalent in the development of social and economic
policy for the country. This aims to reduce coal production
significantly in Appalachia, the number one coal producing
region in the country at the time of SMCRA's adoption. That
could not have been the policy envisioned by the people who
voted for this law in 1977.
Also, SMCRA envisioned that because of the diversity in
climate and terrain, that states would be the primary
regulators and would have some freedom to tailor their state
programs individually to state specific concerns. What we have
now is a one-size-fits-all approach that's going to be imposed
in the stream protection measures rule on things like
approximate original contour and material damage. The issues
that John faces on material damage to hydrologic balance in
Wyoming are vastly different than what Mr. Lambert and I face
in a more humid east. Approximate original contour, I believe
the area of eastern Wyoming is pretty flat, plain type area,
Indiana and Illinois much the same way. What Mr. Lambert and I
face in southern West Virginia and southwest Virginia are very
steep, very rugged topography, and so for those reasons--and
they were good reasons--the states were given the authority to
define and apply terms like these, and OSM wants to take that
away.
But the third area, and one you touched on in your
question, is potential violation of the Clean Water Act. And as
I suggested before, the states particularly in the Appalachian
region are in the midst of deciding how to go about
implementing state narrative water quality standards for
protection of the aquatic ecosystem.
EPA has its own idea how to do that. The states, I think
it's fair to say, we differ on that. OSM intends to jump right
in the middle of the fray by adding a biologic component to
this material damage standard.
While the states and EPA are working out what these water
quality standards mean, I think that OSM is treading the same
ground that the courts rejected its rulemaking on in the early
eighties, where it attempted to establish what amounted to
water quality standards. OSM can't do that under SMCRA. That's
a Clean Water Act function.
So again, SMCRA can't supersede or amend, repeal the Clean
Water Act, and we believe that the path they're on is fraught
with peril in that area.
Mr. Lamborn. OK. Thank you all for the answers. I now
recognize Representative Johnson for five minutes.
Mr. Johnson. Mr. Chairman, in listening to this, before I
ask my question, it's interesting to me and it's astounding to
me that this Administration thinks that it's acceptable that it
takes four to six months, in some cases longer, to process a
claim for America's veterans returning from the war zone to get
the benefits and the care that's needed to them, and yet when
they want to reach out with these over regulated, over
burdensome rules like this one, they give the states mere days
to respond. I don't understand the logic there.
Director Clarke, and really any of the three of you, can
you briefly describe the role that, in this case West Virginia,
but your other states, as well, played in general in what
became the 2008 stream buffer zone rule, the one that was
finished back in 2008?
Mr. Clarke. Yes, sir, we in West Virginia probably were in
compliance with most of the 2008 buffer zone rule through
state-specific adjustments we made to our regulatory program
prior to the adoption of that rule. Many of the aspects of what
that rule would require were the same things we were already
doing in our state program, and we were involved in the EIS
that was conducted. I can't tell you how long we were given for
comment, although I'd be glad to check on that and get back to
the Subcommittee with a response if you would be interested in
the number of days, for example, for comparison that we were
allowed for response on that.
Mr. Johnson. I'm mostly curious as to how, in your
assessment, the 2008 version that took five years to do, how
that rulemaking process has differed, from your perspective, to
this current process.
Mr. Clarke. As I suggested, OSM wants, or appears to want,
to conduct this rulemaking and EIS at a world-record pace,
which is unrealistic, given that the earlier rulemaking, as you
observed, took five years to conclude, and this one is much
more sweeping, a broader in scope rulemaking that intends to
not only replace the buffer zone rule but rewrite the rules for
almost every aspect of the way mining is conducted.
Mr. Johnson. Has OSM provided any documentation or evidence
suggesting widespread problems with the current regulations on
surface mining operations? And, in fact, aren't most of your
state evaluation reports from OSM generally positive?
Mr. Clarke. We, as always, have a number of issues to
address with OSM. We believe that, generally, we are in full
compliance and taking every effort to improve our program. But
to answer your question briefly, we don't believe there is any
basis in the regulatory record developed on oversight of the
West Virginia program to support the need for a huge rewrite of
all the rules on how mining is conducted.
Mr. Johnson. Just in general, do you feel that OSM has
respected the states during this current rulemaking process and
has the agency conducted a fair rulemaking process?
Mr. Clarke. No, sir, I do not. I think that in hearkening
back to one of Mr. Lamborn's questions, it's almost as if the
process that they have established for this EIS is designed to
prevent any meaningful input from the states and the states are
the primary regulators under SMCRA and do have probably the
most valid experience that ought to be taken into account.
Mr. Lambert. Mr. Johnson, Virginia would probably not use
the word ``respected.'' I would like to use the word
``ignored.'' We were invited but comments weren't received,
weren't included in the other drafts that came out.
Mr. Johnson. OK.
Mr. Corra. Mr. Chairman, Wyoming would echo the sentiments
there and if I may, could I go back one and just read a quote
from one of OSM's annual reports that talks about Wyoming this
year. And, quote, ``The lack of additional enforcement actions,
despite increased inspection frequency, helps illustrate the
effectiveness of Wyoming's regulatory programs.'' And these
Federal inspections increased by 78 percent during the period
of time reviewed. They noted, ``We have no issues with the
proximate original contour'' and they have no issues with our
reclamation bonding program either.
Mr. Johnson. One final question. If OSM were to proceed
with this version, the draft rule that's now being proposed
that we've seen, what would be the impact on your state, on
state agency resources to both amend the approved state program
and then implement the new rule? Any idea?
Mr. Corra. Since we haven't seen the complete text of the
rule, it's hard to give you a really precise answer. If
everything else, the current version of OSM has done in the
context of State/Federal relationship is borne out in the rule
that's ultimately adopted, I can predict that it would be a
quite significant increase in the burden on states.
Mr. Johnson. That's what I was going to say. Isn't it safe
to say with it being very much more restrictive, it's going to
be onerous on the states to put in the people and the processes
and the planning to implement?
Mr. Corra. Well, necessarily, radical change in all the
regulations is going to require significant effort on the
states' part to adjust. In addition to that, we have the issue
of OSM adopting three new regulatory policies called Reg 8, Reg
23 and INE 35, which also have significantly increased the
burden on the state, and at the same time, they're doing that,
they have proposed to cut grants to the state by 15 percent. So
they are putting more eyes on the state. They are adding more
bureaucratic requirements to respond to state, or to Federal
authorities on, and so when you have a new set of rules that
are completely new, with a new set of procedures governing the
Federal/State relationship, it gets into more than just the
rule, the stream protection measures rule, itself. It's a whole
new way of dealing with the Federal Government that is much
more burdensome than what has existed in the past.
Mr. Johnson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Lamborn. OK. Thank you, Representative Johnson. We'll
have our second round of questions. You have some very valuable
information to give us on this important subject. I'm going to
step back a step and although you've done a really good job of
talking about the impacts on your regulatory process as a state
and your ability or inability to comply with the requests of
OSM, I want to talk about the impact to your state on a
community level because the subject of our hearing today is the
community impacts of the efforts to rewrite the stream buffer
zone.
So if this rule were to take effect as it's currently
written, despite the problems that we've looked at so far in
our hearing, what would be the impact on employment in your
state or the economy in your state or coal production or the
cost of electricity? And I just want to step back and look at a
little broader perspective on what this rule could do.
So if either one of you could comment on that, I would
appreciate it. And I understand that we always have to strike a
balance between protecting the environment and being
responsible there, as well as not having a hit on our economy
that destroys jobs and adds to the cost of living when people's
dollars are already stretched too thin as it is. So we always
have to strike that balance and I understand that. Mr. Lambert,
would you care to respond to that?
Mr. Lambert. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for the question.
Just using the numbers in the draft that we have seen to date,
we understand that OSM is continuing to work on revising those
numbers and we don't know what those are because they haven't
involved the cooperating agencies any further after the
contractor was let go.
But just using their numbers, the impact to the economy in
Virginia would be devastating. As I mentioned in my oral
statement, metallurgical coal production in Virginia is, at
this point in time, given the process of metallurgical coal on
the market, would probably take away 60 percent of our coal
production, and with the exodus out of Virginia right now, just
because of the poverty level, the mining industry is the only
thing that's supporting that economy in southwest Virginia. So
just using OSM's numbers, I think it would be devastated to the
economy in Virginia.
Mr. Lamborn. Thank you. Mr. Clarke or Mr. Corra?
Mr. Lambert. May I add, Mr. Lamborn, before we go on, using
our planning districts in southwest Virginia, using their
numbers, for every one coal job, that equates to four to six
additional jobs that are ancillary to the mining industry. So,
you know, that's just a multiplier that I'm not sure how we
could survive.
Mr. Lamborn. Thank you.
Mr. Lambert. OSM's own numbers were a decrease in surface
coal production in Appalachia by 30 percent. They didn't
address the potential decrease in underground coal production.
The new material damage regulation will have an impact
negatively on the ability to permit underground mining
operations as well. OSM's own numbers predict job loss of
10,749 jobs in Appalachia. That doesn't take into account what
they're going to do, I don't think, to underground mining
production. Thirty thousand people below the poverty line,
those are real economic impacts to our state. I believe that
it's contrary to what Congress envisioned in 1977.
There's a constituency out there that would like to see
mining severely restricted or eliminated. That results in a
much higher degree of environment protection, but those policy
calls are calls I think for Congress to make and not for OSM.
Congress hasn't put OSM in charge of economic policy for the
Appalachian region and it's something that OSM should not be
allowed to get into, I don't think.
Mr. Lamborn. And Mr. Clarke, do you agree with what Mr.
Lambert just said, that when you lose direct mining jobs that
there are indirect job losses, as well, in your state?
Mr. Clarke. Absolutely. I've heard, you know, multipliers
anywhere, three indirect jobs for every one direct job, some
multipliers I've heard higher than that. But that would have a
devastating effect on the West Virginia economy.
Mr. Lamborn. Mr. Corra?
Mr. Corra. Mr. Chairman, we have not conducted a detailed
analysis at that level to be able to answer your question
directly. We've quite honestly been waiting to see how the
smorgasbord of 55 different options that they teed up in the
original draft shakes out. It has been said at one point that
Wyoming coal production could actually go up and I'm not
totally convinced that that's the case. I do want to repeat
what I said earlier, that the customers of Appalachian coal, if
something changes there with regard to their fuel supply, it is
not an automatic to assume that they will just go buy coal from
somewhere else. Simply for no other reason just because of the
additional regulations that are coming down the road with
regards to the utility industry. And I think the abundance of
natural gas now in the eastern part of the United States will
also play a factor in that. So, for us, it's too early to tell.
Mr. Lamborn. All right. Thank you. Representative Johnson,
you are recognized for five minutes.
Mr. Johnson. Gentlemen, is it true that several states have
actually considered withdrawing from the process as a
cooperating agency? Are you aware of this and have either of
your states considered doing so on this rewrite?
Mr. Clarke. I think it was November or thereabouts of last
year, West Virginia and, I believe, Virginia and Wyoming signed
onto a joint letter of concern to OSM which, I believe,
suggested that that was a possibility. Where we find ourselves
is we have to put forth a lot of effort to provide meaningful
comments and to review the documents. It doesn't appear like
they're paying any attention to the input we provide. The
process, as far as we can see what has happened, is a sham, and
it's like a box they need to check to do an EIS. Yes, we had
cooperating agencies. Yes, we gave them an opportunity to
comment. We checked the box. And with the result that they're
working toward, we don't want to necessarily be seen has having
contributed or endorsed the result.
Mr. Lambert. I would agree with Mr. Clarke's statement.
Virginia did consider in the letter that was sent to OSM of
withdrawing from the process.
Mr. Lamborn. Mr. Corra?
Mr. Corra. Mr. Chairman, I also agree. I mean, it's
similar. I couldn't add anything more to what's already been
said.
Mr. Johnson. OK. Do your states implement an NPDES program
under the authority of the CWA that requires the protection of
streams potentially impacted by mining, and is that program
implemented by the same agency that enforces the SMCRA program?
Mr. Clarke. Yes, sir. In West Virginia we do. The Division
of Mining and Reclamation within the State Department of
Environmental Protection issues both the SMCRA permit and the
NPDES permit for mining operations.
Mr. Johnson. OK.
Mr. Lambert. And that is true in Virginia, as well. We have
the regulatory authority or delegated authority for the NPDES
process within the SMCRA permit.
Mr. Corra. Mr. Chairman, the Department of Environmental
Quality for the State of Wyoming has both jurisdictions.
Mr. Johnson. So if OSM implements its proposed rule, we
would have, in addition to the EPA, the state CWA authority and
in many cases, the COE, two additional agencies, OSM and the
State Mining Authority, implementing programs to protect
streams using different criteria and imposing different and
possibly conflicting requirements. Do you see it the same way?
Mr. Clarke. Yes, sir, I do.
Mr. Lambert. Yes, sir, we see that as the same issue, as
conflicting agencies.
Mr. Corra. Mr. Chairman, yes.
Mr. Johnson. OK. Would you then expect this rule, if it is
implemented, to lead to more litigation, more confusion and
uncertainty?
Mr. Clarke. Yes. Yes, we do.
Mr. Lambert. Yes, sir, we do.
Mr. Corra. Mr. Chairman, yes, we do.
Mr. Johnson. I think we know the answers. So it doesn't
sound like a real good deal for the American tax payer and for
the industry, the coal industry, and certainly the people of
West Virginia and Ohio and Virginia and Wyoming.
Mr. Chairman, I think I've exhausted my questions.
Mr. Lamborn. All right. Thank you all for being here. I
want to thank you for your testimony. Members of the Committee
may have additional questions for the record, and I would ask
that you respond to those in writing. Thank you. We will now
hear from our third panel of witnesses. And we're going to have
a diversity of views on this panel.
I'd like to invite forward Mr. Roger Horton, the West
Virginia Co-Chair of the Mountaintop Mining Coalition; Mr.
Michael Carey, President of Ohio Coal Association; Mr. Jason
Bostic, West Virginia Coal Association; Ms. Katharine
Fredriksen, Senior Vice President of Environmental & Regulatory
Affairs for CONSOL Energy, Inc.; Mr. Bo Webb, former President
and current member of Coal River Mountain Watch; and Ms. Maria
Gunnoe, community organizer. I hope I pronounced the names
correctly.
Please come forward. Like all of our witnesses, your
written testimony will appear in full in the hearing record, so
I ask that you keep your oral statements to five minutes, as
outlined in our invitation letter to you. The microphones are
not automatic, so you need to turn them on when you're ready to
begin. And I'll explain how the timing lights work. When you
begin to speak, the timer will start and a green light will
appear. After four minutes a yellow light comes on, and at five
minutes, the red light comes on and we would ask that you
conclude at that time. We will have one or more rounds of
questions for all of you afterwards.
So Mr. Horton, you may begin.

STATEMENT OF ROGER HORTON, WEST VIRGINIA CO-CHAIR, MOUNTAINTOP
MINING COALITION

Mr. Horton. Thank you. Mr. Lamborn, first of all I want to
thank you for recognizing a very valuable point, one that I've
discussed with a lot of the people prior to coming here today.
The money that's generated from the levies placed upon coal
that is mined that's diverted to the surface mine reclamation,
the abandoned mine reclamation does, in fact, provide
healthcare for many thousands of United Mine Workers
recipients, whose businesses have gone out of business. And for
that reason, I thank you for that recognition. And I will
begin.
My name is Roger Horton. I am the founder of Citizens for
Coal, a co-founder of the Mountaintop Mining Coalition, and a
member of Local Union 5958 of the United Mine Workers of
America. I have spent over 30 years in the West Virginia mining
industry beginning in 1974, as an underground coal miner.
During my career, I have also been active in union activities,
serving as various official capacities for my UMWA local union.
I am proud to say that I am still a coal miner and a local
union officer on a surface coal mine in West Virginia.
A native West Virginian, I have lived virtually all my life
in the coalfields of the Mountain State, spending most of that
time in Logan, West Virginia, where I live today in the
community of Holden. I built a home, raised two children,
participated and enriched my community all because of my
employment in the coal industry.
Because of my rewarding experiences in and around the coal
industry and its communities, that in 2008 I founded Citizens
for Coal, a group open to everyone, no matter their employment
or affiliation, dedicated only to preserving the future of coal
mining jobs, to actively participate in the debate surrounding
coal mining in West Virginia and Appalachia. It is in this
capacity that I appear before you today, as well.
I am deeply concerned and troubled by the rulemaking
currently being conducted by the Federal Office of Surface
Mining. By virtue of regulatory revisions, OSM would rewrite
the Surface Mining Control and Reclamation Act, otherwise known
as SMCRA, and drastically alter the role of coal in the
nation's energy mix envisioned by Congress when it passed in
1977.
This proposal from OSM is but one part of an open war on
American coal being waged by bureaucrats in Washington,
Pittsburgh and Philadelphia. The assault begins with the permit
application process and continues through the mining process
and finally to the end use of coal, where EPA announced
sweeping regulatory changes as it relates to air emissions from
coal fired power plants and the placement of coal combustion
residuals, such as boiler ash.
These end use initiatives coupled with the EPA's
obstruction of mining permits and now this outrageous rule from
the Office of Surface Mining threatens to cripple the viability
of West Virginia and other coal producing states as sources of
domestic energy.
In its proposed rewrite of the stream buffer zone rule, OSM
would drastically reduce coal production in West Virginia and
across the Nation by applying new standards that have no basis
in law and serve only to satisfy a very warped political
agenda.
OSM is unable to identify any rational basis for revising
these regulations and potentially eliminating 90 percent of the
coal production in this country. All forms of mining across the
country, surface and underground, are at risk. Amazingly, the
rule changes appear poised to dramatically impact underground
mining and perhaps more than surface mining. If finalized, the
rule will throw the Nation into an energy crisis, the likes of
which has never been seen.
Unless restrained by Congress, OSM will destroy the
economies of states that produce coal and propel thousands of
coal miners on the jobless roles. OSM appears to have advanced
these positions without regard to jobs and communities that
depend on those occupations for their very survival. If left
unchecked, OSM threatens to strip our citizens, our communities
and the very social fabric of West Virginia and other coal
producing areas of their most important source of existence,
and that is coal.
These are not just idle observations. I have personally
witnessed the social and economic disruptions that occur when
unelected bureaucrats make arbitrary decisions about what is
best for my fellow coal miners, my friends and my community.
About eleven years ago, through a combination of government
interference and frivolous legal challenge, a large-scale
surface mine in Logan County, West Virginia, was forced to
close because it could not obtain the permits necessary to
continue mining the operation. The results were devastating.
Some 400 members of Local Union 2935 were out of a job, not
because there was no demand for the coal or because the coal
reserve had been exhausted, but because of pure legal and
regulatory interference. The workforce and Local were obviously
devastated, but the county was also damaged. The school system
and social welfare programs lost revenue that was vital to
their existence and operation. Entire communities were
devastated. With nowhere to work and no prospect of the mine
reopening any time soon, residents packed up and moved to other
states to find lower paying jobs.
Businesses that relied on the mine for their income, gas
stations, restaurants, repairs shops and equipment vendors,
vanished. Families suffered and disintegrated. Substance abuse
and divorces skyrocketed and these folks struggled to come to
terms with the loss of good paying jobs that were forecast to
last decades. In fact, it is fair to say that our communities
and certain families have never recovered from the loss of
these jobs. That experience and those troubling, painful
memories motivated me to start Citizens for Coal, and I hope
this Committee and the entire Congress is mindful that
Washington, D.C.'s assault on the coal industry has real, often
dramatic effects on our workplace, our people, our schools, our
churches and our communities.
Mr. Lamborn. Mr. Horton, if you would wrap up.
Mr. Horton. Pardon me?
Mr. Lamborn. You need to conclude now.
Mr. Horton. Yes. Finally, as a life-long citizen of the
coalfields of Logan, West Virginia, I would like the Committee
to carefully consider the excuse for these rule changes offered
by OSM. Whether they are from the OSM or the EPA or some other
agency, we don't need their help. We can do just fine on our
own, mine our own coal.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Horton follows:]

Statement of Roger D. Horton, Co-Founder, Mountaintop Mining Coalition

Good afternoon and thank you for the opportunity to testify today
on this very important subject. My name is Roger Horton. I am the
founder of Citizens for Coal, a co-founder of the Mountaintop Mining
Coalition and a member of Local 5958 of the United Mine Workers of
America (UMWA). I have spent over 30 years in the West Virginia mining
industry beginning in 1974 as an underground coal miner. During my
career I have also been active in union activities, serving in various
official capacities for my UMWA local. I am proud to say that I am
still a coal miner and a local union officer on a surface coal mine in
West Virginia.
A native West Virginian, I have lived virtually all my life in the
coalfields of the Mountain State, spending most of that time in Logan
County West Virginia, where I live today in the community of Holden. I
built a home, raised two children, participated and enriched my
community all because of my employment in the coal industry.
Because of my rewarding experiences in and around the coal industry
and its communities that in 2008 I founded Citizens for Coal, a group
open to everyone no mater their employment or other affiliation,
dedicated only to preserving the future of coal mining jobs, to
actively participate in the debate surrounding coal mining in West
Virginia and Appalachia. It is in this capacity that I appear before
you today. I am deeply concerned and troubled by the rulemaking
currently being conducted by the federal Office of Surface Mining
(OSM). By virtue of regulatory revisions, OSM would re-write the
Surface Mining Control and Reclamation Act (SMCRA) and drastically
alter the role of coal in the nation's energy mix envisioned by
Congress when it passed that law in 1977.
This proposal from OSM is but one part of an ``open war'' on
American coal being waged by bureaucrats in Washington, Pittsburgh and
Philadelphia. This assault begins with the permit application process
and continues throughout the mining process and finally to the end use
of the coal, where EPA announced sweeping regulatory changes as it
relates to air emissions from coal fired power plants and the placement
of coal combustion residuals such as boiler ash. These end use
initiatives, coupled with EPA's obstruction of mining permits and now
this outrageous rule from OSM threatens to cripple the viability of
West Virginia and other coal producing states as sources of domestic
energy.
In its proposed re-write of the Stream Buffer Zone rule, OSM would
drastically reduce coal production in West Virginia and across the
nation by applying new standards that have no basis in the law and
serve only to satisfy a warped political agenda. OSM is unable to
identify any rational basis for revising these regulations and
potentially eliminating 90 percent of the coal production in this
country. All forms of mining across the country, surface and
underground are at risk. Amazingly, the rule changes appear poised to
dramatically impact underground mining perhaps more than surface
mining. If finalized, the rule will throw the nation into an energy
crisis the likes of which it has never seen. Unless restrained by this
Congress, OSM will destroy the economies of state that produce coal and
propel thousands of coal miners on the jobless roles. OSM appears to
have advanced these positions without regard to jobs and communities
that depend on those occupations for their very survival. If left
unchecked, OSM threatens to strip our citizens, our communities and the
very social fabric of West Virginia and other coal producing areas of
their most important source of existence- coal.
These are not just idle observations. I have personally witnessed
the social and economic disruptions that occur when unelected
bureaucrats make arbitrary decisions about what is best for my fellow
coal miners, my friends and community.
About 11 years ago, through a combination of government
interference and frivolous legal challenges, a large scale surface mine
in Logan County West Virginia was forced to close because it could not
obtain the permits necessary to continue the mining operation. The
results were devastating. Some 400 members of Local Union 2935 were out
of a job. . .not because there was no demand for the coal or because
the coal reserve had been exhausted but because of pure legal and
regulatory interference. The workforce and local were obviously
devastated but the county was damaged. The school system and social
welfare programs lost revenue that was vital to their existence and
operation.
Entire communities were devastated. With nowhere to work and no
prospect of the mine reopening any time soon, residents packed up and
moved to other states to find lower paying jobs.
Businesses that relied on the mine for their income- gas stations,
restaurants, repair shops and equipment vendors vanished.
Families suffered and disintegrated. . .substance abuse and
divorces skyrocketed as these folks struggled to come to terms with the
loss of good-paying jobs that were forecast to last decades. In fact,
it fair to say that our communities and certain families have never
recovered from the loss of those jobs. That experience and those
troubling, painful memories motivated me to start the Citizens for Coal
organization, and I hope this Committee and the entire Congress is
mindful that Washington D.C.'s assault on the coal industry has real,
often dramatic effects on our workforce, our people, our schools, our
churches and our communities. OSM has chosen to conveniently ignore
these effects. OSM has also disregarded the charge given to it by
Congress when it created the agency 34 years ago- to balance
environmental and community protection with the increased production of
coal. Unfortunately, OSM has joined the ranks of other federal agencies
intent on ignoring Congress by regulating what it cannot legislate.
This dangerous attitude must be changed and, given the behavior of OSM
and EPA in Appalachia and West Virginia, needs to be changed quickly.
OSM's proposed rules cast a long shadow of uncertainly over our
coal miners and communities by placing our entire economic livelihood
in jeopardy. People are not buying cars or homes or vacationing. . .we
are not spending money. . .we are not contributing to the economy.
I have been fortunate to be able to spend the majority of my life
living and working in my native West Virginia. Every day I enjoy the
benefits of our rural way of life. . .I hope that my children could
live and work in West Virginia and enjoy that same lifestyle and
experience but everyday that OSM continues its reckless disregard for
the rule of law those chances decline.
Finally, as I life-long citizen of the coalfields of Logan County
West Virginia, I would like the Committee to carefully consider the
excuses for these rule changes offered by OSM. They will come before
you as false prophets, claiming to represent the people of the
coalfields and our environment and offering to ''help'' us survive or
transition to other forms of employment when they destroy our coal
industry. Whether they are from OSM or EPA or some other agency, we
don't need their help or assistance. We can do just fine on our own.
Thank you.
______

Brian Sanson
United Mine Workers of America
8315 Lee Highway
Fairfax, VA 22031

[emailprotected]

703-208-7220

Department of the Interior
Office of Surface Mining Reclamation and Enforcement
Comments on:
As proposed in 74 FR No. 228/11-30-2009/Proposed Rules; 30 CFR Parts
780, 784,816, and 817
[Docket ID OSM-2009-0009]
RIN: 1029-AC63
Stream Buffer Zone and Related Rules

The United Mine Workers of America, International Union (UMWA)
offers the following comments on the above-captioned notice. Our
comments are focused on the implications of revisions to regulations
concerning the conduct of mining activities in or near streams. We have
concerns that revision of the stream buffer zone (SBZ) rule published
on December 12, 2008, as part of the interagency action plan that the
Administration has developed to significantly reduce the harmful
environmental consequences of surface coal mining operations in
Appalachia, may negatively impact workers' economic security in
Appalachia.
The June 11, 2009 Memorandum of Understanding (MOU).
The UMWA has long supported responsible enforcement of rules and
laws used to regulate surface mining. Per the June 11, 2009 Memorandum
of Understanding, OSM is proposing Oversight Improvement Actions that
will increase OSM's oversight of state surface mining programs. This
action is taken as part of an agreement of the MOU's signatory agencies
to create an interagency working group to coordinate the development of
short-term actions, longer term regulatory actions, and coordination
procedures for Appalachian surface coal mining. Unfortunately, these
coordinating efforts have resulted in increased time frames, regulatory
uncertainty, and a lack of private and public understanding with
respect to the criteria that has been established for surface mine
permit approval.
Disclosure and Transparency
The UMWA is a primary stakeholder of the Department of the
Interior's Office of Surface Mining Reclamation (OSM). When OSM embarks
on a rule making the Agency solicits written comments and it also holds
public hearings. The process is carried out in full view of the
interested parties: Miners, mine operators, equipment manufacturers,
and others, as it should be.
We suggest that OSM procedures for evaluating additional rules in
the process should be subject to the same level of public disclosure
and scrutiny. This is necessary both to ensure public accountability,
but also to ensure the necessary expertise be brought to bear in the
highly technical nature of water quality subject matter. What to OSM
may seem like a trivial ``correction'' could in fact have important
consequences. One way to guard against this would be to have public
review of OSM decisions about rules.
Encouraging Public Participation in Agency Rulemaking Processes
Public participation is essential for development of good and
useful rules. Encouraging public participation will help ensure that
broad based, first-hand knowledge will be considered in the rule-making
process, and it helps lead to the creation of rules that will be
understandable.
One way to encourage public participation is to require hearings to
be held at times and places that are convenient for and accessible to
the stakeholders. Sometimes more work is needed to promote active
participation. Coal miners wanting to participate in OSM hearings
generally must leave work, and may forfeit their income and pay their
own travel expenses to participate. Those testifying for environmental
groups or coal operators, on the other hand, generally suffer no such
loss.
The real consequence of this economic inequality means that there
are often fewer workers participating in a public hearing than are the
numbers of workers who are interested in the particular subject.
Likewise, blue-collar workers like those the UMWA represents sometimes
tend to be less comfortable with the written word, so few submit
written comments. While we support the holding of public hearings, we
also urge changes so the hearings' system will better balance the
access for workers.
Regulatory Uncertainty
Regulatory uncertainty has caused many operators to cease capital
expenditures related to UMWA operations, thus negatively impacting our
members who live and work in Appalachia. To illustrate this problem, we
use an example pertinent to the mining industry. Over the last year the
surface mining permitting system has been reduced to an extremely slow
pace.
Currently many factors are considered when requiring the various
permit applicants with respect to the protection of the health and
safety of those living within the communities in which the mining
occurs. It is important to first define the public health goals, and
then to discuss them with the appropriate stakeholders in the states in
which these rules are specifically targeted. As an alternative to
unilateral rulemaking based on yet-to-be established procedures to best
guarantee water quality, we suggest that it may be appropriate to
effectively communicate the agencies' criteria to those operators who
mine coal in a responsible manner and identify the most reasonable and
efficient way to reach goals without compromising the ability of these
coal operators to employ our members.
Oversight is always welcome by the UMWA but any oversight which
impedes the ability of a state to issue permits based on established
permitting criteria has resulted in a ``logjam'' of applications. We
represent workers who have considerable firsthand practical knowledge
about how things get done--or not done--at work. In fact, they have
knowledge that so-called experts sometimes lack. Incorporating the
knowledge of miners and coal operators is essential when designing
policy that will succeed. Different kinds of knowledge are needed to
create effective policies and no single approach will ultimately be
most successful.
Methods of Ensuring That Regulatory Review Does Not Produce Undue Delay
The principal aim of this process should be to address the need to
issue regulations that protect public health and allow coal miners to
continue to produce coal. One primary objective of this should be to
clarify the regulatory review process, thus reducing the delay in the
established permitting process. This is an important objective and,
whatever else OSM may do it should not unnecessarily delay the current
rules. There should be no additional delays while the current rule
making process is underway.
There are no magic formulae for achieving this. It requires setting
deadlines and allocating sufficient resources so that agencies can meet
such deadlines. In this case, in which admittedly the scientific data
has yet to be established in some areas or additional studies are
clearly needed in others, the ability of mine operators to secure
permits should not be delayed due to unproven theory or speculation.
Scope of Proposed Changes
In view of the complexity of this proposal and the fact that it
extends beyond issues related to the stream buffer zone we believe that
additional time should have been granted for public comment. The UMWA
is disappointed that various requests for extensions were not granted.
Any proposed changes to return to some version of the 1983 rule
should be entered into with clear guidance and an understanding that
conducting surface coal mining activities in the stream buffer zone are
not prohibited. Rules must be clear that the protections of the SBZ
rule are meant to conduct surface coal mining operations so as to
prevent, to the extent possible using best technology currently
available, additional contributions of suspended solids to stream flow
or runoff outside the permit area.
Conclusion
In the past, regulatory reform has generally proceeded with the
assumption that federal regulations create better compliance in areas
where there is a clear need.
The rules OSM promulgates generally promote the requirements of the
Surface Mining Control and Reclamation Act (SMCRA) in cooperation with
States and Tribes. The primary objectives are to ensure that coal mines
are operated in a manner that protects citizens and the environment
during mining and assures that the land is restored to beneficial use
following mining, and to mitigate the effects of past mining by
aggressively pursuing reclamation of abandoned coal mines.
Indeed, the history of regulation in the coal mining industry
demonstrates the effectiveness of direct regulation, i.e., creating
rules and a means for enforcing them. However, the UMWA vigorously
opposes any unnecessary regulation that results in a loss of employment
for the members of our union. Such unnecessary rules would likely deter
future capital investment in UMWA represented operations and will
prohibit expansion of existing mining operations. This lack of
investment will prematurely cause the displacement of UMWA members
working at these facilities.
The Surface Mining Control and Reclamation Act of 1977 clearly
allows for the extraction of coal using surface mining methods and one
of the express purposes of SMCRA is to assure that the coal supply
essential to the Nation's energy requirements, and to its economic and
social well-being is provided and to strike a balance between
protection of the environment and the Nation's need for coal as an
essential source of energy.
In proposing changes to the SBZ and related rules, the agency must
also guard against unintended regulatory consequences of its actions.
We have concerns that actions that the agency takes that are aimed at
surface mining in Appalachia could have a significant impact on mining
in other areas, or even on underground operations in the same region.
Rules that could potentially impede an operator's ability to store and
treat coal mine waste causes serious concerns. The preamble discussion
to the 2008 rule (73 FR 75815) makes clear Congress recognized that
coal mine waste had been and would continue to be placed in streams.
Congress found and declared, in Section 101(b) of SMCRA:
the overwhelming percentage of the Nation's coal reserves can
only be extracted by underground mining methods, and it is,
therefore, essential to the national interest to insure the
existence of an expanding and economically healthy underground
coal mining industry;
The vast majority of coal produced by underground mining in the states
targeted by the proposed rules must be processed through preparation
plants to remove impurities. The waste byproduct lacks the stability of
excess spoil and must be placed in disposal areas that extend fuither
down into valleys than excess spoil fills. To prohibit coal mine waste
disposal sites in areas that extend into perennial streams in the
states targeted by the proposed rules could result in the elimination
of the underground coal mine industry throughout Appalachia. There are
no provisions in the Act that support or authorize these types of
restrictions on coal mine waste placement. Specifically, it would seem
that such restrictions would be in conflict with the provisions of
SMCRA.
The original intent of the SBZ rule is to ensure compliance with
SMCRA's requirements to use caution when mining near streams and to use
the best technology currently available to avoid, to the extent
possible, the contributions of suspended solids to streamflow or runoff
outside the permit area. The rule was never meant as a ban on surface
mining activities in streams. As part of the process the Agency should
carefully consider past litigation, similar to which caused the
elimination of hundreds of UMWA member's jobs at the Ach Coal's Daltex
operation, as well as other surface mining complexes over the past
decade. If the intent of OSM is to repeal the current version of the
SBZ rule then OSM has a duty to clarify what this means for valley
fills, coal refuse pile, and impoundments. OSM has applied the 1983
version of the SBZ rule in the past and coal companies have always had
the ability to secure permits required to maintain their operations.
However, due to litigation and various rulings from the courts the 2008
rule was put into place by OSM. In repealing such rule OSM should have
provisions in place to ensure the ability of surface mining to continue
while scientific data is gathered and reviewed by experts from the
various stakeholders.
Would future research and analysis accurately reflect the positions
held by the stakeholders on either side of the surface mining issue? We
do not know. But we do know that premature rulemaking absent creditable
studies can cause job loss and financial hardships to communities
already suffering from the effects of a worldwide recession. Many of
the measures proposed in this notice could affect large numbers of
miners working today and many miners' families that rely on these good-
paying jobs.
We support the promulgation by OSM of protective rules that allow
UMWA members to continue to mine coal in a responsible manner, but let
us not venture down a path of potential hardship for those who rely on
this vital component of the Appalachian economy. Let us not restrain
the regulations necessary to address real problems but let us do so
with a clear and decisive plan that will preserve this vital part of
our nation's energy needs.
______

Mr. Lamborn. Thank you. Mr. Carey?

STATEMENT OF MICHAEL CAREY, PRESIDENT,
OHIO COAL ASSOCIATION

Mr. Carey. Chairman Lamborn, members of the Subcommittee, I
appreciate the opportunity to testify at this very important
Subcommittee hearing today on the Office of Surface Mining.
My name is Mike Carey. I am President of the Ohio Coal
Association, a trade organization that represents Ohio's coal
producing companies. I also serve on the National Coal Council
and I serve as the Chairman of the Ohio Coal Technical Advisory
Committee, and serving as Chair for the last seven years.
In our country today, coal is mined in 27 states across
this country and provides affordable, reliable energy in 48 of
them. Coal is not only America's most abundant energy resource,
but it is by far our lowest cost domestic energy resource. Now,
today it will be difficult for me to confine my remarks only to
the stream buffer zone rule because nationwide, our industry is
facing an unprecedented onslaught of new regulations that are,
simply put, designed to eliminate the American coal industry
and the thousands of jobs associated with it.
The Obama Administration and its allies have declared a de
facto war on coal across this country. The Department of the
Interior's OSM stream buffer zone rule, the EPA's various
rules, including the greenhouse gas rule, the Cross-State Air
Pollution Rule, the Utility MACT, have one purpose--to force
coal out of business.
Mr. Chairman, the Obama Administration's attempts to
rewrite the stream buffer zone rule is nothing but a blatant
attempt, again, to kill coal in Appalachia. The last rewrite
undertaken in 2008, only three years ago, was a thoughtful
process involving all of the stakeholders and examining all of
the major issues. The Administration's efforts were a rush job
done solely to placate their environmental allies. When the
environmental impact statement was criticized for its bluntness
of the potential job losses, instead of admitting that there
was a problem, they fired the contractor who made those
observations.
Now, there's a right way to conduct rulemaking, as
Congressman Johnson pointed out in his opening remarks. When
OSM revised the stream buffer zone rule in December of 2008, it
was the product of over five years, millions of taxpayers'
dollars in research, two environmental impact statements and
over 43,000 public comments. The wrong way, that contrasted
directly with the Obama Administration's closed and rushed
efforts to ram a new rule through the process to placate
environmentalist allies.
Fire the messenger. The Administration had hired the
outside contractor, as previously mentioned, to prepare the EIS
without the benefit of any new Federal studies. After the EIS
draft was completed, the press seized upon the study, which
predicted that at least, at least, 20,000 jobs would be lost,
and the elimination of up to 20 to 30 percent of all surface
mines in the east.
Two months later, instead of changing direction on the
regulation and announcing that they were wrong to eliminate the
jobs or that they would change their approach, they instead
blamed the contractor and they fired him and announced that
they would hire a new contractor to start the EIS all over
again. This is a classic example of shooting the messenger, but
not changing the message.
Now, what's at stake? OSM's stream buffer zone rule is the
most comprehensive, far-reaching revision of SMCRA rule in over
30 years. Rather than providing regulatory clarity as the 2008
rule did, the new rule replaces decades of interpretation of
law, prohibits standard mining practices and has nationwide
application. In light that it took five years to come up with
the OSM 2008 rule, they could not possibly responsibly rewrite
such a rule in such a short period of time.
Rural regions of West Virginia, Ohio, Pennsylvania,
Illinois, Indiana, Kentucky, Tennessee, would all be
economically devastated by losing major employers such as the
coal industry. The number, in fact, could be 20,000, might be
low, but 70,000 coal-related jobs could also be affected.
Mr. Chairman, when an agency ignores the previous open
rulemaking process of its past, i.e. The 2008 stream buffer
zone rulemaking process, rushes its replacement through after
meeting in secret with environmental organizations and ignoring
the stakeholders and the states themselves and shoots their own
messenger when the work is was derided in the press, then one
can only conclude that this proposal was intentional and they
knew exactly what they were doing.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for the opportunity to testify and
I look forward to any questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Carey follows:]

Statement of Mike Carey, President, Ohio Coal Association

Chairman Lamborn, Ranking Member Holt, Members of the Subcommittee,
good morning.
Thank you for inviting me to testify at this very important hearing
on Office of Surface Mining, Reclamation, and Enforcement's (OSM)
Stream Buffer Zone Rule and its impact on American jobs. My name is
Mike Carey and I serve as President of the Ohio Coal Association (OCA).
I am also a member of The National Coal Council, which serves as an
advisory committee for the Secretary of Energy on energy resource
issues.
In our country today, coal is mined in 27 states and produces
affordable electricity for 48 states. Coal provides 86 percent of the
electricity needs for powering Ohio's business and residential sectors.
The OCA provides a voice for the many thousands of our citizens working
in Ohio's coal sector. The companies we represent are proud to directly
employ over 3,000 individuals in Ohio alone and the over 30,000
additional jobs dependent on our industry.
The OCA seeks to continually educate state and federal lawmakers on
the effects that policies have on American jobs, the economy, the
reliability of electric power production and our global energy
manufacturing competitiveness. This is why I am here today. Coal
provides our country with a strong international competitive advantage,
as we have more coal than Saudi Arabia has oil and gas. Energy
Information Administration data shows that at least 261.5 billion tons
of coal reserves are available in America, making our recoverable coal
reserves almost 1/3 of the world's total supply.
Coal is not only America's most abundant energy resource, but it
is, by far, our lowest cost domestic energy resource. Cheap, affordable
coal is what powers the nation's manufacturing base and keeps the
lights on for millions of America families. The low cost electricity
that coal provides is a staple of American life and is essential to
many Americans' standard of living.
It is difficult for me to confine my remarks today to only the
Stream Buffer rule, because nationwide our industry is facing an
unprecedented onslaught of new regulations that are, simply put,
designed to eliminate America's coal industry and the thousands of jobs
associated with coal. The Obama Administration and its allies have
declared a de facto war on coal across Appalachia and America. The
Department of Interior's (DOI) OSM Stream Buffer rule and EPA's various
rules, including greenhouse gas rule, the Cross-State Air Pollution
Rule (CSAPR) and Utility MACT, have one purpose: to force coal out of
business. These regulations, coupled with the permit delays across the
entire Obama Administration, will be economically devastating and will
have an inevitable adverse effect on our nation. Hard-working Americans
will lose their jobs, businesses will shutter, families will be forced
to pay more to keep warm in the upcoming winter months as we are forced
to supplant our nation's most abundant and affordable energy resource.
Mr. Chairman, the Obama Administration's attempts to rewrite the
Stream Buffer Zone Rule is nothing but a blatant attempt to kill coal
in Appalachia, which will destroy jobs across the industrial Midwest.
Why do I say this?
1)  The last rewrite undertaken in 2008--only three years ago--
was a thoughtful process involving all of the stakeholders and
examining all of the major issues.
2)  The Obama Administration's efforts were a rushed job done
solely to placate their environmental allies, ignoring
stakeholders and the impacted States themselves.
3)  When the Obama Environmental Impact Statement (EIS) was
criticized for the bluntness of the potential job losses,
instead of admitting the problem, they fired the contractor who
made the informed observations.
The Right Way to Conduct a Rulemaking
When OSM revised the Stream Buffer Zone rule in December 2008 it
was the product of over five years of studies, millions of taxpayers'
money spent on research, two environmental impact statements, over
43,000 public comments, and 30 economic and scientific studies.
OSM began the process in 2003, releasing a discussion draft of
methods to clarify the older 1983 rule. Later that year OSM, working
with the EPA, Army Corps of Engineers, Fish and Wildlife Service, and
importantly the State of West Virginia completed a 5,000-page
programmatic ESI on mountaintop mining. This EIS contained 30 separate
federal studies on all aspects of Mountaintop Mining. They later
proposed additional changes to the rule based upon public comments.
Then in 2007 they completed another EIS which examined more
specifically the stream buffer zone rule, addressed further comments
and involved all stakeholders. The final regulation was issued in 2008.
The Wrong Way to Conduct a Rulemaking
This is contrasted directly with the Obama Administration's closed
and rushed efforts to ram a new rule through the process to placate
their environmentalist allies.
In 2009, at the beginning of the Obama Administration Secretary
Salazar signed an memorandum of understanding (MOU) vowing to revisit
the stream buffer zone rule and then attempted to vacate the 2008 rule
by guidance document. It took a federal court telling them they had to
use the APA rulemaking process.
They later published an advanced notice of proposed rulemaking,
making 10 significant changes to the stream buffer zone rule. They only
allowed 30 days comment and ran the clock between Thanksgiving and just
after Christmas.
In 2010, they entered into secret negotiations with several
environmental organizations, emerging with a signed settlement
agreement and also agreeing to pay their legal fees. They then started
a new EIS and decided to expand the scope of the Stream Buffer Zone
rules to include major changes to the underlying Surface Mining Control
and Reclamation Act regulations.
As opposed to the 2008 efforts, eight States and the Western
Governors Association wrote the Agency objecting to the draft EIS
conclusions and the lack of opportunity to participate in the process.
Fire the Messenger
The Administration hired an outside contractor to prepare the EIS,
without the benefit of any new federal studies. After the EIS draft was
completed, the press seized upon the study which predicted at least
20,000 jobs would be lost including the elimination of 20-30 percent of
all surface mining in the East.
Two months later, instead of changing direction on the regulation,
announcing they were wrong to eliminate jobs, or that they would change
their approach, they instead blamed the contractor, fired them, and
announced they would hire a new contractor to start the EIS over again.
This is a classic example of shooting the messenger, but not changing
the message. If this example wasn't so real and troubling, I would
swear that they took their strategy from watching the movie Casablanca.
Just like Captain Renault was shocked that gambling was going on, OSM
Director Pizarchik was shocked that his regulation would lead to job
losses. It's not very credible. One can only surmise that the new
contractor has either explicitly or at least implicitly been told to
steer clear of any job loss projections.
What's at Stake?
OSM's Stream Buffer Rule is the most comprehensive and far-reaching
revision of a SMCRA rule in more than 30 years. Rather than providing
regulatory clarity as the 2008 rule did, the new rule replaces decades
of interpretation of the law, prohibits standard mining practices and
has nationwide application. In light of the five years it took to come
up with the 2008 rule, OSM could not properly and responsibly rewrite
this rule in such a short period. OSM's rulemaking process and the new
rule have been widely criticized by states and state agencies
responsible for implementing the rule. Moreover, this rule will have
damaging effects throughout the states where the mining industry
operates and will destroy tens of thousands of coal related jobs.
It is imperative that this Subcommittee and Congress carefully
review OSM's rules in order to protect American jobs. We are always
concerned when regulatory overreaching negatively impacts job security
and growth in our region. We are in difficult economic times when many
Ohioans and Americans find themselves out of work. Unemployment in Ohio
is 9.1 percent, the same as the overall unemployment rate in the U.S.
Rural regions in West Virginia, Ohio, Pennsylvania, Illinois,
Indiana, Kentucky and Tennessee would be economically devastated from
losing a major employer such as the coal industry due to the OSM rule.
By OSM's own admission, more than 7,000 jobs in Appalachia would be
lost. This is an optimistic, underestimated assessment; we believe
Appalachia will lose more than 20,000 jobs and nearly 70,000 coal
related jobs would also be lost nationwide. This would mean the
unemployment rate rising in these states and a loss of more than $650
million of earnings and state revenue.
According to the agency's draft ESI, the Stream Buffer rule would
annihilate approximately 1/3 of surface mines in the East and up to 50
percent of underground mines nationwide. In addition to closures of
Eastern mines, the OSM rule would cause closures in coal production of
20 percent of Illinois' Basin mines, over 25 percent of the Gulf region
and 84 percent of Alaska's mines.
This rule will be economically devastating to many states and
communities in the East, but its impacts will be far-reaching effecting
the nation's economy, employment rate and energy affordability.
Decreases in Eastern coal production will increase electric prices, a
fact which OSM did not take into consideration while rulemaking.
Twenty-two of the 25 states with lowest electricity costs rely on coal
for at least 40 percent of their electricity needs.
Mr. Chairman, when an agency:
1)  Ignores the previous open rulemaking processes of its past,
ie the 2008 Stream Buffer rulemaking process, and
2)  Rushes its replacement through after meeting in secret with
environmental organizations and ignoring the stakeholders and
the States in the process, and
3)  Shoots their own messenger, only after the work is derided
by the press,
Then one can only conclude that their proposal was intentional and
that they knew exactly what they were doing to the coal industry.
I ask that you help reign in OSM and do all that you can to stop
this rulemaking. Americans have lost enough jobs; don't allow tens of
thousands of additional families to suffer for OSM's misguided and
unjustified rule.
Thank you for this opportunity to testify, Mr. Chairman, and stand
ready to answer any questions the subcommittee may have about this
attack on coal jobs, power providers and businesses throughout the
United States.
______

Mr. Lamborn. Thank you. Mr. Bostic?

STATEMENT OF JASON D. BOSTIC, VICE-PRESIDENT,
WEST VIRGINIA COAL ASSOCIATION

Mr. Bostic. Good morning and thank you for the opportunity
to address this Committee. I am Jason Bostic with the West
Virginia Coal Association.
Mr. Lamborn. If you can get just a little closer.
Mr. Bostic. Is that better?
Mr. Lamborn. A little bit more.
Mr. Bostic. OK. Sorry about that. On behalf of our
membership, which accounts for 98 percent of West Virginia's
underground and surface coal production, we are grateful for
the opportunity to address this Subcommittee and we welcome
your interest in these rule changes.
West Virginia is the nation's second largest coal producing
state, averaging about 155 million tons of annual production,
60 percent of which comes from underground coal mining
operations. West Virginia is the nation's leading underground
coal producer.
As you've heard from others this morning, coal is the
broad-shouldered atlas of West Virginia's economy. In addition
to the 21,000 miners directly employed in the industry, coal
production supports another 42,000 jobs throughout our economy.
Coal is also the backbone of West Virginia's government and
social program structure, providing almost $500 million in
severance taxes to support vital county and state, local
services.
The thousands of coal miners in West Virginia, Appalachia
and across this nation desperately need your help. While the
President speaks of stimulating the economy, at every turn his
regulatory agencies are erecting substantial barriers to the
expansion of the coal industry. While he pleads the case for
more jobs, the agencies under his authority seem determined to
drastically increase unemployment and outright poverty.
All of the benefits provided by the coal industry have been
placed in jeopardy by the actions of the current
Administration. With this current initiative, OSM has joined
EPA in advancing an anti-coal agenda that targets all coal
production. To implement this agenda, these agencies rely on
policy, guidance and secretive revisions that are developed
behind closed doors, wrapped in bureaucratic intrigue.
As the mining industry and our employees struggle to
decipher and cope with this assault, we cannot help but marvel
how this Administration's commitment to transparency stops at
Appalachia and with the coal industry.
At the very outset of the new Administration, the White
House Council on Environmental Quality engineered a blueprint
that committed the entire Federal regulatory structure to
target Appalachian coal miners. Following its orders from CEQ,
for example, the EPA embarked on an unprecedented campaign to
twist the Federal/State relationship under the Clean Water Act
to nullify the rights of individual states. So bad are the
actions of the EPA that individual states, including West
Virginia, have sued in Federal court to preserve their
sovereign authority.
The rulemaking from OSM that is the subject of the hearing
today is particularly offensive. The agency has set out to
radically change the mining regulatory program with absolutely
no justification. The path to revise the stream buffer zone
rule began by way of a settlement agreement between OSM and
certain anti-mining factions. From there, OSM established a
rulemaking schedule that you've heard from others that would
astonish most of the world. Under this record-breaking
schedule, OSM would quash a prior effort that took four years
to complete.
Far from being the midnight regulation as accused by the
Administration, the 2008 revisions were actually comprehensive
changes that remained faithful to the Surface Mine Law.
According to OSM's own estimates, these changes stand to
potentially reduce coal production in Appalachia by as much as
30 percent and throw thousands out of work. Further, despite
the efforts of some to mask the impact of these revisions as
confined to surface mining, and we cannot emphasis this point
enough, the changes that OSM is currently contemplating could
dramatically impact the underground production of coal in West
Virginia and across this country.
The coal industry is not alone in its observation that OSM
is attempting to change an act of Congress by way of a
regulation. Individual mining states have been openly
critically of this process, as you've already heard this
morning, with one state agency properly characterizing the
rulemaking as junk and with the remainder of those agencies
alleging the rule will violate the surface mining law.
It is against this backdrop of a Federal assault, waged by
the EPA and OSM on coal, that we welcome your interest in these
rule changes. The strong demand for West Virginia coal should
be reassuring to our mining families and encouraging investment
and expansion that puts even more people to work, but
unfortunately, that is not the case. The politically motivated
actions of OSM and EPA have cast a long shadow of uncertainty
over the coal industry. For our mining families and their
communities, these mysterious rule changes hang over their
heads like an ominous cloud.
Coal cannot only sustain current jobs but could add even
more if these arbitrary actions from Washington are restrained
through effective oversight from Congress. We seek not a
subsidy or a handout. We just need the permission to work. To
continue to do for this country what we've done for years,
providing it with energy and industrial fuel that so many
others in the developing world crave as they aspire to economic
greatness, we urge you and we applaud your efforts to pull OSM
and the other regulatory agencies from the shadows of their
secretive routines and to demand real, hard answers.
Thank you again.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Bostic follows:]

Statement of Jason D. Bostic, Vice-President,
West Virginia Coal Association

Good morning and thank you for the opportunity to address this
Committee. I am Jason Bostic with the West Virginia Coal Association.
On behalf of our membership, which accounts for 98 percent of West
Virginia's underground and surface coal production, we are grateful for
the opportunity to address this Subcommittee.
West Virginia is the nation's second largest coal producing state,
averaging 155 million tons of annual coal production, 60 percent of
which comes from underground mining operations.
West Virginia is the nation's leading underground coal producer and
21,000 men and women show up every day at mines in West Virginia to
produce one of the most valuable energy resources found anywhere in the
world. For electrical generation, West Virginia coal offers a fuel
source that is both high in BTU content and low in emissions. For
domestic and international steel producers, coal from West Virginia and
Appalachia is irreplaceable as a feedstock for the production of iron
and steel. Our coal is also used in a variety of manufacturing
processes that produce everything from plastics, to medication to
cosmetics.
In short, West Virginia coal does everything from charging your
iphone to forging the steel for our nation's infrastructure to making
the plastic bottle for your soda. Our coal is shipped to 33 states and
23 countries. Energy produced in West Virginia fuels 40 percent of all
electrical consumption on the east coast.
Coal is also the broad-shouldered Atlas of West Virginia's economy.
In addition to the 21,000 coal miners directly employed by the mining
industry, coal production supports another 42,000 jobs throughout the
economy. These are jobs that pay twice the average annual state wage
and represent $3.4 billion in direct wages annually. Coal is also the
backbone of West Virginia's government and social program structure,
providing almost $500 million in severance taxes to support vital
state, county and local services. Together with the electric utility
industry, coal provides upwards of 60 percent of all business taxes
collected in West Virginia.
The thousands of coal miners in West Virginia, Appalachia and
across the nation need your help.
While the President speaks of stimulating the economy, at every
turn his regulatory agencies are erecting substantial barriers to the
expansion of the mining industry. While he pleads the case for more
jobs the agencies under his authority seem determined to drastically
increase unemployment and increase those living below the poverty
level. As the President calls for review of administrative actions, one
of his executive agencies appears determined to push through a
regulation with little public participation.
All of the benefits provided by the coal industry, and all that
results from having a domestic source of energy that is so versatile in
the economy, has been placed in jeopardy by the actions of the current
administration. With its current initiative to re-write the Stream
Buffer Zone Rule, the federal Office of Surface Mining (OSM) has joined
the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) in advancing an anti-coal
agenda that targets all coal production but seems to focus specifically
on the Appalachian coal basin. To implement this agenda, these agencies
rely on policy, guidance and, in the case of OSM, secretive regulatory
revisions that are developed behind closed doors, wrapped in
bureaucratic intrigue. As the mining industry and our employees
struggle to decipher and cope with this assault, we cannot help but
marvel how this administration's stated commitment to transparency
stops at Appalachia and the coal industry.
At the very outset of the new administration, the White House
Council on Environmental Quality engineered a ``blueprint'' that
committed the entire federal regulatory structure to restricting coal
production and unfairly targeting Appalachian coal miners. The ideology
expressed in this June 11, 2009 Memo (copy provided an as attachment)
has been used by EPA to halt the legal and orderly processing of mining
permit applications. Marching to its orders under the June 11 memo, EPA
embarked on an unprecedented campaign to twist the federal-state
relationship under the Clean Water Act (CWA) to nullify the rights of
individual states with respect to water quality standards. So bad are
the actions of EPA that individual states, including West Virginia,
have sued in federal court to preserve their sovereign authority.
The rulemaking from OSM that is the subject of the hearing today is
particularly offensive. The agency has set out to radically change the
mining regulatory program with no justification. As the agency itself
admitted in the Federal Register, ``. . .we had already decided to
change the rule following the change of administrations on January 20,
2009'' (75 Fed. Reg. 34667, June 18, 2010)
The path to revise the Stream Buffer Zone rule began by way of
settlement agreement between OSM and anti-mining factions that have
consistently, yet unsuccessfully, legally harassed the orderly
regulation of coal mining. From there, came the June 11 memo and an OSM
established rulemaking schedule that will astonish most observers- the
agency committed to rewrite its regulations and complete an
Environmental Impact Statement by February 2012--perhaps the fastest
rulemaking exercise ever undertaken by a federal agency.
Under this record-breaking rulemaking schedule, OSM would quash a
prior effort that took four years to complete and certainly included
more public comment opportunities than the current initiative.
Far from being the ``midnight regulation'' as accused by OSM and
this administration, the 2008 revisions were a thoughtful and inclusive
change to federal mining regulations that remained faithful to the
federal Surface Mining Control and Reclamation Act (SMCRA) and
reflected several federal court decisions. Under this current regime,
OSM has embarked on the most sweeping changes to the mining regulatory
program since its creation in 1977 by Congress.
OSM's political leadership would have you believe these changes are
but mere clarifications. Changes that, by OSM's own conservative
estimates, stand to potentially reduce coal production in Appalachia by
as much 30 percent and throw 20,000 people out of work are not minor.
Further, and we can't stress this important fact enough, despite the
efforts of some to mask the impact of these revisions as confined to
surface mining, the changes being contemplated by OSM could
dramatically impact underground coal mines. They are in fact changes
that betray the very will and intent of Congress as expressed in SMCRA.
Just as we have seen from EPA and its actions under the CWA,
unelected bureaucrats within OSM are set to radically alter the place
of coal in our nation's energy mix. They will do so with a stroke of
the regulatory pen, ignoring public scrutiny and debate before
Congress. Even the regulatory process associated with these changes has
become secretive. Individual states, which SMCRA envisioned as the
primary regulators of mining activity, have been locked out of the
process by OSM.
The coal industry is not alone in its observation that OSM is
attempting to change an act of Congress by way of regulation.
Individual mining states have been openly critical of this process,
with one state agency properly characterizing the rulemaking as
``junk'' and many others alleging the rule will clearly violate SMCRA.
It is against this backdrop of a federal assault, waged by EPA and
OSM on coal that we welcome the Subcommittee's interest in this rule
change. The strong demand for West Virginia coal should be reassuring
to our mining families and encouraging investment and expansion that
puts even more people to work. But that is not the case.
The politically-motivated actions of OSM and EPA have cast a long
shadow of uncertainty over the coal industry. For our mining families
and their communities these mysterious rule changes hang over their
heads like an ominous cloud. They worry about their jobs, their
children, paying their bills and the fabric of their communities. We
are left to ponder why, if Washington is so concerned about creating
good jobs, that it seems so determined to take away those that already
exist.
Coal has allowed West Virginia and other mining states to survive
recent economic disruptions relatively unscathed without massive budget
deficits and drastic reductions in social services. Coal production in
West Virginia and elsewhere in this nation has a potentially bright
future as the country struggles to regain its economic footing. We will
need coal to power factories and forge steel. We will need coal to
provide reliable, affordable electricity to our citizens. Coal cannot
only sustain current jobs but could add even more if these arbitrary
actions from Washington are contained through effective oversight from
Congress.
We seek not a subsidy or handout. We just need the permission to
work. To continue doing for this country what we've done for years--
providing it with the energy and industrial fuel that so many in the
developing world crave as they aspire to economic greatness and
providing the wages and taxes that support our states and communities.
We ask that you pull OSM and the other regulatory agencies from the
shadows of their secretive routines and demand real answers.
Thank You.
______

MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING AMONG THE

U.S. DEPARTMENT OF THE ARMY,

U.S. DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR,

AND U.S. ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY

IMPLEMENTING THE INTERAGENCY ACTION PLAN ON

APPALACHIAN SURFACE COAL MINING \1\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

\1\ For purposes of this MOU, ``Appalachian surface coal mining''
refers to mining techniques requiring permits under both the Surface
Mining Control and Reclamation Act (SMCRA) and Section 404 of the Clean
Water Act (CWA), in the states of Kentucky, Ohio, Pennsylvania,
Tennessee, Virginia, and West Virginia.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

JUNE 11, 2009

PREAMBLE
The mountains of Appalachia possess unique biological diversity,
forests, and freshwater streams that historically have sustained rich
and vibrant American communities. These mountains also contain some of
the nation's richest deposits of coal, which have been mined by
generations of Americans to provide heat and electricity to millions in
the U.S. and around the world. After generations of mining, however,
the region's most readily available coal resources have diminished, and
the remaining coal seams are less accessible to non-surface mining
methods.
In response, a surface mining technique commonly referred to as
``mountaintop mining'' \2\ has become increasingly prevalent in the
Appalachian region. Although its scale and efficiency has enabled the
mining of once-inaccessible coal seams, this mining practice often
stresses the natural environment and impacts the health and welfare of
surrounding human communities. Streams once used for swimming, fishing,
and drinking water have been adversely impacted, and groundwater
resources used for drinking water have been contaminated. Some forest
lands that sustain water quality and habitat and contribute to the
Appalachian way of life have been fragmented or lost. These negative
impacts are likely to further increase as mines transition to less
accessible coal resources within already affected watersheds and
communities.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ The term ``mountaintop mining'' may also be referred to as
``mountaintop removal'' or ``valley fill mining.''
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
With this Memorandum of Understanding (MOU), the Department of the
Interior (DOI), U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), and the
U.S. Army Corps of Engineers (Corps) are announcing this Interagency
Action Plan (IAP) designed to significantly reduce the harmful
environmental consequences of Appalachian surface coal mining
operations, while ensuring that future mining remains consistent with
federal law. This IAP includes a set of short-term actions to be
implemented in 2009 to existing policy and guidance, and a longer term
process for gathering public input, assessing the effectiveness of
current policy, and developing regulatory actions.
The Federal government has made a commitment to move America toward
a 21st-century clean energy economy based on the recognition that a
sustainable economy and environment must work hand in hand. Federal
Agencies will work in coordination with appropriate regional, state,
and local entities to help diversify and strengthen the Appalachian
regional economy and promote the health and welfare of Appalachian
communities. This interagency effort will have a special focus on
stimulating clean enterprise and green jobs development, encouraging
better coordination among existing federal efforts, and supporting
innovative new ideas and initiatives.

Interagency Action Plan

I. COORDINATION ON REGULATORY PROGRAMS
This MOU formalizes the agencies' IAP for coordinating the
regulation of Appalachian surface coal mining. The elements of the plan
are:

A series of interim actions under existing
authorities to minimize the adverse environmental consequences
of Appalachian surface coal mining;

A commitment by the agencies to investigate and, if
appropriate, undertake longer term regulatory actions related
to Appalachian surface coal mining;

Coordinated environmental reviews of pending permit
applications under the Clean Water Act (CWA) and Surface Mining
Control and Reclamation Act (SMCRA); and

A commitment to engage in robust public
participation, through public comment mechanisms and
Appalachian public outreach events, helping to inform Federal,
State, and local decisions.
In addition to the steps taken above, the Federal government will
help diversify and strengthen the Appalachian regional economy. This
effort will include the agencies to this MOU, and other Federal
agencies, as appropriate, and will work to focus clean energy
investments and create green jobs in Appalachia.
Coordination of interagency policy discussions and assessment of
policy effectiveness will be achieved in consultation with the Council
on Environmental Quality.
II. SHORT-TERM ACTIONS TO MINIMIZE ENVIRONMENTAL HARM
The signatory agencies will take the following short-term actions
under existing laws, regulations, and other authorities to reduce the
harmful environmental consequences of Appalachian surface coal mining.
Before the end of 2009, the Corps and EPA will take the following
steps:

Within 30 days of the date of this MOU, the Corps
will issue a public notice pursuant to 33 C.F.R. Sec. 330.5
proposing to modify Nationwide Permit (NWP) 21 to preclude its
use to authorize the discharge of fill material into streams
for surface coal mining activities in the Appalachian region,
and will seek public comment on the proposed action.

EPA and the Corps, in coordination with DOI's Fish
and Wildlife Service (FWS), will jointly develop guidance to
strengthen the environmental review of proposed surface coal
mining projects in Appalachia under the CWA Section 404(b)(1)
Guidelines.

Recognizing that the regulation of surface coal
mining extends beyond CWA Section 404, EPA will improve and
strengthen oversight and review of water pollution permits for
discharges from valley fills under CWA Section 402, and of
state water quality certifications under CWA Section 401, by
taking appropriate steps to assist the States to strengthen
state regulation, enforcement, and permitting of surface mining
operations under these programs.

The Corps and EPA, in coordination with FWS and
consistent with the agencies' regulations governing
compensatory mitigation, will jointly issue guidance clarifying
how impacts to streams should be evaluated and how to evaluate
proposed mitigation projects to improve the ecological
performance of such mitigation implemented to compensate for
losses of waters of the United States authorized by Section 404
permits.

EPA, in coordination with the Corps, will clarify the
applicability of the CWA waste treatment exemption for
treatment facilities constructed in waters of the United States
in order to minimize the temporary impacts of mining operations
on streams.
Before the end of 2009, DOI will take the following steps:

If the 2008 Stream Buffer Zone Rule is vacated by the
U.S. District Court for the District of Columbia in Coal River
Mountain Watch et al v. Kempthorne, 1:08-cv-02212-HHK C, as
requested by the Secretary of the Interior on April 27, 2009,
the Office of Surface Mining Reclamation and Enforcement (OSM)
will issue guidance clarifying the application of the 1983
stream buffer zone provisions to further reduce adverse stream
impacts.

OSM will reevaluate and determine how it will more
effectively conduct oversight of State permitting, State
enforcement, and regulatory activities under SMCRA.

OSM will remove impediments to its ability to require
correction of permit defects in SMCRA primacy states.
III. DEVELOPMENT OF LONGER TERM REGULATORY ACTIONS TO BETTER MANAGE
APPALACHIAN SURFACE COAL MINING
A. OBJECTIVES

The signatory agencies will review their existing regulatory
authorities and procedures to determine whether regulatory
modifications should be proposed to better protect the environment and
public health from the impacts of Appalachian surface coal mining. At a
minimum, the agencies will consider:

Revisions to key provisions of current SMCRA
regulations, including the Stream Buffer Zone Rule and
Approximate Original Contour (AOC) requirements;

Eliminating use of Nationwide Permit 21 in connection
with surface coal mining in the Appalachian region when the
Nationwide Permit Program is reauthorized in 2012; and

Revisions to how surface coal mining activities are
evaluated, authorized, and regulated under the CWA.
B. PROCESS

The signatory agencies will create an interagency working group to
coordinate the development of short-term actions, longer term
regulatory actions, and coordination procedures for Appalachian surface
coal mining. The group will ensure robust public involvement in the
development of any proposed actions or regulatory reforms.
For any proposed regulatory revision or other action under this MOU
that is a major federal action significantly affecting the quality of
the human environment (and is an action subject to NEPA), an
Environmental Impact Statement (EIS) will be prepared to inform the
decision-making process. At an early stage in the interagency
coordination process, the working group will determine whether
coordinating these NEPA processes programmatically would more
effectively guide regulatory development and decision-making. The
interagency group will coordinate with CEQ regarding the implementation
of the National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA) in the development of
regulatory reforms.
IV. INTERIM INTERAGENCY COORDINATION PROCEDURES
A. Clean Water Act

EPA and the Corps will begin immediately to implement enhanced
coordination procedures applicable to the Clean Water Act review of
Section 404 permit applications for Appalachian surface coal mining
activities that have been submitted prior to execution of this MOU. The
goal of these procedures is to ensure more timely, consistent,
transparent, and environmentally effective review of permit
applications under existing law and regulations. The agencies are
issuing these enhanced joint procedures concurrently with this MOU.
Also concurrently, EPA is clarifying the factual considerations it is
using to evaluate pending CWA permit applications under the 404(b)(1)
Guidelines.
Pending Clean Water Act Section 404 permit applications for
Appalachian surface coal mining activities will continue to be
evaluated by the Corps and EPA on a case-by-case basis. The agencies
will focus their reviews of Appalachian surface coal mining permit
applications based on likely environmental impacts with the goal of
avoiding, minimizing, and mitigating such impacts to the extent
practicable under the CWA Section 404(b)(1) Guidelines and consistent
with NEPA. This approach will enable the continued permitting of
environmentally responsible projects.
B. Surface Mining Control and Reclamation Act

During 2009, OSM will issue guidance concerning appropriate
application of the Stream Buffer Zone rule and other related rules and
will ensure that states are implementing their counterpart provisions
and SMCRA regulatory programs consistent with the guidance.
V. PUBLIC INVOLVEMENT
This IAP will be accompanied by robust public comment on its short-
and longer term actions. The agencies will hold public meetings in
Appalachia during 2009 to gather on-the-ground input and encourage
ongoing local engagement in the environmental assessment and decision-
making process. Additional public participation will occur as agency
actions move forward.
VI. GENERAL
A. The policy and procedures contained within this MOU are intended
solely as guidance and do not create any rights, substantive or
procedural, enforceable by any party. This MOU does not constitute
final agency action on any issue, and any actions contemplated by this
MOU will be carried out in an appropriate administrative process by the
action agency in accordance with all applicable laws and regulations.
B. This document does not, and is not intended to, impose any
legally binding requirements on Federal agencies, States, or the
regulated public, and does not restrict the authority of the employees
of the signatory agencies to exercise their discretion in each case to
make regulatory decisions based on their judgment about the specific
facts and application of relevant statutes and regulations.
C. Nothing in this MOU is intended to diminish, modify, or
otherwise affect statutory or regulatory authorities of any of the
signatory agencies. All formal guidance interpreting this MOU and
background materials upon which this MOU is based will be issued
jointly by the appropriate agencies.
D. Nothing in this MOU will be construed as indicating a financial
commitment by DOI, the Corps, EPA, or any cooperating State agency for
the expenditure of funds except as authorized in specific
appropriations.
E. This MOU will take effect on the date shown above and will
continue in effect until permanent procedures are established, or
unless earlier modified or revoked by agreement of all signatory
agencies. Modifications to this MOU may be made by mutual agreement of
all the signatory agencies. Modifications to the MOU must be made in
writing.

Signed,

Lisa P. Jacks
Administrator
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency

Ken Salazar
Secretary
U.S. Department of the Interior

Terrence ``Rock'' Salt
Acting Assistant Secretary of the Army (Civil Works)
U.S. Department of the Army
______

Mr. Lamborn. All right. Thank you. Ms. Fredriksen?

STATEMENT OF KATHARINE A. FREDRIKSEN, SENIOR VICE PRESIDENT,
ENVIRONMENTAL STRATEGY & REGULATORY AFFAIRS, CONSOL ENERGY

Ms. Fredriksen. Good morning, Mr. Chairman, and
distinguished Subcommittee members. My name is Katharine
Fredriksen and I am the Senior Vice President of Environmental
Strategy & Regulatory Affairs for CONSOL Energy. I'd like to
thank you for inviting me to participate today in this very
important hearing.
CONSOL Energy holds the largest proven reserves of minable
bituminous coal of 4.4 billion tons. We are the nation's
largest underground producer of coal and will produce 62
million tons this year alone.
My comments today are based on the draft Office of Surface
Mining stream buffer zone rule that is available in the public
forum. Based on our analysis of this draft rule, CONSOL has
very serious concerns about the jobs at risk and the
significant impact on coal mining if this rule were to go
forward as drafted.
Eighty-eight percent of our coal is produced using the
longwall method of mining. Longwall mines are the safest method
of underground mining and at CONSOL, safety is absolutely our
number one core value. Currently, we operate active mining
complexes across five states. Eight of our mining complexes are
longwall mines, with five of those eight located right here in
northern West Virginia. We also have surface and underground
mining operations in central and southern West Virginia.
As the Subcommittee knows, SMCRA not only regulates surface
coal mines, but it also regulates the surface effects of
underground coal mines. Thus, all of CONSOL Energy's longwall
mining operations operate pursuant to and in accordance with a
SMCRA permit.
OSM's revised SBZ rule appears to include, among other
things, a prohibition of mining in, near or through
intermittent and perennial streams and within 100 feet of such
streams, very restrictive provisions for excess spoil fills and
new and expansive standards for what constitutes a material
damage to the hydrologic balance.
These standards could make longwall mines impossible to
permit or operate. In the locations where we operate, it is
impossible for longwall mining to avoid impacts to intermittent
and perennial streams because such streams are ubiquitous atop
our operations. The proposed definition of material damage
could further prohibit subsidence of streams and thus eliminate
our ability to extract coal via longwall mining.
Using a moderate interpretation, and I stress moderate,
instead of extreme or worse case, CONSOL conducted a
preliminary engineering analysis of the impacts of this rule in
its current draft form. If you'll indulge me, I have a graphic
to represent this because they always say a picture is worth a
thousand words.
Mr. Lamborn. Ms. Fredriksen, is this in your testimony or
do we need to have it added to the record?
Ms. Fredriksen. Yes, it's included. I can include this as a
part of the written, if you would like. I have it as an
exhibit.
Mr. Lamborn. OK. If there's no objection, that will be
added to the record.
Ms. Fredriksen. Thank you. Our analysis indicated that the
rule would result in a 40 percent loss of eastern longwall
minable reserves to CONSOL. That is over one billion tons
CONSOL would be prohibited from mining. At current market
prices, this translates to a reduction in future revenues of
over $66 billion.
Additionally, the increased quantity and frequency of
longwall moves to avoid protected streams could further reduce
the mine's annual production by 25 to 30 percent and
potentially increase production costs by 20 to 35 percent. For
CONSOL alone, this would mean many of our longwall mines would
be unprofitable at today's coal prices.
Please note that streams typical of the streams that are to
be protected by this proposed rule have been undermined by
longwall operations for over 35 years. To date, over 172 square
miles in Pennsylvania and West Virginia have been undermined by
CONSOL's longwall operations with no material damage to the
hydrologic balance.
CONSOL believes that coal production, safety of personnel
and environmental stewardship are not mutually exclusive goals.
Impacts to the environment as a result of longwall mining are
regulated by the state environmental agencies through NPDES
permits and by the Army Corps of Engineers through 404 permits.
These permits account for the hydrological, stream baseline,
ecological and geologic impacts. A complete listing of all of
the permits we are subject to is included in my written
testimony.
But this hearing is entitled ``Jobs at Risk,'' so if you'll
indulge me, I'd like to take a few moments to discuss the
impacts this rule will have on our communities in which we
operate and on our employees.
By way of example, and attached as Exhibit D to my written
testimony, we analyzed the 2010 year end economic impacts of
our Pennsylvania mining complex called Bailey-Enlow, two of our
larger mines that would be significantly impacted by this rule.
There are a total of 1,348 CONSOL employees at this complex, as
well as an average of 412 contractor employees onsite every
day. The total direct expenditures from the complex in the
local economy is $763 million, with an additional $98 million
in Federal, state and local taxes. Using a five to one
multiplier effect, the estimated local economy impact is $1.7
billion, creating 6,740 jobs, bringing the total economic
impact to $2.6 billion for 2010 alone.
But we've got five longwall mining complexes in West
Virginia and they provide similar high-paying jobs and economic
benefits. We directly employ 3,035 employees at these mines and
approximately 264 contractors. The total direct expenditures
from these five complexes in the local economies in West
Virginia are $872 million, with an additional $146 million in
Federal, state and local taxes. The local economy multiplier
effect for northern West Virginia mines brings the local impact
to $1,017 billion for 2010, with an estimated 15,175 jobs.
We've additionally provided $2.4 million in philanthropic
donations to the communities where we operate in 2010 alone.
In conclusion, Mr. Chairman, please allow me to say that at
a time when our nation's economy is still struggling to regain
its former balance, and with unemployment remaining stubbornly
high, one of the few relatively robust sectors is the coal
mining industry. In this regard, we are particularly pleased
and proud of our longwall operations and of all the men and
women who work so tirelessly toward the safe, environmentally
protective and economically successful operation of these
mines.
The stream buffer zone rule, if promulgated in its current
form, would mean the loss of billions of dollars to the economy
and literally thousands of jobs. On behalf of CONSOL, I
fervently hope that the Administration will proceed in a
different direction. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Fredriksen follows:]

Statement of Katharine A. Fredriksen, Senior Vice President,
Environmental Strategy & Regulatory Affairs, CONSOL Energy

Introduction
Good Morning Mr. Chairman and distinguished Subcommittee Members
and guests. My name is Katharine Fredriksen and I am the Senior Vice
President, Environmental Strategy & Regulatory Affairs for CONSOL
Energy. Thank you for inviting me to participate in this very important
Subcommittee oversight hearing. CONSOL Energy holds the largest proven
reserves of minable bituminous coal of 4.4 billion tons. We are the
nation's largest underground miner of coal, and will produce some 62
million tons of coal this year alone. My comments today are based on
the draft Office of Surface Mining (``OSM'') Stream Buffer Zone rule
available in the public forum. Based on our analysis of that draft
rule, CONSOL has serious concerns about the jobs at risk and the
significant impacts on coal mining if this rule were to go forward as
any of the proposed alternatives other than ``no action''.
Eighty-eight percent of our coal is produced using the longwall
method of mining. As Members of this Subcommittee may know, longwall
systems have their own hydraulic roof supports called shields for
overlying rock that move with the machine as mining progresses into the
coal seam. Rock that is no longer supported by the coal that has been
removed is allowed to fall behind the operation in a controlled manner,
always keeping the miners under the shields. Longwall mines are the
safest method of underground mining, and at CONSOL, safety is
absolutely our number one core value.
Currently, we operate active mining complexes across five states.
Eight of our mining complexes are longwall mines, as follows; (1)
Buchanan in Southwest Virginia; (2) Shoemaker in Northern West Virginia
near Wheeling; (3) McElroy in Northern West Virginia near Moundsville;
(4) Blacksville in Northern West Virginia near the Pennsylvania border;
(5) Loveridge in Northern West Virginia near Fairmont; (6) Robinson
Run, also near Fairmont in Northern West Virginia; (7) Bailey Mine in
Pennsylvania; and 8) Enlow Fork Mine, also in Pennsylvania. We also
have surface and underground mine operations in central and southern
West Virginia, namely our Fola and Miller Creek mines.
SMCRA Regulates the Surface Effects of Underground Coal Mines
As the Subcommittee knows, SMCRA not only regulates surface coal
mines, but also, as specified in SMCRA Sec. 516, the surface effects of
underground coal mining operations. Importantly, however, SMCRA
Sec. 516 mandates that in adopting any rules and regulations for the
surface effects of underground coal mines, OSM ``shall consider the
distinct difference between surface coal mining and underground coal
mining.'' Thus, all of CONSOL Energy's longwall mining operations
operate pursuant to and in accordance with SMCRA permits issued by the
state regulatory authorities in the states where we operate. The
programs of these state regulatory authorities have been approved by
OSM as being as stringent as federal SMCRA and they are subject to
strict oversight by OSM. In addition, Congress in SMCRA specifically
encouraged the use of planned subsidence such as that which occurs with
longwall mining.
Consequently, CONSOL Energy will be directly affected by any
changes OSM makes to its stream buffer zone rule. As I describe in more
detail below, everything we have learned to date about these changes
causes us to be gravely concerned about the economic viability of our
longwall mines, and the adverse impacts on employment at the mines, as
well as the effects on the local communities that depend on these
operations.
What is the Stream Buffer Zone Rule?
Rules and policies on stream buffer zones have been in existence
from almost the very beginning of the implementation of SMCRA by OSM
and the regulatory authorities of the coal mining states. The current
stream buffer zone rule was published in the Federal Register on
December 12, 2008 in a document entitled ``Excess Spoil, Coal Mine
Waste, and Buffers for Perennial and Intermittent Streams.'' 73 Fed.
Reg. 75,814. A copy of the first page of the preamble to the stream
buffer zone rule and the rule itself is attached as Exhibit A to my
prepared statement. As you heard in earlier testimony, the existing
rule is a is a very comprehensive and detailed rule.
This 2008 rule resulted from a careful and well-executed public
process completed over more than a five-year period. It included public
hearings and consideration of over 45,000 public comments. The 2008
rule was also supported by an October 2005 programmatic environmental
impact statement (``EIS''), which was sponsored by four federal
agencies: OSM; EPA; the Corps of Engineers; and the Fish and Wildlife
Service. This EIS included 30 scientific and economic studies. OSM also
completed another separate EIS to support the final rule. The 2008 rule
clarified existing agency policy on stream buffer zones that had been
consistently used and applied by both OSM and state regulatory
authorities for over 25 years. However, it also added and strengthened
significant new environmental requirements for the placement of excess
spoil. These new requirements included provisions for:

minimizing excess spoil, avoiding mining activities
in or near perennial and intermittent streams, if reasonably
possible;

requiring an analysis of alternatives; and

selection of the option for placement of spoil with
the least environmental impact on fish, wildlife, and related
environmental values, to the extent possible.
The 2008 rule was challenged in court, but instead of remanding or
vacating the rule, the court instructed OSM that any changes the agency
wanted to make would have to be done through notice and comment
rulemaking, with full public participation. In the meantime, the 2008
stream buffer zone rule would remain in effect. A copy of the court's
August 2009 decision in this case is attached to my prepared statement
as Exhibit B.
Impacts Resulting from Revisions to the SBZ rule
OSM's revised SBZ rule appears to include, among other things:

prohibition of mining in, near, or through
intermittent and perennial streams and within 100 feet of such
streams;

very restrictive provisions for excess spoil fills;
and

new and expansive standards for what constitutes
material damage to the hydrologic balance.
These standards could make longwall mines impossible to permit or
operate. In the locations where we operate, it is impossible for
longwall mining to avoid impacts to intermittent and perennial streams
because such streams are ubiquitous atop our operations and we cannot
avoid mining beneath them. The proposed definition of material damage
could prohibit subsidence of streams, thus eliminating our ability to
extract the coal via longwall mining.
Using a moderate interpretation of a protected stream, CONSOL
conducted a preliminary engineering analysis of the impacts this rule,
in its current draft form, could have if finalized. Our analysis
indicates that the rule would result in a 40% loss of eastern longwall
minable reserves to CONSOL--that is over 1 billion tons CONSOL would be
prohibited from mining. At current market prices, this translates to a
reduction in future revenues by over $66 billion. Additionally, the
increased quantity and frequency of longwall moves due to avoidance of
protected streams could further reduce the mine's annual production by
25 to 30 percent, and potentially increases production costs by 20 to
35 percent. For CONSOL alone, this would mean many of CONSOL's longwall
mines would be unprofitable at today's coal prices.
Please note that streams typical of the streams ``to be protected''
by this proposed rule have been undermined by longwall operations for
35 years. This mining has been conducted consistent with the
Congressional intent that underground mining cause ``subsidence to
occur at a predictable time and in a relatively uniform and predictable
manner'' (Report of the House Committee on Interior and Insular Affairs
to Accompany H.R. 2; April 22, 1977). To date, over 172 square miles in
PA and WV have been undermined by CONSOL's longwall operations with no
material damage to the hydrologic balance. And in those infrequent
circumstances where subsidence does impact streams, states require
those impacts to be addressed. We suggest that it would be educational
for the committee members to take the time to drive through these areas
that have been undermined to see for themselves that environmental
normalcy exists in those areas.
Existing Environmental Regulations Already Address the SBZ Issues
CONSOL believes that coal production, safety of personnel and
environmental stewardship are not mutually exclusive goals. Impacts to
the environment as a result of longwall mining can be, and have been,
addressed in a manner that complies with the existing laws and
regulations of the states in which CONSOL operates these mines.
The following environmental permits must be obtained for our mining
operations. These permits incorporate ALL the provisions of the federal
Clean Water Act, Clean Air Act, NEPA and SMCRA.
United States Army Corps of Engineers (USACE) 404
Permit to impact jurisdictional waters and wetlands. The permit
includes mitigation to offset the stream and wetland impacts from the
project, a cumulative impact statement or environmental impact
statement, a jurisdictional determination for the streams and wetlands,
long term maintenance plan for mitigation sites, long term monitoring
plan and a description of the project and direct impacts.
PA Department of Environmental Protection (PA DEP) 401/NPDES Coal
Mining Activity permit application--The permit includes the design,
purpose and details of the project, hydrological, stream baseline,
ecological and geological evaluations, construction specifications, and
bonding.
PA DEP Chapter 105--Permit for water obstructions and
encroachments. The permit includes mitigation to offset the stream and
wetland impacts from the project, a long term maintenance plan for
mitigation sites, long term monitoring plan and a description of the
project and direct impacts. As part of the Chapter 105 approval an
erosion and sedimentation/NPDES plan approval is obtained by either the
Conservation District or DEP.
PA DEP Chapter 105 and Mine Safety and Health Administration
(MSHA)--Permit for Dam construction and maintenance. The permit
includes design, construction specifications, and bonding, Emergency
Action Plan and Operation and Maintenance Plan.
VA Department of Mines, Minerals and Energy Surface Mine Control and
Reclamation Act Permit (SMCRA)
The permit includes the design, purpose and details of the project,
hydrological, stream baseline, ecological and geological evaluations,
construction specifications, and bonding. This permit is issued as a
combined SMCRA/NPDES Permit.
WV DEP 401/NPDES Coal Mining Activity permit application.
The permit includes the design, purpose and details of the project,
hydrological, stream baseline, ecological and geological evaluations,
construction specifications, and bonding.
Jobs at Risk and Impacts on Our Communities
By way of example, we wish to provide the Subcommittee with our
analysis (attached as Exhibit D to my statement) of the year-end 2010
economic impacts of our Bailey-Enlow Fork complex in Southwestern
Pennsylvania. To briefly summarize this analysis, there are a total of
1,348 CONSOL employees at this complex, as well as an average of 412
contractor employees on-site every day. The total direct expenditures
from the complex in the local economy is almost $763 million, not
including almost $98 million in federal, state, and local taxes. This
results in a total direct economic impact from the mining complex on
the local economy of almost $861 million. In addition, the estimated
local economy multiplier effect is about $1.7 billion, with the
estimated ``spin-off'' effect of jobs resulting from the Bailey-Enlow
Complex at 5 to 1--creating 6,740 jobs. Thus, the total economic impact
of the Bailey-Enlow Fork Complex on the local community is almost $2.6
billion for 2010.
Our other five longwall mining complexes in WV provide similar
high-paying jobs and economic benefits to the communities in which they
operate. We directly employ 3,035 employees at those mines, and
approximately 264 contractors. At a 5 to 1 spin-off that equals about
15,175 jobs. The total direct expenditures from these five complexes in
the local economies in WV is almost $871 million, not including almost
$146 million in federal, state, and local taxes. This resulted in a
total direct economic impact from the mining complex on the economy of
almost $1,017 billion for 2010 to the communities of northern West
Virginia.
Also please note that CONSOL provided approximately $2,363,000 in
philanthropic donations to the communities in which we operated in PA,
VA and WV in 2010. Should our longwall mines be forced to close or
curtail business as a result of OSM's SBZ rule, then those donations
would be substantially reduced.
We would be happy to provide the Subcommittee with analyses for
each of these operations.
Conclusion
Mr. Chairman, and Members of the Subcommittee, please allow me to
conclude by saying that at a time when our Nation's economy is still
struggling to regain its former balance, and with unemployment
remaining stubbornly high, one of the few relatively robust sectors is
the coal mining industry. In this regard, we are particularly pleased
and proud of our longwall operations and all of the men and women who
work so tirelessly toward the safe, environmentally protective, and
economically successful operation of these mines. The coal we produce
is ``America's on Switch.''
TM
The SBZ rule, if promulgated
in its current form, would mean the loss of billions of dollars to the
economy, and literally thousands of jobs. On behalf of CONSOL, I
fervently hope that the Administration will proceed in a different
direction.
Thank you.
[NOTE: Attachments have been retained in the Committee's official
files.]
______

Mr. Lamborn. Thank you. Mr. Webb?

STATEMENT OF BO WEBB, FORMER PRESIDENT/CURRENT MEMBER, COAL
RIVER MOUNTAIN WATCH

Mr. Webb. Good morning. For the record, let's just be
clear, that as of right now, at this moment, there is no
rewrite and what we're hearing here this morning is a lot of
speculation. I won't be speculating about anything I'm talking
about.
The title of this hearing, ``Jobs at Risk, Community
Impacts of the Obama Administration's Effort to Rewrite the
Stream Buffer Zone Rule,'' is offensive to me. It's offensive
to anyone that is living and dying in mountaintop removal
communities, and that's what I'm here to talk about. I am not
opposed to underground mining.
I don't believe any rewrite of the SBZ rule in any way,
shape or form is going to curtail jobs or lose jobs. I have
some evidence that I have submitted to this Committee in
writing that reference sources from the Mine Safety and Health
Administration and the Bureau of Labor Statistics that say that
won't happen.
The SBZ rule must be corrected in order to protect the
people's health. It was rewritten by George W. Bush as a
parting gift to the coal industry at the cost of people's
health and it needs to be fixed.
Let us not forget, President Ronald Reagan, your President,
my President, in 1983 created the stream buffer zone rule
because he realized the responsibility he had to protect
America's water supply in the face of a coal industry that was
moving more rapidly toward a method of mining that would turn
entire mountains into ruin and destroy head water source
streams that carry drinking water to millions of Americans.
That responsibility now sits on your shoulders, on current
President's shoulder, on every Member of Congress' shoulders.
No one gets a free pass, not you and certainly not those that
seek the subvert protection of our water.
Protecting our water is far more important than money,
power and politics. To date, there are 19 peer-reviewed science
papers addressing human health in mountaintop removal
communities. A few of the titles are, ``The association between
mountaintop mining and birth defects among live births in
central Appalachia;'' ``Self-Reported Cancer Rates in Two Rural
Areas of West Virginia With and Without Mountaintop Coal
Mining;'' ``Cardiovascular Disease Mortality in Mountaintop
Mining Areas of Central Appalachian States.'' It goes on and
on, there's nineteen of these. And yet, not one of these have
been refuted, scientifically refuted, not one. Yet no one in
Congress, nor the coal industry will acknowledge these papers,
these science papers, exist. Now, you either believe in science
or you choose to put your head in the sand and revert back to
the dark ages.
With some of the rhetoric that's coming from the coal
industry these days, one must wonder about their acceptance of
modern science and living in the 21st century. The coal
industry's latest comment on the recent alarming birth defects
research in mountaintop removal communities is that the
research did not take into account that those of us living in
mountaintop removal communities are a bunch of inbreeds. I
think that perhaps they need to look inside their own gene
pool. It's a scientific fact that inbreeding can't account for
ignorance and low IQs.
Mountaintop removal is an unprecedented form of coal
extraction. Nearly a million acres of forested mountains have
been obliterated. Two thousand miles or more of headwater
source streams have been contaminated and countless water wells
have been rendered unsafe for human consumption. Entire
ecosystems have been wiped out. Mountaintop removal has been in
full stride now for about 15 to 20 years and already we are
witnessing health effects of human exposure to the fallout of
this insane method of mining, and it is insane. What will be
the long-term effects?
Statistical research on Appalachian birth defects that I
mentioned a moment ago has found that a woman pregnant living
near mountaintop removal has a 42 percent greater chance of a
baby born with birth defects than a pregnant woman living in a
non-mountaintop removal community. You equate that to cigarette
smoking. A baby born in mountaintop removal community has a 181
percent greater chance of heart or lung birth defects while the
risk related to the mother's smoking was only 17 percent
higher. That, Committee Members, that's staggering. If that
doesn't get your attention, it doesn't spur you to some sort of
action, then you've sold your very heart and soul. And your
pro-life stamps that you claim you have is not credible. It's
phony. It's transparent. You stand on a soapbox and claim to be
pro-life yet allow our babies to be poisoned, disregarded like
yesterday's garbage, ignored. I think a dog probably has more
rights and protection that an unborn baby in a mountaintop
removal community. I'm beginning to wonder if Congress has any
decency left.
I ask each of you, in the name of our great nation, to put
your politics aside, stand for what's right, protect our
citizens and do not oppose change to the current SBZ's rule
that will help protect American lives. At the very least,
support it being rolled back to the Reagan Rule, with
enforcement.
Let us be reminded that regulatory agencies are created to
protect the people from industries that may cause harm to the
people. When these agencies or legislators, for that matter,
become ill- influenced by those they oversee or their power to
regulate is circumvented by acts such as the Bush trashing of
the SBZ rule, the people are not well served. America is not
well served.
Please remember this each and every waking moment of your
service to our country. Our future, our children's future, your
children's future and our lives depend on it. And I would
simply ask, and I'll request here right now, that there should
be an immediate moratorium placed on all mountaintop removal
operations until the Federal Government can take a look and see
what is happening in southern West Virginia and eastern
Kentucky with this type of mining. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Webb follows:]

Statement of Bo Webb, President, Coal River Mountain Watch

The very title of this hearing indicates a bias against those of us
who are living (and dying) in mountaintop removal mining communities.
The title suggests that jobs are at risk if the SBZ rule is corrected.
The SBZ rule must be corrected in order to protect The People's health.
It's been broken and it needs fixed.
Let us not forget, President Ronald Reagan, your president, my
president, in 1983 created the Stream Buffer Zone Rule because he
realized the responsibility he had to protect America's water supply in
the face of an industry that was moving more rapidly toward a method of
mining that would turn entire mountains into ruin and destroy head
water source streams that carry drinking water to millions of American
citizens. This committee now shares that responsibility because
President George W. Bush, with the stroke of a pen, trashed the Reagan
SBZ rule just before leaving office as a present to a coal industry
that wills itself to increase profit at all cost, even at the cost of
human health.
I will first address the fallacy of job loss with factual data
providing referenced resources. This committee would serve The People
well if its actions are based upon fact and not coal industry deception
and often outright deceit.
Fallacy: Stopping the destruction of Appalachian mountains and
streams would cost jobs.
Fact 1: Underground mines create over 50% more jobs than
mountaintop removal mines. Underground mines create 52% more jobs than
mountaintop removal mines for every ton they produce--they employ
nearly two thirds of the miners in Central Appalachia while producing
just over half of the coal\1\.
Fact 2: Unemployment in counties where a high proportion of coal is
mined by mountaintop removal is higher than in counties where coal is
mined mostly underground. According to data from the Bureau of Labor
Statistics from 2000 through 2010, the average annual unemployment rate
was 8.6% in Central Appalachian counties where more than 75% of coal
production was by mountaintop removal, compared to 6.7% in counties
where mountaintop removal accounted for less than 25% of production\2\.
See: http://www.flickr.com/photos/appvoices/5938215752/
Fact 3: Historically, the total number of mining jobs has fallen in
places where the proportion of coal mined by mountaintop removal has
increased. According to the West Virginia Geologic and Economic Survey,
the proportion of coal production in West Virginia that came from
mountaintop removal mines increased from 19% to 42% of production
between 1982 and 2006\3\. Even though overall production increased, the
number of mining jobs was cut in half over the same period\4\.
See: http://www.flickr.com/photos/appvoices/6167625000/
Fallacy: More stringent enforcement of the Clean Water Act by the
EPA and other federal agencies is creating an economic crisis in
Central Appalachia.
Fact: The number of mining jobs in Appalachia has increased since
the start of the recession, since the EPA began enhanced review of
mountaintop removal permits, and since the EPA released its interim
guidance in April, 2010. Since 2007, as production in Central
Appalachia has shifted away from mountaintop removal in favor of
underground mining techniques, the increase in employment at
underground mines has more than offset declines at other types of
mines. Employment is up 11.5% since the start of the recession
(December, 2007), up 2.5% since Enhanced Coordination Procedures on
mountaintop removal permitting were announced among three federal
agencies (June, 2009), and up almost 6% since the EPA announced a new
guidance on Appalachian mine permitting (April, 2010).
See: http://www.flickr.com/photos/appvoices/6130794844/
Fallacy: Ending mountaintop removal would put US energy supply at
risk.
Fact: U.S. coal production is limited by demand for coal, not by
the ability of companies to obtain permits for mountaintop removal
mines. According to energy analysts\8\ as well as executives from Arch
Coal\9\, Peabody Energy\10\ and Southern Company\11\, declining Central
Appalachian coal production is the result of competition from lower
cost natural gas. Mines across the country are producing at just 75% of
their capacity\12\--down from 85% in 2008--and the Energy Information
Administration projects that coal demand won't recover to 2008 levels
for another 15 years\13\. Coal from mountaintop removal mines could
easily be replaced if other US mines were operating at just 81% of
their capacity.
See: http://www.flickr.com/photos/appvoices/5937661551/
Fact: Coal from mountaintop removal mines accounts for less than 5%
of US electricity generation. While coal accounts for nearly 45% of US
electricity generation\14\, only 15% of that is mined in Central
Appalachia\15\. Coal from all of Appalachia accounts for less than 9%
of US electricity generation, and coal from mountaintop removal less
than 5%.
See: http://www.flickr.com/photos/appvoices/5818441741/
Fallacy: Prohibiting valley fills would prevent all forms of coal
mining in Appalachia.
Fact: The majority of recently approved permits for new mines in
Central Appalachia do not use valley fills. A survey of all
applications for new mine permits in Central Appalachia that were
approved by state agencies in 2009 revealed that just 44% used valley
fills to dispose of mine waste\16\.
See: http://www.flickr.com/photos/appvoices/5938219772/
References and Notes
1.  Calculated from MSHA Part 50 data files
; Mountaintop removal production and
employment calculated from ``strip'' mines, as defined by MSHA for
mines in Central Appalachian counties.
2.  Ibid; Unemployment data from the Bureau of Labor Statistics

3.  Hendryx, 2008. ``Mortality Rates in Appalachian Coal Mining
Counties: 24 Years Behind the Nation.'' Environmental Justice; Volume
1, Number 1
4.  MSHA op. cit. 2000-2010
5.  MSHA op. cit. 2007-2010; Bureau of Labor Statistics op. cit.
6.  EIA/DOE ``EIA-923'' Database

7.  DOE/EIA Cost and Quality of Fuels for Electric Plants, Table
3.2 for 2007- 2009; Adjusted to 2009 $ based on Budget of the United
States Government: Gross Domestic Product and Implicit Outlay
Deflators;
8.  Bernstein Commodities & Power Report, 2/18/2011: ``No Light
for Dark Spreads: How the Ruinous Economics of Coal-Fired Power Plants
Affect the Markets for Coal and Gas''
9.  Steve Leer, Chairman and CEO, Arch Coal, Inc. presentation to
Barclays 2010 CEO Energy-Power Conference on 9/15/2010;
10.  Rick Navarre, President and Chief Commercial Officer, Peabody
Energy, ``Expanding Markets and Peabody Growth Opportunities,'' a
presentation to the 2010 Analyst and Investor Forum on 6/17/2010
11.  Chad Hewitt, Southern Company, ``Utility Perspective on the
Future of Coal'' presented at American Coal Council's Spring Forum on
February 3, 2011;
12.  DOE/EIA Annual Coal Report for 2009. Analysis by Appalachian
Voices.
13.  DOE/EIA Annual Energy Outlook, 2011 Early Release edition
14.  EIA/DOE Electric Power Monthly with data for December 2010,
Table 1.1: ``Net Generation by Energy Source: Total (All Sectors) ``;

15.  EIA/DOE ``EIA-923'' Database op. cit.
16.  Applications for new mine permits approved in 2009 obtained
from: Kentucky Department of Natural Resources; West Virginia
Department of Environmental Protection; Virginia Department of Mines,
Minerals and Energy; US Office of Surface Mining Reclamation and
Enforcement, Knoxville Office
I doubt very much if the coal industry has provided any factual
evidence whatsoever of jobs loss risk if the SBZ rule is fixed. If so,
please provide that evidence to The People.
It would be shameful and woefully incompetent if a Unites States
Congressional committee would take action based upon misleading and
false coal industry information. A question of ethics and suspicion
would be ever glaring with a hearing that in reality was nothing more
than political grandstanding, organized as a ``stacked deck'' against
those who are simply asking for our most basic human needs, clean water
and a safe environment. This hearing should desire a just outcome for
The People. The outcome of this hearing should not be one that supports
those who are benefitting from an endeavor that is killing people in
mountain communities. To do so will be a shameful affront to American
Democracy. People, American citizens, are dying at the hands of an
insatiable coal industry profit machine, and this committee has the
nerve to label this hearing with a title that is clearly an attempt to
mislead the American people.
Mountaintop Removal and Human Health
Now, I will address the issue that we should be here for, and that
is the human health crisis we are facing in mountaintop removal
communities.
To date there are 19 peer-reviewed science papers addressing human
health in mountaintop removal communities. Just to name a few:
Environmental Research Journal ``The association between mountaintop
mining and birth defects among live births in central Appalachia''. The
Journal of Rural Health, 2011 '' Chronic Cardiovascular Disease
Mortality in Mountaintop Mining Areas of Central Appalachian States''.
Community Health July 2011 ``Self Reported Cancer Rates in Two Rural
Areas of West Virginia with and without Mountaintop Coal Mining''. And
it goes on. To place the matter in a national perspective that members
of Congress might appreciate, the three congressional districts with
the most mountaintop removal consistently rank at or near the three
with the worst well-being, according to the annual Gallup-Healthways
survey. In 2009 and 2010, the states of West Virginia and Kentucky
ranked as the states with the worst and next worst well-being in the
country (http://www.gallup.com/poll/125066/State-
States.aspx?wbTabOnly=true). In 2010, the 3rd Congressional District of
West Virginia, where I live, ranked 435th for both physical and
emotional health (http://www.well-beingindex.com/files/2011WBIrankings/
LowRes/WV_StateReport.pdf). The 5th Congressional District of Kentucky
ranks 435th overall in well-being, (http://www.well-beingindex.com/
files/2011WBIrankings/LowRes/KY_State
Report.pdf), and the 9th District of Virginia ranks 434th in both
physical and emotional health (http://www.well-beingindex.com/files/
2011WBIrankings/LowRes/VA_
StateReport.pdf). Clearly, the prevalence of mountaintop removal has
not brought about the happy, healthy, prosperous communities that the
coal industry has promised. This committee should be alarmed, yet
remains silent. The silence has become deafening.
Science does not allow a choice or preference of what to believe
and what not to believe. You either believe in science or choose to put
your head in the sand and revert to the dark ages. With some of the
rhetoric coming from the coal industry today, one must wonder about
their acceptance of modern science and living in the 21st century. One
of their more recent comments on the alarming birth defects research in
mountaintop removal communities is that the research did not take into
account that those of us living in mountaintop removal communities are
a bunch of inbreds. And while the researchers consistently account for
other factors that affect the health of an impoverished community, the
coal industry and its political apologists consistently deny the
conclusions without offering any credible science as refutation.
Mountaintop removal is an unprecedented form of coal extraction.
Nearly a million acres of forested mountains have been obliterated.
2000 miles or more of headwater source streams have been buried or
contaminated and countless water wells have been rendered unsafe for
human consumption. Mountaintop removal has been in full stride now for
only 15-20 years, and already we are witnessing the short term effects
of human exposure to this mad method of mining. What are the long term
effects? Statistical research on Appalachian birth defects found that a
woman pregnant with child has a 42% greater chance of a baby born with
birth defects than a pregnant woman living in a non-mountaintop removal
community. Equate that to cigarette smoking: a baby born in a
mountaintop removal community has a 181% greater chance of a
circulatory or respiratory birth defect, while the risk related to
mother's smoking was only 17% higher. That, committee members, is
staggering. If that does not get your attention, then you simply don't
care. Your pro-life claim is no longer credible; it's tossed out the
window.
For those of us living beneath mountaintop removal sites, the cold
statistics do not compare to the real flesh-and-blood loved ones, the
friends and family, that we see perishing from cancer all around us.
The industry claims that we cannot prove that they are responsible, yet
our common sense tells us that the clouds of silica dust, ammonium
nitrate, fuel oil, and blasting residue that smother our communities
are a likely culprit. When we raise the issue with the state Department
of Environmental Protection, they take no action, either refusing to
investigate, showing up after the dust has cleared, or offering a lame
excuse. At best, after citizens doggedly pursue follow-up to the
complaints, the agency may issue a fine so low that it serves as no
deterrent whatsoever to continued bad behavior. When a federal agency
takes even the smallest of baby steps to reign in the worst offenders
and protect the citizens, Congress responds by shackling that agency.
Our own representatives not only ignore our pleas, but lead the charge
to enable further poisoning of our communities. We are consistently
told that we must accept what the industry calls ``balance.'' What this
really means is that we must sacrifice everything we have--our homes,
our health, our lives, and the lives of our children--so that wealthy
coal executives and their Wall Street funders can continue their
unfettered extraction of wealth.
While I offer these documents and my statements in the spirit of
truth and justice, I have no illusions that they will be seriously
considered by this Committee. After all, I have made no campaign
contribution. I do not operate a company or media outlet that can
deliver votes through an endorsement. The citizens of communities most
directly impacted by mountaintop removal lack access to the wealth and
power that may sway congressional opinion. Instead, our lives and
health suffer from the actions of the companies that do hold that
wealth and power.
I ask each of you in the name of our great American democracy to
protect our citizens and do not oppose any change to the Bush stream
buffer zone rule that will help protect American lives. At the very
least, support it being rolled back to the Reagan rule with real and
total enforcement.
Let us be reminded that regulatory agencies are created to protect
The People from industries that may cause harm to The People. When
these agencies, or legislators for that matter, become captured by
those they oversee, or their power to regulate is circumvented by acts
such as the Bush trashing of the SBZ rule, The People are not well
served; America is not well served. Please remember this each and every
waking moment of your service to our country. Our future, our
children's future, and our lives depend on it.
Bo Webb
Referenced peer reviewed science research publications associating
mountain top removal with negative human health:
American Journal of Public Health Mar. 2011 ``Health-Related
Quality of Life Among Central Appalachian Residents in Mountaintop
Mining Communities''
Journal of Health Disparities Research and Practice Volume 4,
number 3, Spring 2011 pp. 44-53 ``Poverty and Mortality Disparities in
Central Appalachia: Mountaintop Mining and Environmental Justice''
Environmental Research Journal ``The association between
mountaintop mining and birth defects among live births in central
Appalachia, 1996-2003''
Community Health July 2011 ``Self Reported Cancer Rates in Two
Rural Areas of West Virginia with and without Mountaintop Coal Mining''
The Journal of Rural Health, 2011 '' Chronic Cardiovascular Disease
Mortality in Mountaintop Mining Areas of Central Appalachian States''
Science Mag. Jan. 8 2010 volume 327 ``Mountaintop Mining
Consequences''
Eco Health April 02, 2010: Ecological Integrity of Streams Related
to Human Cancer Mortality Rates
Geospatial Health 4 (2), 2010, pp 243-256 ``A geographical
information system-based analysis of cancer mortality and population
exposure to coal mining activities in West Virginia, United States of
America''
Matern Child Health Journal, Jan. 2010 ``Residence in Coal-Mining
Areas Low-Birth- Weight Outcomes''
Preventative Medicine 49 (2009) 355-359 ``Higher coronary heart
disease and heart attack morbidity in Appalachian coal mining regions''
Public Health Reports/July-August 2009 volume 124 ``Mortality in
Appalachian Coal Mining Regions: The value of statistical life lost''
24 years behind the nation.''
American Journal of Public Health Vol 98 No 4 '' Relations between
health and residential proximity to coal mining in West Virginia''
Journal of Toxicology and Environmental Health Part A, 70: 2064-
2070, 2007 ``Hospitalization patterns associated with Appalachian coal
mining''
Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences Issue: Ecological
Economics Reviews ``Full cost accounting for the life cycle of coal''
Public Health Reports/July-August 2010 volume 125 ``A comparative
analysis of health-related quality of life for residents of U.S.
counties with and without coal mining''
Environmental Justice volume 3, number 2, 2010 ``Learning outcomes
among students relation to West Virginia coal mining: an environmental
riskscape approach''
______

Mr. Lamborn. OK. Ms. Gunnoe?

STATEMENT OF MARIA GUNNOE, COMMUNITY ORGANIZER

Ms. Gunnoe. Hello. My name is Maria Gunnoe. I'm a native
West Virginian and I and my family before me have lived the
history that this coal industry has left in its path. We
settled this area before coal was discovered. I am a Daughter
of the American Revolutionary War.
Throughout all the boom and bust, manmade catastrophes and
massive death and sickness, some members of my family tell
their generational part of coal's history in Southern
Appalachia. All my life, every political move has always been
directed at propping up the coal industry in West Virginia.
This industry and our politicians have held jobs over our heads
for 150 years. We know only too well what it's like to do
without.
The fear that we as Appalachians have experienced
throughout time of being without jobs is nothing compared to
the fear of living without healthy, clean water in our streams
and homes and fresh mountain air to breathe.
We, as a family, for many generations have survived some of
the most historically horrible poverty in this country by
sustaining our lives from these mountains and streams. Now
rules changes such as the buffer zone rule threaten to
permanently annihilate all that supports the real mountaineer's
culture. Jobs in surface mining are dependent on blowing up the
next mountain and burying the next stream. When will we say
enough is enough?
The buffer zone rule from the Reagan era was historically
intended to be a good thing for the people who live in the
valleys where these intermittent and perennial streams flow.
Over the years, it's been crooked politics and coal money
influence that has gutted the intent of this law. In my
lifetime, I do not know of this law ever being fully enforced.
The coal industry in West Virginia states politicians have
manipulated and twisted this law in order to legally break this
law. Surface mining has demolished our quality of life and life
expectancy in our native homes. Our communities are now war
zones with constant blasting, pollution and death. All area
surface mining has stolen our ability to recreate our mountains
and do what we culturally always have. We are being shut out of
areas that we have always enjoyed. Even our historic cemeteries
are left inaccessible to the public.
We, like the Obama Administration, know what it's like to
go up against impossible odds created by the coal and energy
industries that have a stranglehold on our Congressional
Members. We suffer these very real consequences daily and we,
too, have drawn a line and dug our heels in. We refuse to
tolerate inhumane treatment of our people and their homes,
communities and jobs. We, too, have taken a stand and it's been
one without the basic of protections. We refuse to tolerate
this industry in our schools, attempting to brainwash our kids
into being the next generation of slaves by influencing the
curriculum with their big money.
My children's history book says that surface mining, in
some instances, leaves the land in better than before
condition. This, alone, is outrageous. Our children are not
subjects. Leave them alone in their schools. We will not
tolerate violence because of our open opposition to our
mountains blowing up over our homes and our streams, wells and
air to be poisoned.
This industry is pitting their workers against the
community members in violent attacks because we won't die
quietly. We refuse to continue to tolerate the terror of the
flooding from these stream fill experiments and sludge dams. We
have, throughout the years of manipulations of this law
governing surface mining, been traumatized by what has happened
in our communities. Studies have shown 40 to 200 percent
increase in peak flow caused by surface mining runoff during
rainfall periods. FEMA and we, as individuals, pick up this
cost. The coal industry continues mining our mountains,
destroying our very existence for these jobs.
A majority of voters in West Virginia, Kentucky and
Virginia and Tennessee reject mountaintop removal mining. The
number of voters who oppose mountaintop removal dwarfs the
number who supports it. Fifty-seven percent opposed mountaintop
removal and with a noticeable intensity; 42 percent strongly
opposed it, compared to 20 percent who support it. Voters who
strongly support mountaintop removal in these states are a very
small minority, only 10 percent.
``Jobs at Risk'' is also insulting as anything I have ever
read. We have worked consistently in Washington, D.C., and
southern Appalachia to get our political leaders to enact a
moratorium on any further surface mining permits because
studies have proved that this type of mining is killing the
people who live in our communities. It's about our lives and
our livelihoods. These jobs are for mostly outsiders from other
states. Our people tend to not want to blow up their mountains
and homes and communities.
In Twilight, West Virginia there's imported workers coming
in by the busloads. The driver of this--of the busload convoy,
a non-English speaking gentleman, asked me for directions to
Progress Coal, which is the Twilight surface mine now owned by
Alpha and Massey. There was an incident where a drunk imported
worker from A Elk Run mines in Sylvester killed a child while
racing on our roads as school was being dismissed. This is what
kind of jobs we're talking about, and this is what they're
doing to our communities. This shows that this hearing is about
the company's bottom line and not about jobs for poor people or
at least not poor people from this country.
The southern mountains people are fully expected to give up
everything that sustains life, enforce the buffer zone rule and
protect the water and very existence of the culture of people
known as Appalachians. This history is unimaginable to most
people in this country. Mountaineers will never be free until
this madness ends.
Reinstate the stream buffer zone rule to at least the
Reagan era and for the first time in history enforce it, to
protect American lives from this criminal industry. We will
continue to demand better for our children. We will continue to
demand better for our children's future and in all that we do.
The impacts of coal are not acceptable losses for our
children's future. It would benefit all of our children if we
take this very seriously and fix this problem right away. We
can no longer excuse the fact that coal is a finite resource
and we are running out. Not to mention the fact that we are
poisoning our water and our air for electricity.
My seven year old nephew reminds me of what----
Mr. Lamborn. Ms. Gunnoe, I'd ask that you----
Ms. Gunnoe. I'm wrapping up. I'm wrapping up. Thank you. My
seven-year-old nephew reminds me of what surface mining looks
like from a child's eyes. As we were driving through our
community, he looks up and says, ``Aunt Sissy, what's wrong
with these people? Don't they know we're down here?'' I had to
honestly look at him and say, ``Yes, they know, they just don't
care.''
[The prepared statement of Ms. Gunnoe follows:]

Statement of Maria Gunnoe, Community Organizer, Van, West Virginia

My name is Maria Gunnoe I am a native West Virginian. I and my
family before me have lived the history that the coal industry has left
in its path. We settled this area before coal was discovered. I am a
Daughter of the American Revolution. Throughout all the ``boom and
bust'', manmade catastrophes, and massive deaths and sicknesses some
members of my family tell their generational part of coal's history in
Southern Appalachia. This history is one of the many lessons of life we
learned at a young age growing up in these communities. We learned from
our hard schooled fathers and grandfathers that coal is mean and one
thing you simply could not do was to trust this industry. No matter
what the subject the conversation always come down to the coal
company's bottom line. All my life every political move has always been
directed at propping up the coal industry in WV. The fear that we as
Appalachians have experienced throughout time of being without jobs is
nothing compared to the fear of living without healthy, clean water in
our streams and homes. We as families for many generations have
survived some of the most historically horrible poverty in this country
by sustaining our lives from these mountains and streams. The
biodiversity in S WV is what created the culture of the real
mountaineers that we grew up being. Now rule changes such as Stream
Buffer Zone threaten to permanently annihilate all that supports the
real mountaineer's culture. The coal industry obviously wants to bury
and pollute all of our water and all of who we are for temporary jobs.
Jobs in surface mining are dependent on blowing up the next mountain
and burying the next stream. When are we going to say enough is enough?
The Buffer Zone Rule from the Regan era was historically was
intended as a good thing for people who lived in the valleys where
these intermittent and perennial streams flow. Over the years it has
been crooked politics and coal money influence that has gutted the
intent of this law. In my lifetime I do not know of this law ever being
fully enforced. The coal industry and the politicians have for most of
my life manipulated and twisted the law in order to legally break this
law by destroying our valuable headwater streams.. Surface mining has
demolished our quality of life and life expectancy in our native homes.
Our communities are now war zones with constant blasting, pollution and
all area surface mining has stolen our ability to recreate in the
mountains and do what we culturally always have. We are being shut out
of areas that we have always enjoyed. Even our historic cemeteries are
left in accessible to the public.

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

This photo shows Jarrell Cemetery and the town of Lindytown in
Boone County WV. This is one of my many family mountain cemeteries. We
as family members must go through training and guards to visit our
loved ones in these now active destruction sites.
The town in this photo is nearly gone. One family is all that
remains in this town. The homes that you see are now gone now. The
people that were bought out signed contracts that clearly violated
their rights to contact state or federal regulatory agencies to
complain about blasting dust, water pollution, or health and safety
concerns.
Here is a link to those contracts.
Our regulatory agencies are allowing this to happen. I have been
told that the WV state DEP is a PERMITTING AGENCY by one of their
agents. The DEP is allowing these companies to destroy our mountains
and our waters and in turn this destroys our towns and runs away all
the people. The WVDEP treats us less than human. The WV DEP is
permitting the destruction of our homes and we are not even supposed to
get upset. See this and this.
Below is a text copy of the NY Times article that Dan Barry wrote
about Lindytown. In reading this article please recognize that
Lindytown is only one of the recent towns that this has disappeared.
There are many of our rural communities depopulated to expand surface
mining and stream fills. How could anyone say that these temporary jobs
is worth the permanent displacement of our people and the destruction
of their waters, mountains and culture.
The New York Times
April 12, 2011
As the Mountaintops Fall, a Coal Town Vanishes
http://www.nytimes.com/2011/04/13/us/13lindytown.html?_r=2
By DAN BARRY
LINDYTOWN, W.Va.
To reach a lost American place, here just a moment ago, follow a
thin country road as it unspools across an Appalachian valley's grimy
floor, past a coal operation or two, a church or two, a village called
Twilight. Beware of the truck traffic. Watch out for that car-chasing
dog.
After passing an abandoned union hall with its front door agape,
look to the right for a solitary house, tidy, yellow and tucked into
the stillness. This is nearly all that remains of a West Virginia
community called Lindytown.
In the small living room, five generations of family portraits gaze
upon Quinnie Richmond, 85, who has trouble summoning the memories, and
her son, Roger, 62, who cannot forget them: the many children all
about, enough to fill Mr. Cook's school bus every morning; the Sunday
services at the simple church; the white laundry strung on
clotheslines; the echoing clatter of evening horseshoes; the sense of
home.
But the coal that helped to create Lindytown also destroyed it.
Here was the church; here was its steeple; now it's all gone, along
with its people. Gone, too, are the surrounding mountaintops. To mine
the soft rock that we burn to help power our light bulbs, our laptops,
our way of life, heavy equipment has stripped away the trees, the soil,
the rock--what coal companies call the ``overburden.''
Now, the faint, mechanical beeps and grinds from above are all that
disturb the Lindytown quiet, save for the occasional, seam-splintering
blast.
A couple of years ago, a subsidiary of Massey Energy, which owns a
sprawling mine operation behind and above the Richmond home, bought up
Lindytown. Many of its residents signed Massey-proffered documents in
which they also agreed not to sue, testify against, seek inspection of
or ``make adverse comment'' about coal-mining operations in the
vicinity.
You might say that both parties were motivated. Massey preferred
not to have people living so close to its mountaintop mining
operations. And the residents, some with area roots deep into the 19th
century, preferred not to live amid a dusty industrial operation that
was altering the natural world about them. So the Greens sold, as did
the Cooks, and the Workmans, and the Webbs ...
But Quinnie Richmond's husband, Lawrence--who died a few months
ago, at 85--feared that leaving the home they built in 1947 might upset
his wife, who has Alzheimer's. He and his son Roger, a retired coal
miner who lives next door, chose instead to sign easements granting the
coal company certain rights over their properties. In exchange for also
agreeing not to make adverse comment, the two Richmond households
received $25,000 each, Roger Richmond recalls.
``Hush money,'' he says, half-smiling.
As Mr. Richmond speaks, the mining on the mountain behind him
continues to transform, if not erase, the woodsy stretches he explored
in boyhood. It has also exposed a massive rock that almost seems to be
teetering above the Richmond home. Some days, an anxious Mrs. Richmond
will check on the rock from her small kitchen window, step away, then
come back to check again.
And again.
A Dictator of Destiny
Here in Boone County, coal rules. The rich seams of bituminous
black have dictated the region's destiny for many generations: through
the advent of railroads; the company-controlled coal camps; the bloody
mine wars; the increased use of mechanization and surface mining,
including mountaintop removal; the related decrease in jobs.
The county has the largest surface-mining project (the Massey
operation) in the state and the largest number of coal-company
employees (more than 3,600). Every year it receives several million
dollars in tax severance payments from the coal industry, and every
June it plays host to the West Virginia Coal Festival, with fireworks,
a beauty pageant, a memorial service for dead miners, and displays of
the latest mining equipment. Without coal, says Larry V. Lodato, the
director of the county's Community and Economic Development
Corporation, ``You might as well turn out the lights and leave.''
In recent years, surface mining has eclipsed underground mining as
the county's most productive method. This includes mountaintop
removal--or, as the industry prefers to call it, mountaintop mining--a
now-commonplace technique that remains startling in its capacity to
change things.
Various government regulations require that coal companies return
the stripped area to its ``approximate original contour,'' or
``reclaim'' the land for development in a state whose undulating
topography can thwart plans for even a simple parking lot. As a result,
the companies often dump the removed earth into a nearby valley to
create a plateau, and then spray this topsy-turvy land with seed,
fertilizer and mulch.
The coal industry maintains that by removing some mountaintops from
the ``Mountain State,'' it is creating developable land that makes the
state more economically viable. State and coal officials point to
successful developments on land reclaimed by surface mining,
developments that they say have led to the creation of some 13,000
jobs.
But Ken Ward Jr., a reporter for The Charleston Gazette, has
pointed out that two-fifths of these jobs are seasonal or temporary; a
third of the full-time jobs are at one project, in the northern part of
the state; and the majority of the jobs are far from southern West
Virginia, where most of the mountaintop removal is occurring, and where
unemployment is most dire. In Boone County, development on reclaimed
land has basically meant the building of the regional headquarters for
the county's dominant employer--Massey Energy.
And with reclamation, there is also loss.
``I'm not familiar at all with Lindytown,'' says Mr. Lodato, the
county's economic development director. ``I know it used to be a
community, and it's close to Twilight.''
A Fighter
About 10 miles from Lindytown, outside a drab convenience store in
the unincorporated town of Van, a rake-thin woman named Maria Gunnoe
climbs into a maroon Ford pickup that is adorned with a bumper sticker
reading: ``Mountains Matter--Organize.'' The daughter, granddaughter
and sister of union coal miners, Ms. Gunnoe is 42, with sorrowful dark
eyes, long black hair and a desire to be on the road only between shift
changes at the local mining operations--and only with her German
shepherd and her gun.
Less than a decade ago, Ms. Gunnoe was working as a waitress, just
trying to get along, when a mountaintop removal operation in the small
map dot of Bob White disrupted her ``home place.'' It filled the valley
behind her house, flooded her property, contaminated her well and
transformed her into a fierce opponent of mountaintop removal. Through
her work with the Ohio Valley Environmental Coalition, she has become
such an effective environmental advocate that in 2009 she received the
prestigious Goldman Environmental Prize. But no one threw a parade for
her in Boone County, where some deride her as anti-coal; that is, anti-
job.
Ms. Gunnoe turns onto the two-lane road, Route 26, and heads toward
the remains of Lindytown. On her right stands Van High School, her alma
mater, where D. Ray White, the gifted and doomed Appalachian dancer,
used to kick up his heels at homecomings. On her left, the community
center where dozens of coal-company workers disrupted a meeting of
environmentalists back in 2007.
``There was a gentleman who pushed me backward, over my daughter,
who was about 12 or 13, and crying,'' Ms. Gunnoe later recalls. ``I
pushed him back, and he filed charges against me for battery. He was
250 pounds, and I had a broken arm.''
A jury acquitted her within minutes.
Ms. Gunnoe drives on. Past the long-closed Grill bar, its facade
marred by graffiti. Past an out-of-context clot of land that rises
hundreds of feet in the air--``a valley fill,'' she says, that has been
``hydroseeded'' with fast-growing, non-native plants to replace the
area's lost natural growth: its ginseng root, its goldenseal, it
hickory and oak, maple and poplar, black cherry and sassafras.
``And it will never be back,'' she says.
Ms. Gunnoe has a point. James Burger, a professor emeritus of
forestry and soil science at Virginia Tech University, said the valley
fill process often sends the original topsoil to the bottom and crushed
rock from deeper in the ground to the top. With the topography and soil
properties altered, Dr. Burger says, native plants and trees do not
grow as well.
``You have hundreds of species of flora and fauna that have
acclimated to the native, undisturbed conditions over the millennia,''
he says. ``And now you're inverting the geologic profile.''
Dr. Burger says that he and other scientists have developed a
reclamation approach that uses native seeds, trees, topsoil and
selected rock material to help restore an area's natural diversity, at
no additional expense. Unfortunately, he says, these methods have not
been adopted in most Appalachian states, including West Virginia.
Past a coal operation called a loadout, an oversized Tinker Toy
structure where coal is crushed and loaded on trucks and rail cars.
Past the house cluster called Bandytown, home of Leo Cook, 75, the
former school bus driver who once collected Roger Richmond and the
other kids from Lindytown, where he often spent evenings at a horseshoe
pit, now overgrown.
``We got to have coal,'' says Mr. Cook, a retired miner. ``What's
going to keep the power on? But I believe with all my heart that
there's a better way to get that coal.''
Ms. Gunnoe continues deeper into the mud-brown landscape, where the
fleeting appearance of trucks animates the flattened mountaintops. On
her right, a dark, winding stream damaged by mining; on her left,
several sediment-control ponds that filter out pollutants from the
runoff of mining operations. Past the place called Twilight, a jumble
of homes and trailers, where the faded sign of the old Twilight Super
Market still promises Royal Crown Cola for sale.
Soon she passes the abandoned hall for Local 8377 of the United
Mine Workers of America, empty since some underground mining operations
shut down a couple of decades ago. Its open door beckons you to examine
the papers piled on the floor: a Wages, Lost Time, and Expense Voucher
booklet from 1987; the burial fund's bylaws; canceled checks bearing
familiar surnames.
On, finally, to Lindytown.
The Company Line
According to a statement from Shane Harvey, the general counsel for
Massey, this is what happened: Many of Lindytown's residents were
either retired miners or their widows and descendants who welcomed the
opportunity to move to places more metropolitan or with easier access
to medical facilities. Interested in selling their properties, they
contacted Massey, which began making offers in December 2008--offers
that for the most part were accepted.
``It is important to note that none of these properties had to be
bought,'' Mr. Harvey said. ``The entire mine plan could have been
legally mined without the purchase of these homes. We agreed to
purchase the properties as an additional precaution.''
When asked to elaborate, Mr. Harvey responded, in writing, that
Massey voluntarily bought the properties ``as an additional backup to
the state and federal regulations'' that protect people who live near
mining operations.
James Smith, 68, a retired coal miner from Lindytown, says the
company's statement is true, as far as it goes. Yes, Lindytown had
become home mostly to retired union miners and their families; when the
Robin Hood No. 8 mine shut down, for example, his three sons had to
leave the state to work. And yes, some people approached Massey about
selling their homes.
But, Mr. Smith says, many residents wanted to leave Lindytown only
because the mountaintop operations above had ruined the quality of life
below.
His family went back generations here. He married a local woman,
raised kids, became widowed and married again. A brother lived in one
house, a sister lived in another, and nieces, nephews and cousins were
all around. And there was this God-given setting, where he could wander
for days, hunting raccoon or searching for ginseng.
But when the explosions began, dust filled the air. ``You could
wash your car today, and tomorrow you could write your name on it in
the dust,'' he says. ``It was just unpleasant to live in that town.
Period.''
Massey was a motivated buyer, he argues, given that it was probably
cheaper to buy out a small community than to deal with all the
complaint-generated inspections, or the possible lawsuits over silica
dust and ``fly rock.''
``Hell, what they paid for that wasn't a drop in the bucket,'' he
says.
Massey did not elaborate on why it bought out Lindytown, though
general concerns about public health have been mounting. In blocking
another West Virginia mountaintop-removal project earlier this year,
the Environmental Protection Agency cited research suggesting that
health disparities in the Appalachian region are ``concentrated where
surface coal mining activity takes place.''
In the end, Mr. Smith says, he would not be living 150 miles away,
far from relations and old neighbors, if mountaintop removal hadn't
ruined Lindytown. ``You might as well take the money and get rid of
your torment,'' he says, adding that he received more than $300,000 for
his property. ``After they destroyed our place, they done us a favor
and bought it.''
Memories, What's Left
Ms. Gunnoe pulls up to one of the last houses in Lindytown, the
tidy yellow one, and visits with Quinnie and Roger Richmond. He uses
his words to re-animate the community he knew.
For many years, his grandfather was the preacher at the small
church down the road, where the ringing of a bell gave fair warning
that Sunday service was about to begin. And his grandmother lived in
the house still standing next door; she toiled in her garden well past
100, growing the kale, spinach and mustard greens that she loved so
much.
His father, Lawrence, joined the military in World War II after his
older brother, Carson, was killed in Sicily. He returned, married
Quinnie, and built this house. Before long, he became a section foreman
in the mines, beloved by his men in part because of Quinnie's fried-
apple pies.
After graduating from Van High School--that's his senior
photograph, there on the wall--Roger Richmond followed his father into
the mines. He married, had children, divorced, made do when the local
mine shut down, eventually retired and, in 2001, set up his mobile home
beside his parents' house.
By now, things had changed. With the local underground mine shut
down, there were nowhere near as many jobs, or kids. And this powder
from the mountaintops was settling on everything, turning to brown
paste in the rain. People no long hung their whites on the
clotheslines.
Soon, rumors of buyouts from Massey became fact, as neighbors began
selling and moving away. ``Some of them were tired of fighting it,''
Mr. Richmond says. ``Of having to put up with all the dust. Plus, you
couldn't get out into the hills the way you used to.''
One example. Mr. Richmond's Uncle Carson, killed in World War II,
is buried in one of the small cemeteries scattered about the mountains.
If he wanted to pay his respects, in accordance with government
regulations for active surface-mining areas, he would have to make an
appointment with a coal company, be certified in work site safety, don
a construction helmet and be escorted by a coal-company representative.
In the end, the Richmonds decided to sell various land rights to
Massey, but remain in Lindytown, as the homes of longtime neighbors
were boarded up and knocked down late last year, and as looters arrived
at all hours of the day to steal the windows, the wiring, the pillars
from Elmer Smith's front porch--even the peaches, every one of them,
growing from trees on the Richmond property.
``They was good peaches, too,'' says Mr. Richmond.
``I like peaches,'' says his mother.
Would Lindytown have died anyway? Would it have died even without
the removal of its surrounding mountaintops? These are the questions
that Bill Raney, the president of the West Virginia Coal Association,
raises. Sometimes, he says, depopulation is part of the natural order
of things. People move to be closer to hospitals, or restaurants, or
the Wal-Mart. There is also that West Virginia truism, he adds:
``When the coal's gone, you go to where the next coal seam is.''
Of course, in the case of Lindytown, the coal is still here; it's
the people who are mostly gone. Now, when darkness comes to this
particular hollow, you can see a small light shining from the kitchen
window of a solitary, yellow house--and, sometimes, a face, peering
out.
______

We as community members have been forced to reach out to the state
and national environmental and social justice organization and
foundations across the country to help us end the Appalachian
Apocalypse that this committee dismisses as being benign simply by
changing words of laws and buying time before they are reviewed again.
The people who have lived and died with these impacts are the people
who have helped to form a national movement to end all surface mining
in Appalachia. http://appalachiarising.org/We have had no choice but to
take these measures to protect our own lives and the future existence
of who we are from this out of control industry and their big money
backing in DC. We like the Obama Administration know what it is like to
go up against impossible odds created by the coal and energy industries
that have control of our Congress.
We suffer these very real consequences daily and we to have drawn a
line and dug in our heels. We refuse to tolerate inhumane treatment of
our people in their homes, communities and jobs. We too have taken a
stand and it has been a tough one with basically no protection and
still we refuse to back down.
The New York Times
July 14, 2010
http://www.nytimes.com/2010/07/15/us/
15mining.html?scp=1&sq=Jimmy+Weekley&st=nyt
Project's Fate May Predict the Future of Mining
By ERIK ECKHOLM
BLAIR, W.Va.--Federal officials are considering whether to veto
mountaintop mining above a little Appalachian valley called Pigeonroost
Hollow, a step that could be a turning point for one of the country's
most contentious environmental disputes.
The Army Corps of Engineers approved a permit in 2007 to blast 400
feet off the hilltops here to expose the rich coal seams, disposing of
the debris in the upper reaches of six valleys, including Pigeonroost
Hollow.
But the Environmental Protection Agency under the Obama
administration, in a break with President George W. Bush's more coal-
friendly approach, has threatened to halt or sharply scale back the
project known as Spruce 1. The agency asserts that the project would
irrevocably damage streams and wildlife and violate the Clean Water
Act.
Because it is one of the largest mountaintop mining projects ever
and because it has been hotly disputed for a dozen years, Spruce 1 is
seen as a bellwether by conservation groups and the coal industry.
The fate of the project could also have national reverberations,
affecting Democratic Party prospects in coal states. While extensive
research and public hearings on the plan have been completed, federal
officials said that their final decision would not be announced until
late this year--perhaps, conveniently, after the midterm elections.
Environmental groups say that approval of the project in anything
like its current form would be a betrayal.
``Spruce 1 is a test of whether the E.P.A. is going to follow
through with its promises,'' said Bill Price, director of environmental
justice with the Sierra Club in West Virginia.
``If the administration sticks to its guns,'' Mr. Price predicted,
``mountaintop removal is going to be severely curtailed.''
Coal companies say politics, not science, is threatening a practice
vital to local economies and energy independence. ``After years of
study, with the company doing everything any agency asked, and three
years after a permit was issued, the E.P.A. now wants to stop Spruce
1,'' said Bill Raney, president of the West Virginia Coal Association.
``It's political; the only thing that has changed is the
administration.''
While the government does not collect statistics on mountaintop
mining, data suggest that it may account for about 10 percent of
American coal output, yielding 5 percent of the nation's electricity.
The method plays a bigger economic role in the two states where it is
concentrated, Kentucky and West Virginia.
The proposal to strip a large area above the home of 70-year-old
Jimmy Weekley, Pigeonroost Hollow's last remaining inhabitant, was
first made in 1997 by Arch Coal, Inc., of St. Louis. The legal ups and
downs of Spruce 1 have come to symbolize the broader battle over a
method that produces inexpensive coal while drastically altering the
landscape.
Spruce 1 started as the largest single proposal ever for hilltop
mining, in which mountains are carved off to expose coal seams and much
of the debris, often leaking toxic substances, is placed in adjacent
valleys.
After years of negotiations and a scaling back of the mining area
to 2,278 acres, from its original 3,113 acres, the Spruce 1 permit was
approved by the Army Corps of Engineers in 2007 and limited
construction began. But this spring, the E.P.A. proposed halting the
project.
The announcement caused an uproar in West Virginia. The E.P.A. held
an emotional public hearing in May and stopped accepting written
comments in June. Arch Coal has objected publicly, but did not respond
to requests to comment for this article.
The Obama administration's E.P.A. has already riled the coal
companies by tightening procedures for issuing new mining permits and
imposing stronger stream protections. But environmental groups were
worried in June, when the agency approved a curtailed mountaintop plan
in another site in Logan County, W.Va. Now, as negotiations between the
E.P.A. and Arch Coal continue, the Spruce 1 battle is being closely
watched as a sign of mountaintop mining's future.
Feelings run high in the counties right around the project area.
``Spruce 1 is extremely important to all of southern West Virginia
because if this permit is pulled back, every mine site is going to be
vulnerable to having its permits pulled,'' said James Milan, manager of
Walker Machinery in Logan, which sells gargantuan Caterpillar
equipment.
The loss of jobs, Mr. Milan said, would have devastating effects on
struggling communities.
Maria Gunnoe, an organizer for the Ohio Valley Environmental
Coalition and a director of SouthWings, which organizes flights to
document environmental damages, said that if Spruce 1 went forward,
``it's going to mean the permanent erasure of part of our land and our
legacy.''
``We can't keep blowing up mountains to keep the lights on,'' said
Ms. Gunnoe, a resident of nearby Boone County who has received death
threats and travels with a 9 millimeter pistol.
Mr. Weekley, whose house is in sight of the project boundary,
remembers the day in 1997 when he decided to fight it. Nearby mining
under previous permits had filled his wooded valley with dust and
noise.
``You couldn't see out of this hollow,'' he recalled. ``I said,
Something's got to be done or we're not going to have a community
left.''
He and his late wife became plaintiffs in a 1998 suit claiming that
the project violated environmental laws. A ruling in their favor was
overturned, setting off litigation that continues.
Mr. Weekley said that he had rejected offers of close to $2 million
for his eight acres and that he had seen the population of the nearby
town of Blair dwindle to 60 from 600, with most residents bought out by
Arch Coal.
A rail-thin man who enjoys sitting on his porch with a dog on his
lap, Mr. Weekley uttered an expletive when told that coal industry
representatives, including Mr. Raney in an interview, referred to the
upper tributaries filled in by mining as ``ditches'' that can be
rebuilt. In fact, some of the streams to be filled by Spruce 1 are
intermittent, while others, including Pigeonroost Creek, flow year-
round.
``I caught fish in that stream as a child, using a safety pin for a
hook,'' Mr. Weekley said. ``If they get that permit, there won't be a
stream here.''
In documents issued in March, the E.P.A. said the project as
approved would still smother seven miles of streambed.
Filling in headwaters damages the web of life downstream, from
aquatic insects to salamanders to fish, and temporary channels and
rebuilt streams are no substitute, the agency said. The pulverized rock
can release toxic levels of selenium and other pollutants, it noted.
The effects of Spruce 1 would be added to those of 34 other past
and present projects that together account for more than one-third of
the area of the Spruce Fork watershed, the agency said.
The debate over Spruce 1 and other mountaintop mine permits has
been a source of division and anguish among local residents.
Michael Fox, 39, of Gilbert, is a mine worker who like many other
miners here thinks the objections are overblown. ``I have three kids I
want to send to college,'' Mr. Fox said.
One former mountaintop miner who says he now regrets his
involvement is Charles Bella, 60. He is one of the remaining residents
on Blair's main street, along the Spruce Fork, which is fed in turn by
Pigeonroost Creek.
``I know it put bread on my table, but I hate destroying the
mountains like that,'' Mr. Bella said.
______

We refuse to tolerate this industry in our schools attempting to
brain wash our kids into being their next generation of slaves by
influencing the curriculum with big money. Below is a scanned copy of
my children's history book. Notice it says that ``surface mining in
some instances leaves the land in better than before condition''. In
reality no one is stupid enough to believe this, not even
impressionable kids. We all know that no one can improve on God's work.
This alone is outrageous behavior.
More links to what is going on in schools. ``It's predatory
marketing. By selling its privileged access to children to the coal
industry, Scholastic is commercializing classrooms and undermining
education.''
http://www.cedarinc.org/
http://www.nytimes.com/2011/05/12/education/12coal.html?_r=1
The New York Times
May 11, 2011
Coal Curriculum Called Unfit for 4th Graders
By TAMAR LEWIN
Three advocacy groups have started a letter-writing campaign asking
Scholastic Inc. to stop distributing the fourth-grade curriculum
materials that the American Coal Foundation paid the company to
develop.
The three groups--Rethinking Schools, the Campaign for a
Commercial-Free Childhood and Friends of the Earth--say that
Scholastic's ``United States of Energy'' package gives children a one-
sided view of coal, failing to mention its negative effects on the
environment and human health.
Kyle Good, Scholastic's vice president for corporate
communications, was traveling for much of Wednesday and said she could
not comment until she had all the ``United States of Energy'' materials
in hand.
Others at the company said Ms. Good was the only one who could
discuss the matter. The company would not comment on how much it was
paid for its partnership with the coal foundation.
Scholastic's InSchool Marketing division, which produced the coal
curriculum in partnership with the coal foundation, often works with
groups like the American Society of Hematology, the Federal Trade
Commission and the Census Bureau to create curriculum materials.
The division's programs are ``designed to promote client objectives
and meet the needs of target teachers, students, and parents'' and
``make a difference by influencing attitudes and behaviors,'' according
to the company Web site.
``Promoting `client objectives' to a captive student audience isn't
education,'' Susan Linn, director of the Campaign for a Commercial-Free
Childhood, said in a statement. ``It's predatory marketing. By selling
its privileged access to children to the coal industry, Scholastic is
commercializing classrooms and undermining education.''
The Campaign for Commercial-Free Childhood, a tiny group in Boston,
has often been at odds with Scholastic, a $2 billion company whose
books and other educational materials are in 9 of 10 American
classrooms. Last year, the group criticized the company for its
``SunnyD Book Spree,'' featured in Scholastic's Parent and Child
magazine, in which teachers were encouraged to have classroom parties
with, and collect labels from, Sunny Delight, a sugary juice beverage,
to win free books. The campaign has also objected to Scholastic's
promotion of Children's Claritin in materials it distributed on spring
allergies.
And in 2005, the campaign tangled with the company over its
``Tickle U'' curriculum for the Cartoon Network, in which posters of
cartoon characters were sent to preschools and promoted as helping
young children develop a sense of humor.
None of the previous episodes led to any specific action.
The coal controversy seems to be the first time the campaign and
its allies have challenged Scholastic lesson plans.
11The United States of Energy'' is designed to paste a smiley face
on the dirtiest form of energy in the world,'' said Bill Bigelow, an
editor of Rethinking Schools magazine. ``These materials teach children
only the story the coal industry has paid Scholastic to tell.''
The Scholastic materials say that coal is produced in half of the
50 states, that America has 27 percent of the world's coal resources,
and that it is the source of half the electricity produced in the
nation, with about 600 coal-powered plants operating around the clock
to provide electricity.
What they do not mention are the negative effects of mining and
burning coal: the removal of Appalachian mountaintops; the release of
sulfur dioxide, mercury and arsenic; the toxic wastes; the mining
accidents; the lung disease.
``The curriculum pretends that it's going to talk about the
advantages and disadvantages of different energy choices, to align with
national learning standards, but it doesn't,'' Mr. Bigelow said.
``The fact that coal is the major source of greenhouse gases in the
United States is entirely left out,'' he said. ``There's no hint that
coal has any disadvantages.''
In a statement, Ben Schreiber, a climate and energy tax analyst at
Friends of the Earth, called the curriculum ``the worst kind of
corporate brainwashing.''
According to an article by Alma Hale Paty, the executive director
of the American Coal Foundation, and posted on Coalblog, ``The United
States of Energy'' went to 66,000 fourth-grade teachers in 2009.
There was no answer at the foundation Wednesday, and Ms. Paty did
not return calls.
______

We refuse to tolerate violent attacks on ourselves and our family
members because of our open opposition to our mountains blowing up over
our homes and our streams, wells, and air being poisoned.
This link is where we were attacked by men on Larry Gibson's
property on Kayford Mountain. These men were out to defend their jobs
at all cost. One went as far as to threaten to cut a child's throat.
This is what is happening to us as our politicians turn a blind eye and
pretends as if it didn't happen. There is no ``balance'' when people
are dying. This industry is pitting their workers against the community
members in violent attacks.
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Gjc7Jg_gMy0&feature=related
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7XSTrXX7hbo
Judy Bonds being smacked at a peaceful protest.
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8dP27PKnCG0&feature=related
We have even been brutalized by our local law enforcement while
attempting to protect a school full of children from a leaking sludge
dam and coal load out facility. The officers actually carried one
protestor out by the cuffs. http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3jqENyow0cQ
Even our elders have been attacked at federal hearing while the
officials pretended as if they had no control. http://www.youtube.com/
watch?v=EtwceseZz4w
I too have been personally attacked while attempting to speak at a
permit hearing in Charleston WV. I was nearly assaulted as I left this
federal hearing. The officers told us that ``we got what we deserved''.
No one should have to be subjected to this treatment to defend their
home. http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5WeJgX7vmgE Because of my out
spoken opposition I currently live on high alert 24/7.
In 2007 there was an occasion where myself and other participants
was attacked during a media training at the local community building by
60 men that were told that we were going to shut down their operation.
When in reality we were organizing to stop an ILLEGAL permit.
http://noacentral.org/page.php?id=191
I was charged with battery because I defended myself from a 250
pound man who was pushing me over my daughter to defend his job. This
individual filed battery charges against me. ME an individual that had
already been put through everything imaginable by this coal company was
being arrested for battery. I was found not guilty of these charges.
After nearly 2 years of litigation the jury vote was unanimously not
guilty.
Our industry controlled Government continued their violent rhetoric
even today as they up hold the practice of blowing up mountain over our
homes and filling our streams for jobs. After meetings with Joe Manchin
and all our state leaders we still face these attacks in our
communities and homes. Only because we don't agree that blowing up our
mountains and putting them into our valleys and calling it jobs is a
good thing. Here is one article about this meeting. After all the
discussion about death and sickness caused by surface mining and water
pollution Then Governor now Senator Manchin words were ``every job in
the state of WV is a precious one''. Shame on all of our state and
federal politicians! Not one will stand up to the industry that is
responsible for demise of southern Appalachia. They are all responsible
putting temporary jobs above the importance of human health, lives,
communities and long term livelihoods.
Here a good insight. . .http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=g24tpXtJ540
They try to make us lo0k like extremist by saying we only care about
mayflies..
Manchin calls for calm in the coalfields
http://blogs.wvgazette.com/coaltattoo/2010/01/25/manchin-calls-for-
calm-in-the-coalfields/
Ken Ward, January 25, 2010
Well, here's the answer to the question posed on my previous post,
``What's Gov. Manchin going to say?'' For starters, Manchin emerged
from a long meeting with coalfield citizens and issued a call for an
end to threats and intimidation against West Virginians who are
fighting to stop mountaintop removal:
We will not in any way, shape or form in this state of West
Virginia tolerate any violence against anyone on any side. If you're
going to have the dialogue, have respect for each other.
Manchin also promised he would look into citizen complaints about
lax enforcement of strip-mining rules by the West Virginia Department
of Environmental Protection, but he certainly wasn't persuaded to drop
his strong support for mountaintop removal. He said he told the
citizens they would have to agree to disagree about that one.
Singer and West Virginia native Kathy Mattea was among those who met
with Gov. Manchin.
This meeting was slightly different in format than the one Manchin
held back in early November with coal executives. For one thing, the
citizen groups offered to have a couple of coal industry lobbyists sit
in, and they did. Reps. Rahall and Capito of West Virginia both
attended, but Sen. Jay Rockefeller (who did have time to meet with the
industry executives) didn't show up. Rockfeller sent a staffer. (Senate
records indicate there was just one floor vote yesterday in Washington,
D.C.)
And more importantly, the citizen groups brought some experts with
them--including WVU's Michael Hendryx, who told me he tried to explain
to the governor his research about coal's harsh impacts on public
health and a study that showed the industry costs the Appalachian
region more than it provides in economic benefits.
I'm not sure Manchin heard that, given his comment about how
``every job in West Virginia is a precious job.'' I got the idea that
Manchin is still focused on just trying to preserve existing jobs, not
finding ways to ``embrace the future,'' as the Central Appalachian coal
industry continues its inevitable decline.
Bo Webb, the Raleigh County resident and activist who asked Manchin
for the meeting, seemed pretty pleased, but he also emphasized ``there
is an urgency to address some serious issues, and hopefully some of
those concerns will begin to be addressed very soon.''
And while Rep. Shelley Moore Capito, R-W.Va., was busy filing for
re-election and also forming a ``coal caucus'' in Washington, D.C.,
even she was talking about trying to find ways to ``bridge that gap''
between the coal industry and folks who want to stop mountaintop
removal.
Activist Maria Gunnoe--not really one to settle for just talk when
it comes to mountaintop removal--assessed the meeting by saying it
needs to be just the start of such talks:
It's very important that this not be a one-time thing. We live in
these communities, and we're not going anywhere. This can't be where it
ends. This is the beginning of a long process
It is important to know that this was the end of these discussions
about the violent attacks and violent rhetoric that we refuse to
tolerate.
If you will notice that there are members of the group that formed
in support of surface mining our homes present at this hearing today.
They call themselves FACES of coal. http://www.facesofcoal.org/Here is
a photo of a screen shot that I saved from their website. This is only
one example of ``what we get'' for opposing them blowing up the
mountains over our homes and dumping them into the valleys where we
live polluting our headwater streams and destroying everything that
support our lives.

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

I believe the ``They'' above would be people that live here and
oppose what is happening to them.
We refuse to continue to tolerate the terror of the flooding from
these stream fill experiments and sludge dams. Throughout the years of
the manipulations of the laws governing the impacts on our streams we
have always been the ones at risk. We live daily hoping that they don't
fail yet knowing that someday they will. As a child I experience the
loss of family members in the Buffalo creek flood that brought about
the Surface Mining and Reclamation Act Laws. Then in 2001 our neighbors
in KY suffered the Martin County Coal Spill. These laws didn't help us
sleep at night knowing that these very operations were being permitted
all over southern Appalachia. To us this was no more than words on
paper. Living here you know that these laws were not being enforced
then and they are not being enforced now. The present day generations
of children and their families live terrified of the rains. It nearly
always brings flooding when you have surface mining and plugged valleys
nearby. Studies have shown 40%to 200% increase in peak flows caused by
surface mining runoff during rainfall periods. FEMA and we as
individuals picks up this cost while companies go on with business as
usual keeping their men working destroying our very existence. At what
cost do we excuse these illegal jobs?
Surveys show that most voters in 4 regional states dislike
mountaintop removal. http://earthjustice.org/features/campaigns/poll-
strong-opposition-to-mtr A majority of voters in WV, KY, VA, and TN
reject mountaintop removal mining: The number of voters who oppose
mountaintop removal dwarfs the number who support it: 57% oppose
mountaintop removal, and with noticeable intensity (42% strongly
oppose), compared to just 20% who support it. Voters who strongly
support mountaintop removal mining in these states are a very small
minority (at 10%).
``Jobs at risk'' is as insulting as anything I have ever read. We
have worked consistently in DC and in Southern Appalachia to get our
political leaders to enact a moratorium on any further surface mining
permits because studies prove that this type of mining is killing the
people who live in our communities. All of our politicians continue to
ignore our plea for help. This blatantly says that none of you care
about the Appalachians who are paying the real cost of this so called
``cheap energy'' with their very existence. IT IS LIVES AND LIVLIHOODS
AT RISK. This industry is willing to take this risk for their bottom
line. The National Mining Association attorney called us inbreeds. This
again shows the total and complete disrespect for our people. This
hearing really isn't about jobs. This hearing is about the coal bosses
bottom line. This hearing was staged as a political platform to get out
their message that'' jobs are at risk in the already impoverished WV''.
Let's talk about those jobs, why we are still one of the poorest states
with the richest resources and what is really at risk.
These jobs are people from the outside. Very few of our local
people work these jobs. This is mostly outsiders from other states here
doing this work. In Twilight, WV there is imported workers coming in by
the busloads. Some of which are not legal to be in the US. Here is a
photo taken from my vehicle along RT 26 where this non-English speaking
gentleman ask me for directions to Progress Coal which is the Twilight
surface mines. The buses were packed with imported workers and marked
as school buses with PA plates. These same people show up drunk at our
community church outings so they can eat. There was also an incident
where a drunk imported worker from the Elk Run mines in Sylvester
killed a child while racing on our roads as school was letting out.
This is what kind of jobs we are talking about.

This again shows that this is all about the company's bottom
line and not about jobs for poor people.
Fallacy and Facts About Jobs in Appalachia
Fallacy: Stopping the destruction of Appalachian mountains and streams
would cost jobs
Fact 1:
Underground mines create 50% more jobs than mountaintop removal
mines.
Underground mines create 52% more jobs than mountaintop removal
mines for every ton they produce--they employ nearly two thirds of the
miners in Central Appalachia while producing just over half of the
coal1.
Fact 2:
Unemployment in counties where a high proportion of coal is mined
by mountaintop removal is higher than in counties where coal is mined
mostly underground. According to data from the Bureau of Labor
Statistics from 2000 through 2010, the average annual unemployment rate
was 8.6% in Central Appalachian counties where more than 75% of coal
production was by mountaintop removal, compared to 6.7% in counties
where mountaintop removal accounted for less than 25% of production2.
See: http://www.flickr.com/photos/appvoices/5938215752/
Fact 3:
Historically, the total number of mining jobs has fallen in places
where the proportion of coal mined by mountaintop removal has
increased. According to the West Virginia Geologic and Economic Survey,
the proportion of coal production in West Virginia that came from
mountaintop removal mines increased from 19% to 42% of production
between 1982 and 20063. Even though overall production increased, the
number of mining jobs was cut in half over the same period4.
See: http://www.flickr.com/photos/appvoices/6167625000/
Fallacy: More stringent enforcement of the Clean Water Act by the EPA
and other federal agencies is creating an economic crisis in
Central Appalachia
Fact: The number of mining jobs in Appalachia has increased since
the start of the recession, since the EPA began enhanced review of
mountaintop removal permits, and since the EPA released its interim
guidance in April, 2010. Since 2007, as production in Central
Appalachia has shifted away from mountaintop removal in favor of
underground mining techniques, the increase in employment at
underground mines has more than offset declines at other types of
mines. Employment is up 11.5% since the start of the recession
(December, 2007), up 2.5% since Enhanced Coordination Procedures on
mountaintop removal permitting were announced between 3 federal
agencies (June, 2009), and up almost 6% since the EPA announced a new
guidance on Appalachian mine permitting (April, 2010).
See: http://www.flickr.com/photos/appvoices/6130794844/
Fallacy: Ending mountaintop removal would put US energy supply at risk
Fact: U.S. coal production is limited by demand for coal, not by
the ability of companies to obtain permits for mountaintop removal
mines. According to energy analysts8 as well as executives from Arch
Coal9, Peabody Energy10 and Southern Company11, declining Central
Appalachian coal production is the result of competition from lower
cost natural gas. Mines across the country are producing at just 75% of
their capacity12--down from 85% in 2008--and the Energy Information
Administration projects that coal demand won't recover to 2008 levels
for another 15 years13. Coal from mountaintop removal mines could
easily be replaced if other US mines were operating at just 81% of
their capacity.
See: http://www.flickr.com/photos/appvoices/5937661551/
Fact: Coal from mountaintop removal mines accounts for less than 5%
of US electricity generation. While coal accounts for nearly 45% of US
electricity generation14, only 15% of that is mined in Central
Appalachia15. Coal from all of Appalachia accounts for less than 9% of
US electricity generation, and coal from mountaintop removal less than
5%.
See: http://www.flickr.com/photos/appvoices/5818441741/
Fallacy: Prohibiting valley fills would prevent all forms of coal
mining in Appalachia
Fact: The majority of recently approved permits for new mines in
Central Appalachia do not use valley fills. A survey of all
applications for new mine permits in Central Appalachia that were
approved by state agencies in 2009 revealed that just 44% used valley
fills to dispose of mine waste16. See: http://www.flickr.com/photos/
appvoices/5938219772/
References and Notes
1.  Calculated from MSHA Part 50 data files
; Mountaintop
removal production and employment calculated from ``strip''
mines, as defined by MSHA for mines in Central Appalachian
counties.
2.  Ibid; Unemployment data from the Bureau of Labor
Statistics

3.  Hendryx, 2008. ``Mortality Rates in Appalachian Coal
Mining Counties: 24 Years Behind the Nation.'' Environmental
Justice; Volume 1, Number 1
4.  MSHA op. cit. 2000-2010
5.  MSHA op. cit. 2007-2010; Bureau of Labor Statistics op.
cit.
6.  EIA/DOE ``EIA-923'' Database

7.  DOE/EIA Cost and Quality of Fuels for Electric Plants,
Table 3.2 for 2007- 2009; Adjusted to 2009 $ based on Budget of
the United States Government: Gross Domestic Product and
Implicit Outlay Deflators;
8.  Bernstein Commodities & Power Report, 2/18/2011: ``No
Light for Dark Spreads: How the Ruinous Economics of Coal-Fired
Power Plants Affect the Markets for Coal and Gas''
9.  Steve Leer, Chairman and CEO, Arch Coal, Inc. presentation
to Barclays 2010 CEO Energy-Power Conference on 9/15/2010;
10.  Rick Navarre, President and Chief Commercial Officer,
Peabody Energy, ``Expanding Markets and Peabody Growth
Opportunities,'' a presentation to the 2010 Analyst and
Investor Forum on 6/17/2010
11.  Chad Hewitt, Southern Company, ``Utility Perspective on
the Future of Coal'' presented at American Coal Council's
Spring Forum on February 3, 2011;
12.  DOE/EIA Annual Coal Report for 2009. Analysis by
Appalachian Voices.
13.  DOE/EIA Annual Energy Outlook, 2011 Early Release edition
14.  EIA/DOE Electric Power Monthly with data for December
2010, Table 1.1: ``Net Generation by Energy Source: Total (All
Sectors) ``;

15.  EIA/DOE ``EIA-923'' Database op. cit.
16.  Applications for new mine permits approved in 2009
obtained from: Kentucky Department of Natural Resources; West
Virginia Department of Environmental Protection; Virginia
Department of Mines, Minerals and Energy; US Office of Surface
Mining Reclamation and Enforcement, Knoxville Office Produced
by Appalachian Voices on behalf of the Alliance for Appalachia
Spreadsheets and details of all analyses available at:
www.appvoices.org/resources/mtr_facts.zip
The Obama administration has stated that they would follow the
science. That is what I see that this administration is doing SLOWLY.
Simple fact is science doesn't favor jobs over human health so this
administration is being attacked by the extractive industries who now
call themselves ``job creators''. It's true that we all need jobs.
However we cannot depend on jobs that destroy other's lives and
livelihoods. Frasure Creek Mining is owned by an INDIAN Company and
they are blowing up my homeland. I feel the vibrations of the core
driller in the floors of my home and impacts of the blasting near my
home are horrendous. This is absolutely against everything that America
stands for. When someone destroys water in a foreign country it is
called an act of war. When the coal industry destroys Appalachia's
water it's said to be in the best interest of our homeland security.
Here is what the Scientist says. . .What are we waiting on? People
are dying!
http://blogs.wvgazette.com/coaltattoo/2010/01/07/bombshell-study-
mtr-impacts-pervasive-and-irreversible/
Mountaintop Mining Impacts Serious and Irreversible
Led by Chesapeake Biological Laboratory Director Margaret Palmer, a
team of the nation's leading environmental scientists completed a
comprehensive analysis of the latest scientific findings and emerging
data related to the controversial practice of mountaintop mining. In
this practice massive amounts of rock are removed to expose coal seams,
valleys and streams are filled with the rock debris. Dr. Palmer's team
concluded that peer-reviewed research unequivocally documents
irreversible environmental impacts from this form of mining and also
exposes local residents to a higher risk of serious health problems.
At one time even Jay Rockefeller support banning surface mining. He
openly admitted that strip mining was not a good economic future. Here
is a few quotes from him.
December 20, 1970--''I will fight for the abolition of strip mining
completely and forever.'' John D. Rockefeller IV while running for
governor of WV as a stripmine abolitionist.
After getting beat by republican Arch Moore with the help of
concerned corrupt democrat politicians and huge contributions from coal
companies, Rockefeller followed the advice of his advisors and changed
his mind on strip mining and on attacking corrupt politicians in
southern WV. He won the following election for Governor as an advocate
of strip mining and shut up about corruption.
``We know that strip mining is tearing up the beauty of our state.
We know that strip mining is not a good economic future for West
Virginia and not a good economic future for our children. And we know
that, whatever advantage it has now, the damage that it leave is a
permanent damage.'' -Jay Rockefeller, 1972
March 2, 1977--``...mountaintop removal should certainly be
encouraged, if not specifically dictated.'' Gov. Rockefeller's
testimony to the U. S. Senate Subcommittee on Energy and Natural
Resources, March 12, 1977.
Southern Mountains Community members speak out against the
atrocities of surface mining in Appalachia.
http://www.wvphotovoice.org/
www.plunderingappalachia.org
www.burningthefuture.com
www.oncoalrivermovie.com
http://lowcoalexplicit.org/
www.coalcountrythemovie.com
We know we have options and that we do not have to blow up our
mountains and poison our water to create energy. This was our idea.
Hopefully it will catch on. www.thelastmountainmovie.com We will
continue to demand better for our children's future in all that we do.
Here is a short list of the impacts of coal on our lives nationally. It
would benefit all our children if we take this very serious and fix
this problem right away. We can no longer excuse the fact that coal is
a finite resource and we are running out. Enforce the stream buffer
zone rule and protect the very existence of a culture of people known
as Appalachians. We have witnessed the history that the coal industry
has left in its path. Let me say that this history is unimaginable by
most people in this country. Mountaineers will never be free until this
madness ends. Reinstate the stream buffer zone rule to at least the
Regan Era Rule and (for the first time in history) enforce it to
protect American lives from this criminal industry. My nephew reminds
me of what surface mining looks like from a child's eyes. As we were
driving through our community he looks up and says ``Aunt Sissy what is
wrong with these people don't they know we live down here?'' I had to
be honest with him and say ``yes they know they just simply don't
care.''
______

Mr. Lamborn. All right. Thank you. OK. Thank you all for
your statements. We will now begin our questions. Members are
limited to five minutes. We may have additional rounds. I'll
begin the first round of questions.
Mr. Bostic, your organization was involved in the 1999
lawsuit that began this process of mountaintop mining EIS with
the affiliated rule. Some of this was driven by settlements
between the Administration and environmental groups. In your
view, were those settlements prior to the 2008 rule
appropriate?
Mr. Bostic. Thank you for that question, Mr. Chairman. I
think that's a very appropriate one to ask. The litigation you
refer to we call that brag here in West Virginia. And as a
result of that initial litigation, the Federal Government
negotiated a settlement agreement with the environmental
plaintiffs that committed the first environmental impact
statement on mountaintop mining and this stream buffer zone. As
part of that settlement agreement the government agreed to name
as government contractors pre-picked certain experts selected
by the environmental community. We had a great deal of concern
by that inclusion of those outside parties in an EIS, as you
can imagine. But as the EIS progressed and the studies
progressed and the programmatic EIS was a much more complicated
and more intense effort than the 2008 or even the rule changes
now, and it ultimately found that surface mining was not having
an inordinate amount of impact on the resources of the area.
Mr. Lamborn. OK. Thank you. Ms. Fredriksen, I have a
question for you. The original focus of the rule is on
mountaintop mining and streams. In fact, one of the witnesses
just a moment ago stated that he had no objection to
restrictions on underground mining, if I understood what he
said correctly. However, after listening to your testimony, it
seems that the rule could have or even would have a large
impact on underground mining operations. Could you elaborate on
that, please?
Ms. Fredriksen. Yes. As the graphic demonstrated, if you
take the new standards that they've put in place, which is go
to the middle of the stream, go out 50 feet and go down a 15-
degree angle of draw until you hit the coal. So you have to
protect that buffer around the stream. So that's how we looked
at the rule, and when you do that, even our deepest mines, for
example, in southern Virginia, where we mine a lot of met coal,
loses almost have of its reserves based on this rule.
In addition, what we did not include in that calculation,
while the stream buffer zone rule currently, that's in the
public forum for the draft, states that coal refuse disposal
areas on the surface are not impacted, since they are very
similar to a valley fill and are permitted similarly, if that
coal refuse disposal area were to be not allowed either, then
that wipes out all ability to even room and pillar, much less
longwall mine underground.
So it's the nuances of those sweeping changes that they
propose to make that really impact the longwall mines,
particularly for CONSOL, but if we stretch that across the
nation, there's probably roughly 200 million tons that are
longwalled per year in the U.S., so you're talking about a
fifth of that being subject to potentially restricted mining.
Mr. Lamborn. Well, I find that really ironic because SMCRA
is the Surface Mining Control and Reclamation Act. Surface
mining control, so ostensibly, it's not supposed to dictate
underground mining, if I heard you correctly?
Ms. Fredriksen. We have SMCRA permits for every one of our
mines. Every one of our longwall mines has a SMCRA permit. And
then as you heard from the previous panel, we also have
combined NPDES permits with those SMCRA permits.
Mr. Lamborn. OK. Well, thank you for your clarifying that.
And for any of you, would the effect of this, especially if it
includes the underground impacts that we've just discussed,
have a tendency to push coal production away from private lands
owned in the east to the Federal lands that are predominantly
where coal comes from in the west? Mr. Carey?
Mr. Carey. Mr. Chairman, I think the idea that those coals
would have to be replaced from someplace, but I think also the
panel prior to our panel also outlined the fact that what you
would see is power producers ultimately switch to another fuel
source, which would not be cost effective to the average
consumer or to the manufacturing base in the Midwest. In the
short term, it would actually probably be replaced by western
coal.
Mr. Lamborn. OK. But ultimately to natural gas, if that's
still allowed to be produced?
Mr. Carey. That's correct, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Lamborn. OK. Thank you. I'd like to recognize Mr.
Johnson.
Mr. Johnson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Carey, first of
all, it's good to see a fellow buckeye here today as we talk
about this very, very important topic.
In your testimony, you spoke about the jobs that could be
lost nationwide if this rewrite as proposed by OSM goes into
effect. Could you elaborate and shed some light on the number
of direct and indirect jobs that are at stake in our home state
of Ohio?
Mr. Carey. Mr. Chairman, Congressman Johnson, certainly.
The effect just looking at the numbers we've calculated that
about 30 percent of the surface mining would be affected
immediately. That roughly makes up 45 percent of Ohio's coal
production. So if you look at the spin-off jobs to whatever
number you want, six to ten jobs--up to ten jobs, according to
Penn State, we would be looking in the thousands in
southeastern, and primarily in your district, Congressman.
Mr. Johnson. That's exactly why I have been fighting so
hard against this rule rewrite because most of those jobs, as
you and I know, come from Ohio's sixth congressional district
and the people that I represent. Mr. Carey and Mr. Bostic, much
of the press has been on potential impacts on surface mining.
We've talked a little bit about the effects on longwall mining.
How many longwall mines could be affected in the rewrite, if it
goes through?
Mr. Bostic. Well, sir, based on the information that we
have that's in the public domain from OSM now, virtually every
underground mine, whether it's longwall or otherwise, could be
impacted. And it's over this concept of fill construction. And,
again, the detractors, the Administration wants you to believe
this is about surface mining. It's not true. When you
underground mine coal, you're going to impact streams, whether
it's through the longwall subsidence that was mentioned earlier
or through the construction of refuse areas.
Coal seams are not all coal. There are certain splits of
shale and clay that lie within the coal seam, and when you
extract that coal underground, it's brought to the surface.
Those impurities have to be removed from the coal so that it
will burn, and meet air emission properties or meet coking
properties for the metallurgical industry. And you have to have
a place to put that material and that's typically in a refuse
fill. About 98 percent of all of West Virginia's underground
coal production has to be cleaned, so there's a potential
impact on all underground mines, longwall or otherwise.
Mr. Johnson. Ms. Fredriksen, can you talk about the
planning preparation and caution that CONSOL undertakes before
they begin surface mining?
Ms. Fredriksen. Yes. As the SMCRA requirements, the NPDES
requirements, we also have the various state laws and
regulations that we apply, the 404 permits. So everything--your
entire mine plan, your impacts--you have to do an environmental
impact assessment, you have to do hydrologic balance. You have
to look at geology and the impacts of that. And so every bit of
that is incorporated, and it's about a five-year process to go
through and obtain your mining permit. And like I said before,
they have a combined SMCRA/NPDES permit in all of our states
where we operate. And so that process is a very lengthy one,
it's a very thoughtful one and it's also a public process.
Those are put up for public comments when our limits are
assessed on us for what we can do and we have to operate
according to that plan.
Mr. Johnson. And can you also briefly talk about the
reclamation efforts that CONSOL engages in after the surface
mining is completed?
Ms. Fredriksen. Yes. In fact, in the State of Ohio, closed
mine operations are also in my department, and I'm very proud
that we have received numerous awards on our reclamation
efforts on those mines. We have bonding. Those are financial
obligations that we carry through the SEC process and annual
10K filings that we are required to meet. And until we meet
those obligations and get full bond release on our reclaimed
sites, that's the financial obligation that CONSOL must state
for its shareholders. So it is in our interest to get those
reclaimed and to get those bonds released.
Mr. Johnson. OK. Thank you very much. Mr. Chairman, I don't
have any further questions and I yield back the balance of my
time.
Mr. Lamborn. OK. Thank you. We'll begin our last round of
questioning.
Mr. Bostic, do you have any thoughts or suggestions on what
might have be the origin of the current proposed stream buffer
zone rule as opposed to the 2008 settlement?
Mr. Bostic. Yes, sir. I have a couple speculations to make
there. I think if you look, attached to my written testimony
submission there is a June 11, what's referred to as the MOU,
Memorandum of Understanding between the primary agencies that
regulate coal mining under the Federal Government. It was
written by and with the influence of the White House Counsel on
Environmental Quality. Those actions, which began in 2009,
followed a Federal court decision that we received here in West
Virginia. That somewhat, we think, landmark decision that
clarified the proper role of all of these agencies, whether it
be the Corps of Engineers, EPA, our own Department of
Environmental Protection. With that landmark decision, we had
some degree of hope that now we'll have certainty and
predictability in the permitting process. I think there are
those within the Administration, within EPA, that disagreed
with that decision, and then set out the promulgate this MOU
and to force these rule changes through to restrict mining. Now
that the Federal courts had found it to be proper, the balance
of separation of power between those agencies to be
appropriate, they set out to change all that by way of
regulation.
And Congressman, I use the term ``regulations'' very
loosely. For the most part, the agencies set out to do this by
policy or by reinterpretation. Only by way of a lawsuit from
the National Mining Association was OSM forced to undertake the
proper rulemaking process with this stream buffer zone rule.
What we've seen from EPA, what we've seen from the other
agencies within the Federal Government has been policy and it's
going to trample, we think, congressional intent, whether it's
under the Surface Mining Act or under the Clean Water Act.
Mr. Lamborn. All right. Thank you. Now, some people have
said that they don't like the 2008 rule, they think that the
earlier Reagan rule was better. Do you think that that rule was
stronger or is the 2008 rule actually stronger?
Mr. Bostic. Well, Congressman, to be honest with you, if
you look at the history of the 1983 version of the rule, the
Reagan era stream buffer zone rule, in a history that's very
well articulated through the programmatic environmental impact
statement or through the 2008 EIS, the 1983 rule wasn't never,
ever interpreted nor intended to ban or prohibit mining in and
around streams. That was made consistently clear through its
entire rulemaking history leading up to its final inclusion in
the program in '83.
Having said that, going to the 2008 rule, if you look
through the administrative record, you'll find some concern
expressed on behalf of the mining industry, including West
Virginia, that it increased certain requirements, certain
analysis, certain things that the companies had to do with
respect to the SMCRA permit. And we at several steps opposed
those changes.
So if you peel back the rhetoric presented by the current
OSM and the current Administration, that the 2008 rule was a
give-away or a midnight regulation. It actually made mining and
permitting of these operations tougher.
Mr. Lamborn. OK. Thank you. And Mr. Horton, if I could turn
to you, you spoke very movingly on the impacts of the loss of
jobs. Now we've also heard some very passionate testimony on
negative impacts of mountaintop mining. How would you respond
to someone who says it only does bad things, or the bad things
outweigh the good things? How do you respond to that on a human
level?
Mr. Horton. There have been bad operators that have done
negative things to the coal industry, just as there has been
bad automobile manufacturers who have built bad cars and killed
people, and there have been bad steel mills who do things that
are not right in the sight of the public. Not every coal
operator should be considered in that light. Mountaintop mining
can be done in an environmentally safe manner and it can be
done and is done by a lot of coal operations and provides good
employment for a lot of people and it can be done even better,
and we strive to do that each and every day.
In fact, if rewritten, this rule will affect, as Jason has
said, the underground industry because mountaintop mining today
is used in a lot of advancements of the underground sector.
We'll come in and develop an area through the mountaintop
mining method for the underground mining method to proceed. And
it's a much more cost effective way of doing so. And that's
done in both West Virginia and Virginia and I'm sure in parts
of Ohio, as well.
Any time anyone has an issue with anything that we're doing
in our operation, we'll talk to them, and if we're doing
something that's not right, we'll try to make it right.
Mr. Lamborn. And finally, Mr. Carey, is there a
contradiction between responsible stewardship of the
environment and keeping jobs available and the economy strong?
Mr. Carey. Mr. Chairman, I don't believe there's a
contradiction. I believe that if you're operating under the
letter of the law and you're doing what you need to be doing,
these companies are responsible and I think that there is a
balance and we are meeting that.
Mr. Webb. May I comment, please, on that question?
Mr. Lamborn. I'm afraid our time is up. Let's talk
afterward.
Mr. Webb. I would like to comment for the record about what
he's talking about.
Mr. Lamborn. I want to thank the members of the panel for
their testimony. I want to ask unanimous consent----
Ms. Gunnoe. Mountaintop removal jobs are killing people.
Mr. Lamborn. I would ask for civility, please. I would like
to ask unanimous consent that Representative Nick Rahall's
press statement be put into the hearing record and I'm going to
ask each member of the panel that if anyone submits questions
to you in writing, that you would respond to those as well.
[The press release follows:]

Rahall Welcomes Monday Hearing on Stream Buffer Zone Rule

Washington, D.C.--U.S. Representative Nick J. Rahall, D-WV, Friday,
welcomed a hearing in Charleston to examine the proposed ``stream
buffer zone'' rule, scheduled for Monday, September 26th, by the
Subcommittee on Energy and Mineral Resources of the House Natural
Resources Committee.
``I am glad that the Subcommittee has chosen to get to the heart of
the matter and conduct a hearing in West Virginia, where Members can
hear first-hand about the negative effects a revised stream buffer zone
rule would have on our coal miners,'' said Rahall. ``It is always a
good thing for Members of Congress to get out of Washington and spend
time in the communities that are being affected by the laws we write
and the regulations being handed down by agencies.''
Rahall is a former Member of the Natural Resources Committee,
serving on that Committee for 34 years until taking over the top
Democratic spot on the Transportation and Infrastructure Committee
earlier this year. While Chairman of the Natural Resources Committee,
Rahall pressed EPA and the Corps of Engineers for expeditious
consideration of coal mining permits and continually urged federal
agencies to work together with the State of West Virginia to ensure
that coal mining jobs were not put at risk by unfair and inequitable
regulations.
Rahall's work on that front has continued in his new post. Earlier
this year, the House passed H.R. 2018, the ``Clean Water Cooperative
Federalism Act of 2011,'' authored by Rahall. Rahall's legislation,
which has been sent to the Senate for consideration, would rein in
EPA's overreach in the Clean Water Act permitting process that is
threatening the future of coal mining jobs and communities throughout
Appalachia.
Although previously scheduled commitments, including an oversight
tour of the Coalfields Expressway--a road needed for the efficient
transport of West Virginia coal and other products--prevented Rahall
from attending the Monday hearing, he sent an unequivocal message to
participants.
``Without a doubt, the new stream buffer zone rule under
consideration by the Office of Surface Mining Reclamation and
Enforcement is unworkable; it would, unquestionably, adversely affect
coal mining and eliminate mining jobs so important to our West Virginia
economy. The message I send to the agency is this: `Go back to the
drawing board' said Rahall.
______

Mr. Lamborn. Thank you for being here. If there's no
further business, the Subcommittee stands adjourned.
[Whereupon, the Subcommittee was adjourned.]

[Additional material submitted for the record follows:]

[A Letter from the Alabama Surface Mining Commission;
Indiana Department of Natural Resources; Kentucky Department of
Natural Resources; Railroad Commission of Texas; Utah Division
of Oil, Gas and Mining; Virginia Department of Mines, Minerals
and Energy; and Wyoming Department of Environmental Quality, to
The Honorable Joseph Pizarchik dated November 23, 2010,
submitted for the record follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[A statement submitted for the record by the Interstate
Mining Compact Commission (IMCC) follows:]

Statement submitted for the record by the
Interstate Mining Compact Commission

The Interstate Mining Compact Commission (IMCC) appreciates the
opportunity to submit this statement regarding an oversight hearing on
``Jobs at Risk: Community Impacts of the Obama Administration's Effort
to Rewrite the Stream Buffer Zone Rule'' held on September 26, 2011 in
Charleston, West Virginia. IMCC is a multi-state governmental
organization representing 24 coal and mineral producing states
throughout the U.S., several of whom implement regulatory programs
under the Surface Mining Control and Reclamation Act of 1977 (SMCRA).
The current effort by the Office of Surface Mining (OSM) to rewrite
the stream buffer zone rule is in response to two decisions by the
Obama Administration: a settlement agreement with environmental groups
challenging a final rule promulgated by the previous Administration in
December of 2008 and a Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) signed by the
Interior Department, the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency and the
U.S. Army Corps of Engineers in June of 2009. Both of these decisions
committed the agency to develop a new rule for the protection of
streams, with a projected completion date of June 2012. However, unlike
prior rulemakings in this area, OSM appears to be expanding the scope
of the rule well beyond stream buffer zone requirements, taking on
topics such as the definition of material damage to the hydrologic
balance, baseline data collection and analysis, monitoring
requirements, corrective action thresholds, and fish and wildlife
protection and enhancement.
As IMCC has noted in comments that we have submitted to the agency
concerning this rule and the underlying environmental impact statement
(EIS), OSM is faced with the challenge of attempting to address and
resolve issues that are much broader than the rule itself. With each
successive reiteration of the stream buffer zone rule since 1979, more
and more pressure has come to bear on the agency to define the rule in
such a way as to completely ban the disposal of excess spoil in any
type of stream that may be impacted by surface coal mining operations.
However, as the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Fourth Circuit clearly
articulated in its 2003 opinion in Kentuckians for the Commonwealth,
Inc. v. Rivenburgh, 317 F.3d 425, 443 (4th Cir. 2003), ``it is beyond
dispute that SMCRA recognizes the possibility of placing excess spoil
material in waters of the United States even though those materials do
not have a beneficial purpose.'' Accord Ohio Valley Environmental
Coalition v. Aracoma Coal Company, 556 F.3d 177, 195 (4th Cir. 2009).
OSM's rule, therefore, should not be about banning the practice of
disposal of excess spoil in streams, but defining how it can be done in
a manner that comports with the law. And while OSM can prescribe a
national standard for accomplishing this task, it remains the
responsibility of the states, as exclusive regulatory authorities where
primacy programs have been approved, to apply the standard through the
permitting process, in which OSM plays no role other than through
appropriate federal oversight.
In its draft EIS (and in early drafts of the new rule), OSM appears
to be searching for the ultimate answer to the appropriate protection
of streams that has somehow eluded them. From where we sit, it is not
OSM that has failed to articulate the solution to this matter. The
agency, on more than one occasion, has engaged in comprehensive
analyses through both rulemakings and environmental impact statements
(EIS's) that address the complexity of the issue and provide solutions
that are consistent with SMCRA, protective of the environment and
respectful of state primacy. There is little left to offer. OSM has
examined every possible combination of alternatives and analyses that
attend this issue. The real dilemma lies not with OSM's rule, but with
the practice of excess spoil disposal itself, which the courts have
authorized and found to be consistent with the way SMCRA is currently
written. Any significant change in direction would therefore require an
amendment to SMCRA.
The problem also does not lie at the footstep of the states as
primary regulators in this area. Over the course of the past 30 years
since states first began to receive primacy, OSM has seldom found
concerns with our implementation of the applicable stream buffer zone
requirement. In fact, as OSM recently found with respect to West
Virginia's regulatory program, there has been no indication that the
states do not apply their respective SBZ rules consistent with the
historic application of the SBZ requirements, as approved by OSM over
the years. See letter to Joseph Lovett from OSM Regional Director
Thomas Shope dated December 8, 2009. Consequently, as OSM continues to
search for new alternatives to address this matter, two things must be
kept in mind: 1) the states' implementation of this rule and its many
iterations over the years has not been the stumbling block; and 2) as
OSM attempts to move forward once again with a new variation on a
common theme, it is critical to bring the states into the final
solution given our role as sole issuers of permits that incorporate and
implement these standards.
As the states consider their regulatory role in the context of this
potential rulemaking, they are particularly concerned about a
propensity on OSM's part to insert itself into the state permitting
process in inappropriate ways. In OSM's ``Immediate Stream Protection
Measures'' which were released in November of 2009, for instance, OSM
indicates that it intends to ``coordinate the SMCRA and Clean Water Act
(CWA) permitting processes to ensure effective and coordinated
compliance with provisions of the Clean Water Act.'' While the states
are fully supportive of coordinated approaches to meeting the
objectives of both SMCRA and the CWA, and have in fact advocated this
in the past, they are uncertain of where OSM intends to go with this
initiative. Time and again in the recent past, states have received
conflicting or incomplete responses from EPA concerning what they
believe the applicable CWA standards are for state-issued surface coal
mining and reclamation permits, especially in Appalachia. Our attempts
to obtain more clarity have been met with either silence or
uncertainty.
Furthermore, there are specific administrative procedures specified
under SMCRA for concurrence by EPA regarding the approval of state
programs or any amendments thereto. EPA and the Corps are involved with
the issuance of NPDES permits by states under the CWA, which are often
coordinated with the issuance of SMCRA permits. OSM's role is relegated
to one of oversight. Any attempts by the federal government to convert
their statutorily designated roles into something more intrusive in the
name of ``coordination'' will be met with suspicion, if not outright
opposition. As the U.S. Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia
has noted, the state, as the sole issuer of permits, decides ``who will
mine in what areas, how long they may conduct mining operations, and
under what conditions the operations will take place. It decides
whether a permittee's techniques for avoiding environmental degradation
are sufficient and whether the proposed reclamation plan is acceptable.
The state. . .inspects the mine to determine compliance; [and] [w]hen
permit conditions are violated, the states is charged with imposing
appropriate penalties.'' In re: Permanent Surface Mining Regulation
Litigation (en banc), 653 F.2d 514, 519 (D.C. Cir. 1981) (citations
omitted).
It is obvious from a review the June 2009 MOU, as well as OSM's
rulemaking documents to date, that while there may be some merit in
designing a set of regulatory requirements that applies specifically to
mountaintop removal operations in steep slope areas, the stream buffer
zone rule has always had, and will likely continue to have, broad
implications for all regions of the country. In fact, OSM's proposal to
adjust the definitions of ``material damage to the hydrologic balance''
and ``approximate original contour'' confirms the national scope of the
rulemaking. As a result, OSM must consider how any reformulation of the
rule will impact each state's program in terms of both implementation
and resources. As we noted in our comments on the 2007 proposed rule,
the incorporation of approaches such as the ``alternatives analysis''
contained in that proposal (and ultimately embodied in the 2008 final
rule) will require the investment of considerable time and effort by
state permitting personnel that could prove to be overwhelming. Given
the current fiscal constraints under which the states are operating,
attempting to accommodate these types of permitting analyses could
seriously jeopardize primacy programs.
There is also the question of how OSM's intentions with regard to
this new rulemaking comport with SMCRA's goal of creating a level
playing field across the 24 state coal regulatory programs. For
instance, the term ``material damage to the hydrologic balance'' is
contained in every state's regulatory program and any effort by OSM to
define that term for the Appalachian region will have consequences for
all other state programs, regardless of how OSM attempts to narrow its
scope or applicability. In fact, given the significant differences in
geology, hydrology and terrain among the various regions of the country
where surface coal mining operations occur, regulatory terms such as
``material damage'' have necessarily been left to each state to define
based on their unique circumstances. This is the very essence of
SMCRA's design, whereby Congress vested primary governmental
responsibility for developing, authorizing, issuing and enforcing
regulations for surface mining and reclamation operations with the
states so as to accommodate the diversity in terrain, climate,
biologic, chemical, and other physical conditions in areas subject to
mining operations.
OSM has set forth in the draft EIS chapters upwards of 55 different
options for proceeding forward with a new SBZ rule. Most of these are
variations on themes that have already been explored in previous
rulemakings or EIS's, as noted above. Some alternatives suggest the use
of concepts that have proven elusive or difficult to implement in the
past, such as quantitative or qualitative thresholds. However, reading
between the lines of the draft EIS, what we sense is an attempt by OSM
to reconcile not just its own regulatory requirements under SMCRA, but
a larger, undefined set of standards for water quality protection being
advocated by EPA and the Corps. This rulemaking simply cannot be taken
out of context from all the other activity that has attended the
development of the EPA/DOI/Corps MOU referenced above. While much of
that activity has been focused in central Appalachia at this time, the
overarching concerns regarding conductivity, total dissolved solids,
and numerical and narrative biologic water quality standards have
implications nationwide. Furthermore, there is simply no agreement
among the affected federal agencies on what those standards should be.
In some circumstances, such as the setting of narrative water quality
standards, the federal agencies play no role whatsoever. These
determinations are left solely to the states under the Clean Water Act.
As OSM moves forward with this rule and the EIS, the states believe
that it is important for both state and federal agencies to agree upon
several key issues: 1) who is taking the lead on the issues; 2) what
specific regulatory standards are in play under both SMCRA and the CWA;
3) how and where these standards should be incorporated into existing
regulatory programs, especially at the state level; and 4) what the
expectations are for both implementation of and compliance with those
standards. These types of discussions are long overdue and without some
resolution with all parties at the table, rulemakings such as that
regarding SBZ and related issues are likely to fail.
An overarching concern that should also be addressed is why OSM
feels compelled to move forward with this rulemaking. We are still
uncertain, even after all the debate over the past several months
concerning the June 11 MOU and OSM's stream protection rule, about the
basis for the proposed rulemaking or the problem the agency is
attempting to fix. We certainly understand the high levels of angst
associated with mountaintop mining operations in Central Appalachia,
but what OSM is attempting to do with this national rulemaking cannot
be justified by that public debate. As we have noted in comments to OSM
and testimony to the Subcommittee, the appropriate forum for that
debate is before Congress, not OSM. Nor can the pending litigation
associated with OSM's 2008 stream buffer zone rule serve as an adequate
basis for a new rule. There are other options available to the agency
for the resolution of this litigation short of a new rulemaking on the
matter. And even though we have requested this information in the past,
we are still unaware of any data that supports the need for this
rulemaking. Quite to the contrary, the data and information we are
familiar with (including OSM oversight reports) indicates that the
states have been implementing stream protection requirements in a fair,
balanced and appropriate manner that comports with the requirements of
SMCRA and our approved regulatory programs. It would therefore be
helpful if OSM would finally clarify its goals and the problems it
hopes to address in the rulemaking process.
As we peruse the various ``principal elements'' of the proposed
action spelled out in OSM's draft EIS, one of our primary concerns
relates to resource implications for the states. While much remains to
be seen in terms of details about the rule, what little we do know
signals a major impact on the states in terms of permit reviews,
monitoring requirements, various new technical analyses, and
intergovernmental coordination. In this regard, we believe that it is
critical, as part of the EIS, for OSM to undertake an assessment of the
rule's impact on both state resources and federalism implications. We
assert that this is required by both the National Environmental Policy
Act (NEPA) and Executive Orders that specifically address federalism
impacts.
We also recommend that, before moving forward with the EIS and
proposed rule, OSM seriously consider the other alternatives available
to the agency for addressing stream protection. We believe that there
are opportunities for the states and the affected federal agencies
(OSM, EPA, the Corps and the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service) to work
cooperatively together to address stream protection concerns. However,
to date our requests for arranging such meetings have been ignored. We
believe that there are a variety of tools, protocols, policies and
other measures available to us as state and federal agencies that, with
some coordination, could lead to a comprehensive and effective approach
to protecting streams.
As OSM develops the various alternatives that it will consider
during the EIS process, we suggest that the agency include an
alternative that recognizes the inherent regional differences,
especially between the East and the West, related to stream protection.
We believe that OSM likely gained an appreciation for these differences
during its stakeholder meetings in June and July of 2010. SMCRA itself
recognizes the importance of regional differences, both in its findings
(Section 101(f)) and in its designation of special treatment for mining
practices associated with alluvial valley floors west of the 100th
meridian, prime farmland in the Mid-continent and steep slopes in the
East. Failure to recognize these regional differences could result in
the expenditure of considerable resources to address issues that are of
marginal significance in a particular region of the country.
Before delving into some of the very practical implications and
impacts associated with implementation of the elements listed in OSM's
draft EIS, we want to note our concern about whether the science
supports some of OSM's proposed concepts. In particular, it seems to us
that there are several technical issues associated with the concepts
that require further thought and research, such as sequencing of stream
disturbance, bottom up fill construction, diverting water around fills
to avoid retention and percolation, and compliance points off the
permit area. We also believe that more can be done in the way of
developing tools or methods for prevention and prediction. By advancing
a rule that embodies some of these concepts without more in the way of
scientific support will complicate the ability of the states to issue
and enforce permits that are sound and defensible.
The balance of our statement will focus on some of the practical
implications associated with implementation of the various ``principal
elements'' of OSM's proposed action.

New Permit Application Requirements--the states have
several questions with regard to these new requirements, as
follows: what is a ``new permit'' for purposes of prospective
application of the new rule? Will states be required to
reassess discharge monitoring reports at permit mid-term
review? Will this serve as a potential re-opener? When will we
see definitions of ``preferred watersheds'' and ``hydrologic
equilibrium''? These are new terms and could have significant
implications for program implementation. How will some of the
new permit application requirements impact us as regulatory
authorities, e.g. 12 months of baseline monitoring data
(instead of six) and requiring alternative analyses to include
depositions within one mile of the mining operation?

Definition of ``material damage''--OSM's new
definition appears to be based on a stream classification and
use concept pursuant to which OSM seems to be moving toward
establishing a narrative water quality standard based on
aquatic life. As noted previously, those standards are solely
within the province of the states. Additionally, OSM's approach
could result in much duplication with EPA and Corps
requirements. OSM's concept of ``enhancement'' sounds very much
like mitigation under Section 404 of the Clean Water Act, again
raising concerns about potential conflicts. With respect to
mining operations in the western states, a broad, national
definition of material damage could prove problematic due to
the unique issues associated with water rights and interstate
compacts.

Mining through streams--the states have concerns
about whether sequencing of streams is feasible. If an
assessment of the success of stream restoration must include
the hydrologic regime and benthics, this could take well over
six months to accomplish. How many hydrologic cycles will be
needed to prove restoration? If we have to require full cost
bonding for these stream restoration projects, how will this be
effectuated? How will we track these bonds in conjunction with
other reclamation bonds? How do we avoid duplication with bonds
required by the Corps under Section 404? How will sequencing
impact the permit revision process? For instance, even if mine
throughs are focused on form and function, if there are
multiple cuts that impact the same stream over and over (as is
often the case with multiple contour cuts in the Appalachian
coalfields and multiple dragline pits in the Midwest and West),
how will this impact the mining operation and permitting? Does
OSM envision the states using CHIA monitoring/networking
stations to measure off-site damage? How can we predict the
probability that the stream will be fully restored--are there
interim benchmarks anticipated?

Monitoring requirements--there are potential right of
entry/access concerns for gathering some of this data off the
permit area that will need to be addressed. For biologic
monitoring--what system/standard of scoring do we use? Is there
an expectation of consistency among the states? For instance,
it has been suggested that biological monitoring would not be
required for ephemeral streams in the West. However, there is
some uncertainty associated with this issue given the fact that
the monitoring of biota in ephemeral streams is an emerging
area of science. The U.S. Geological Survey, under the
sponsorship of EPA, has been examining biological information
on ephemeral drainages and recent research at Pennsylvania
State University is focused on the biological component of
``dry streams'', which may be analogous to ephemeral streams in
the West. How do we accurately attribute changes in stream
quality to mining, as opposed to some other activity--
especially as the applicable watershed is expanded under the
rule? How far up and down the stream must we monitor--where is
the compliance point? It should be kept in mind that limiting
the percentage of a watershed has the potential for significant
implications, depending on how the watershed is defined.
Watersheds can vary in size from less than one square mile to
over a hundred square miles, especially in the West. Small
watersheds are sometimes completely disturbed by a single mine
and are reclaimed at a later time depending on pit advancement
and configuration. A constraint on the percentage of
disturbance would greatly limit operations that are dependent
upon large pits and large equipment. Finally, if the intent is
to address all impacts in a watershed, such a change would
likely overlap into land use planning, which would be outside
the authority of OSM and the states under SMCRA. It would also
require extensive program resources to undertake such planning.

Backfilling and grading and approximate original
contour requirements--is OSM attempting to limit postmining
land uses, regardless of what a landowner may desire--
especially where reforestation is concerned? What about
situations, as in West Virginia, where there is a mandate to
comply with county land development and master plans? We have
serious concerns about the impacts of bottom up fills and the
use of aquitards which can result in failure planes being
created in the fills, the overall stability of fills and
flooding potential.

Coordination of permitting processes--if we attempt
to coordinate SMCRA and Clean Water Act permits, can we expect
to see mandated time frames for final action by EPA and the
Corps? We also have a concern that the more permitting activity
that is undertaken by the state mining agencies under the SMCRA
umbrella, the more these agencies will be expected to assume
duties that are currently those of state water quality
divisions. It will important to avoid duplication of effort and
have clear lines of authority.
Without rehashing our previously articulated concerns about the
need and justification for both the proposed rule and the accompanying
EIS, we must object to the quality, completeness and accuracy of those
portions of the draft EIS that we have had the opportunity to review
and comment on so far. As indicated in the detailed comments the
cooperating agency states have submitted to date, there are sections of
the draft EIS that are often nonsensical and difficult to follow. Given
that the draft EIS and proposed rule are intended to be national in
scope, the states are also mystified by the paucity of information and
analysis for those areas of the country beyond central Appalachia and
the related tendency to simply expand the latter regional experience to
the rest of the country in an effort to appear complete and
comprehensive. In many respects, the draft EIS appears very much like a
cut-and-paste exercise utilizing sometimes unrelated pieces from
existing documents in an attempt to create a novel approach to the
subject matter. The result so far has been a disjointed, unhelpful
exercise that will do little to support OSM's rulemaking or survive
legal challenges to the rule or the EIS.
The states also have serious concerns regarding the constrained
timeframes under which they have been operating to provide comments on
these flawed documents. As the states have noted from the outset, and
as members of Congress have also noted in letters to Secretary Salazar,
the ability to provide meaningful comments on OSM's draft documents is
extremely difficult with only five working days to review the material,
some of which is fairly technical in nature. In order to comply with
these deadlines, the states have had to devote considerable staff time
to the preparation of their comments, generally to the exclusion of
other pressing business such as permit reviews. While the states were
prepared to reallocate resources to review and comment on the draft EIS
Chapters, additional time would have allowed for a more efficient use
of those resources and for the development of more in depth comments.
The states understand that OSM is considering further adjustments
to the time table for review of additional parts of the draft EIS. The
stats are hopeful that in doing so, the agency will incorporate
additional time for review by the cooperating agencies, especially
given the size and complexity of the full draft EIS. The states have
requested OSM to provide these new time tables as soon as possible so
that the states can begin their own internal planning.
As you know, several cooperating agency states testified before the
Subcommittee's oversight hearing on September 26 regarding their
concerns with both OSM's rulemaking and the EIS development process.
Those comments are incorporated here by reference. The state of Ohio
was also a participant in the EIS development process, although not as
a formal cooperating agency. As noted above, Ohio also found the EIS
process to be flawed and unworkable. Insufficient time was provided to
review and comment on the various draft chapters and there was no
meaningful feedback from OSM to the state comments that were provided.
The rulemaking appears to be based on two relatively small research
studies in the states of West Virginia and Kentucky with differing
geology, stream morphology and aquatic resources than is found in Ohio.
For this reason, Ohio is conducting its own study of the potential
long-term impacts to stream resources following final reclamation on
mine sites in various geographic regions of the state and that analysis
should be completed by June of 2013.
As part of its approved regulatory program, Ohio has undertaken
efforts to limit impacts from mining to not only intermittent and
perennial streams, but also in valuable headwater streams and habitat.
Prohibition of permanent impoundments in streams and reconstruction of
natural stream channels are an integral part of the program. Improved
coordination with other state and federal agencies also insures
protection and restoration of stream resources both during and after
mining and reclamation. Ohio is concerned that if OSM were to move
forward with the stream protection rule as drafted, it would result in
a steep learning curve for current state program staff in both the
permitting, technical review and enforcement areas. Additional
specialized staff would be needed, including field biologists and
hydrologists.
In terms of the impacts to the Ohio coal mining industry, the state
anticipates that it will be difficult to permit most surface and
underground mining operations given the requirements of the proposed
rule, especially when combined with EPA's proposed numeric effluent
criteria for specific conductance and sulfates. This is particularly
true with respect to treating the water using conventional active or
passive treatment methods. Additionally, the proposed requirement to
``hold bond until the hydrologic balance reaches equilibrium (including
biological resources)'' would require an extension of the current
maintenance period following final reclamation that could extend well
beyond the current five years, thereby adding considerable costs.
We appreciate the opportunity to provide these comments to the
Subcommittee concerning OSM's proposed stream protection rule and
associated EIS. We urge the Subcommittee to continue its investigation
and oversight of the process with the goal of motivating OSM to
reconsider the need for this rulemaking and the significant impacts it
will have on state regulatory authorities and the communities we
protect, as well as the industry we regulate.


