- OVERSIGHT HEARING ON NATIVE YOUTH PERSPECTIVES ON MENTAL HEALTH AND HEALING

[House Hearing, 116 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

NATIVE YOUTH PERSPECTIVES ON MENTAL HEALTH AND HEALING

=======================================================================

OVERSIGHT HEARING

before the

SUBCOMMITTEE FOR INDIGENOUS PEOPLES OF THE UNITED STATES

of the

COMMITTEE ON NATURAL RESOURCES
U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED SIXTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

Thursday, July 16, 2020

__________

Serial No. 116-38

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Natural Resources

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.govinfo.gov

or

Committee address: http://naturalresources.house.gov

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

41-256    WASHINGTON : 2020

COMMITTEE ON NATURAL RESOURCES

RAUL M. GRIJALVA, AZ, Chair
DEBRA A. HAALAND, NM, Vice Chair
GREGORIO KILILI CAMACHO SABLAN, CNMI, Vice Chair, Insular Affairs
ROB BISHOP, UT, Ranking Republican Member

Grace F. Napolitano, CA              Don Young, AK
Jim Costa, CA                        Louie Gohmert, TX
Gregorio Kilili Camacho Sablan,      Doug Lamborn, CO
CNMI                             Robert J. Wittman, VA
Jared Huffman, CA                    Tom McClintock, CA
Alan S. Lowenthal, CA                Paul A. Gosar, AZ
Ruben Gallego, AZ                    Paul Cook, CA
TJ Cox, CA                           Bruce Westerman, AR
Joe Neguse, CO                       Garret Graves, LA
Mike Levin, CA                       Jody B. Hice, GA
Debra A. Haaland, NM                 Aumua Amata Coleman Radewagen, AS
Joe Cunningham, SC                   Daniel Webster, FL
Nydia M. Velazquez, NY               Liz Cheney, WY
Diana DeGette, CO                    Mike Johnson, LA
Wm. Lacy Clay, MO                    Jenniffer Gonzalez-Colon, PR
Debbie Dingell, MI                   John R. Curtis, UT
Anthony G. Brown, MD                 Kevin Hern, OK
A. Donald McEachin, VA               Russ Fulcher, ID
Darren Soto, FL
Ed Case, HI
Steven Horsford, NV
Michael F. Q. San Nicolas, GU
Matt Cartwright, PA
Paul Tonko, NY
Jesus G. ``Chuy'' Garcia, IL
Vacancy

David Watkins, Chief of Staff
Sarah Lim, Chief Counsel
Parish Braden, Republican Staff Director
http://naturalresources.house.gov
------

SUBCOMMITTEE FOR INDIGENOUS PEOPLES OF THE UNITED STATES

RUBEN GALLEGO, AZ, Chair
PAUL COOK, CA, Ranking Republican Member

Darren Soto, FL                      Don Young, AK
Michael F. Q. San Nicolas, GU        Aumua Amata Coleman Radewagen, AS
Debra A. Haaland, NM                 John R. Curtis, UT
Ed Case, HI                          Kevin Hern, OK
Matt Cartwright, PA                  Vacancy
Jesus G. ``Chuy'' Garcia, IL         Rob Bishop, UT, ex officio
Vacancy
Raul M. Grijalva, AZ, ex officio

------
CONTENTS

----------
Page

Hearing held on Thursday, July 16, 2020..........................     1

Statement of Members:

Gallego, Hon. Ruben, a Representative in Congress from the
State of Arizona...........................................     1
Prepared statement of....................................     2

Statement of Witnesses:

Gonzales, Leticia, UNITY/OJJDP Peer Guide Ambassador, Bishop
Paiute Tribe, Bishop, California...........................     6
Prepared statement of....................................    20
Kippenberger, Cheyenne, UNITY/OJJDP Peer Guide Ambassador,
Seminole Tribe of Florida, Hollywood, Florida..............     6
Prepared statement of....................................     7
Miller, Robert ``Scottie'', Male Co-President, National UNITY
Council, Swinomish Indian Tribal Community, LaConner,
Washington.................................................     9
Prepared statement of....................................    10
Ovando, Marco, UNITY 25 Under 25 Youth Leader, Shoshone
Paiute Tribes of the Duck Valley Reservation, Owyhee,
Nevada.....................................................     3
Prepared statement of....................................     5

Additional Materials Submitted for the Record:
Alyce Spotted Bear and Walter Soboleff Commission on Native
Children, Testimony for the Record by Gloria O'Neill, Chair    21
Ozeena, Chicago, Testimony for the Record....................    23

OVERSIGHT HEARING ON NATIVE YOUTH PERSPECTIVES ON MENTAL HEALTH AND
HEALING

----------

Thursday, July 16, 2020

U.S. House of Representatives

Subcommittee for Indigenous Peoples of the United States

Committee on Natural Resources

Washington, DC

----------

The Subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 3:02 p.m., via
WebEx, Hon. Ruben Gallego [Chairman of the Subcommittee]
presiding.

Present: Representatives Gallego, Soto, San Nicolas,
Haaland, and Garcia.

Mr. Gallego. The Subcommittee for Indigenous Peoples of the
United States will now come to order. The Subcommittee is
meeting today to hear testimony on Native youth perspectives on
mental health and healing. Under Committee Rule 4(f), any oral
opening statements at hearings are limited to the Chair and the
Ranking Minority Member. This will allow us to hear from our
witnesses sooner and help Members to keep to their schedules.
Therefore, I ask unanimous consent to allow the Members'
opening statements be made part of the hearing record if they
are submitted to the Clerk by 5 p.m. today or the close of the
hearing, whichever comes first. Hearing no objection, so
ordered. Without objection, the Chair may also declare a recess
subject to the call of the Chair. Hearing no objection, so
ordered.
As described in the hearing notice, statements, documents
or motions must be submitted to the electronic repository at

[email protected]
. Additionally, please note that, as
with in-person meetings, Members are responsible for their own
microphones and Members can be muted by staff only to avoid
inadvertent background noise. Finally, Members or witnesses
experiencing technical problems should inform Committee staff
immediately.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. RUBEN GALLEGO, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF ARIZONA

Mr. Gallego. Good afternoon. Thank you to our witnesses for
being with us and welcome to all those tuning in via
livestream. Before moving forward with my opening, I wanted to
acknowledge the fact that this is a historic hearing. This is
our Subcommittee's first virtual hearing. As such, I would like
to thank my colleagues and the witnesses for being flexible and
accommodating social distancing guidelines while sharing their
important testimony.
Today, we will be hearing perspectives from Native youth on
a topic of personal importance to them: mental health and
healing.
Prior to beginning today, I would like to warn all virtual
attendees that today's proceedings will likely include
discussion of self-harm, including suicide.
Native American perspectives on mental health and healing
take on a new significance in the midst of an ongoing pandemic
that is disproportionately affecting Indian Country.
Not only have Americans suffered the physical and economic
costs of COVID-19, but this crisis will surely take a mental
health toll on our most vulnerable citizens as well. The mental
health impacts, like most impacts of COVID-19, will likely
disproportionately be affecting Native American communities.
That is because poor mental health and inadequate access to
mental health care are already an epidemic in many Indigenous
communities, especially for young people. Native youth between
the ages of 15 and 25 suffer higher rates of mental health
problems, such as depression, anxiety, and post-traumatic
stress disorder than their peers.
In 2014, suicide was the second leading cause of death for
Native youth between the ages of 10 and 34, at 2.5 times the
national rate.
As of 2018, Native youth were more likely to participate in
gang activity than other demographic groups, and one-third of
American Indians and Alaska Natives over 25 had not graduated
from high school. These statistics are hard to hear for all of
us. But this is the reality facing Native youth in this
country, one that we have a responsibility to acknowledge and
address.
The youth testifying here today are leading this important
movement and work in their communities. I applaud each of you
for your work. I know the future of your tribes and our country
are brighter because of your leadership. I look forward to
hearing your unique perspectives on healing and mental health.

[The prepared statement of Mr. Gallego follows:]
Prepared Statement of the Hon. Ruben Gallego, a Representative in
Congress from the State of Arizona
Good afternoon. Thank you to our witnesses for being with us and
welcome to all those tuning in via livestream.
Before moving forward with my opening, I wanted to acknowledge the
fact that this is a historic hearing. It is our Subcommittee's first
virtual hearing.
As such, I would like to thank my colleagues and the witnesses for
being flexible in accommodating social distancing guidelines while
sharing their important testimony.
Today, we will be hearing perspectives from Native youth on a topic
of personal importance to them: mental health and healing.
Prior to beginning today, I would like to warn all virtual
attendees that today's proceedings will likely include discussion of
self-harm, including suicide.
Native American perspectives on mental health and healing take on a
new significance in the midst of an ongoing pandemic that is
disproportionately affecting Indian Country.
Not only have Americans suffered the physical and economic costs of
COVID-19, but this crisis will surely take a mental health toll on our
most vulnerable citizens as well.
The mental health impacts--like most impacts--of COVID-19 will
likely disproportionately affect Native communities. That is because
poor mental health and inadequate access to mental health care are
already an epidemic in many Indigenous communities, especially for
young people.
Native youth between the ages of 15 and 25 suffer higher rates of
mental health problems such as depression, anxiety, and post-traumatic
stress disorder than their peers.
In 2014, suicide was the second leading cause of death for Native
youth between the ages 10 and 34--at 2.5 times the national rate.
As of 2018, Native youth were more likely to participate in gang
activity than other demographic groups, and one-third of American
Indians and Alaska Natives over 25 had not graduated from high school.
These statistics are hard to hear for all of us, but this is the
reality facing Native youth in this country--one that we have a
responsibility to acknowledge and address.
Fortunately, Native youth have taken the lead in facing these
challenges head on by acknowledging the impact of historical trauma in
their lives, and figuring out what it means to heal in that context.
The youth testifying here today are leading this important work in
their communities. I applaud each of you for your work and I know the
future of your Tribes and our country are brighter because of your
leadership.
I look forward to hearing your unique perspectives on healing and
mental health.

______

Mr. Gallego. I would now like to recognize the Ranking
Member for any opening remarks. Do we have a Ranking Member? Do
we have any Member from across the aisle with us?
Staff Member. Chairman, there is no Ranking Member present
here. You may continue.
Mr. Gallego. OK. Let us move on then. I'd like to
transition to our panel of witnesses for today. Under Committee
Rules, oral statements are limited to 5 minutes, but you may
submit a longer statement for the record if you choose.
When you begin, the on-screen timer will begin counting
down, and it will turn orange when you have 1 minute remaining.
I recommend that Members and witnesses joining remotely use the
grid view function so they may pin the timer on their screen.
If you go over the allotted time, I will ask you to please wrap
up your statement.
After your testimony is complete, please remember to mute
yourself to avoid any inadvertent background noise. I will
allow the entire panel to testify before we question the
witnesses.
The Chair now recognizes Mr. Marco Ovando, a member of the
Shoshone Paiute Tribes of the Duck Valley Reservation and UNITY
25 Under 25 youth leader.
Thank you, Marco. Please begin.

STATEMENT OF MARCO OVANDO, UNITY 25 UNDER 25 YOUTH LEADER,
SHOSHONE PAIUTE TRIBES OF THE DUCK VALLEY RESERVATION, OWYHEE,
NEVADA

Mr. Ovando. Thank you, Mr. Chair and honorable members of
the Subcommittee. Before we begin, please allow me to introduce
myself in the traditional and respectful manner of my Native
tongue.
Haganee'uh, ne Marco Ovando naneeha. Ne bi Marcella
McKinney ne Appe Francisco Ovando. Ne Tosawihi Tso'a'vich Newe
a Koa'aga'itoka Numa. Ne bit Dokapattih ne Idaho a Nevada. For
translation for my relations, I am greeting each of you in high
regard by stating who I am as a Shoshone Paiute citizen by
first stating my parents, second my traditional nomadic bands
of the White Knife, Jarbidge, and Salmon-Eater Peoples, where I
come from a long line of chiefs like Chief Truckee and Chief
Winnemucca of Nevada and where my great-great-grandmother,
Sarah Winnemucca, is currently standing amongst the Nation's
brightest and finest in the United States Capitol Building. And
last, I state where I call home, the oasis of the desert, the
Duck Valley Indian Reservation, in Idaho and Nevada. As nomadic
nations, understanding where one roamed is essential to
identity. This introduction also ties me and all of my
spiritual being into the resilient culture of the Great Basin.
It reminds me every time I speak it that I am strong,
resilient, and most importantly, Indigenous.
I am honored to speak before you today to share my
testimony on how when being reconnected to the traditional
cultures that all Native youth possess within us, our minds and
spirituality can heal, flourish, and ultimately thrive. Though
it may not look like it from a camera's point of view, I, in
fact, struggle from depression and social anxiety. They come
and go. But just a few years ago, I was in a very dark place
from these torments, so lost and dark, in fact, I even
contemplated suicide. I did not know where to go from there.
My mother was long deceased from the effects of alcoholism
and my father estranged. Western medicine wasn't adequate and
unreachable in my rural desert community. But it was in that
dark moment of my life, a light glimmered. That light was the
culture embodied by my grandmother, who, in the decades of her
incredible life, has reconnected with her spirituality and has
helped countless people on the reservation reconnect with
theirs.
``How?'' you may ask. It started with a simple trip to the
camas prairie on the north end of my reservation to harvest the
staple root of my people, a root that has helped to sustain us
through the bitter winters of the desert for years. I was
taught how we consumed the roots of the plants placed in the
earth in relation to tying us closer to the planet. I was also
taught various phrases and words of objects in Shoshone and
Paiute and, of course, engaged in many long days of talking
with elders about the past and stories passed down from
generations in the oral tradition, gaining the sacred knowledge
so many are so worried to lose.
In those months and then years of spending time among my
culture, my depression gradually diminished, and my social
anxiety was replaced with an immense and burning passion for
working with youth. I was more than eager to start. And that
was when organizations like the United National Indian Tribal
Youth, Inc., a.k.a., UNITY, seemingly fell into place perfectly
to help me do just that, much like this afternoon talking to
you.
My mental health is tied to my spirituality. And to me and
my people back home, one can't simply exist without the other.
Much like in my introduction, I would probably still be lost
and without knowing who I am if I didn't rediscover this.
My story is a story repeated across Indian Country, where
youth who are lost and alone like I was, are reconnected with
who they were before colonization and, in return, are mentally
revitalized to face the ever-changing world of the 21st century
and begin the process to reverse centuries of institutionalized
genocide and intergenerational trauma for generations to come
to flourish.
However, my story is a story of its own, unique and just as
important as the countless others. I hope my words inspire each
of you to further understand yourself and make the best
decisions of this Subcommittee to help my success story become
the success story of thousands of fellow Native Americans and
Americans alike.
By advocating for those whose voice has yet to be
discovered, I hope that supporting tribal sovereignty and the
mental and spiritual health of the first Americans will ever be
at the forefront of this Congress. It is more critical than
ever to act upon this crisis.
I thank you, the Committee, for the invitation and your
time. And I will happily take any questions you may have.

[The prepared statement of Mr. Ovando follows:]
Prepared Statement of Marco Ovando, UNITY 25 Under 25 Youth Leader,
Shoshone Paiute Tribes of the Duck Valley Reservation
Honorable Members of the Subcommittee, before we begin, please
allow me to introduce myself in the traditional and respectable manner
of my native tongue. Haganee'uh, ne Marco Ovando naneeha. Ne bi
Marcella McKinney ne Appe Francisco Ovando. Ne Tosawihi Tso'a'vich Newe
a Koa'aga'itoka Numa. Ne bit Dokapattih ne Idaho a Nevada.
For translation to my relations, I am greeting each of you in high
regard by stating who I am as a Shoshone Paiute youth by first stating
my parents, second my traditional nomadic bands of the White Knife,
Jarbidge, and Salmon-Eater Peoples, and last where I call home, Duck
Valley. As nomadic nations, understanding where one roamed was
essential to identity. This introduction also ties me and all of my
spiritual being into the resilient culture of the Great Basin. It
reminds me every time I speak it, that I am strong, resilient, and most
importantly, Indigenous.
I am honored to speak before you today to share my testimony on how
being reconnected to the traditional cultures that all native youth
possess within us; our minds and spirituality can heal, flourish, and
thrive. Though it may not look like it from a camera screen or at first
glimpse, I in fact struggle from depression and social anxiety. They
come and go but just a few years ago I was in a very dark place from
these demons. So lost and dark in fact I even contemplated suicide. I
didn't know where to go. My mother was long deceased and my father
estranged. Western medicine wasn't adequate in my rural desert
community. But it was in that dark moment of my life, a light
glimmered. That light was my culture embodied by my grandmother, who in
the decades of her incredible life, has reconnected with her
spirituality and has then helped countless people on the reservation
reconnect with theirs. How you may ask? Well It started with a simple
road trip to the camas prairie on the north end of my reservation to
harvest the staple root of my people. A root that helped sustain us
through the bitter winters on the plateau. I was taught how we consumed
the roots of the plants placed in the earth in relation to tying us
closer to the planet. I was also taught various phrases and words of
objects in Shoshone and Paiute, and of course engaged in many long days
of talking with elders about the past and the stories passed down from
generations in the oral tradition, gaining the sacred knowledge so many
are worried to lose.
In those months and then years of spending time among my culture,
my depression gradually diminished and my social anxiety was replaced
with an immense passion for working with youth. I was more than eager
to start. That was when organizations like UNITY seemingly fell into
place perfectly to help me do just that, much like today in this very
hearing. My mental health was tied to my spirituality and to me and my
people back home, one can't exist without the other. Much like in my
introduction, I would probably still be lost and without knowing who I
am if I didn't rediscover it.
My story is a story repeated across Indian Country, where youth who
are lost and alone like I was, are reconnected to who they were before
colonization and in return, are mentally revitalized to face the ever
changing world of the 21st century and begin the process to reverse
centuries of institutionalized genocide and intergenerational trauma
for generations to come to flourish.
However, my story is my story of its own, unique and just was
important as the countless others. I hope these words inspired each of
you to further understand yourself and make the best decisions in this
Subcommittee to help my success story become the success story of
thousands of fellow Americans. By advocating for those whose voice has
yet to be discovered, I hope that by supporting tribal sovereignty and
the mental and spiritual health of the First Americans will ever be at
the forefront of this Congress. Thank you for your time and I will
happily take any questions you may have.

______

Mr. Gallego. Thank you, Marco.
The Chair now recognizes Ms. Leticia Gonzales, a member of
the Bishop Paiute Tribe and a UNITY/OJJDP Peer Guide
Ambassador.
Leticia, you may begin.

STATEMENT OF LETICIA GONZALES, UNITY/OJJDP PEER GUIDE
AMBASSADOR, BISHOP PAIUTE TRIBE, BISHOP, CALIFORNIA

Ms. Gonzales. [Heavy static.] Thank you for having me
today. I am very honored to be here to speak on behalf of such
an important topic.
Mr. Gallego. Can you give us a second? Can we do a mic
check real quick? Reset the time. OK. Leticia, try your
microphone again. OK. Hold on. Leticia, do you have a headset?
Ms. Gonzales. I do not.
Mr. Gallego. OK. Staff, can you guys get in contact with
her and try to work this out while we move to Ms. Cheyenne
Kippenberger for her testimony?
Staff Member. Yes, sir. Will do.
Mr. Gallego. OK. Thank you, Leticia. We will get right back
to you.

The Chair now recognizes Ms. Cheyenne Kippenberger, member
of the Seminole Tribe of Florida, a UNITY/OJJDP Peer Guide
Ambassador and the current Miss Indian World.
Cheyenne, please go.

STATEMENT OF CHEYENNE KIPPENBERGER, UNITY/OJJDP PEER GUIDE
AMBASSADOR, SEMINOLE TRIBE OF FLORIDA, HOLLYWOOD, FLORIDA

Ms. Kippenberger. [Speaking in Native language.] Good
afternoon, Chair Gallego, and members of the Committee. My
English name is Cheyenne Kippenberger. My given name is Eete,
meaning ``fire'' in my Native language. I am the granddaughter
of Lawanna Osceola and the daughter of Joe and Susan
Kippenberger. I am a proud member of the Seminole Tribe of
Florida. I am the current reigning Miss Indian World and serve
as a UNITY Peer Guide for the Healing Indigenous Lives
initiative.
I kindly thank you for the opportunity to appear before you
to discuss some of the challenges that Native youth face in
their lives. As Miss Indian World and a UNITY Peer Guide, I am
an ambassador to Indian Country, as well as our Native youth. I
have dedicated myself to destigmatizing mental health in our
Native communities and I have openly talked about my own
experience with my mental health and the many hardships that
come with living with depression and anxiety.
I am fortunate enough to have been diagnosed, treated, and
counseled through the Center for Behavioral Health, a primarily
tribal-funded facility conveniently located on my home
reservation, providing integrated mental and behavioral health
care. I am aware of the privilege it is to have access to a
therapist on my own reservation and to have resources that
prescribed me the antidepressants that I needed.
But mental health care should not be a privilege. This type
of access, support, facility and funding should be available
all over Indian Country. Programs and mental care professionals
should be available on and off Indian reservations and within
educational institutions starting from preschool and continuing
on through college. Our youth should be provided mental health
education, equipping them with healthy coping skills, emotional
intelligence, and understanding, helping to build their
confidence and self-esteem.
Additionally, these mental health professionals must also
be equipped with the understanding of cultural differences and
historical context of Native American and Alaska Natives so
that our youth can receive culturally competent care with
treatment paths not limited to just therapy or medications. Our
youth are suffering from depression, anxiety, PTSD, physical
health problems, and educational disparities. And it is leading
to some of the lowest graduation rates in high school and the
highest suicide rates of any other ethnic group in the United
States.
If these intergenerational traumas continue to go unnoticed
or unresolved, they will turn into more severe issues leading
into their adulthood, alcohol and drug dependencies, high
incarceration rates, domestic violence, and unhealthy living
lifestyles.
But how do we know what needs to be done or provided
without an understanding of what is occurring in the lives of
our Native people? We need accurate research and data to prove
what we know has been occurring for decades in our communities.
I ask you, members of the Committee, to help us end these
cycles of intergenerational traumas and help us provide the
support, resources, and facilities to do so. The future of our
Native community is in the hands of our youth. And their lives
are in your hands.
I am extremely grateful for your time and this opportunity
to share not only my own journey but the things that I have
seen in my lifetime in our communities. Mvto, shonaabesha, and
thank you very, very much.

[The prepared statement of Ms. Kippenberger follows:]
Prepared Statement of Cheyenne Kippenberger, Miss Indian World 2019-
2021, United National Indian Tribal Youth, Healing Indigenous Lives
Initiative Peer Guide
Cheehentamo, I am Cheyenne Kippenberger and I am from the Seminole
Tribe of Florida. I am the current reigning Miss Indian World, and I
currently serve as a United National Indian Tribal Youth (UNITY) Peer
Guide for the Healing Indigenous Lives Initiative. My efforts as Miss
Indian World have been greatly directed toward destigmatizing mental
health in our communities and openly talking about my own experience
with depression and anxiety. Additionally, as a UNITY Peer Guide, the
focus of our initiative is Native youth engagement and juvenile justice
and delinquency prevention in Indian Country. The development program
is a cooperative agreement between the Office of Juvenile Justice and
Delinquency Prevention (OJJDP) and UNITY. I kindly thank you for the
opportunity to appear before you to discuss the many challenges that
Native youth face in their lives.
According to the U.S. Census, the Native American and Alaska Native
population accounts for less than 1 percent of the U.S. population.
Studies show our ethnic group disproportionately suffers from mental
health issues. Our community needs for mental health cannot be
understood unless the historical context is also understood. Research
shows displacement, residential schooling, and even socioeconomic
consequences leading to poverty all play a role in the current mental
health condition of Native American communities. Unresolved or
unnoticed traumas can turn into intergenerational traumas that are
passed down for decades from generation to generation within our
families. Intergenerational trauma can manifest in many forms other
than just psychologically. Mental, spiritual, familial, social and
cultural effects have been seen in Native youth as a result of these
unresolved traumas. The common issues present in our Native communities
include depression, anxiety, PTSD, alcohol or drug abuse, domestic
violence, suicide, incarceration, and educational disparities. All
these issues can be linked to intergenerational traumas.
There are 574 federally recognized tribes in the U.S. In addition,
there are state recognized tribes around the country. Each tribal group
has its unique history, culture and language. Research conducted in the
past has either been inaccurate or has failed to include Native
American and Alaska Natives entirely. The current research data is not
sufficient in that accurate conclusions can be made to decide what is
needed for mental health care in Native communities. To have a clear
understanding of the needed support to accomplish the necessary healing
within Indian Country, we need to understand what is occurring within
these communities through statistical research, surveys, and in depth
cultural understandings of historical trauma. With Indian Country being
extremely diverse in location, financial stability, accessibility,
language, and cultural teachings, all factors need to be considered
when research conduction does take place.
I myself have experienced the hardship that depression and anxiety
can bring. I was not diagnosed with depression until well into my early
20s. Since I can remember I suffered from depressive episodes and high
anxiety and was not aware of what these things were. I felt shame,
embarrassment and no control over what was happening to me. My mental
state soon developed into something less manageable and much more
severe as I moved into my high school years. I was destructive, angry,
and misunderstood. I was labeled a ``trouble maker,'' as ``lazy'' and
``a delinquent.'' By my junior year of high school, I was rarely in
attendance and I was failing most of my classes at my then fourth high
school. I was in a state of acceptance that school was not for me, so
with no opportunity to change my mind, I withdrew from school. I became
another high school dropout.
It was not until my own mother realized how severe my mental state
was that she forced me to seek help. I reached out to the Center for
Behavioral Health on my home reservation, a facility providing
integrated mental and behavioral health care. I was diagnosed with
clinical depression and anxiety and even after receiving a diagnosis
and therapy, I ultimately had to be prescribed antidepressants due to
the severity of my depression. It was a struggle of good days and bad
days, accepting my diagnosis, understanding how this affects my
everyday life, and even shedding the burden of shame and embarrassment.
Because of the support, resources, and accessibility I had available to
me, I was able to heal. My healing led to me receiving my high school
diploma and even moving on to college and graduating with a degree.
Although I am proud of my journey, I am also very aware that is not the
case for many Native youth. It is a privilege to have a primarily
tribal funded Center for Behavioral Health on my own reservation. It is
a privilege to have received counseling and be prescribed
antidepressants. Mental health treatment should not be a privilege.
Healing can take its course in Indian Country with accessibility,
resources, funding, support, and cultural competency. With more
accessibility to facilities such as the Center for Behavioral Health
with culturally aware mental health professionals, our Native youth can
be guided, treated, and healed. Implementation of mental health
programs or resources into educational institutions on and off Indian
reservations could mean a shift in mental health understanding as well
as emotional intelligence and healthy coping mechanisms. Cultural
competence in mental health care of Native youth is crucial in the
healing process. It is critical for mental health professionals to be
aware of cultural differences, historical trauma, and also treatment
approaches. For example, expression of emotional distress exhibited in
Native check of American and Alaska Natives contrasts from typical
emotional expressions. Healing also cannot be limited to the
Westernized ideals of treatment for mental health. Positive changes
occur with a positive approach. With our children and young adults
being educated on what mental health is, what healing is, and being
provided support, resources and accessibility, we are breaking the
stigma and shifting the conversation toward healing our
intergenerational trauma.
By equipping Native youth with the knowledge of mental well-being
we are empowering them to break the many cycles of intergenerational
trauma in our communities and families. They will be prepared to
graduate high school and pursue higher education, they will end the
dependency of alcohol and drugs in our communities, suicide will no
longer be the final question, and they can be successful, happy, and
healthy. Healing takes resources. Funding, support, facilities,
educational programs, and mental health professionals can make the
difference that our Native youth need. Help to make that difference, to
give that support. The future of our Native community is in the hands
of our youth and they're lives are in your hands. Shonaabesha, mvto,
thank you.

______

Mr. Gallego. Thank you, Cheyenne.
The Chair now recognizes Mr. Robert ``Scottie'' Miller, a
member of Swinomish Indian Tribal Community and the male co-
president of the National UNITY Council.

STATEMENT OF ROBERT ``SCOTTIE'' MILLER, MALE CO-PRESIDENT,
NATIONAL UNITY COUNCIL, SWINOMISH INDIAN TRIBAL COMMUNITY,
LACONNER, WASHINGTON

Mr. Miller. [Speaking in Native language.] Thank you for
having me. I am Robert Miller, but I go by ``Scottie'' from the
Swinomish Tribe in Washington State. My traditional name is
Goliah. I come from the Edwards family. My people are people of
the water. Yesterday, I was on the boat exercising my treaty
rights, crabbing. Our previous Chairman was Brian Cladoosby,
and he was president of NCAI for a few years.
One of my earliest memories as a kid is attending a funeral
of a neighbor boy who I played with. His brother was my age,
and he was only a few years older than us. He committed suicide
by hanging himself in his garage. The most shocking part of it
now, looking back, is that after his death, my small community
did nothing to advocate for suicide prevention or mental
health.
Flash forward to less than a year ago. A child in my
community is pretty much an orphan because his mom killed
herself and his dad has alcoholism, which is from a form of
intergenerational trauma. Another story that hits close to home
for me is one of my great uncles--so many times, my dad has
gone to his house to repair bullet holes in his roof because he
had tried taking his own life. When he did take his own life,
we all swept it under the rug and didn't think it was a
suicide, just more of a mere accident. One last story that
sticks out to me is one of the youth workers who is very
traditional, goes on canoe journey, does many things with the
youth. He took his own life. And, again, it was kind of like
not really a suicide. Those are just a few stories that
happened pretty commonly around where I am from.
You would have never thought that these people or anybody
else in my community that committed suicide had any sort of
mental health problems. It comes time to ask myself what are we
not doing in these communities to prevent suicides and make
awareness of our mental health issues? Personally, my Tribe's
culture, we are supposed to be reserved. You only cry during
funerals and you show little to no emotion. You aren't supposed
to be vulnerable.
What I would advocate for is better mental health treatment
across the country, but specifically on Indian reservations and
also in Indian urban health centers, finding a way to integrate
our Native American culture and practices with modern-day
mental health medicine along with suicide prevention campaigns.
I sat in on a national Indian health listening session for
HIV. My idea for anything concerning health would be for
funding Indian health employees to be trained themselves and
that they do some type of community outreach with the
communities that they are in or the urban centers that they are
in. So, they do outreach and any sort of prevention. In United
National Indian Tribal Youth, also known as UNITY, we have
promoted the ``I Will Live'' campaign, which is designed for
the youth. It teaches them that their lives matter and are
sacred. I hope to revive that campaign again this next upcoming
year.
To close, it may seem like a big task at hand. And it will
take years of hard work for us to put out a strong suicide
prevention campaign. But it will make a difference. And if I
have learned anything from learning the history of my people,
it is that we are strong, resilient people. Thank you for your
time. [Speaking in Native language.]

[The prepared statement of Mr. Miller follows:]
Prepared Statement of Robert ``Scottie'' Miller, Male Co-President,
National UNITY Council, Swinomish Indian Tribal Community
One of my earliest memories as a kid is from attending a funeral of
a neighbor boy I played with. His brother was my age and he was only a
few years older than us. He committed suicide by hanging himself in his
garage. The most shocking part of it now looking back is after his
death my small community did nothing to advocate for suicide prevention
or mental health.
Flash forward to a little less than a year ago now, a child in my
community is pretty much an orphan because his mom killed herself and
his dad has alcoholism which is most likely caused by some form of
intergenerational trauma. Another story that hits close to home is one
of my great uncles, so many times my dad has gone to his house to
repair bullet holes in his roof because he had tried taking his own
life. When he did take his own life everyone swept it under the rug
nobody called it a suicide it was more of a mere accident. One last
story that sticks out to me is one of the youth workers from a
neighboring tribe, about 2 years ago he shot himself in the heart and
bled out. You would've never thought he or any of the people in the
stories I've told would've had any mental health issues. I remember
them all being so happy. But it comes time to ask myself what are we
not doing in our communities to prevent suicide and make awareness of
mental health issues. In my culture we are supposed to be reserved, you
only cry during funerals and show little emotion, don't be vulnerable.
What I would advocate for is better overall treatment of mental
health across the country but intensively on reservations. Finding a
way to integrate our culture and practices with modern day mental
health medicine along with strong suicide prevention campaigns. At
Unity we have the `I will live' campaign this is to help teach the
youth that their lives matter and are sacred. I hope to revive that
campaign on my next term of the executive committee. It may seem like a
big task at hand and that it'll take years of hard work to make a
difference but if I have learned anything from learning the history of
my people it's that we are strong and resilient people.

______

Mr. Gallego. Thank you, Mr. Miller. The Chair now
recognizes Leticia Gonzales. OK, Leticia, try again. Leticia,
we cannot hear you. Leticia, I apologize. We are going to have
you call in. My staff will be reaching out to you right now, so
please just stand by. We just need you to be calling in while
you are still on camera in order for us to abide by the rules.
And please, everyone that is in Committee right now, just give
us a few minutes to work this out. Thank you.
[Recess.]
Mr. Gallego. We will come back to have testimony from
Leticia maybe in the order as we are doing these calls. But I
want to respect everyone's time here. I apologize, Leticia. You
will have an opportunity to make sure that you are heard. Let
me move on now.

I want to thank the panel of witnesses for the testimony,
reminding the Members that Committee Rule 3(d) imposes a 5-
minute limit on questions. The Chairman will now recognize
Members for any questions they may wish to ask the witnesses. I
will start by recognizing myself for 5 minutes. And let me
switch to my headset here because I think it is going to be
better for you guys to hear me.
OK. Thank you all for being here to testify today. My first
question for all of our witnesses is regarding the coronavirus
pandemic and how it has taken a terrible toll on both
Americans' physical and mental health. I am particularly
concerned with how the pandemic has affected Indigenous
peoples' mental health given how hard-hit Indian Country has
been. In your own experience and the experience of your
communities, how would you say the current pandemic has
impacted Native youth mental health and Native youth's ability
to access mental health care?
Why don't we start with Marco, and then we will go to
Scottie, then Cheyenne, and then Leticia, if we have been able
to work out the comms issue? Marco, please give us your
perspective.
Mr. Ovando. Gladly. In the wake of the COVID-19 pandemic--I
live in a very small rural community as it is anyway--and
access to even the basic necessities such as water, hand
sanitizer, and masks have been extremely difficult to achieve,
especially out here in the middle of nowhere, essentially.
Mental health-wise, the youth have been struggling in a sense
that they cannot see their friends, their family.
Another key aspect of my community is that everyone is all
related to each other in such a small town and come from
various large families that intermingle with each other. And
overall, they can't see their family, their friends. But they
can stay at home per executive orders put in place by our
tribal council. So, it has been a really tough time for them to
grasp that sort of new reality of staying home to keep safe
from a threat that they can't see, touch, smell, a threat that
they don't even know exists, pretty much, since we have no
cases on the reservation as of now.
However, I do work with the logistical side of our Tribe's
Emergency Operations Center. And what we have established is
kind of like a pen pal program for youth in our community to
engage with the elders of our community, because they are also
feeling similar aspects of being neglected, alone. And that is
just not in our Shoshone or Paiute ways to treat an elder. So,
we set up a pen pal program to connect our youth and our elders
together to pretty much get to know each other, offer words of
advice, share stories, share their life achievements, just
things to keep them mentally strong and fit and just to keep
them ready to go. Another thing that we have going on over here
is that our EOC----
Mr. Gallego. Thank you, Marco. I want to make sure I get to
the other witnesses and respect their time also.
Scottie, could you describe to us what you are feeling and
what your community is feeling?
Mr. Miller. It has been very hard for my community and
other tribes around me. Where I am from, we are very social
people all around the state. Spring and summer is time for
canoe races, powwows, canoe journey, stick games, any kind of
community events. This is a time for all of us to get together.
And it has been hard with not having school and other social
things. We have community events here like usually three or
four times a month. And those have been canceled. So, that is
hard.
But I have learned that my community is really good at
rallying. We have gotten grants and put together food boxes,
masks. We have done a lot of stuff for our community. I am
proud of that. But it has been tough on mental health for all
the youth around.
Mr. Gallego. Cheyenne, could you give us a perspective?
Ms. Kippenberger. I definitely have been able to see
firsthand the significance of the impact of COVID on my own
community. My community consists of several different
reservations, mine being in a very populated urban area. As far
as accessibility, we have been very fortunate in being able to
have masks, hand sanitizer, soap, along those lines. But I have
also seen the mental impact that it has taken on the youth, as
well as the adults within our community. It has been difficult
trying to handle all of the cancellations. I think the best way
to put it kind of feels like the rug has been ripped out from
under all of us. And the new sense of normalcy. We are working
with the transitions. But we are going to continue to keep our
spirits strong, uplift each other, and stay connected through
social media platforms. And if that means having Zoom calls
weekly, we will manage that and we will make it happen.
Mr. Gallego. Thank you, Cheyenne. I'd like to move back now
to--I think we have Leticia full up on comms. Leticia, are you
there?
Ms. Gonzales. Yes, I am. Can you hear me now?
Mr. Gallego. We can hear you. Leticia, why don't we go and
do your opening statement? And then we will move on to
questions from other Members of Congress. Can we reset the
timer for Leticia to 5 minutes?
Leticia, you are ready to go. Thank you.

Ms. Gonzales. Thank you. Hello, everyone. And thank you for
having me today. I am very honored to speak on behalf of this
important topic that plagues our Indian community. I am going
to go ahead and introduce myself in my Native tongue.
[Speaking in Native language.] Hello. My name is Leticia
Gonzales, and I come from the valley where the water flows,
today known as Bishop, California. And I am a member of the
Bishop Paiute Tribe. I reside here on the Bishop Paiute
Reservation. And I currently work at our Indian Health Clinic
as a youth prevention worker in our behavioral health
department. When I am speaking on mental health and advocating
for mental health with our Native youth, I like to educate them
on the term ``intergenerational trauma.''
And I think that this is at the forefront of our many
issues that we face as Native youth, especially when we speak
on behalf of mental health. Intergenerational trauma is a
psychological term which asserts that trauma can be transferred
between generations. Many of our communities, our nations
across Indian Country, have been faced with many traumas. Even
facing today, when we are being very plagued by the
coronavirus, it is something that is a traumatic event, current
event, facing our Native American communities. And it is
something that we need to bring to the forefront, and we need
to make sure that we are educating all of our people about
mental health and taking care of their mental health today.
Therefore, we do not face the same uncertainties that
historical trauma and intergenerational trauma has brought upon
our people.
[Connection lost.]
Mr. Gallego. Leticia, are you there? Leticia, if you need a
moment to gather yourself, we absolutely understand. Or if you
are having a comms issue, please just give us a heads up. OK.
Did we lose her? OK.
We are going to move back to questions now. I believe next
up in terms of recognition is our good friend, Delegate San
Nicolas from Guam. Thank you.
Mr. San Nicolas. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. Thank
you for putting this very important hearing together. And thank
you to our witnesses for your testimony. As an Indigenous
person myself, I can directly relate to the experiences you are
sharing. I, too, at one point in time, was diagnosed with
depression and anxiety. It is really something that never goes
away. And I would like to first thank all of you for being so
open and sharing what your experiences are.
One of the things that I found growing up in my Indigenous
community was that talking about it is something that is very
difficult for young people to do. It is challenging because
there is the stigma that comes with it, especially when you
have very close-knit communities and you say something one day
and everybody finds out about it tomorrow. And then there is
the other side of the coin where even talking about it is
challenging because the access to services and the ability to
get the help that you need is so much more limited when you
come from communities that just don't have access to it. So,
those two things, I find they get in the way. They get in the
way of us being able to identify. And they get in the way of us
being able to treat and to help.
So, I wanted to ask each of you to, I guess, share your
experiences. Are you finding that, among the youth, there is
that stigma issue about talking about mental health issues? And
is part of it due to the difficulty in getting the services?
And if the services were a lot more accessible, do you think
that we would be able to help a lot more of our youth that are
dealing with this? Cheyenne?
Ms. Kippenberger. I do see within not only my community but
as well in the communities that I had the privilege of being
able to visit as well as the Native youth that I have been able
to meet all over Indian Country, stigmatization is a very large
issue within all of our communities. I do think that having
that understanding of why we as Indigenous people express our
emotions in a different manner is extremely important. And I do
feel that accessibility for funding is a great issue,
especially considering how diverse Indian Country is.
As I mentioned before, I am from a reservation that is
considered ``city.'' But we have a reservation that is over 2
hours out of the city that is practically remote, as well as
knowing that there are other communities within Indian Country
that are in food deserts. There are more than a handful of
communities that are set up to where they are having to drive
hours just to see a doctor at IHS.
So, I do believe that breaking down the stigmatization is
one barrier but also tackling down the issue of accessibility
to these different facilities as such would be the next thing
that we need to take care of.
Mr. San Nicolas. Thank you.
Scottie?
Mr. Miller. In my community, we do have some mental health
counselors. That is really good. But it is almost kind of
awkward just because of the stigma about it, and then you have
to walk all the way through our tribal offices, not like the
rest of our health facilities. So, it is kind of awkward.
You know, I am from a really small town, a really small
reservation. And it is almost kind of like if somebody were to
see you walk in, they would be like, ``Oh, why does he need to
go in there?'' Like a ``What is wrong with him?'' kind of
thing. So, part of it, I think, would just be education to
everybody and advocating that you don't have to have a problem
to go to a counselor and just letting people know that it is
normal and that it is OK to need help and it is OK just to go
talk to somebody. But, yes, I would just say that would be the
best, like to destigmatize everything and make it so that youth
have access.
Mr. San Nicolas. Marco?
Mr. Ovando. In my community, we are a very open and
emotional people, sharing our emotions. We are very loud,
prosperous. But we also cry and do all those other sorts of
things that changed when colonization happened, the
assimilation of a Western culture or this macho-ism pretty much
came in where you have to hide your emotions.
Me, being a male, I am pretty much told I have to hide my
emotions at all times. And I have to have this stoic,
stereotypical face of a Native American. That is just not the
way that my community runs. And for us personally here on the
Duck Valley Indian Reservation, that stigmatism is still very
prevalent and very strong. But it is moving forward, in a way,
to destigmatize that and to accept people for who they are and
accept people as emotional people.
Mr. San Nicolas. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. My time is up. I
yield back.
Mr. Gallego. Thank you, Representative San Nicolas and
thank you to the witnesses.
I now recognize Representative Haaland for 5 minutes.
Ms. Haaland. Thank you, Chairman. And thank you all. And
Leticia, if you can still hear us, I thank you so much, all of
you, for being here today and sharing what you have shared with
us. I absolutely believe that generational trauma is something
that plagues our people. I have experienced it. I have helped
my daughter through it. And I just hope that we all--you know,
we have our traditional healing and our elders to help us
through these things for a purpose.
And I believe very strongly that going to the people in our
respective tribes who know how to help us, who know how to take
that hurt out of our bodies, take what is plaguing us away from
us and then, from there out, protecting ourselves from those
awful things poisoning our bodies and our minds. I know that is
real. And I applaud all of you for staying close to your people
and staying close to the people who you know can help you. I
also know that, right now in our history, it is a very
challenging time.
My daughter came home the other day crying and saying she
felt guilty for being so comfortable, for having a warm bed to
sleep in and a hot shower in the morning, when so many people
are out there suffering.
And I want you all to know that there are millions of
people to share that burden with you. Don't weigh ourselves
down with so much of the hurt that is going on in our country
right now. You need to take care of yourselves so that you can
help other people. You need to be healthy, get your rest, and
make sure that you are doing everything you can to nurture your
own bodies and your minds so that you can be of help to your
peers. That is so important.
So, I thank you all so much. I am going to try to get
through some questions because I probably talked too long. I
will start with you, Marco. Thank you for your testimony. What
do you believe is the connection between traditional teachings
and mental wellness?
Mr. Ovando. Thank you so much for the question,
Representative Haaland. For me personally, I believe the
connection between wellness and spiritual connection is the
simple fact of community. All of our tribal nations, whether
you are from Florida, Washington, California, we all have this
strong sense of community, whether we are a large tribe or a
small tribe. And that interconnectedness of leaning on
someone's back has always been there. And during that time of
assimilation and cultural genocide, that sense of community was
tried to be broken by the atrocities committed by the United
States. So, for that, to answer your question--our sense of our
community needs to be re-established, reconnected and tell
everyone that we are there for them.
No one is facing anything alone when you are in a Native
community. We are all in this together. And that term has been
used so many times throughout the last month, especially in
this pandemic. But that term has never been more important than
it is now.
Ms. Haaland. Thank you so much. Cheyenne, in what ways can
the Federal health and wellness programs better support tribal
communities?
Ms. Kippenberger. Thank you for your question,
Representative Haaland. I do believe that through Federal
health and wellness programs, we are able to uplift and support
these communities all over Indian Country. But again, going
back to that cultural awareness, that historical understanding,
I think it really plays into the approach of how we decide to
implement these programs. I have definitely seen firsthand how
positive changes that we want to see, when they come from
within our community, our community members are much more
inclined to respond to those as opposed to outsiders coming
into the community trying to implement those things.
And I do believe with the support of these Federal health
and wellness programs, if we can do it for our people, by our
people from the very inside, the heart of the community, we
will see the successes that we need, and our people will be
able to break these cycles. Thank you very much.
Ms. Haaland. Thank you. And Scottie, I just have a few
seconds left. Why do you believe that your community has had a
hard time discussing mental health and healing?
Mr. Miller. We have a hard time honestly, I think, just
because it is so small and that it is so different from my
culture--you know, not being vulnerable. But we do have other
ways of healing, I guess, other than modern medicine, like with
traditional blessings, cedar. We have a couple different
religious-type blessings. But I would just say, small
community, res gossip, just the stigma around it and to help
take that away, break down the barrier and kind of outreach to
the community. That would help.
Ms. Haaland. Thank you very much.
Chairman, I yield.
Mr. Gallego. Thank you, Representative Haaland. I also want
to just make a friendly reminder. Leticia Gonzales is back on
and is able to answer questions. So, if any Member wants to ask
her questions the next go around, she is available. Next, I
have on my list Representative Garcia, Chuy Garcia, from
Chicago.
Mr. Garcia. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you so much
to the panelists who come from different parts of the country
and the diversity of the Native American communities. We are
about 4 months into this pandemic. And while much is still
unknown about COVID-19, we do know that it has devastated our
country. It is unlike anything we have ever experienced. And we
also know that certain communities have been more impacted than
others.
As an example, while the number of cases among the Navajo
Nation is on the downward trend, let's not forget that only
just a few days ago, the tribe had a higher death toll than any
other single state. COVID-19 did not cause these outcomes, but
it is certainly exposing the inequities. The disproportionate
devastation this public health crisis is having on Native
American communities lays bare the U.S. government's failure to
adequately address limited health services, broken
infrastructure, and dire economic crisis. And many tribes are
facing, of course, intergenerational trauma.
Even before the pandemic, many of us knew that the
Indigenous populations in the United States had an increased
risk of mental health problems. These existing disparities
coupled with the coronavirus pandemic have undoubtedly resulted
in worsening mental health, especially for Native youth. Marco,
how are organizations like UNITY helping Native youth overcome
obstacles, including mental health issues, in their own
communities?
Mr. Ovando. Thank you so much for the question,
Representative Garcia. Organizations such as UNITY offer a
bright spot in many of the youths' lives. Even before the
pandemic, UNITY was always there to provide that bright spot of
community and self-awareness and ambition, to be something
bigger than you are, something bigger than your tribe,
something to represent all of Indian Country.
It is phenomenal in reaching Native youth through all
aspects, and especially in social media where social media
counts more than ever in connecting youth from across the
country while we are all stuck at home on our home
reservations, home cities and towns, just at home staying safe
during this pandemic. A fellow panelist on the panel with me,
Leticia Gonzales, we met through UNITY. And we provided that
sense of community and comfort that we needed when we were
going through some hardships.
And now she is a lifelong friend and a sister, pretty much,
from the same sister nation. So, stuff like that has helped us
greatly, as organizations like UNITY have greatly achieved that
through their social media platforms and connecting us with
each other.
Mr. Garcia. Thank you. In your remarks, you mentioned the
obligation that Congress has to Indian Country. In what ways do
you think Congress could support mental and spiritual health of
Native communities?
Mr. Ovando. Congress could definitely help with increasing
funding for mental health, and any sort of funding to
Indigenous communities across this country in general is a
great benefit to all the people and part of the obligations of
the United States to the first peoples of this country through
the various treaties that have been broken.
Mental health especially can be especially addressed with
increased funding, increased access, like Cheyenne said
earlier, for patients to reach those much-needed clinics,
psychiatrists, psychologists, to get the necessary resources
needed to help benefit them and to help benefit their mental
being.
Mr. Garcia. Thank you.
Cheyenne, in your testimony, you mentioned insufficient and
inaccurate research around mental health care in Native
communities. What is missing, and how can Congress help bridge
that gap?
Ms. Kippenberger. Thank you for your question,
Representative Garcia. I do think that living in the society
that we do in this day and age, a lot of the things that we
move forward on are based on research and data and that
accuracy of those statistics, for instance. And I do feel like,
although we are such a small population in the United States--
and I understand the difficulties there may be to conduct some
of this research, but it needs to be done. And there are a lot
of factors that need to be taken into consideration when this
research is conducted.
As mentioned before, Indian Country is extremely diverse.
And I guess, being more specific, that could be financial
stability, location, even cultural teachings, languages. And to
bridge that gap, I really do believe that we need to have
people on the ground actively in these communities trying to
understand all of these different factors, take them into
account, be able to sit there, look at everything in front of
them and sit here and say we have an inaccessibility problem.
We have a funding problem. We have a cultural barrier that we
need to overcome. And the only way for us to battle the issue
that we have, which is this mental health crisis, we need to
have that research to back it. And we need to know what we are
battling as well as how we can battle it successfully.
[Speaking in Native language.] Thank you.
Mr. Garcia. Thank you very much. My time is up. I yield
back, Mr. Chair.
Mr. Gallego. I now recognize Representative Soto for 5
minutes.
Mr. Soto. Thanks. First of all, I want to welcome Ms.
Kippenberger. I am representing Florida. We beam with pride
knowing you are the reigning Miss Indian World. And we know
Florida has been hard-hit by COVID-19, particularly recently. I
am speaking here from Kissimmee, Florida as we have this
meeting.
The Seminole Tribe and the Miccosukee Tribe have also been
hit pretty hard by COVID-19, including losing an important
decorated Vietnam War veteran, Don Osceola, who was born a
Seminole and became a member of the Miccosukee Tribe. And the
paper had covered our unfortunate loss of him.
The Seminole Tribe has been the only government in Indian
Country that has been approved for disaster declaration by the
President. And we think there should be more approved. In the
meantime, does that disaster relief help provide mental health
services for COVID-19 in Seminole Country, Ms. Kippenberger?
Ms. Kippenberger. Thank you for your question,
Representative Soto. I am not knowledgeable on the declaration
that you are referring to. But of the knowledge I do have in
regards to the availability and funding that we have for our
behavioral health, what I do know is it is primarily tribally-
funded.
I don't want to be incorrect in how I say this, but I do
know that there is Federal grant money that is flowing through
these services. I do see that because we have this department,
this entire facility that is dedicated to treating our
community members. I do think that we have started to see a
difference in the mental state of our entire community. I think
just knowing that it is right there on our own reservation
makes a very large difference. As of right now, it is only on
our Hollywood Reservation.
One of my dreams is to see it on all of our reservations.
But I do think even if someone is in the state of contemplation
of should I go in there, should I make an appointment, should I
make a call and maybe just see what it is, that, I believe, is
already tackling that first step of the stigma. I think that my
Tribe has been very proactive in trying to implement this, in
trying to get our community members to utilize it.
Mr. Soto. Thank you, Ms. Kippenberger. And the Committee
should note unfortunately Florida ranks last or near last in
mental health spending statewide. So, the Federal health and
wellness programs are absolutely critical for our Native
American tribes in Florida because of the lack of funding. I
wanted to ask is there any unique mental trauma that Native
American girls face, Ms. Kippenberger, that we may or may not
be aware of?
Ms. Kippenberger. Yes, and I greatly appreciate this topic
being brought up. Our Indigenous women here in the United
States, as well as Canada, are being affected by an epidemic
called the ``Missing and Murdered Indigenous Women and Girls.''
Our women not only are hyper-sexualized, but they are
vulnerable in these instances. And we are being hit extremely
hard by human trafficking or having high rates of women and
girls going missing.
We are not having recovery of these things early enough or
even at all. Our women are extremely vulnerable to many of
these things. And I have mentioned before it is an epidemic. I
do think that it is something that needs to be more well-known
to everybody. I do have a general knowledge of ``Missing and
Murdered Indigenous Women and Girls,'' but there are other
people that are much more knowledgeable. And I do feel that it
would be more respectable for me to be able to allow those
people to speak on that, but thank you.
Mr. Soto. Thank you.
Mr. Ovando and Mr. Miller, we know broadband is key to
connect Indian Country isolation; it can cause mental health
issues, barriers to education, and starting a business. But how
important is it that we improve broadband in Indian Country? I
will start with Mr. Ovando and go to Mr. Miller.
Mr. Ovando. Thank you for the question, Representative
Soto. Broadband, especially for my reservation, is critical. It
is a lifeline for the outside world. My reservation is 100
miles north and south of the next largest town. And even then,
those towns are small compared to the metropolises of the West
Coast.
For us, broadband is a way for us to connect with our
banking, our families off the reservation, and just engage with
outside life in general. And access to broadband has been
evermore the topic of my Tribe's agenda to address to increase
because they see how vital it is for our students to succeed,
our elderly to connect with their friends from across the
country, and just for people in general to enjoy what the rest
of America has to offer. So, for us, broadband is a lifeline.
Mr. Soto. Mr. Chairman, with your indulgence, can we have
Mr. Miller answer? Thank you.
Mr. Miller. Thank you. On my reservation, we do have
limited broadband. We do have a casino at our tribal offices.
But other than that, it is really hard to get. We don't have
much phone service either. There is only one Wi-Fi company who
is almost willing to serve half the rez. And it is really hard
to access. But like Marco said, it would really help our
education and other services that we have.
But sometimes it is almost scary going to other places on
the reservation because my phone won't work. So, if there is an
accident or something happens, I don't know what I am going to
do, but yes.
Mr. Soto. Thank you, Mr. Miller. My time has expired.
Mr. Gallego. Thank you, Representative Soto.
I would like to now give an opportunity to Leticia
Gonzales. I think we have taken care of all the comms issues
which does highlight, I think, what Representative Soto was
trying to get at, that probably one of the basic things we can
do is bring broadband to Indian Country, if anything, both for
obviously economic reasons, educational reasons. But, yes, you
can even receive mental health care through the internet. I
suffer from PTSD and sometimes receive my therapy through my
therapist over my iPad. So, there are a lot of people that can
benefit from that.
Leticia, I apologize. But you do have your 5 minutes.
Ms. Gonzales. OK. I just want to make sure that everyone
can hear me OK.
Mr. Gallego. Yay.
Ms. Gonzales. Perfect. Thank you. OK. Thank you very much
for having me. I am very excited to be here. And I apologize
for the connectivity issues.
[Speaking in Native language.] Hello. My name is Leticia
Gonzales. I come from the Bishop Paiute Tribe in Bishop,
California. I am a member of the Bishop Paiute Tribe, and I
reside here in Bishop, California on the Bishop Paiute
Reservation.
I am very honored to be here to speak on behalf of such an
important issue that plagues our Indigenous communities all
across this Nation. And as I was formerly speaking about, I was
wanting to address intergenerational trauma and how this is
affecting us in today's current events with the novel
coronavirus plaguing many of our tribal communities, so hitting
us very hard in our communities that face mental health
disparities at high rates, alarmingly high rates.
We need to do what we can to bring mental health resources
to our communities and help our people heal and turn this into
something that doesn't turn into intergenerational trauma for
our future generations because it is something that can
definitely turn into trauma for many more generations to come.
That is why I think it is super important for our people to
have the mental health care and bring mental health care to the
forefront for our Indigenous communities. Thank you.

[The prepared statement of Ms. Gonzales follows:]
Prepared Statement of Letitia Gonzales, UNITY/OJJDP Peer Guide
Ambassador, Bishop Paiute Tribe
As a Native Youth in today's world so much comes to mind when I
hear ``Mental Health''. There are many disparities that the Indigenous
people of these lands face that have harmful effects on their mental
health, Intergenerational Trauma, being at the forefront of these many
issues. A psychological term which asserts that trauma can be
transferred in between generations--is the definition that appears when
searching the very term on the internet. As a California Native
American trauma that generations, not so far ahead of my own, have
faced being forced assimilation--more specifically to my own tribal
people, Bishop Paiute (Nuumu), the land we inhabit is rich in many
natural resources that settlers sought to deem their own, said settlers
lured the Nuumu to Fort Independence, CA on the 4th of July for a
``celebration'' where the Paiute people where then marched at gunpoint
over 200 miles to Fort Tejon, south of what is known today as
Bakersfield, CA with temperatures that reach over 100 degrees. 200 plus
Paiute's lost their lives in that march and as a result of the March.
This story is my tribes own, although, sadly many other tribes have
similar traumas that were brought upon their people as well. Something
many of the tribal people of the United States sadly share in common
relating to Intergenerational Trauma is, Boarding Schools, the U.S.
Government used this tactic, removing children from their parents,
culture, and traditional language, to strip these children of their
roots and further more assimilate them. Indigenous Children were ripped
away from their families and way of life, violently mistreated for
speaking their only known language and worse if caught doing so in
these Boarding Schools. Today, when we speak of the effects these
majorly misfortunate events have on our people we speak about how it
impacts not only those who suffered from firsthand but also those
generations that follow. Substance Use Disorders, Suicide rates are 1.6
times higher than the U.S. all--races rate, higher domestic violence
rates, and a variety of other Mental Health issues. These are all the
issues that I believe is the product of these specific traumas
resulting in intergenerational trauma. In terms of today's traumas
intertwining with intergenerational trauma, today the Novel Corona
Virus that plaguing many of our tribal communities at highly alarming
rates, all points back to when Indigenous peoples were exposed to
infectious diseases when coming in contact with European Settlers, as a
Prevention Worker in a behavioral health clinic I knew I had to do my
part in making sure our youth aren't impacted as severely as their
ancestors were, although there still is trauma relating back to the
experiences that our ancestors faced almost so similarly. Although,
having to convert to remote and virtual sessions we oftentimes use
culture as prevention, relying on teachings of our traditional values
to aid our mental health.

https://www.ihs.gov/sites/newsroom/themes/responsive2017/
display_objects/documents/factsheets/BehavioralHealth.pdf

https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK44242/

______

Mr. Gallego. Trying on the technological side, did you want
to just kind of fill in or answer the question about how
broadband would help improve the situation, especially for our
Native American youth on tribal lands?
Ms. Gonzales. Yes, most definitely. Thank you for that
question. It is so important, especially since everyone is
social distancing. And in order for our people to receive the
mental health care that they need, they need the connectivity.
And they need to be able to be connected with the resources
that bring them to their therapist or their psychologist, and
so on and so forth. So, it is a huge issue and something that
really needs to be brought forth for our people to receive the
mental health care that they need.
Mr. Gallego. Thank you, Leticia. And I just want to check.
Do we have any other new Members that joined since we started?
I just wanted to make sure if there are any Members--I do not
see any. Staff cannot actually answer this question, so I am
just looking through. I do not see any other Members, and no
one has spoken up.
So, I would like to thank all of our witnesses for sharing
their incredible knowledge and stories with us today. And,
again, thank you to those watching on livestream. As I stated
before, members of the Committee may have some additional
questions for the witnesses. We will ask you to respond to
these in writing. Under Committee Rule 3(o), members of the
Committee must submit witness questions within 3 days following
the hearing, and the hearing record will be open for 10
business days for these responses.
If there is no further business, without objection, the
Committee stands adjourned.

[Whereupon, at 3:59 p.m., the Subcommittee was adjourned.]

[ADDITIONAL MATERIALS SUBMITTED FOR THE RECORD]

Supplementary Testimony
by Gloria O'Neill, Chair
Alyce Spotted Bear and Walter Soboleff Commission on Native Children
in response to testimony presented at the July 16, 2020 Hearing
Chairman Gallego and members of the Committee, thank you for the
opportunity to provide supplemental testimony on the topic of mental
health and healing as it relates to Native youth on behalf of the Alyce
Spotted Bear and Walter Soboleff Commission on Native Children. The
Commission is charged with conducting a comprehensive study on the
programs, grants, and supports available for Native children, both at
government agencies and on the ground in Native communities, with the
goal of developing a sustainable system that delivers wrap-around
services to Native children. The Commission will examine the unique
challenges Native children face and make recommendations on improving
the current system by building on the strengths and leadership of
Native communities.
We appreciate Chairman Gallego and the Committee's understanding
and concern for the topics addressed by the testimonies of four Native
youths which mirror those of the Commission and are consistent with the
goal of the Commission's work. The testimony provided by Marco Ovando,
Letitia Gonzales, Cheyenne Kippenberger, and Robert ``Scottie'' Miller
reflects the critical nature of this issue within Native communities
and demonstrates the urgent need for accessible mental health care for
youth on reservations and in rural and urban Native communities. We
also appreciate the interest of Chairman Gallego and the Committee in
improving mental health services in Indian Country and their
willingness to take the time to listen to those most affected, our
youth.
Mental health issues linked to intergenerational trauma are not
uncommon in Native communities, and the need for community-based and
culturally informed healing processes, especially where the effects of
intergenerational trauma are concerned, cannot be emphasized enough.
Furthermore, mental health care providers in Indian Country need to
understand not only historical trauma, but cultural differences and
ways of healing to ensure that the healing process has a component of
cultural connection in order to fully support mental wellness.

However, the healing process is hindered by the lack of mental
health resources and care available in Indian Country; for some
communities, there are no accessible mental health resources. Building
tribal capacity with programs and resources doing work in Native
communities is essential to develop and implement the programs that
will incorporate culture and address mental health issues in the most
effective way. Given the diversity of Native communities, both urban
and rural, and reservations, it is important to remember that each will
have their own needs and best practices for addressing the challenges
in their communities.

Due to the COVID-19 pandemic, the inaccessibility of
mental health resources has become even more prevalent. The
negative mental effects of social distancing measures
disparately affect Native youth. The lack of in-person
socializing is keeping youths from seeing their friends,
extended family members, and the support of community
cultural activities that have been put on hold or canceled.
While face-to-face interactions have decreased for safety
reasons, this has led to a decline in mental health. In
regard to the use of digital platforms for social and
educational purposes, it is important to note that not all
communities have reliable broadband service, which makes
staying connected more difficult. The increasing use of
telehealth coupled with broadband issues in rural Native
communities and reservations have posed challenges for not
only health care, but also mental health services.
Expanding broadband services in these communities is
essential for community connectedness and the delivery of
resources across Indian Country to provide the care that
Native youth not only need, but deserve.

Mental health support should be made more readily
available in academic institutions in order to provide more
comprehensive aid in all aspects of a child's life. Trauma
can occur to children at any age, and so appropriate mental
health resources and programs need to be ready to provide
services from early childhood onwards. Bureau of Indian
Education (BIE) schools have behavioral health resources
for their students, which should work in collaboration with
other mental health services for consistent care. Mental
health support in schools is a practice which should be
expanded and offered to all Native youth in their academic
endeavors, whether kindergarten through 12th grade,
vocational training, or secondary schooling. Supporting
mental health in educational settings is a critical tool to
decrease the achievement gap. Education surrounding mental
health should also be increased in order to lessen the
stigma surrounding mental health and finding support.

It is important to note the mental health considerations
when Native youth interact with the justice system.
Victimization, domestic violence, and substance use can
result in interactions with the justice system in which
Native youth will need mental health support.

The Department of Health and Human Services oversees many
different administrations, offices, and programs that
interact with Native youth. For example, the Administration
for Children and Families has several offices which are
focused on the well-being of children and the issues of
trauma as they affect the mental of children and families,
but there is little coordination between the programs, even
if they are serving the same communities. The existing silo
structure for programs can be improved through
communication and collaboration between existing
administration, offices, and programs; Native communities
and their youths would benefit from coordinated efforts
between government programs to ensure care and support is
provided in effective ways.

Refining and implementing the most supportive healing
processes is contingent on research and data on Native
communities and their available resources. However, more
accurate research is necessary. The current lack of
research makes it difficult to comprehensively support
communities; in order to fully understand the level of
need, accurate statistics are necessary not only to know
the most pressing community-specific needs, but to direct
funding and other resources in ways that are most effective
for these challenges facing Native youth today.

--  Mental health factors include suicide, drug and alcohol
abuse, domestic violence, etc., which can be results of
unresolved intergenerational trauma; all of these factors
should to be taken into consideration and respectfully
researched so that programs and resources can be distributed
accordingly.

--  Without accurate research and data, these components of
mental health will perpetuate and make it even more difficult
for the healing process to take place.
Conclusion
The focus of the Alyce Spotted Bear and Walter Soboleff Commission
on Native Children is the health and well-being of Native children.
Increasing funding is also critical to address the escalated needs of
Native communities due to the challenges caused by the COVID-19
pandemic. The challenge is to align the multiple agencies and
departments serving Native youth, break down silos, and coordinate ways
in which they can collaborate in order to best serve Native youths
through a wide, but cohesive array of programs. The government programs
and resources that are in place need to be fully funded and include
flexibilities and tribal set-asides so that culturally informed and
community-specific practices can be put in place. More research needs
to be conducted so that the care being provided is supportive of the
mental health of Native youth and more effective in treating,
educating, and providing them with resources so they cannot only heal,
but thrive. Increasing efforts to understand not only community
cultures, but their historical traumas will yield more positive
results. It is vital that we support the mental health of Native youth
disproportionately affected by the COVID-19 pandemic and beyond as they
and their communities heal from intergenerational trauma and other
factors which negatively affect mental health. We need to support our
most vulnerable populations and ensure that Native youth, the stewards
of our future, have access to mental health resources so that they can
heal and overcome the challenges they face in a manner that aligns with
their cultures and communities.

______

Supplementary Testimony
Submitted on behalf of Chicago Ozeena
in response to testimony presented at the July 16, 2020 Hearing
Chicago is an 18-year-old, Athabascan young adult. He currently
resides at Rights of Passage after 2 months at Covenant House. He grew
up traveling back and forth between Nome and Anchorage, Alaska. His
parents separated when he was 7. At 8 years old, he lived in Anchorage,
at 9 he lived in Nome, at 11 years old in Anchorage, and then back in
Nome. His mother lived in Anchorage; father lived in Nome. He has two
older siblings and two younger siblings. At 17 years old, he decided to
live with friends and, currently, has no relationship with his
siblings. He states there was ``too much going on, life situations.''
Chicago reports that ``Nome is a crazy town. You have to be careful of
certain people.'' He dropped out of school during his senior year
because ``it was annoying and too hard.'' He is still in contact with
both parents. He spoke with his father this morning and his mother 2
weeks ago. His mother currently lives in Fairbanks.
When Chicago turned 18, he moved out of Alaska. He lived in
Chicago, New York City, London, and visited 19 states. He reports that
Starbucks transferred him to various locations as a barista. He would
like to leave Alaska again, but is waiting for the Pandemic to end.
When asked, Chicago reports alcohol and marijuana use for both
parents. He states that his home life was ``busy--did not like the
feeling of home''. He clarifies that he felt safe, but there were
arguments and substance use.
Chicago is in his third month of employment at Walmart. His goal is
to become CEO of Walmart as he enjoys the business industry and is
happy with his job. He currently is in the maintenance department.
When asked about experience with mental health services in Alaska,
Chicago reports that he received counseling through Southcentral
Foundation from ages 10 to 14. He states that the services were for
anger management due to home situations and school. Chicago reports
``counseling was all right, but mom was always present, so it was hard
to express myself.'' Chicago feels that counseling would have been more
effective if it focused on him as a person and his mother was not
present for the sessions.

[all]
