- DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE APPROPRIATIONS FOR 2023

[House Hearing, 117 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE APPROPRIATIONS FOR 2023

_______________________________________________________________________
_______________________________________________________________________

HEARINGS

BEFORE A

SUBCOMMITTEE OF THE

COMMITTEE ON APPROPRIATIONS

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED SEVENTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

____________

SUBCOMMITTEE ON DEFENSE

BETTY McCOLLUM, Minnesota, Chair

TIM RYAN, Ohio
C. A. DUTCH RUPPERSBERGER, Maryland
MARCY KAPTUR, Ohio
HENRY CUELLAR, Texas
DEREK KILMER, Washington
PETE AGUILAR, California
CHERI BUSTOS, Illinois
CHARLIE CRIST, Florida
ANN KIRKPATRICK, Arizona

KEN CALVERT, California
HAROLD ROGERS, Kentucky
TOM COLE, Oklahoma
STEVE WOMACK, Arkansas
ROBERT B. ADERHOLT, Alabama
JOHN R. CARTER, Texas
MARIO DIAZ-BALART, Florida

NOTE: Under committee rules, Ms. DeLauro, as chair of the full
committee, and Ms. Granger, as ranking minority member of the full
committee, are authorized to sit as members of all subcommittees.

Chris Bigelow, Walter Hearne, Ariana Sarar, Jackie Ripke,
David Bortnick, Matthew Bower, William Adkins, Jennifer Chartrand,
Hayden Milberg, Paul Kilbride, Shannon Richter, and Kyle McFarland
Subcommittee Staff

____________

PART 2

Page
Department of Defense.................
------
1

National Geospatial-Intelligence
Agency and National Reconnaissance
Office..................................
------
77

U.S. Air Force and U.S. Space Force...
------
79

U.S. Indo-Pacific Command.............
------
157

United States Army....................
------
207

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

____________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

48-815                           WASHINGTON : 2022

COMMITTEE ON APPROPRIATIONS

----------
ROSA L. DeLAURO, Connecticut, Chair

MARCY KAPTUR, Ohio
DAVID E. PRICE, North Carolina
LUCILLE ROYBAL-ALLARD, California
SANFORD D. BISHOP, Jr., Georgia
BARBARA LEE, California
BETTY McCOLLUM, Minnesota
TIM RYAN, Ohio
C. A. DUTCH RUPPERSBERGER, Maryland
DEBBIE WASSERMAN SCHULTZ, Florida
HENRY CUELLAR, Texas
CHELLIE PINGREE, Maine
MIKE QUIGLEY, Illinois
DEREK KILMER, Washington
MATT CARTWRIGHT, Pennsylvania
GRACE MENG, New York
MARK POCAN, Wisconsin
KATHERINE M. CLARK, Massachusetts
PETE AGUILAR, California
LOIS FRANKEL, Florida
CHERI BUSTOS, Illinois
BONNIE WATSON COLEMAN, New Jersey
BRENDA L. LAWRENCE, Michigan
NORMA J. TORRES, California
CHARLIE CRIST, Florida
ANN KIRKPATRICK, Arizona
ED CASE, Hawaii
ADRIANO ESPAILLAT, New York
JOSH HARDER, California
JENNIFER WEXTON, Virginia
DAVID J. TRONE, Maryland
LAUREN UNDERWOOD, Illinois
SUSIE LEE, Nevada

KAY GRANGER, Texas
HAROLD ROGERS, Kentucky
ROBERT B. ADERHOLT, Alabama
MICHAEL K. SIMPSON, Idaho
JOHN R. CARTER, Texas
KEN CALVERT, California
TOM COLE, Oklahoma
MARIO DIAZ-BALART, Florida
STEVE WOMACK, Arkansas
CHUCK FLEISCHMANN, Tennessee
JAIME HERRERA BEUTLER, Washington
DAVID P. JOYCE, Ohio
ANDY HARRIS, Maryland
MARK E. AMODEI, Nevada
CHRIS STEWART, Utah
STEVEN M. PALAZZO, Mississippi
DAVID G. VALADAO, California
DAN NEWHOUSE, Washington
JOHN R. MOOLENAAR, Michigan
JOHN H. RUTHERFORD, Florida
BEN CLINE, Virginia
GUY RESCHENTHALER, Pennsylvania
MIKE GARCIA, California
ASHLEY HINSON, Iowa
TONY GONZALES, Texas
JULIA LETLOW, Louisiana

Robin Juliano, Clerk and Staff Director

(ii)

DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE APPROPRIATIONS FOR 2023

----------

Wednesday, May 11, 2022.

DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE

WITNESSES

HON. LLOYD J. AUSTIN III, SECRETARY OF DEFENSE
MICHAEL J. McCORD, UNDER SECRETARY OF DEFENSE (COMPTROLLER)/CHIEF
FINANCIAL OFFICER
GENERAL MARK A. MILLEY, CHAIRMAN, JOINT CHIEFS OF STAFF

Opening Statement of Chair McCollum

Ms. McCollum. I now call this meeting of the Defense
Subcommittee to order. This is a hybrid meeting, so I am going
to have to do a few housekeeping matters to make sure everyone
knows what is going to happen and how this is going to work.
Members joining virtually, once you start speaking there is
a slight delay before you are displayed on the main screen.
Speak into the microphone because it will activate the camera
displaying the speaker on the main screen. Do not stop your
remarks if you are not immediately seeing the screen switch. If
the screen does not change after several seconds, please make
sure you are not muted.
To minimize background noise and ensure the correct speaker
is being heard and displayed, we ask that you remain on mute
unless you have sought recognition. And I will call on you, or
if you need to seek recognition, please do so.
Myself or a staff designee may mute the participants'
microphone when they are not under recognition if there is
inadvertent background noise.
Members who are virtual, though, I want to remind you that
you are responsible for muting and unmuting yourselves, unless
we have a technical issue.
If I notice when you are recognized and having a technical
issue and you have not unmuted yourself, I will ask the staff
to send you a request to unmute yourself. Please accept the
request so that you are no longer muted.
And, finally, House rules would require me to remind you
that we have set up an email address in which members can send
anything they wish to submit in writing to any of our hearings.
That email address has been provided in advance to your staff.
This morning the subcommittee will receive testimony from
the Honorable Lloyd Austin, Secretary of Defense, General Mark
Milley, Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff. And to help
answer any extremely technical questions, we are joined today
by Under Secretary Mike McCord, Comptroller.
Gentlemen, thank you for participating, and I welcome you
to our subcommittee.
The Biden administration released its fiscal year 2023
budget request in March. As always, this subcommittee will have
an aggressive schedule to review the request, to make
adjustments, and pass the bill out of committee in June.
Our goal will be to go to the floor with the appropriations
bill in July and to get them to the President's desk by October
for his signature.
We both know that speed is of the essence because both here
at home and around the world democracy and democratic values
are under threat. Congress must make every effort to pass these
appropriations bill on time.
For fiscal year 2023, the President has proposed $762
billion within our subcommittee's jurisdiction. This is a $33
billion or 4.6 percent increase over what was enacted in fiscal
year 2022.
Make no mistake, we will ensure that the Department of
Defense has the resources it needs to protect our country.
But this top-line number, when you put in perspective--
let's think about it for a minute--in 2015, when we were still
fighting in Afghanistan, the Department received $5.60 billion.
That is an increase of spending over $200 billion in just 8
years.
And, yes, the world has changed, and it has changed rapidly
in recent years. And we have learned a lot. We have learned
from the war in Ukraine that it is not only important that we
have strong military deterrence, but we also must have a robust
diplomatic effort to rally the world in opposition to
authoritarianism.
We must ensure that we have both in order to protect our
national security. It is our responsibility as Congress to
strike the correct balance between defense, diplomacy, and
development.
The war on Ukraine has also made it clear that the
foundational task of properly maintaining, training, and
equipping a modern military is essential to our success in the
21st century conflicts. The poor performance of Russia and
their military has highlighted this very fact.
Taking care of our personnel, their families, providing our
servicemembers with the best training possible, ensuring
logistics challenges can be overcome, and giving decisionmakers
the best intelligence, these are all vital components of making
sure that our military can win in any conflict. Procurement,
modernization of course are important, but we will always want
to have the edge over our enemy.
It doesn't matter if we have 355 Navy ships with the most
advanced weapons if we cannot perform basic maintenance to keep
the ships in service. Investments in personnel and operation
and maintenance and health don't always drive the defense
budget debates, but last year they made up 63 percent, 63
percent of our bill.
We all know that there is no more critical investment than
in the life and health and safety of our servicemembers.
Members have been particularly alarmed with recent events. The
USS George Washington, where there have been several deaths,
including investigations into suicide. The Navy has launched
this investigation into what led to these terrible tragedies.
This subcommittee stands ready to work with you for any
additional funding for mental health services and any suicide
prevention programs that you should want more resources for.
We look forward to hearing from our witnesses how the
budget request prioritizes investments in our people, which are
the backbone of our force. I want to commend the Department for
proposing $3.1 billion in this budget for increasing resiliency
at installation, for energy efficiency, for its research and
development into clean energy.
As the largest consumer of fuel in the Federal Government,
the Department needs to do more to reduce its emissions, lower
the cost of energy, and to fight climate change, and our
subcommittee wants to work with you on these shared goals. And
we all know that climate change and addressing it is part of
our national security agenda.
Finally, several of us have had the opportunity to travel
to Eastern Europe in the last month to see firsthand the
importance of working with the soldiers and sailors and
marines, airmen and guards who are all doing whatever they can
to help Ukraine defend itself and promote security throughout
the region.
We look forward to hearing how this budget request and the
immediate threat of Russian aggression in Europe while making
investments in future capabilities in the Indo-Pacific region.
And, as you know, we sent over to the Senate the supplemental
support for Ukraine last night.
So, Secretary Austin, General Milley, Under Secretary
McCord, I want to thank you again for your service and the
service of your families to our country and for being here
ready to answer any questions we might have.
But before we hear your testimony, sir, I would like to
recognize our distinguished ranking member, Mr. Calvert, for
any opening comments he would have.
Mr. Calvert.

Opening Remarks of Mr. Calvert

Mr. Calvert. Thank you. Thank you, Chair McCollum.
I want to thank Secretary Austin and General Milley for
being here today to testify on the Department of Defense budget
request for fiscal year 2023.
Though I look forward to hearing about your priorities for
the coming fiscal year, I must note my disappointment in the
request both in the amount and substance.
As I said last year, I believe it is critical that we fund
the DOD at 3 to 5 percent above inflation to meet our national
defense requirements. The 4.6 requested for fiscal year 2023
would be sufficient historic levels, but due to this
administration's spending, inflation is soaring at rates we
have not seen since 1981.
Instead of accounting for these economic realities, the DOD
wrongfully budgeted for a 2.2 percent inflation rate in a time
where we must increase defense spending to keep pace with peer
adversaries. This administration is effectively proposing to
cut the Department of Defense.
America must continue to enforce the rules-based order that
we led in the enduring global security that we are involved in.
As we have seen in Ukraine, the world looks to the United
States to stand by democratic allies around the world. This
comes at a cost, but doing so is in our own national security
interest.
Republicans in the House and the Senate are united, just as
we were in fiscal year 2022, to ensure that our warfighters
have the tools they need to be ready, modernized, and lethal.
It is my hope that the majority follows that fiscal year
2022 conference framework and provide a sufficient funding to
DOD and that we pass our bills on time this year.
Along with my disappointment in the top-line funding level,
I also have serious concerns about some of the proposals by the
administration.
First, many of the services are continuing to pursue a
``divest to invest'' strategy. In some cases, like the Marine
Corps, I think this is appropriate. In others, I fear some
proposals are shortsighted and leave glaring capability gaps.
We cannot simply hope that the programs will meet the needs
of the warfighters. China, Russia, Iran, North Korea, nonstate
actors are continuing to invest in capabilities that threaten
our security as well as our allies.
I fail to understand how decommissioning 24 Navy ships,
divesting hundreds of aircraft, helps us maintain our strategic
combat advantage over these threats.
Budget prioritization must of course occur, but we must be
ready for a variety of conflicts to break out in multiple
warfighting domains.
Though I expect much of the discussion today to be focused
on the situation in Ukraine, I do not want us to lose sight on
what happened in the withdrawal from Afghanistan. Not only did
this decision weaken our strategic footprint in the region, it
directly led to the deaths of 13 U.S. servicemembers.
I look forward to hearing from you about what our enduring
requirements in this region are, along with what capability we
should be focused on in fiscal year 2023 appropriation bills.
Again, thank you for being here today. I look forward to
taking time to question you.
And I yield back my time.
Ms. McCollum. Thank you, Mr. Calvert.
The full committee chairwoman, Ms. DeLauro, will be joining
us later. But now it is my pleasure to recognize the former
chair of this subcommittee and now the full ranking member of
the committee, Ms. Granger.

Opening Remarks of Ms. Granger

Ms. Granger. Thank you, Chairman McCollum. I appreciate
that very much. And I would like to thank the witnesses for
appearing before us today.
The past several months have highlighted how important it
is that Congress prioritizes our national security and
adequately funds our military. Russia's unprovoked, illegal,
and appalling invasion of Ukraine must continue to be met with
strong resistance from the United States and our allies.
Adversaries like China, Iran, and North Korea must know that
America will stand firm with its allies and we have the ability
to win any fight.
While I commend the Department's swift response to the
ongoing conflict in Ukraine, I am disappointed by the
Department's fiscal year 2023 budget request. Inflation
continues to increase costs for all sections--sectors--and the
defense industry is not immune to its effects, despite
increased aggression from our adversaries, and once again the
Biden administration is shortchanging defense.
I hope we can reach a bipartisan consensus similar to the
one that led to the final passage of the fiscal year 2022
appropriation bills. This includes robust defense spending at a
rate much higher than requested by the administration. Congress
must ensure that our men and women in uniform have the tools
and the resources to meet and defeat our enemies. Now is not
the time to underfund the military.
And to close, I thank each of you for your service. I look
forward to hearing from you today.
And thank you, Madam Chair. I yield back.
Ms. McCollum. Thank you, Ms. Granger.
Gentlemen, your full written testimony will be placed in
the record. Members have lots of questions, as you can well
imagine, so feel free to give a summarized form of your
statements.
Secretary Austin, the floor is yours.

Summary Statement of Secretary Austin

Secretary Austin. Well, good morning, Chair McCollum,
Ranking Member Calvert, Ranking Member Granger, and all the
distinguished members of the committee. Thank you for the
chance to testify today in support of the President's budget
request for fiscal year 2023. It is great to be here with
General Milley, who has been an outstanding partner. I am also
pleased to be joined by our Comptroller, Under Secretary Mike
McCord.
Madam Chair, we are still focused on three key priorities
at the Department of Defense--defending our Nation, taking care
of our people, and succeeding through teamwork--and our budget
request helps us meet each of those priorities.
Our budget request seeks more than $56 billion for air
power platforms and systems and more than $40 billion to
maintain our dominance at sea, including buying nine more
battle force ships, and almost $13 billion to support and
modernize our combat credible land forces.
Our budget request also funds the modernization of all
three legs of the nuclear triad to ensure that we maintain a
safe, secure, and effective strategic deterrent.
And of course none of these capabilities matter much
without our people and their families. So we are seeking your
support for a 4.6 percent pay raise for our military and
civilian personnel and other special pay and benefits.
We also plan to invest in outstanding and affordable
childcare and in the construction of on-base child development
centers and in ensuring that all of our families can always put
good and healthy food on the table.
We are also deeply focused on the terrible problem of
suicide in the U.S. military. So we are increasing access to
mental healthcare, expanding telehealth capacities, and
fighting the tired old stigmas against seeking help.
And with your support, I have just ordered the
establishment of an independent review committee to help us
grapple with suicide, to better understand it, to prevent it,
and treat the unseen wounds that lead to it.
At the same time, we are still working hard to implement
the recommendations of the Independent Review Commission on
Sexual Assault. We know that we have a long way to go to rid
ourselves of this scourge, and our budget request seeks nearly
$480 million to do just that.
This is a leadership issue, and you have my personal
commitment to keep leading.
You are also seeing how much our leadership matters when it
comes to Ukraine. And last month I convened the first meeting
of what is now the Contact Group on Ukrainian Security. It is a
group of defense leaders from around the world committed to
supporting Ukraine after Russia's unprovoked and unjust
invasion. And it is an important new way for nations of good
will to intensify their efforts to help Ukraine better defend
itself both for today's urgent needs and for the long haul.
Now, with the help of Congress, the United States has been
able to deliver security assistance to Ukraine with
unprecedented speed and resolve and that has made a huge
difference on the ground. And President Zelenskyy made that
clear when I met with him last month in Kyiv, along with
Secretary of State Blinken.
Since January 2021, the United States has committed
approximately $4.5 billion in security assistance to Ukraine,
which includes the $150 million authorized by the President
last Friday.
Our most urgent goal continues to be sending the Ukrainians
the capabilities they need most right now, as the war has
shifted to the Donbas and to the south.
The coming weeks will be critical for Ukraine. Next week,
we expect to exhaust the drawdown authority that Congress
approved in March.
So, as you know, the President submitted a supplemental
budget request to Congress so that we can continue to meet
Ukraine's urgent requirements without interruption, and I
deeply appreciate the House's vote yesterday to approve that
request with bipartisan support. And I hope that the Senate
quickly follows.
The supplemental will provide funds for additional drawdown
authority. It will also provide more resources for the Ukraine
Security Assistance Initiative, for critical investments, and
for covering the operational costs of bolstering NATO's eastern
flank.
I want to thank all of you for your strong leadership
toward our shared goal of helping Ukraine defend itself and
supporting NATO.
Now, let me briefly mention a few other major efforts that
the Department is focused on.
As you know, the Department's pacing challenge remains
countering aggression from China. So this budget invests some
$6 billion in the Pacific Deterrence Initiative. And in keeping
with our new National Defense Strategy, we are going to enhance
our force posture, our infrastructure, our presence, and our
readiness in the Indo-Pacific, including the missile defense of
Guam.
At the same time, we must be prepared for threats that pay
no heed to borders, from pandemics to climate change. And we
must tackle the persistent threats posed by North Korea, Iran,
and global terrorist groups.
So I am proud that our budget seeks more than $130 billion
for research, development, testing, and evaluation, and it is
the largest R&D request that this Department has ever made.
This includes $1 billion for artificial intelligence, $250
million for 5G, nearly $28 billion for space capabilities, and
another $11 billion to protect our networks and develop a cyber
mission force.
Madam Chair, this budget maintains our edge, but it does
not take that edge for granted. So I ask this committee to
support the President's budget. And with the help of Congress,
we will continue to defend this Nation, take care of our
people, and support our allies and partners.
Thank you. And I look forward to your questions.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Summary Statement of General Milley

Ms. McCollum. Thank you, Mr. Secretary.
General Milley, the floor is yours.
General Milley. Chair McCollum and Ranking Member Calvert
and Ranking Member Granger, I am indeed privileged to be here
alongside the Secretary of Defense and Secretary McCord to
represent the soldiers, the sailors, the airmen, the marines,
the guardians of the United States Joint Force.
Our troops or the best led, best equipped, best trained,
most lethal, and most capable military force in the world
largely due to your continued support. Alongside our allies and
partners, at any given time approximately 400,000 of us are
currently standing watch in 155 countries and conducting
operations every day that keep Americans safe.
Currently, we are supporting our European allies and
guarding NATO's eastern flank in the face of the unnecessary
war of aggression by Russia against the people of Ukraine and
the assault on the democratic institutions and the rules-based
international order that have prevented great power war for the
last 78 years since the end of World War II.
We are now facing two global powers, China and Russia, each
with significant military capabilities, both who intend to
fundamentally change the current rules-based order. We are
entering a world that is becoming more unstable, and the
potential for significant international conflict between great
powers is increasing, not decreasing.
The United States military comprises one of the four key
components of national power--diplomatic, economic,
informational, and military--in order to protect the homeland
and sustain a stable and open international system.
In coordination with the other elements of power, we
constantly develop a wide range of military options for the
President as Commander in Chief and for this Congress to
consider.
As the United States military, we are prepared to deter,
and if necessary to fight and between against anyone who seeks
to attack the United States, our allies, or our significant and
vital national security interests.
The Joint Force appreciates the work that our elected
representatives do to ensure that we have the resources needed
to train, equip, and manage the force in order to be ready. We
thank the Congress for increasing last fiscal year's level of
military funding, and we look forward to your support for this
year's budget.
The Joint Force will deliver modernization and readiness
for our Armed Forces and security to the people of the United
States at the fiscal year budget request of $773 billion. This
budget will enable the decisions, the modernization, and the
transformation of the Joint Force in order to set and meet the
conditions of the operating environment that we are likely to
see in 2030 and beyond, the so-called change in the character
of war that we have discussed many times in the past. We will
work diligently to ensure the resources the American people
entrust to us are spent prudently in the best interest of the
Nation.
In alignment with the National Defense Strategy and the
forthcoming National Military Strategy, this budget delivers a
ready, agile, and capable Joint Force that will defend the
Nation while taking care of our people and working with our
partners and allies.
We are currently witness to the greatest threat to the
peace and security of Europe and perhaps the world in my 42,
almost 43 years of service in uniform. The Russian invasion of
Ukraine is threatening to undermine not only European peace and
stability, but global peace and stability, the one that my
parents and generations of Americans fought so hard to defend.
The islands of the Pacific and the beaches of Normandy bore
witness to the incredible tragedy that befalls humanity when
nations seek power through military aggression across sovereign
borders.
Despite this horrific assault on the institutions of
freedom, it is heartening to see the world rally and say never
again to the specter of war in Europe.
Your military stands ready to do whatever is directed in
order to maintain the peace and stability not only in the
European continent, but a peace that ensures global stability
and international order where all nations can prosper in peace.
We are also prepared and need to sustain our capabilities
anywhere else on the globe as well as our priority effort in
the Asia-Pacific region measured against our pacing challenge
of the People's Republic of China.
And in defense of our Nation, we must maintain competitive
overmatch in all the domains of war--space, cyber, land, sea,
and air.
The United States of America is at a very critical and
historic geostrategic inflection point. We need to pursue a
clear-eyed strategy of maintaining the peace through the
unambiguous capability of strength relative to China and
Russia.
This requires that we simultaneously maintain current
readiness and modernize for the future. If we do not do that,
then we are risking the security of future generations. And I
believe this budget is a major step in the right direction.
I look forward to your questions.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Inflation Plan for the Budget

Ms. McCollum. Thank you.
I have got three questions and succinct answers. I want to
be a good steward of time for my colleagues here up at the
podium.
Yesterday, President Biden referred to combating inflation
as his top domestic policy. Would you please share with the
committee the fiscal year 2023 budget request and how it was
built in the amount of program and cost growth, and then how
you worked inflation into that?
So, Secretary Austin, if you would start out with that. And
if you want to turn it over to Mr. McCord at any point, please
do so.
Secretary Austin. Well, thank you, Chair McCollum, and I
will provide some comments. And I certainly will invite
Secretary McCord to make some comments as well.
We built this budget based upon our National Defense
Strategy, which we just released, as you know, in classified
form. We were very diligent and careful to make sure that we
went after the capabilities that we needed to support that
strategy and I am confident that we were successful in doing
that.
And this budget provides us significant capability. And,
again, as we match those capabilities to what is needed to be
relevant in the work that we are pursuing in the Indo-Pacific
and also in Europe, I think that, again, this is a very healthy
budget and provides a significant capability.
When we built the budget, we had to snap a chalk line at
some point in time, as you always do when you build a budget.
And at that point in time we made some key assumptions. And I
will let Secretary McCord speak to that.
Ms. McCollum. Mr. Secretary.
Mr. McCord. Thank you.
Yes, as the Secretary said, the first line of effort of
course was building the budget to support the strategy and
implement the strategy. But parallel to that, I was conducting
a review, my team was, on what inflation was doing in calendar
year 2021, which was the period we were building the budget.
So we came in with an assumption that the GDP inflation
that we used would be about 2. We saw that that was increasing.
We doubled it, basically, to 4, 3.9 percent for 2022, as built
that price increase into 2023 and going forward. If you look at
the last 6 months of data, which we did not have then but have
now, that number is now 5, 5.3. So we are a little under.
But we, as the Secretary said, we did the best we could
with the information we had. We recognized that things have
changed a little since then. And as I described in my rollout
brief when the budget came out, we put about $14 billion a year
of additional pricing increase into each year of our 5-year
plan for goods and services, another $6 billion for higher
compensation.
So about $20 billion per year from last year's plan to this
year's plan just for the pricing increase on top of the
strategy-driven specific program choices.

INTELLIGENCE DIPLOMACY

Ms. McCollum. So thank you for that.
So inflation, as I said, the President is focused on
combating it. And I know you will work diligently with both
sides of the aisle as well as our staff as we move forward if
we have any inflation issues that need to be addressed. But
thank you for that answer.
In the run-up to the Russian invasion of Ukraine, the Biden
administration engaged in an unprecedented campaign to
declassify intelligence, one I fully supported knowing what I
was being briefed on and what I thought the American public and
the world should know.
Could you maybe expand for this committee how important the
role of intelligence diplomacy has been in Ukraine and working
with our European allies as the Russians prepared its
unnecessary aggression against the people of Ukraine? And are
there any areas in the defense intelligence enterprise that you
would recommend for additional investments or for this
committee to focus on?
Secretary Austin. Well, thank you. Chair McCollum.
You make a great point. What we did in terms of sharing
intelligence with our allies and partners was very, very
helpful to demonstrate that we wanted to be transparent.
And this is a tribute or credit to the President. It was
his decision to move forward and make sure that we shared as
much information as possible. That created trust amongst our
allies in a more meaningful way, and that trust allowed us to
create greater unity.
And so from the very beginning, you have seen the
President, myself, Secretary Blinken work hard to make sure
that we united the alliance as much as we could. And we have
been united from the very start and we hope to be that way
going forward.
But to answer your question, the sharing of intelligence
was a key element in getting us to where we are right now.

THE ARCTIC

Ms. McCollum. And then my last question, and I know I will
probably get a brief answer because we are going to be talking
to your staffs as we move forward.
But there is a lot of focus on the Indo-Pacific, and
rightly so. But the Arctic also with what is happening with
climate change, the natural resources that are out there, the
shipping, the distance the United States actually is from
Russia, the fact that Russia and China at times are working
together, and China considering itself a near Arctic nation,
which as a geography teacher I find a little baffling, but they
often say things that baffle me.
Would you maybe talk about what the Department is doing to
coordinate activities in the Arctic, but here, again, with a
lot of our allies, a lot of our NATO allies, and any resources
that you would want us to be focused on that are included in
this budget?
Secretary Austin. We are an Arctic nation. This is a region
that is very important to us. And you have seen us address the
Arctic in our strategy, our National Defense Strategy that just
came out. You have seen us most recently open up a center that
is focused on Arctic issues. And we continue the work of making
sure that we have that center properly manned and focused on
the right issues.
We have conducted a number of significant exercises in the
Arctic region here recently. As a matter of fact, there is a
substantial exercise ongoing up there right now, air exercise,
and that has been--we have been doing that throughout. We will
continue that work. We have recently had two combatant
commanders visit the Arctic simultaneously.
And so I think that this is a focus area for us. As you
pointed out, this is important. And we will continue to
resource it appropriately.
Ms. McCollum. Thank you so much for that. And I look
forward to being a person from the bold North, as many of us on
this committee are, not the gentleman next to me from Florida,
however, to work with you on this.
Mr. Calvert.

NATIONAL DEFENSE STRATEGY AND THE BUDGET REQUEST

Mr. Calvert. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Secretary Austin, I think we are all in agreement regarding
the threats facing our Nation. China is using all the
instruments of national power to erode America's standing in
the world. We received your new National Defense Strategy and
your fiscal year 2023 budget request.
I would like to know a few things. First, how does this
budget align with your new strategy? And, second, how does this
budget, specifically, deter China and Russia?
For example, with no clear shipbuilding plan and only 8
ships, as I read the budget, requested in the budget, coupled
with the retirement of 24 ships, I have a very big concern that
we are not taking the threat of China aggression in the South
China Sea seriously, especially when China is building 22 ships
this year and we are retiring 24 and only building 8.
How does this budget ensure that we are balancing the
ability to fight tonight with a much needed modernization
across the Armed Forces?
Secretary Austin. Well, thank you, sir.
Again, when we built this budget, we built it based upon
our new National Defense Strategy. And there is significant
investment in a number of issues, a number of capabilities that
are absolutely relevant to the competition with China.
As you know, we have to be relevant in all domains, all
warfighting domains, air, land, sea, space, and cyber. And in
this budget, you see us invest $27 billion in space and another
$11 billion in cyberspace, $24 billion in missile defense and
defeat, $7 billion in long-range fires, $4 billion of that is
invested in hypersonics.
And so we are investing in significant capability with this
budget. And there is an additional $6.1 billion invested in our
Pacific Defense Initiative.
So we believe that, again, this is going after the right
capabilities to ensure that we remain not only competitive, but
we maintain that competitive edge that we spoke of earlier.
Mr. Calvert. Well, obviously, from my perspective, and I
think from the perspective of many of us on this side--and,
obviously, all the things that you talked about we are
supportive of. But at the same time, numbers do matter. And
right now, as you know, the Chinese have, what, about 360 ships
to our 280 ships. And they are building significantly, almost 3
to 1 to our capability. So that is a big concern.

CIVILIAN PERSONNEL

One other quick question on the issue of civilian
personnel. I know I bring this up to you and others often.
I have a historic trend sheet here that I would like to
submit to the record. In the year 2000, there were 651,000 DOD
civilians and 1,384,000 Active-Duty military. Today, there is
100,000 more civilians, 752,000--actually, 753,000 civilian
employees to 1,350,000 Active Duty. So we have dropped Active
Duty by 50,000 and increased civilians by 100,000, and the
ratio obviously is out of sync to the historic average.
And I think I have mentioned to you, if we went to the
Business Council recommendation to bring that back to the
historic ratio, we would save $125 billion over 5 years, which
we could keep in the Department and spend on procurement of
building the ships that we need and building the new air frames
that we need and assisting the Army and all the rest of the
service on the capabilities that they desperately need.
So, again, I would take a look at the reforms that are
necessary to bring this back into some historic ratio where we
spend the money where it needs to be spent.
And, Madam Chair, I would like to submit this for the
record.
Ms. McCollum. Without objection.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Calvert. Anything you would like to address on that,
Mr. Secretary?
Secretary Austin. Well, thank you, sir.
As I have mentioned to you before when we talked about
this, maintaining the right balance, as you pointed out, is a
key objective of mine. And we will stay sighted on this and
make sure that we do, in fact, have the right balance.
We have taken on a number of new initiatives. We are doing
things in space and cyberspace and other areas that require
additional staffing.
But to your point, we have to make sure that we keep our
staffs lean and that we have what we need and not more than we
need. I am committed to you to continue to work this.
Mr. Calvert. Thank you.
Ms. McCollum. Ms. DeLauro. Or I should say full committee
Chair DeLauro.

UKRAINE

The Chair. Ms. DeLauro is fine. You can even call me Rosa.
Anyway, thank you very, very much, Madam Chair.
Mr. Secretary, when we wrote the second supplemental, one
area that we focused on was our ability to track weapons that
we are sending to Ukraine. The bill requires you, along with
Secretary Blinken, to report to Congress on measures taken to
account for the defense articles sent to Ukraine, particularly
those that require enhanced end used monitoring. I look forward
to your report.
Is there anything you can share with us today about actions
you are taking? Would having more of a diplomatic presence in
Ukraine, even if were less than before the Russian invasion,
help? How is the Department of Defense ensuring that equipment
is reaching the right Ukrainian units and used for their
intended purposes?
The 2022 omnibus provided an additional $300 million for
U.S. allies and partners in Europe, including $180 million for
the Baltic Security Initiative, $30 million for Poland, $30
million for Romania, $20 million for Bulgaria, and $40 million
for Georgia. How will the Department use these resources to
shore up their defenses?
Secretary Austin. Thanks, Chair DeLauro.
Accountability is an important issue to all of us. As you
know, we don't have people on the ground right now, so it makes
it a bit difficult.
But this is an issue that when I met with President
Zelenskyy and Minister of Defense Reznikov in Kyiv about 2
weeks ago, I emphasized the importance of accountability--and
his Chief of Defense was also in that meeting--and how
important it is to make sure that they are tracking the
disposition of our sensitive equipment that is being deployed.
And they are assured me that they were focused on this.
I revisited this again with the Minister of Defense a week
ago, 2 weeks ago, when I met with him in Germany, and then as
late as yesterday.
And in terms of the disposition, the actual disposition of
the equipment, whether or not it is getting to the people that
need it, this is something that the Chairman and I check every
time that we talk to our counterparts, and we talk to them
weekly.
And, again, I revisited this issue with Minister Reznikov
yesterday and again will continue to emphasize this very, very
important point.
The Chair. And I am presuming that we are working with
these other countries, in essence, to bolster their resources
as well in terms of what they need--Bulgaria, Romania, Poland.
Secretary Austin. We continue that work. You are right,
Chair.
The Chair. Thank you.
If I can, I just have a quick question.
Ms. McCollum. Please.

IMPORTANCE OF TIMELY FUNDING

The Chair. There is great focus on the total amount of
funding for the Department of Defense. I would like to focus on
two other aspects: consistent and timely funding.
From 2021 to 2022 for programs within the subcommittee's
jurisdiction, the Department received a 4.7 percent increase.
The budget request proposes a nearly identical increase for
2022 to 2023.
We have already started the process of having full
committee counterparts meet to attempt to come to an agreement
on overall spending which would greatly facilitate the
enactment of the 2023 bills.
How important are predictability, the steady increases in
funding? How helpful would it be for the Department for
Congress to enact spending bills before October 1? And can you
describe the negative consequences of another CR?
Secretary Austin. Well, first of all, Chair DeLauro, let me
thank you for your continued focus on this issue. You have done
a lot of work to help the Department in the past, and I
appreciate what I anticipate that you will continue to do in
the future. Thanks for everything.
This is really important. And if I could ask for anything,
it is for both sides to lean into this and get the budget
passed as quickly as possible. And I know it is important to
everybody.
But, as you know, without a budget, we can't do new starts.
And some of the things that we want to invest in, which will
give us that capability, that helps us maintain that
competitive edge, we are late in some cases getting started.
So getting a budget by September would be great. And,
again, if I could ask for everyone's help on that again. That
is one of the most important things that you could do to help
us aside from passing the budget itself.
The Chair. Thank you very, very much. And thank you for
your help the last time.
I just might conclude by saying that through the
supplementals both in March and the one we passed last night,
we are talking about close to $30 billion for defense. So I
think we are keeping our commitment in that effort as we move
forward. And so that what we are looking at in terms of the
increased percentage in the President's budget, et cetera,
should be in line with where we can try to move forward.
Thank you very, very much, all of you, for your service and
for all of your efforts to keeping our national security
secure. Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Ms. McCollum. Thank you for working it in. I know how busy
everything is.
The Chair. I am going to dash next door.
Ms. McCollum. Next for questions we will hear from the
ranking member of the full Appropriations Committee, Ms.
Granger.

IMPACT OF RETIRING EQUIPMENT

Ms. Granger. Thank you.
The military services want to retire equipment well before
the end of their useful lives. The capabilities lost by
retiring these assets will not be replaced until future systems
come online. One example of this is the Navy's littoral combat
ship.
General Milley, please explain how the Department
determines what amount of risk is acceptable when considering
these types of retirements?
General Milley. The way we evaluate risk is risk to the
mission. Primarily, we take inputs from the combatant
commanders for that.
And, second, we evaluate risk to force, and for that we are
looking at train, man, equip, which is primarily the roles of
the service chiefs.
Together those come in to me, and I compile that for the
Secretary and provide him a risk assessment.
With respect to the littoral combat ship Navy program--
Navy/Marine program--there is an ongoing study for amphibious
warfare and in the Navy for the shipbuilding, as was mentioned
by Ranking Member Calvert, shipbuilding, and we base a lot of
our analysis on those inputs from the Navy and the Marine
Corps.
Ms. Granger. So if you don't have a replacement for it and
you are still considering it, then why would you mothball them,
as we call it, at this time?
General Milley. Well, it comes down to balance in terms of
what is affordable and what the Navy can afford and what the
Department of Defense can afford. So there are risk
calculations on what not to fund and what to fund. And the
overall assessment was to go ahead and fund the eight ships
that we are buying and not to continue to fund the LCS for this
particular budget.

SUPPORT OF THE DEFENSE INDUSTRY

Ms. Granger. I have serious concerns about the way that was
determined.
I have another question. Secretary Austin, the conflict in
Ukraine has placed a high demand on our supply of Javelins,
Stingers, and other U.S. munitions. This demand has highlighted
a capacity issue for our defense industry.
How can we best support a robust and flexible capacity for
our defense industry? And how can we ensure that we have
stockpiles sufficient to meet demand for critical items needed
in Ukraine and for future conflicts?
Secretary Austin. The stockpiles are something that the
chairman and I monitor routinely. Certainly, we have input from
each of the services.
And in terms of working with industry to get them to open
up lines and increase production, as you know, we met with
industry early on. They have committed to doing that. You saw
the President was just down at one of the places where we are
producing javelins here just recently and got a thorough lay-
down.
So the defense industry is leaning into this. It will take
a little bit of time to get some of these opened up to the
degree that we want them opened up, but that work is ongoing.
And I have to admit that the industry is meeting us more than
halfway on this issue.
Ms. Granger. Thank you.
Ms. McCollum. Next, we will go to Mr. Ruppersberger, Mr.
Womack, and Mr. Aguilar, and then Mr. Aderholt.
Mr. Ruppersberger, you are recognized.

UKRAINE CYBERSECURITY POSTURE

Mr. Ruppersberger. Thank you.
The first thing I want to acknowledge, Mr. Secretary and
General, your competence, your leadership throughout the years
I have been here. I have been working mostly national security.
And I think you both are excellent leaders during very
difficult times. And I think you had to build the right team to
move forward in what your mission is. So thank you for your
service.
I am going to get into a more specific area, Ukraine
cybersecurity posture. Over the last few weeks we have publicly
learned more and more about how our Nation's cyberspace
operations have both aided allies and partners like Ukraine and
our own understanding of our adversaries' capabilities and
techniques in cyberspace.
Now, how important is persistent engagement with malign
actors in cyberspace? And how do you assess U.S. Cyber
Command's capacity to build more partnerships like we have with
European nations in other parts of the world?
Secretary Austin. In terms of the importance, it is
absolutely critical. And that is why early on we partnered with
the Ukrainians and helped them with training and helped them to
outline issues associated with their networks. That is paying
dividends for them as we speak.
It also allows us to get early warning if we see something
developing that could be a threat to our allies or us. And that
has been very helpful to us.
In this budget, sir, you have seen that we have invested
over $11 billion in cyber. That helps us to modernize the
force, but it also helps to increase the size of the force. And
that will help in our efforts to partner with additional
nations, not only in Europe, but most importantly in the Indo-
Pacific as well.
To answer your question, it is critical. We are building
more capacity to be able to do that as we speak.

FLEXIBITY OF CYBERSECURITY POSTURE

Mr. Ruppersberger. Another question. How much flexibility
do you have in your posture based on the Department's fiscal
year 2023 budget to account for possible increased risk to
national security systems and defense critical infrastructure
here in the United States given the White House's public
acknowledgment of evolving intelligence that the Russians are
exploring options for cyber attacks?
Secretary Austin. Again, I think we have significant
capacity, and we need more capacity, and we are investing in
that.
In terms of threats to the homeland, as you know, sir, DHS
is the lead agency for that. We are doing everything within our
power to be ready to assist DHS with anything that they need
help with.
And so that coordination is ongoing. We have leaned forward
on this quite a bit. And I think it has been very helpful. So
we will continue those efforts.
Mr. Ruppersberger. And I know NSA does a lot in this
regard. Chris Inglis, who was Deputy Director, very qualified
and competent, is really heading up the domestic side now. And
I assume that you all come together as a team to share
information to protect us.
Secretary Austin. Absolutely. That is routine coordination.
And you know General Nakosone, he is absolutely focused on
being ahead of the need. And so there is a great relationship
there.
Mr. Ruppersberger. Yes, and that is a really good team, in
my opinion.
Yield back.
Ms. McCollum. Thank you.
Mr. Womack.

INDO-PACIFIC STRATEGY

Mr. Womack. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, gentlemen, for your service to our country.
I want to follow up on a question that my colleague, Mr.
Calvert, had asked about the Indo-Pacific strategy.
The budget request seems to have small increases in force
rotations, but no new real permanent increases in combat
capable military forces in the region. Instead seems to be
betting on more innovation and soft power in that strategy.
In my opinion, the need for military power has not
decreased, but we are choosing to try to plug in some gaps with
maybe some nonmilitary capabilities.
Please, Mr. Secretary, help me understand where I am wrong
on this and where this Department is trying to go in meeting
that very complicated strategy.
Secretary Austin. I don't think there is a right or wrong
here, sir. I think what I would like to say is, number one, I
think we have a very sound strategy. You have just seen us roll
out that new National Defense Strategy. It focuses on making
sure that we employ capability in all five of the warfighting
domains--air, land, sea, space, and cyberspace.
And it also focuses on making sure that we leverage the
capability resident in our allies and partners. And I think
that is really important. And as we continue that work, I think
we are seeing some great opportunities.
As we look at our strategy, making sure that we are, in
fact, getting the capabilities of space and cyberspace
integrated into our efforts I think is really, really key.
We, again, with the Pacific Deterrence Initiative, we have
invested significantly in making sure that we increase our
rotation, our training rotations in the theater, that we are
investing in some infrastructure, and doing some other things.
I think it is a sound strategy. I think what we have asked
for enables us to accomplish that strategy.
Mr. Womack. Has the unanticipated extraordinary cost to
deal with what is going on in Eastern Europe right now, has
that cost impacted what we are needing or what we are trying to
do in this budget for our biggest pacing threat, which is
China?
Secretary Austin. I would say no. I think that as we have
taken on our efforts to help the Ukrainians, we certainly have
invested quite a bit. As you heard me say earlier, sir, $4.5
billion over the last couple of years. But we have also seen
investment from our allies and partners.
Our major efforts here are with NATO and with the allies
and partners that are in the region, who are also investing in
providing equipment and training to the Ukrainians as well. And
it is that combination of effort that I think has been very,
very meaningful.
So to answer your question, we have maintained our pace,
our efforts in the Indo-Pacific, all the while we were engaged
in our current efforts in Ukraine.

RECRUITING AND RETENTION

Mr. Womack. I have got a question for General Milley.
The President's budget requests a cut in end strength in
the active Army by 12,000 soldiers. I want us to be very
careful as a country not to allow the Army to be a bill payer
in a lot of areas. It also cut the end strength for both active
Air Force and Navy. But I would like to specifically focus on
the cuts to the Army, that the Army's requested reduction is
based on the reassessment of recruitment potential and
obtainable goals.
Can you speak to the pipeline and the impact it is having
on our ability to meet our objectives on the recruiting and
retention front?
General Milley. I can.
The overall recruiting has actually gone well for the Navy,
the Air Force, the Marine Corps, and Space Force. They are
meeting their goals.
Army is a little bit behind glide path. The high schools
haven't graduated yet. They are coming up. So those numbers
will even out a little bit here in the coming months.
But we predict, we project that the Army will come up a
point or two below what their desired recruiting goals are.
Relative to the end strength, what Secretary Wormuth and
Chief of Staff McConville are focused on is quality of the
force. So they want to make sure that they are bringing in
high-quality individuals into the military. So they determined
in order to do that they wanted to cut end strength just a
little bit.
So it is a modest cut. I don't think it will have a
significant negative impact on the overall national security of
the United States.
Take, for example, what you mentioned about in the Pacific.
We have got 350,000-plus troops arrayed in the Pacific from the
West Coast all the way forward stationed west of the MDL. We
have got a very, very large and capable Naval force with the
Pac Fleet. You have got a corps and a couple of divisions. And
you have got a tremendous amount of fourth- and fifth-
generation aircraft, along with cyber and space capabilities.
So relative to the pacing threat, the main effort, if you
will, the strategic main effort for the United States military,
that is clearly in the Pacific. So even though we are incurring
additional capabilities and investments in what we are doing
with Ukraine, it is not having a significant negative effect on
our ability to keep pace with China. And I think the cuts for
the Army, for example, are quite modest relative to the whole.
Mr. Womack. Thank you, General.
Ms. McCollum. Next, we will hear from Mr. Aguilar, then Mr.
Aderholt, then Mr. Crist.
Mr. Aguilar, you are recognized.

IMPORTANCE OF IRREGULAR WARFARE

Mr. Aguilar. Thank you, Chairwoman.
And thank you, Mr. Secretary and General.
Secretary Austin, recently you spoke about the need to
track and understand and respond to malign activities in the
gray zone, including the information space and the need to
invest in irregular warfare capabilities.
What is the Ukrainian crisis teaching the Nation about the
importance of irregular warfare in a peer and near-peer fight?
Secretary Austin. Again, I think this is a thing that we
need to be capable of addressing going forward and that we
account for that in our strategy. We have seen the Russians
engage in this type of activity in a consistent fashion
throughout. Since 2014, we have watched this continue to
unfold.
We will need to make sure that we have the right
capabilities and the people with the right skills to be
relevant in this kind of activity going forward.

CLIMATE STRATEGY

Mr. Aguilar. How are we thinking about future policies,
existing policies that will enable us to compete effectively in
this climate moving forward?
Secretary Austin. In our policies we need to make sure that
they support speed of effort and that we have the authorities
necessary to get after the things that, again, will be
effective in this fight. And I think, as with anything, our
policies and authorities will evolve as we continue our efforts
in this and other places around the globe.

DOMESTIC VIOLENT EXTREMISM IN THE MILITARY

Mr. Aguilar. Thank you.
Mr. Secretary, I wanted to shift topics and talk about
domestic violent extremism and express my support for your
continued commitment to address threats of domestic violent
extremism in the military.
You previously spoke with us and said that 99.9 percent of
troops serve with dignity and honor, but a small number can
have an outsized impact on a great organization. And you have
talked about including reworking existing screening procedures
for recruits, partnering with other Federal agencies, and
revamping insider training programs.
And, General Milley, you have spoken about these as well,
these programs.
Secretary, can you talk about how the fiscal year 2023
budget request continues support for these efforts?
Secretary Austin. It certainly does allow us to continue to
support the policies and procedures that we put into place.
And, again, I would echo what you said earlier. My firm
belief has been and remains that 99.9 percent of our troops are
focused on the right things and are doing the right things each
and every day.
We certainly, as you pointed out, need to do a good job, a
better job of screening people as they come into the military,
and also as they are in the military, making sure that they
remain focused on supporting those values that they have sworn
an oath to uphold.
But we have, in this budget, we have asked for an ample
amount of funds to support our efforts that you asked about.
Mr. Aguilar. General, domestic violent extremism, you have
spoken with this committee about this in the past and
appreciate your comments.
What more can we do? How should we be thinking through
future insider threats and some of the policies that might need
to be addressed and changed?
General Milley. Just a couple of things.
First of all, I think the size, scale, and scope of the
problem is very, very small inside the military. And as the
Secretary just said, 99.9 percent of those in uniform are
serving their country faithfully in their faithful adherence to
their oath to the Constitution of the United States.
Having said that, small numbers can make a big difference
if they choose to use violence in some manner, shape, or form.
So it all comes down to good order and discipline of the force,
and that is the role of the chain of command.
So the best thing we can do is to reinforce the authorities
of the chain of command, educate the chain of command to signs
and indicators of radical extremism on one bent or another, and
then to take appropriate action if they identify someone who
displays those sorts of behaviors.
We are into behavior, not thought. That is a very, very
important distinction. We are not out to govern people's
thoughts, but behavior is a different matter. And that is what
the Uniform Code of Military Justice is all about and that is
one of the key roles of the chain of command.
Mr. Aguilar. I appreciate the leadership that both of you
have shown in this regard, and thank you for continuing to work
with this committee and others to address these issues moving
forward.
And like you both said, an incredibly small number, but we
want to make sure that we are doing everything we can to
protect the workforce, protect the country, and ensure the
proper leadership. So thank you both so much.
Yield back, Madam Chair.
Ms. McCollum. Thank you.
Mr. Aderholt, please.

MINERAL ISSUES AND IMPACT

Mr. Aderholt. Thank you.
Secretary Austin, General Milley, Under Secretary McCord,
thank you, all three, for being here today.
My first question deals with some mineral issues that we
potentially could have problems we could have in this country.
Of course, the Russian invasion of Ukraine has demonstrated
how Europe has been affected by reliance on Russia for
resources like oil and gas.
But a recent U.S. Geological Survey report illustrated that
the United States is similarly reliant on Russia and China for
some of our most critical mineral needs. And I too have
concerns about the defense industrial base being too reliant on
countries that probably doesn't have our best interest at
heart.
And I think certainly we all should agree that the time to
address this and look at this is now as opposed to waiting
until a crisis occurs. I plan to work with my colleagues to try
to address this problem.
My question to you--let me address this to you, Secretary
Austin--how concerned are you about the risk posed to the
defense industrial base by continued reliance on strategic
adversaries for our critical minerals? And what else can we do
to try to address this issue?
Secretary Austin. You raise a very good point, sir. This is
an issue that is very important to us. It is also important to
our country. It is important to our President, as you have seen
the President adopt an initiative that causes us all to focus
more on our supply chain vulnerability. DOD certainly has a key
part of that.
We are concerned about making sure that we have the right
capabilities with respect to microelectronics, casting and
forging, battery and energy storage, critical materials, as you
pointed out. We want to make sure that we have the right
amounts of stockpiles to be able to support our efforts.
So DOD is focused on this as a part of the overall
government's effort. But to your point, this is very, very
important to us.
Mr. Aderholt. So this is something that you do have some
great concerns about at this point?
Secretary Austin. It is.
Mr. Aderholt. Yeah.
Secretary Austin. It is.
Mr. Aderholt. General Milley, do you have anything you want
to add to that?
General Milley. No. I concur 100 percent, the concern about
us being overly reliant on raw materials, critical minerals, as
you say, from any country that is an adversary to the United
States. To the extent that is humanly possible, that stuff
should be produced in the United States and under our control.

EQUIPMENT STOCKPILES

Mr. Aderholt. Let me just also, I will mention something
that has already been asked about, we have already talked about
how we have done so much to send vital equipment to Ukraine.
And of course we can always debate whether we have sent enough
and that. But there is no doubt that the success they have had
has been because of our helping in the process.
But to follow on a question that Ranking Member Granger,
much of the equipment has come out of our own defense
stockpiles, and I am glad that Congress has already
appropriated $3.5 billion to DOD to backfill the transferred
equipment. And of course last night the House passed
legislation for additional support for Ukraine.
It is clear that DOD's equipment stocks could prove vital
if a similar situation were to arise in the Pacific and Taiwan.
I would like to get your thoughts on whether the Department
of Defense level of stockpiled equipment and munitions should
be grown to levels larger than they were prior to Russia's
invasion.
Secretary Austin. Thanks, sir. And, again, thanks for your
support in getting the legislation through yesterday. That is
very helpful to us.
As you know, we base our decisions on the size of the
stockpile on our requirements, and as we look around at our
global requirements to support our plans, we believe that the
stockpiles are adequate.
And if we believe that we need to grow them based upon
changing situations or changes in our plans, then certainly we
will do that, we will take that on, and make sure that we
advise the President that that is a necessity.
But right now, again, our requirements have put us in a
place where we have the stockages that we have, and we think it
is about right.
Mr. Aderholt. So do you think if we increased our
stockpiles it would deter aggression by China toward Taiwan?
Secretary Austin. You know, our adversaries don't really
know what we have in our stockpiles, nor should they, and so I
am not sure that that would act as, in itself, as a deterrent.
They will judge--I mean, they will base their judgment on
our actions and our demonstrated commitment more so than what
they believe our stockpiles to be.
Mr. Aderholt. Thank you. I yield back.
Ms. McCollum. Thank you, Mr. Aderholt.
Mr. Crist, then Mr. Carter, and then Mrs. Kirkpatrick.
Mr. Crist, you are recognized.

HYPERSONICS

Mr. Crist. Thank you, Madam Chair.
I want to express my gratitude to you, Mr. Secretary, and,
General, to you as well. As Member Ruppersberger mentioned in
his beginning comments, the service you have provided to our
country has been extraordinary, and God bless you for your
dedication to protecting America and freedom.
So I was curious, I read about the hypersonics that were
used against Odessa. Obviously that is very disconcerting. And
I wondered if you had any commentary if we should expect more
of that or what your view of it is, either one of you.
Please.
General Milley. A couple comments.
One is the Russians have used several hypersonic missiles.
Obviously the distinguishing factor of a hypersonic missile is
the speed at which it travels. And we have analyzed each of
these shots that they have taken. And I would like to go into a
classified session and discuss any of the specific details.
But other than the speed of the weapon, in terms of its
effect on a given target, we are not seeing really significant
or game-changing effects to date with the delivery of the small
number of hypersonics that the Russians have used.
But I can elaborate further in a classified session if you
would like.
Mr. Crist. Sure. I appreciate that.
Mr. Secretary, do you have any comment on that?
Secretary Austin. I absolutely agree with the Chairman. And
they have used a number of them. The Ukrainians are still
fighting. And I will leave it at that.
Mr. Crist. Very well.
Is this the first time that we know that they have decided
to utilize hypersonics in this war?
General Milley. To my knowledge, it is the first time of
use of hypersonic munitions in a combat situation.
Mr. Crist. Ever?
General Milley. As far as I know, yeah.
Mr. Crist. Yes, sir.
General Milley. A hypersonic weapon.
Mr. Crist. Yes, sir. No, I understand.
Secretary Austin. But the Russians have used them several
times in this conflict. And, again, not a major game-changer to
this point.
Mr. Crist. Great.
I know you don't have a crystal ball and it is hard to read
Putin's mind, I am sure, but given the fact that he is
utilizing these weapons now, these missiles, do you think that
exacerbates the potential for nuclear or not? Or can you tell?
Secretary Austin. It is very difficult to predict what or
to say what Mr. Putin is thinking. But I don't--I would not say
that because he has used a hypersonic weapon that that is going
to cause him to be willing to elevate to use a nuclear weapon.
You know, again, he used hypersonic weapons weeks ago, and
I think he is trying to create a specific effect with the use
of that weapon. And as the Chairman has pointed out, it moves
at a speed that makes it very difficult to interdict. But it
hasn't been a game-changer.
He has options. I mean, he can launch a cyber attack, he
can employ chemical weapons, those kinds of things that we are
all on the lookout for to see if he makes those kinds of
decisions. But I don't think that this necessarily takes him to
the use of a nuclear weapon.

UKRAINE FUNDING

Mr. Crist. So we voted last night, the House, for $40
billion to help Ukraine. Hopefully the Senate will do that
soon. Are we doing enough to keep Ukraine free and protect our
ally as much as we should be?
Secretary Austin. We are doing a lot, and our allies are
doing a lot, and we are going to continue to do everything that
we can for as long as we can to help them defend their
sovereign space.
And so I think the Ukrainians are very grateful for what we
are doing for them. It has made a significant difference in
their ability to blunt the advance of a superior Russian force.
And so, again, their needs will change as this war evolves.
At the beginning of the fight, sir, you remember, we were
focused a lot on providing anti-armor and anti-aircraft
weaponry. That really put them in a good place. It helped them
win the battle of Kyiv in the north.
But as the fight has shifted to the south and to the east,
we now see that they have more of a need for long-range
artillery, tanks, and armored vehicles and those sorts of
things.
And working with our allies, we are talking to the
Ukrainians routinely and we are trying to provide them exactly
what they think they need in the fight.
Mr. Crist. Great.
Well, thank you both again very much for what you are doing
in protecting this democracy and this great ally of the U.S.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Ms. McCollum. You are welcome.
Mr. Carter, then Mrs. Kirkpatrick, and then Mr. Diaz-
Balart, who will be joining us via video.

IMPACT OF COST OF LIVING ON SERVICE MEMBERS

Mr. Carter.
Mr. Carter. Gentlemen, welcome. Thank you for being here.
I want to tell you about a conversation I had with a group
of people in my district last week. We have Fort Hood in my
district, you all know that. I am very, very proud of our men
and women who serve in uniform, and I commend you for trying to
give them the very best.
But we also, as we take care of our warfighters, have to
remember the burdens, the things in the real world--that is,
the economy--have on the families of these warfighters.
Right now what is going on in our part of Texas is our
mobile population in America. Americans are migrating to Texas
in gigantic numbers, carrying large amounts of money from real
estate sales they made in other States that they left.
And so not only are they driving up the cost of housing
ridiculously high, a house worth $350,000, real worth, is
selling for a million and so forth, therefore, even the smaller
homes that might be available for servicemen and -women off
post are being driven up to $700,000 to $900,000.
And then, with the benefit of a VA loan, they can compete
in that market. The sellers don't want VA loans because the
other guys are offering cash. That drives all of our military
families into the rental market.
The rental market is growing at the same rate. So something
that 6 months ago was $2,000 a month is now $4,500 a month, and
something that was, like, $1,000 dollars a month is now $2,500
a month.
Now, I realize you have given them a raise and I am really
happy about that. Have you considered increasing BAH levels to
meet this type of inflationary challenge that we are seeing
around our posts, not just in Texas, in many other parts of the
country?
I would like to hear your comments, Mr. Secretary and also
General Milley.
Secretary Austin. Thanks, sir. And thanks for your
tremendous support of our troops and families in the Fort Hood
area. That is a pretty important part of our overall structure
in the military here, that big installation.
This is a very important issue to me, the health and well-
being of our family members and our troops. You saw us take
some action last year--or this year--to increase BAH in certain
areas that were challenged by the forces that you just
mentioned.
What we are asking for in this budget is help to do more of
the same going forward. I think this is really, really
important, that the strain caused by rising rent costs and a
number of other things are really kind of creating some adverse
effects for our lower ranking enlisted, and we remain sighted
on this.
So we are asking for that, some help with that in this
budget. We are also asking for $2 billion to support the
construction of family housing, military family housing, and
the improvement of military family housing as well.
So thanks for your support thus far. And I believe this is
really, really important, and so we are asking for more help so
we can do more of the same in the future.
General Milley. And I would echo everything the Secretary
said, Congressman. I have known you for a long time and have
many fond memories of Fort Hood myself. And I heard Congressman
Calvert say most of those people are coming from California, so
I would question whether or not Texas is maybe the right choice
there.
But having said that--that was meant to be funny--look,
soldiers don't ask for much. They want good housing, good
healthcare, good education, and a safe environment for their
family.
I know that the Secretary of Defense has the entire
Department focused on it. And I will personally take a hard
look at the BAH numbers to see if it is appropriate to make
further recommendations on any further increases in terms of
housing allowances specific to the Fort Hood area or other
areas that are experiencing that.
Mr. Calvert. If the gentleman would yield.
You will enjoy my constituents. They are fine people.
Mr. Carter. I hope so. I hope so.
Ms. McCollum. Okay. Thank you.
Mr. Carter. I have another question, but I know I have run
out of time.
Ms. McCollum. We will make sure it gets submitted for the
record. Thank you.
And as you know, there is a freeway that connects Texas and
Minnesota. We have better fishing.
So, Mrs. Kirkpatrick, we are going to go to you.
And Mr. Diaz-Balart, if you wouldn't mind getting ready to
turn on your video.
Thank you.
Mrs. Kirkpatrick.

CLIMATE CHANGE

Mrs. Kirkpatrick. Thank you, Madam Chair.
My first question has to do with climate change.
Mr. Secretary, I am pleased to see the concerted effort in
the budget addressing climate change. The Department of Defense
has recognized for a while that a changing climate will have
significant economic impacts across the globe, lead to food
insecurity issues and potential shifts in regional balances.
The Department of Defense is proposing to invest $3.1
billion in this budget for increased generators storage and
resiliency at military installations, which is a top priority
for Fort Huachuca and Davis-Monthan Air Force Base in my
district.
This funding would also go toward improved energy
efficiency and logistics and research in reducing energy
demand, improved storage, and other energy supplies.
Secretary Austin, what are your goals as you direct the
Department's effort to meet the climate challenge?
Secretary Austin. Well, thank you. And I think you nailed
it right away when you mentioned that this does affect not only
our installations, as we look at our installations in the
coastal regions with the effects of rising water levels, the
effects of severe weather, as we have had to deploy troops with
a greater frequency to address the aftermath of severe storms.
We are deploying troops to fight fires.
But to the point that you made earlier, in the regions that
we operate in, we are seeing climate change cause migration in
some cases and competition--increased competition for water.
So DOD is the largest consumer of energy in the government.
Our goal is to make sure that we reduce our carbon footprint by
reverting to--our installations using more electric vehicles. I
have challenged our installation commanders to find ways to be
more efficient in their energy usage.
And so we have a number of ongoing projects and efforts to
reduce the carbon footprint and be better stewards of our
resources here.
But, again, to a point that you have made, we are asking
for $3.1 billion in this budget to help with our efforts in
addressing installation resiliency and energy storage.

MILITARY MEDICAL REFORMS

Mrs. Kirkpatrick. Thank you.
My second question is for General Milley. It has to do with
military medical reforms.
The Military Health System is undergoing its most
significant transformation in decades. Medical reforms have
included a transition of military treatment facilities from
control of the services to the Department of health agencies,
and reducing military medical manpower in support of the
services' lethality priorities.
General Milley, are you concerned about the direction of
military medical manpower? Are efforts being coordinated across
the military services and with the Joint Staff? And what are
the concerns with the medical manpower reductions the services
are anticipating?
General Milley. Thanks for the question.
The key issue here is the readiness of the force and the
medical readiness of the force, and do we have enough doctors,
nurses, and medics or corpsmen in the fielded force to handle
combat conditions, and are there enough doctors and nurses
available to man combat support hospitals and other field
hospitals that are necessary in combat.
And, candidly, I do have concerns about that. It is a very
challenging subset of our overall military personnel
challenges, but that one in particular causes great attention
because in time of war, as we all know, there will be
significant casualties.
In peacetime you are manning these treatment facilities,
these hospitals and clinics, but in wartime they are going to
go forward, and that is where the readiness issues will show
up.
Right now we are okay on a day-to-day basis, but I do have
concerns that if we did have a significant conflict in terms of
our medical personnel and their ability to deploy.
Mrs. Kirkpatrick. Madam Chair, I have another question, but
I am just about out of time, so I will submit that for the
record. And I yield back. Thank you.
Ms. McCollum. Thank you, Mrs. Kirkpatrick. And we are going
to be having a military health hearing where we will get in
more depth in that.
Mr. Diaz-Balart is submitting questions for the record. He
had to leave. So we are going to turn to Mr. Rogers and then
Mrs. Bustos.
Mr. Rogers.

RISK OF ESCALATION IN UKRAINE

Mr. Rogers. Mr. Secretary, Under Secretary, and General,
welcome, and thank you for your lifetimes of service to the
country. It is appreciated by millions of Americans.
Let me bring up a topic that is tough to deal with, and
that is escalation or the possibilities of escalation in
Ukraine.
I know it is our policy to not be directly involved, and
you have maintained that distance. However, the Russians have
no compunction about the morals or fair play or rules of war,
if you will, and are demonstrating that daily.
Suppose for a moment that the Russians decide to go after
the missile sites in Poland or in the region of any sort. What
do we do? What are the rules of the game that we are into here
in this battle?
Secretary Austin. Well, thanks, sir. And to your point, it
is always dangerous to go down the road of hypotheticals, but
this is an issue that is very, very important.
If Russia decides to attack any nation that is a NATO
member, then that is a game-changer. Then with respect to the
Article 5 commitments, certainly NATO would most likely respond
as a coalition in some shape, form, or fashion.
And this is a thing that NATO has looked at, what it takes
to defend NATO countries. It is a thing that is important to us
as well.
But as you look at Putin's calculus, my view--and I am sure
the Chairman has his own view--but my view is that Russia
doesn't want to take on the NATO alliance. He has got a number
of troops arrayed in the region right now on the Ukrainian
border, and he had some in Belarus and still has some there.
But there are 1.9 million forces in NATO. NATO has the most
advanced capabilities of any alliance in the world, in terms of
aircraft, ships, types of weaponry that the ground forces use.
So this is a fight that he really doesn't want to have, and
that would very quickly escalate into another type of
competition that no one wants to see.
Mr. Rogers. General.
General Milley. I would just say, Congressman Rogers, that
we monitor this literally every day. It is one of the most
significant things we are doing, is monitoring the potential
risk of escalation in any domain and by geography, by type of
weapon, et cetera.
And it is something that the Secretary has us laser-focused
on, the President has us laser-focused on, and the national
security establishment is monitoring it very, very closely.
We can give you more thorough briefings in a classified
session. You asked the question about what we would do. Of
course, that is speculative, but there are conditions, there
are contingency plans, there are things that we have looked at
and will continue to look at, and we monitor it every single
day very, very closely.
Mr. Rogers. Are we prepared to respond in some fashion?
General Milley. I would say that depends on the situation--
THE type weapon, nature of escalation, where was it, was it
Article 5, was it not. There is a laundry list of questions and
it depends on what the answers to those questions are.
But the short is, yes, of course, we are. Militarily, we
are very capable of responding to any form or fashion of
escalation if directed by the President.
Secretary Austin. And, sir, you have heard the President
say that we will defend every inch of NATO. And you saw that
resolve demonstrated shortly after Putin launched his invasion
into Ukraine. We deployed forces to reassure our allies in the
Baltic states and on the eastern front of NATO. And the
President has been very clear about his resolve throughout
this. He is committed to defending every inch of NATO.
Mr. Rogers. Thank you, gentlemen.
Ms. McCollum. Thank you, Mr. Rogers.
I am going to read the next four speakers. However, I will
recognize Mr. Cole, should he walk in, immediately after Mrs.
Bustos. He is ranking member on an NIH hearing that is taking
place across the hall.
With that, it will be Mrs. Bustos, Ms. Kaptur, Mr. Ryan,
and Mr. Kilmer.
Mrs. Bustos, you are now recognized.

SUSTAINMENT AND IMPACT ON THE ARMY BUDGET

Mrs. Bustos. Okay. Thank you, Madam Chair. Appreciate it.
And thanks to our distinguished panel. Appreciate your
service to our country.
The congressional district that I represent is in the
entire northwest corner of the State of Illinois, includes the
Rock Island Arsenal. And so I would like to ask a question
around that.
We talk a lot about ships and planes and space capabilities
when we look at our national defense, but the majority of the
sustainment burden for a prolonged conflict is going to rest
with the Army, specifically the Sustainment Command. And
obviously that is part of the arsenal, and that leads to my
question.
If you look at history, we know the pivotal role that the
Army played in our victories in the Pacific during World War
II.
So wondering about how we prioritize and account for this
in the Army's budget and planning, if we assume significantly
larger investments in the Departments of Air Force and Navy.
And maybe we will start with you, General Austin, if you
could address that, please.
Secretary Austin. Of course we start with the strategy, as
we have said earlier, and then we make our investments based
upon what it takes to support that strategy.
And you are correct, the Army has played a critical role in
the past, it is playing a critical role as we speak, and it
will always play a critical role.
If you look at what the Secretary of the Army and the Chief
of the Army, what they are trying to do in terms of making sure
that they can meet their requirements and also modernize the
force going forward, they are basing their request for
resources on that.
And we think, as you have heard me say earlier, I mean,
there is $13 billion or so in this budget focused on making
sure that we can maintain a combat credible land force for both
the Army and the Marines.
And I really like what we see both the Army and the Marines
doing in terms of their investment in modernization and their
focus on making sure that they are relevant in any competition,
especially any anticipated competition in the Indo-Pacific.
Mrs. Bustos. General Milley, anything to add to that?
General Milley. The Army, relative to the Pacific and
relative to some sort of scenario against the People's Republic
of China, it is our estimation that the weight of effort would
likely be air and sea, maritime and air forces.
But having said that, the Marines and the Army will play a
very, very critical role in any of those scenarios, as they
did, as you mentioned, in World War II.
Even though that was a maritime theater, there was a
tremendous amount of landings and seizures and so on and so
forth.
So it is not a singular service. It is always a joint force
executing combined arms operations in all the domains of war to
achieve integrated deterrence before a war or to achieve
victory in the conduct of war. The Army plays a very critical
role there.
So some of the things the Army is doing in this budget and
in their modernization programs, Long Range Precision Fires,
for example, is really critical to any type of conflict in the
Pacific.
Another one is the transformation of a bunch of their
formations into multidomain task forces as another example.
They are making some fundamental changes in the development of
rotor wing aircraft and Future Vertical Lift.
There is a whole series of modernization initiatives as we
move into the future, into the change in the character of war,
into the future operating environment, the Army is doing to
transform itself so that they can achieve an effect not only in
the Pacific, but anywhere else in the world.

ADDITIVE MANUFACTURING

Mrs. Bustos. The modernization efforts are really exciting.
I co-chair the Army Depot and Arsenal Caucus, I co-chair that,
and we were briefed recently on the modernization efforts, and
I am going to get into that a little bit as well.
So also at the Rock Island Arsenal we are designated as the
Army's Advanced Manufacturing Center of Excellence. We are very
proud of that, and obviously supporting the Army's overall goal
of modernization.
So I would like to get your thoughts on the importance of
advanced and additive manufacturing to the Defense Department.
That is what is being centralized through the arsenal.
General.
Secretary Austin. Thanks. And thanks for your support
throughout.
This is a very important capability. If you look at
additive manufacturing, it enables us to produce some exquisite
types of components. And we can do that forward and save time
and stress on our logistical chains.
And so I think this is a great capability. And as this
continues to develop, I am pretty excited about the
possibilities. But we know that a lot of that is playing out in
your home State, and we appreciate the support that you have
provided them.
Mrs. Bustos. Thirteen seconds left.
General Milley, anything to add to that?
General Milley. It is a great capability, and we appreciate
what is happening at Rock Island for the entire force.
Mrs. Bustos. You guys come over and see us, okay?
General Milley. Absolutely.
Mrs. Bustos. You are invited. Thank you.
I yield back, Madam Chair.
Ms. McCollum. Thank you.
Mr. Cole, unfortunately, will not be joining us. So it will
be Ms. Kaptur, Mr. Ryan, Mr. Kilmer, and then Mr. Calvert, and
I will wrap up the hearing.
Ms. Kaptur.

Remarks of Ms. Kaptur

Ms. Kaptur. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Secretary Austin, General Milley, thank you for your
exemplary lifetime of service to the people of our country.
What a great example each of you are to the young people
aspiring in our country.
I am going to make just a couple little, short statements,
and then I will focus on naval readiness.
But I come from the fourth seacoast, and as the Department
of Defense considers deploying various assets, and I just ask
you to please don't forget the defense industrial base of the
country, which Congresswoman Bustos referenced right now, both
in terms of manufacturing capacity as well as energy.
We are often overlooked as the fourth seacoast, as we look
at just the Washington, D.C., area, for example, and so I just
wanted to point you to that fourth seacoast.
Secondly, in terms of issues, I am very concerned about our
military and the nutritional value of food served to our
military personnel, having just come back from Grafenwoehr and
Rzeszow in Poland, and I would like you to find someone in the
Department that could come to my office and we could discuss
this. I would be very grateful for that.
And then, secondly, the question of Russian vulnerabilities
in terms of Ukraine right now. I don't want to talk about it
here, but I hope someone somewhere in the defense establishment
would be able to brief us on that, as well as the global energy
supply issue and how that relates to what is happening on that
continent far from here.
Thirdly, I just wanted to mention the issue of behavioral
health. And I was down at SOUTHCOM with some of our Members
years ago, and shortly thereafter, though the topic of the
meeting was behavioral health, an extremely high ranking
individual took his life in Bahrain, someone that I had met
down there.
And so I can put this on the record as a member of the
Mental Health Caucus here in Congress. We are 100,000
neuropsychiatrists short as a country, we are 400,000
behavioral nurses short.
So how do we attempt to help the people of our country,
whether they are principals in schools or commanders of units
in the military, when we don't have the personnel to do it?
I would urge you to consider Uniformed Services University
of Health Services as a portal where we could create a program
that would draw people in. They are not going into this field
because they earn more operating on people's knees than they do
taking care of their neuropsychiatric conditions.
But maybe we could have a combined military-civilian
program that would draw people into this so we could help the
people of our country. I just want to put that down.
Finally, in terms of naval readiness, I have to say I am
terribly concerned about what happened on the George Washington
and on the Wasp. I know that one of my other subcommittees, we
deal with nuclear weapons, and the time it is taking both to
retool the weapons, as well as repair ships, is creating a
dispirited situation for some of our naval personnel, for
example, who thought the ship would be maybe repaired by, if it
is sitting in Newport News, a year ago or a year and a half
ago. For hundreds of those sailors they have no access to
housing or a car and they are stuck on the ship.
This is really demoralizing. And I am troubled by the
defense submission on the Navy because I see it getting worse.
And so I just wanted to point a flashlight at this part of the
budget and say we got to do something.
And I am not sure what it is, but we can't keep trying to
do everything and not doing it well and not taking care of
those who are in service to our country right now and the
equipment that we are using, and to try to get a faster pace to
repair. The George Washington is going to be up there in dry
dock for another year. It was supposed to be finished in 2022.
So I am really worried about this issue, and I am hoping at
another briefing or somehow we can get greater clarity on where
we are headed on this.
So if you have any comments about naval readiness and the
backlog of repair, its impact on morale, and where we head.
Your budget makes me even more nervous.

NAVAL READINESS

Ms. McCollum. Mr. Secretary, I will yield Ms. Kaptur an
additional minute so that you can start answering that
question, and the rest we will take for the record.
Mr. Secretary.
Secretary Austin. Okay. Well, certainly I share your
concern on the issue of mental health and our access to
resources. And that is why we are asking you for, in this
budget, additional resources to help us provide greater access
to our troops, which includes telehealthcare opportunities as
well.
But this is a really, really important issue. I certainly
will take on your recommendation to take a look at our
uniformed services piece here and what can be done there. And
so we will have somebody come talk to you on the other issues
that you raised as well.
And if you want to talk on global energy supplies, we will
liaise with DOE as well to make sure that they know you have an
interest here.
The repair of a nuclear carrier is very, very
sophisticated, especially that level of repair, that it is
ongoing.
Now, the pressure that COVID has put on all of our
enterprise is significant, but that work has continued,
certainly not at the pace that we would like to see it
continue.
You know that there are two investigations ongoing by the
Navy on the George Washington issue, and I look forward to
seeing the results of those investigations. And I think the
Secretary of the Navy is headed down to visit with the George
Washington chain of command here on the 17th and should have
greater insights to provide from that visit as well.
There are choices that have been made or will be made in
the future in terms of how you billet sailors when that repair
is ongoing. Whether or not we made the right choices is left to
be seen.
Certainly there is a problem there. We have got to
understand what that problem was a bit more. And then we have
to figure out what to do to ensure that we don't have these
kinds of problems in the future.
Again, I don't think it was anticipated--certainly it was
not anticipated that the ship would be in a repair cycle this
long. But, nonetheless, I expect the leadership to make the
right decisions, and I look forward to seeing what the
investigations are going to show us here.
Ms. McCollum. Thank you, Mr. Secretary.
Mr. Ryan, then Mr. Kilmer.

Remarks of Mr. Ryan

Mr. Ryan. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Let me extend my thanks as well. I can't imagine how many
sleepless nights you have had over the past few months, and we
appreciate it. You are the defenders of freedom in this
country, and we are here to try to help and support the best we
can.
I am going to kind of go through a few things, comments,
before I have my question.
First, let me just say my own personal opinion. We know
this ultimately is going to be the decision of Ukraine and
their leadership. But I don't think that the Russians should be
allowed to have an inch of territory in that country. I just
don't think we can reward this kind of behavior.
And I know it is clearly more complicated than that, but I
think it is important that you know where we stand.
To get to some of the issues Ms. Kaptur brought up around
the mental health, having worked on these issues for a long
time--and, Mr. Secretary, you mentioned the suicide issue,
which is pervasive across our society now--one of the
recommendations I would give is--and we have been trying to
work on this--how do you evaluate people who are coming into
the military.
One of the more recent analyses of this issue is around
adverse childhood experiences where people coming into the
military are bringing trauma from their childhood. Could be
multiple adverse childhood experiences. But in each one of
these experiences it increases your rates of depression,
increases your rates of mental health issues, increases your
rates of suicide.
So I think if you are going to go at this thing, really
trying to get some knowledge about the person before they even
step foot in the military, and that will help, I think, begin
to try to address some of those issues.
I also want to mention having more of a whole of government
approach. You look at the problems that we have now in Eastern
Europe. A lot of this is because of the energy issue and the
overreliance on Russia for oil and gas.
And I think a whole of government approach--we have gas in
eastern Ohio, western PA, Utica Shale, Marcellus Shale--how do
we build the infrastructure to get this gas, liquid natural gas
or whatever it is, out of eastern Ohio to Eastern Europe, and
having obviously not necessarily a short-term solution but a
mid-to-long-term solution to help our allies in Europe be more
reliant on American energy than on Vladimir Putin, which could,
I think, knock the legs out from under him.
Lastly, and Ms. Kaptur brought this up too when she
mentioned it around the issue of food, and it may seem like an
ancillary issue in the military, but we have seen from recent
studies, multiple studies showing increased rates of obesity,
increased rates of diabetes in the military.
Now, a few years ago I sat on the VA Committee, right, so
we are seeing, like, what are we feeding our troops when they
are active, and now we have obesity and diabetes when they go
to the VA, which is driving up costs.
And I have been working on this issue for a couple years,
and we have had the Army make promises about a campus dining
pilot, the Air Force Academy, which, in good faith, they got
shut down because of the pandemic, but the superintendent there
promised to resume the program. Air Force promised to expand
their food 2.0 modernization to food 3.0.
None of these services mentioned fulfilled their
assurances. Navy and Marine Corps did not break any promises
because they haven't made any promises.
But to me, when you see the recently published report on
the military food system, the GAO found that each service
abysmally managed its food systems.
And I just think this is something that--it is so
complicated. My staff brought me a flow chart of how the food
system works in the military. It is insane. I mean, there is so
much--there is no flow.
And I just want to be very clear. This is not a food--this
is a food management and operations problem. This isn't a
nutrition problem. Everybody knows what we should be eating. I
mean, it is pretty common knowledge.
So in 2022, Mr. Secretary, we passed legislation
recommending the formation of a food transformation cell within
the Office of the Secretary of Defense, and if you could just
tell us what the status is of that cell and how you can assure
us that as we move towards food transformation there are not
going to be more broken promises.
I think this is a very important issue for us to save money
that we can then put into a lot of these other programs.

FOOD TRANSFORMATION

Ms. McCollum. Mr. Secretary, once again, I will give you a
few extra moments here to answer the question.
Mr. Ryan. I thank the chair for her generosity.
Secretary Austin. Well, thank you, sir. First of all, let
me thank you for your interest in this and the work that you
have done in the past.
And I would like to say that I share your concerns on the
importance of this. And I think that the food transformation
cell will provide significant benefit in terms of assisting us
and coordinating our efforts here.
That cell is going to be stood up in September, and then in
October we will submit a report to you on how we stood it up
and the progress that has been made to date. It is a work in
progress, but September is the date when that cell will start.
Mr. Ryan. Okay. Well, thank you for that, Madam Chair.
Ms. McCollum. Mr. Kilmer.

SHIPYARD INTRASTRUCTURE OPTIMIZATION PROGRAM

Mr. Kilmer. Thank you, Madam Chair.
And thank you both for being with us and for your service
to our country.
Last year when you were in front of this subcommittee I
asked about the Shipyard Infrastructure Optimization Program,
the SIOP, which is a 20-year, $21 billion investment in
modernizing and optimizing our shipyards.
I was pleased to hear both of you say very positive things
about that, about the importance of that in terms of the
capacity of the Navy to meet its mission and just understanding
how critical that was. And I want to thank you for that, not
only for your support of SIOP but for our public shipyards too.
Having said that, I am a bit worried that the program is
falling behind in terms of both cost and time. Not to put too
fine a point on it, but this really matters. We don't have a
shipyard on the West Coast that can handle a Ford-class
carrier, and so time is of the essence. And would gleefully
invite you to come visit Puget Sound Naval Shipyard in our neck
of the woods.
The SIOP relies on area development plans to inform the
optimization portions of the SIOP and provide accurate schedule
and cost estimates. Those were originally scheduled to be
completed at the end of this fiscal year. It looks like that is
probably going to slip to the end of next fiscal year or even
later.
The Navy also promised to provide a SIOP strategic
framework to coincide with the release of the President's
budget, but Congress still hasn't received that plan.
That guidance aligns all the SIOP activities and provides
the overarching framework to implement SIOP as it moves from
the planning into the execution phase.
So I am just concerned that delays both to the area
development plans and to the SIOP strategic framework could
postpone implementation of some investments that really need to
happen for the Navy to meet its mission.
So I guess I want to hear from you sort of what the plan is
for just making sure that this program stays on track and what
your office is planning in that regard.
Secretary Austin. Thanks, sir. Again, thanks for your
support and your focus on this. It is truly important in terms
of making sure that we maintain the world-class capability that
we have had and will continue to have with our United States
Navy.
We invested in this last year. We are asking you for $1.7
billion to put towards this work going forward. That is an
historic amount. It is twice the amount that we invested in
last year.
It certainly helps to get a budget passed on time so that
we can make sure that we are implementing our plans on time.
And clearly I believe that going forward, without the impacts
of COVID and some other things, that we will be able to come
closer to meeting our goals and objectives.
But, again, we are not where we want to be. This is
important to the Navy. And, again, we will make sure that the
Navy is doing everything it can to maintain pace. And we are
going to have to pick up the pace here.

TRACKING SHIPBUILDING PROGRAMS

Mr. Kilmer. Do you envision a future in which we have to--
or you have to set specific targets and metrics and timelines
and milestones to just ensure that the Navy is keeping on
track?
Secretary Austin. Navy has those. But certainly making sure
that they execute in accordance with the plan is important, and
if those goals and objectives are insufficient, then we will
revisit that.
Mr. Kilmer. Let me ask with the time I have left, I know
unmanned vehicles are a key part of the cutting-edge
technologies that DOD is using now and in the future to combat
threats from Russia and China and elsewhere.
The Navy's 30-year shipbuilding plan calls for an increase
in unmanned assets. The plan proposes to grow the fleet of
unmanned subsurface vehicles from zero in the current inventory
to potentially 50 by fiscal year 2045.
Growth in these technologies will lean on installations,
including Keyport in my neck of the woods, which is one of the
leaders in UUVs, unmanned underwater vehicles.
As the Navy begins to acquire more unmanned vehicles, how
can Congress ensure the Navy is ready to operate this
technology alongside manned vehicles?
Secretary Austin. Well, we are still learning a lot. I
would point to some of the work that the Fifth Fleet commander
is doing out in the Middle East. This is tremendous capability
that we have just begun to scratch the surface on.
And in terms of what it is going to take to fully develop
this, there are a bunch of unknowns now. I believe that this is
a capability that we need to go after faster, further.
And so I will work with the CNO and the SecNav to ensure
that they are identifying what their needs are going forward
and that this capability is fully integrated into our manned
surface and underwater capabilities as well, so.
Mr. Kilmer. Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I yield back.
Ms. McCollum. Mr. Calvert, any closing remarks?

Closing Remarks of Mr. Calvert

Mr. Calvert. Thank you, Madam Chair, and I am going to
submit a number of questions for the record regarding
innovation, hypersonics, Taiwan, fuel costs, a whole bunch of
things that we didn't have time to cover today.
But, General Milley, we had discussed this the other day,
and after our hasty exit from Afghanistan I am concerned about
taking our eye off that region. Obviously, it is still a
problem. And, as you know, 3 of the 13 servicemembers killed in
Afghanistan were either in or near my district in California--
Lance Corporal Kareem Nikoui, Corporal Hunter Lopez, and Lance
Corporal Dylan Merola. The families of the fallen of these
folks, these heroes, want obviously justice and accountability.
We can discuss this more in a classified setting, but, as
you know, what you are doing to find and prosecute these
terrorists that conducted that suicide attack at Abbey Gate is
extremely important, not just to the families but to the morale
of the United States Marine Corps that obviously went there and
did their duty.
Also, I am concerned about the limitations presented over-
the-horizon counterterrorism capability that potentially will
allow ISIS-K and al-Qaida to regroup. I don't think we should
take our eye off the ball on that.
And as much as you can say in this setting to ensure that
Afghanistan never becomes a haven for terrorists again, I would
like to hear that. And what kind of capability have we lost to
conduct counterterrorism missions in the future?
General Milley. Well, first, Congressman, let me say how
deeply I feel personally, and I know the Secretary does as
well, and all of the senior leaders in uniform feel about the
loss of any of our soldiers, sailors, airmen, marines, and
particularly those 13 that were killed at Abbey Gate. We feel
that personally and none more personally than the families of
the fallen.
So we owe them not only a great deal of gratitude, but we
owe them accountability for those that killed their loves one.
We know that, and we have not forgotten, and we will not
forget, not until justice is served.
With respect to over-the-horizon capability, I would like
to go in some detail in a classified session. But you and the
American people should know that we remain committed as a
military to the very first mission statement that we got in
Afghanistan, which was to ensure that Afghanistan never again
becomes a platform from which terrorists will strike the
continental United States.
They haven't done that since 9/11, and we are committed to
making sure that never happens again.
We do maintain surveillance, and I won't go into the
details of how or what forms or mechanisms, and we do have the
capabilities to conduct strike operations if we see a threat
emanating from the land of Afghanistan.
But I would prefer to take the rest of it into a classified
session.
Mr. Calvert. Thank you, Madam Chair.

Closing Remarks of Chair McCollum

Ms. McCollum. Thank you.
I think you heard quite a bit from this committee concerns
about the Navy and shipbuilding and the number of ships. And we
are going to have the Secretary of the Navy in front of us, so
I am sure he has got a preview of what will be coming their
way.
One point that I spoke with, with you, Secretary Austin,
when we met over a couple of months ago in the Senate, and you,
General Milley, is the role of any, if possible to repurpose,
maybe even work with the Coast Guard, with any of the littoral
combat ships in the Atlantic. China is also making inroads in
wanting to be in the Atlantic.
And there might be a mission that they can be refitted for
or repurposed for, not all of them, but working together with
you. And I know that that is going to be pencil to paper to
figure out if that is smart and if that works in working with
AFRICOM and with the combatant commander in Latin America.
But there is a simple fact here: The United States does not
have the shipbuilding industrial base to manufacture, let alone
maintain a Navy that can completely numerically compete with
China.
But quantity alone is not the point. It is quality and
capability that matter, as you gentlemen pointed out. China
might have 500 ships, but half of those ships are small support
vessels that have no qualitative edge over a U.S. combat ship.
The debate, I believe, needs to be very substantiated and
not just picking a number that we think might be for the right
number of ships for the U.S. to have.
That is why the concept of an integrated deterrence is so
important, and the new National Defense Strategy talks quite a
bit about this, the idea that it is necessary to confront China
as a united front with our Pacific allies, that we do not do it
alone, we have the support of the Japanese, the South Koreans,
and the Australians.
And only by leveraging our collective strength as
democracies, as democratic nations, as we have done with NATO
and as we are doing right now in the battle for Ukraine to be a
free and sovereign nation, we need to bring all our assets
together.
So for the record, China, as I said, has about 500 ships,
230 are smaller support vessels. The United States has 290
combat vessels. Japan has smaller support vessels, but they
have 154. South Korea has 160 ships. Some are small support
vessels. And Australia has 43.
So as we talk about how to rightsize the number of ships we
have, but also repair the ships that need to come in, we are
going to have some real in-depth discussions with the Secretary
of the Navy about what is happening in our shipyards.
Another item that this committee needs to work on in
shipbuilding involves the public-private partnerships that we
have. It also involves MILCON, and it also involves the
authorizers. Mr. Calvert and I don't just do this alone. We are
going to have to have robust discussions.
Mr. Calvert. Why not?
Ms. McCollum. Another place where robust discussions have
to take place--because at the end of the day we are the bill
payer--needs to be on base realignment. Once again, that is
going to be the authorizers, it needs to be MILCON and our
committee.
And these are uncomfortable discussions to have, I realize
it. But BRAC, which is under the purview of the authorizers and
the Military Construction Subcommittee, have to start working
with us to address these issues.
I want to fully state my support for a new round of BRAC.
The Department has stated in recent years that it has nearly 20
percent excess infrastructure. And we pay for that
infrastructure to be maintained, and it is doing nothing.
Many of our installations were aligned and built in the
wake of World War II. And, as we have clearly discussed today,
the world has changed. A new round of BRAC is necessary, and I
believe it could save taxpayers billions of dollars, and it
could also save the Department a lot of time and energy
expenditures maintaining something that is not useful to the
Department anymore.
I am not asking you to comment on these issues. We will be
submitting questions for the record and questions for the
Secretary.
So I want to thank you both for coming. I want to thank you
for answering our questions live today and taking all the
questions that are coming your way in written form.
And I also want to give a special thank you with--and I
think you will agree with me--to Mr. McCord. You are on call,
you are in my office frequently, you take questions that this
committee staff works on as we prepare the budget, so that we
have the best bill possible to make sure that our national
defense needs are met.
So thank you again. Thank you for all those who serve under
you, with you, and your families.
And this will conclude today's hearing, and the
subcommittee stands adjourned.
[Answers to submitted questions for the record follow:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Thursday, May 12, 2022.

NATIONAL GEOSPATIAL--INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

NATIONAL RECONNAISSANCE OFFICE

WITNESSES

VICE ADMIRAL ROBERT SHARP, USN, DIRETOR, NATIONAL GEOSPATIAL--
INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
CHRISTOPHER J. SCOLESE, DIRECTOR, NATIONAL RECONNAISSANCE OFFICE
[Clerk's note.--The complete hearing transcript could not
be printed due to classification of the material discussed.]

Friday, May 13, 2022.

U.S. AIR FORCE AND U.S. SPACE FORCE

WITNESSES

HON. FRANK KENDALL, SECRETARY, U.S. AIR FORCE
GENERAL CHARLES Q. BROWN, JR., CHIEF OF STAFF, U.S. AIR FORCE
GENERAL JOHN W. RAYMOND, CHIEF OF SPACE OPERATIONS, U.S. SPACE FORCE

Opening Statement of Chair McCollum

Ms. McCollum. The Defense Subcommittee will come to order.
This is a hybrid hearing, so we need to address a few
housekeeping matters.
Members joining virtually, once you start speaking, there
is a slight delay before you are displayed on the main screen.
Speak into the microphone because it will activate the camera
displaying the speaker on the main screen. Do not stop your
remarks if you are not immediately seeing the screen switch. If
the screen does not change after several seconds, please make
sure you are not muted.
To minimize background noise and ensure the correct speaker
is being heard and displayed, we ask that you remain on mute
unless you have sought recognition. And I will call on you, or
if you need to seek recognition, please do so. Myself or a
staff designee may mute the participants' microphone when they
are not under recognition if there is inadvertent background
noise.
Members who are virtual are responsible for muting and
unmuting yourselves unless we have a technical issue. If I
notice when you are recognized and having a technical issue and
you have not unmuted yourself, I will ask the staff to send you
a request to unmute yourself. Please accept the request so that
you are no longer muted.
And, finally, House rules require me to remind you that we
have set up an email address to which members can send anything
they wish to submit in writing at any of our hearings. That
email address has been provided in advance to your staff.
This morning, members, we are going to adhere as best we
can to--and that includes the ranking member and myself--to the
5-minute speaking rule to get as many people in before votes.
This morning, the subcommittee will receive testimony on
the fiscal year 2023 budget request for the Department of the
Air Force.
Leading our esteemed witness table here today is Secretary
Frank Kendall. While this is Mr. Kendall's first appearance
before us in his capacity as the Secretary of the Air Force, he
is certainly no stranger, having previously served for nearly 5
years as the Department of Defense's top acquisition official
from 2012 to 2017.
So welcome to you, Mr. Secretary.
We are also pleased to welcome back, in person this time,
General Brown, Chief of Staff of the Air Force, and General
Raymond, Chief of Space Operations.
This year's budget request for the Air Force is making
large bets on future technology and capabilities, coupled with
a hold plan to divest--a bold plan to divest legacy aircraft
systems over the next 5 years. And that is a bold plan, and I
am with you on that.
And then there is the bow wave of nuclear modernization
which is placing pressure on modernizing the conventional
forces. This pressure will continue throughout the current 5-
year plan and beyond. The result is that the Air Force is
trading near-term capacity for what hopefully will be
successful investments in capabilities needed to meet the
growing challenge from China.
And, as President Biden stated this week, this
administration is tackling inflation. As the rest of the
services, the Department of the Air Force is not only not
immune to inflation, but I know you gentlemen will be carefully
scrutinizing how we can keep costs down in your budget and make
sure any inflation is truly inflation to the requests that are
being made.
The fiscal year 2023 budget request for Space Force
reflects an increase of 30 percent over the fiscal year 2022
enacted level. Now, some of this growth is due to the
establishment of a new military personnel account, which was
previously included in the Air Force budget, and the planned
transfer of the Space Development Agency into Space Force.
However, even after adjusting for these transfers, the Space
Force budget increase is substantial; it is about 18 percent.
With these increases comes more responsibility to spend the
funds effectively and efficiently to deliver operationally
useful capabilities. We would like an update on the progress
made in fixing space acquisition and bringing greater
discipline to delivering systems on schedule and within the
budget.
I would also like to congratulate Mr. Frank Calvelli, who
was recently confirmed by the Senate to serve as Assistant
Secretary of the Air Force who will serve as the first-ever
Space Acquisition Executive. We really welcome his expertise.
We wish him well.
I would also like to take a second to thank all the men and
women who serve under your commands in the Air Force and Space
Force for their daily diligence and hard work in service to our
country.
I would also like to note for our members that we will be
holding a classified briefing with Secretary Kendall
immediately or as I have to announce, depending upon votes,
after this hearing.
I would like to turn to Ranking Member Calvert for his
openings remarks.
Mr. Calvert.
Mr. Calvert. Thank you, Madam Chair.
I want to thank each of our witnesses for appearing before
us today. We are grateful for your continued service and the
service of those under your command.
While I look forward to working with each of you to
properly fund and equip our airmen and guardsmen, I am deeply
troubled by the administration's weak request for defense. As
we look around the world, we see evolving threats, rapid
technology changes, more capable adversaries. This requires
more resources.
Some aspects of the request are encouraging, such as the
Air Force prioritization of nuclear modernization. However, I
question many other aspects, including the divestment of legacy
systems. Again, the Air Force is looking to reduce its force
structure, including capable platforms like the F-22, AWACS,
and A-10. If we are going to proceed with these requests, this
committee needs a better understanding of how we can meet the
threat environment with a reduced inventory.
I am also pleased to see the Space Force continue to grow
its capabilities. As we on this subcommittee know, nearly all
our military operations rely on a continued dominance in space.
General Raymond, I look forward to hearing how you are
working to right-size and -shape the force.
Throughout this year, we have heard testimony from our
geographic combatant commanders. I continue to be extremely
concerned that the services, and the Air Force in particular,
are failing to prioritize the warfighting needs of our COCOMs.
Like the three of you, I am an advocate for accelerating
change and accepting risk to do so. I am encouraged by the
advanced-manufacturing-and-software-first approach you are
taking for the next-generation systems. However, we cannot
overlook urgent warfighting needs to instead divert funding to
untested and unproven systems. Hope is not a planning strategy,
as my old man used to say, and it certainly will not enable a
capable response to any type of conflict that may break out
around the globe.
Before I close, I must reiterate my concern about how
inflation is eating into the DOD's buying power. Though
everyone saw it coming, the levels of inflation you are dealing
with today are the worst we have seen in decades. Even worse,
we do not know what it will be once we pass the fiscal year
2023 bill.
Sharp price increases in fuel, shipping costs, and other
consumer goods will have a disastrous effect on your ability to
train. I am a big supporter of the use of augmented and
virtual-reality training, but pilots need to fly real missions
against real pilots. I saw the Air Force just canceled a large
contract for adversarial air. I would like you to get me the
justification for this and your training replacement plan going
forward.
As you know, on June 30, 2020, my constituent Lieutenant
David Schmitz tragically lost his life during a training
mission at Shaw Air Force Base. David's death is a painful
reminder of what we risk with limited flight hours and
insufficient training. It is clear that more work is necessary
to ensure this doesn't happen again and that our servicemembers
don't pay the price for a shrinking budget. It is critical that
we work together to provide adequate resources to fully fund
weapons systems, operations, and training.
Again, thank you for taking the time to be with us.
With that, Madam Chair, I yield back.
Ms. McCollum. Thank you, Mr. Calvert.
Ms. Granger, as ranking member of the full committee, would
you like to make an opening statement?

Remarks of Ms. Granger

Ms. Granger. Thank you, Chair McCollum.
I want to thank each of the witnesses for appearing before
us today. I look forward to hearing from you about how the Air
Force and Space Force are preparing for both current and future
conflicts.
I want to begin by restating my serious concern about the
inadequacy of the administration's request for defense
spending. Inflation is dramatically decreasing the Department's
buying power, and this budget proposal fails to provide the
funds needed to maintain and modernize our military.
Looking at this year's request, it is clear that the Air
Force wants to retire older systems to fund new ones. This
needs to be done in a thoughtful manner. We must be prepared
for future conflicts, but we should not do that at the expense
of current needs.
As the war in Ukraine has shown us, it is critical that the
United States has a warfighting inventory that is flexible,
capable, and ready, and we must protect our strategic
advantages in the air and in space.
As we develop this year's bill, I look forward to working
with all of you to ensure that our airmen and guardsmen have
the tools they need to fulfill our National Defense Strategy.
Thank you again for taking the time to be with us today.
And thank you, Madam Chair. I yield back.
Ms. McCollum. Thank you.
Gentlemen, we have your full testimony in front of us, and
members have copies of it made available to them. I would like
to have as much time as we can for members to ask their
questions, so I would encourage you, please, to summarize your
statement. I want you to be complete but as succinct as you can
be, also, when it comes to responding to our questions.
So I would like to now proceed with the testimony,
beginning with Secretary Kendall.
Mr. Kendall.

Summary Statement for Secretary Kendall

Secretary Kendall. Thank you, Chair McCollum.
Chair McCollum, Ranking Member Calvert, members of the
committee, I am honored to have General Brown and General
Raymond join me in representing the nearly 700,000 airmen and
guardians that defend our Nation. We are thankful for your
consistent support over the years.
Speaking in 1940, General Douglas MacArthur said the
following: ``The history of failure in war can almost be summed
up in two words: too late. Too late in comprehending the deadly
purpose of a potential enemy, too late in realizing the mortal
danger, too late in preparedness, too late in uniting all
possible forces for resistance, too late in standing with one's
friends.''
I believe MacArthur made this comment after France fell to
Nazi Germany's aggression but before the attack on Pearl Harbor
drew the United States into a war in Asia--a time that in some
ways may be analogous to our own.
What my colleagues and I are trying to do and what we need
your help with is to ensure that America's Air and Space Forces
are never too late in meeting our pacing challenge, which is
China. We are also concerned about the now obvious and acute
threat of Russian aggression.
I would like to offer the committee a briefing that we have
been giving on the Hill that details the threat that China
poses more completely. I will be summarizing that in our
classified session later today. That briefing lays out China's
efforts to develop and field forces that can defeat the United
States' ability to project power in the Western Pacific. China
is also significantly increasing its nuclear weapon inventory
and working to field long-range strike capabilities that put
our homeland at risk.
Today, we will say more about how the Department of the Air
Force is responding to that threat through our fiscal year 2023
budget and through future budgets. Our budget submission
provides a balance between the capabilities we need today and
investments in the transformation required to address emerging
threats.
With the requested budget, the Air and Space Forces will be
able to support our combatant commanders and the continuing
campaigns that demonstrate our resolve, support and encourage
our allies and partners around the world. Simultaneously, our
fiscal year 2023 budget represents a significant early step in
the transformation of the Air and Space Forces to the
capabilities needed to provide enduring advantage.
An important feature of our budget request is a substantial
increase in research and development funding. This investment
is a downpayment on production and sustainment investments and
hard choices that are yet to come.
We are comfortable with the balance struck in the budget
submission. We also want to ensure the committee understands
that hard choices do lie ahead, at any budget level.
In this request, we are asking for divestiture of equipment
that is beyond its service life, too expensive to sustain, and
not effective against the pacing challenge. These divestments
are necessary to provide the resources required to transform
the Department of the Air Force to support integrated
deterrence.
We appreciate the committee's support for the divestitures
we requested last year, and we ask for your support for those
we are requesting this year and those in the future. Change is
hard, but losing is unacceptable, and we cannot afford to be
too late.
The work we have ongoing at the Department of the Air Force
to define the necessary transformation is focused on seven
operational imperatives, each of which is associated with some
aspect of our ability to project power. As of today, there
should be no doubt that great-power acts of aggression do occur
and equally no doubt of how devastating they can be for the
victims of that aggression and for the global community.
First, if the Space Force is to fulfill its mission of
enabling and protecting the Joint Force, we must pivot to
transformational space architectures and systems. In fiscal
year 2023, we are asking for funding to begin the
transformation to resilient missile warning and tracking and to
resilient communications networks.
Second, we must integrate and efficiently employ Air and
Space Forces as part of a highly lethal Joint Force through an
Advanced Battle Management System, or ABMS. This budget
continues funding for the early increments of ABMS and the
ongoing work that will define additional investments that the
Department needs to cost-effectively modernize our command and
control, communications, and battle management network.
Third, to defeat aggression, we must have the ability to
hold large numbers of air and surface targets at risk in a
time-compressed scenario. This budget funds the E-7 Wedgetail
as an interim AWACS replacement.
Fourth, our control of the air is being challenged, and we
must proceed to an affordable next-generation air-dominance
family of systems.
Fifth, we must have resilient forward-basing for our
tactical air forces. This budget continues funding for agile
combat employment in both the Indo-Pacific and European
regions.
Sixth, we must ensure the long-term viability and cost-
effectiveness of our global strike capability. Within this
budget, the B-21 enters production.
Finally, the Department of the Air Force must be fully
ready to transition to a wartime posture against a peer
competitor.
Members of the committee, I look forward to your support as
we work to ensure that America's Air and Space Forces are never
too late. One team, one fight.
We welcome your questions.
Ms. McCollum. Thank you so much, Mr. Secretary.
And now, General Brown, please proceed.

Summary Statement of General Brown

General Brown. Good morning, Chair McCollum, Ranking Member
Calvert and Ranking Member Granger, and distinguished members
of this committee. It is an honor to appear before you and
represent the 689,000 total force airmen serving today. I want
to thank you for your continued support to our airmen and their
families.
I appreciate the opportunity to be here today with
Secretary Kendall and General Raymond to testify on the fiscal
year 2023 budget submission--a budget that continues to
accelerate the Air Force's rate of change to address the
security challenges articulated in the National Defense
Strategy, a budget that continues to build on the successes of
fiscal year 2022.
The world looks to the United States Air Force as a leading
example, and we make air power look easy, but it is anything
but. A world-class Air Force requires world-class airmen that
are organized, trained, and equipped to remain the world's most
respected Air Force. But if we do not continue to transform,
this may no longer be the case. We must continue to communicate
and collaborate with this committee and key stakeholders so we
can accelerate change.
Last year's budget communicated the Air Force that the
Nation needs for 2030 and beyond. Our message has not changed
for fiscal year 2023, and it won't change in future budget
submissions. We must modernize to counter strategic
competitors. The PRC remains our pacing challenge, and Russia
remains an acute threat.
So we must balance between the demands of today and the
requirements for tomorrow. Failure to do so puts our ability to
execute the National Defense Strategy at risk. It puts
soldiers, sailors, marines, guardians, and airmen, along with
our allies and partners, at risk. And it puts our ability to
place air power anytime anywhere at risk.
The only way our Air Force and the Nation will be
successful balancing risk between today and tomorrow is if we
collaborate. In fact, ``collaboration'' is a critical word in
``Accelerate, Change, or Lose.''
We are beginning to see successes of our collaboration
efforts towards transition to the future. This year's budget
brought substantial increases to research and development. It
is focused on placing meaning military capability into the
hands of our airmen. Investment in systems and concepts allow
our Air Force to penetrate and dominate in any scenario.
Just as important as our investments, we have been
successful in beginning to divest systems that are increasingly
irrelevant against today's and tomorrow's threats. We did not
do this alone; the support of Congress is much appreciated.
Accelerating change is the impetus behind the Department of
the Air Force's operational imperatives. This means moving with
a sense of urgency and doing so in the right direction. This
year's National Defense Strategy provides us the needed
direction. And when you combine the operational imperatives and
the National Defense Strategy, you see this year's budget is in
alignment with what our Nation demands of our Air Force.
The Air Force we are building is critical to integrated
deterrence, campaigning, and building enduring advantages.
Because nuclear deterrence is the backstop of integrated
deterrence, this year's budget ensures our nuclear portfolios
are fully funded.
Current events are emblematic of how our Air Force is
campaigning. We deployed Air Force assets within days, shared
vital information and increased interoperability with our
allies and partners.
Finally, the Air Force invests in enduring advantages that
allow us to defend the homeland, project our power globally,
and operate as a joint, allied, and partner force.
More than anyone, I want tomorrow's airmen to be ready to
respond when our Nation calls. This includes investing in
programs that allow all of our airmen and their families to
reach their full potential. As the United States Air Force
celebrates its 75th anniversary this year, we are committed to
remaining the world-class Air Force America can be proud of.
Current events demonstrate the world is growing more
complex and uncertain, but I am certain we will need air power
anytime anywhere. I am certain this year's budget is another
step towards the transformation of the Air Force. I am certain
there is still more work to be done. Therefore, we must
continue to communicate and collaborate so we can accelerate
change.
Thank you for the opportunity to be with you today, and I
look forward to your questions.
Ms. McCollum. Thank you.
General Raymond, please proceed.

Summary Statement of General Raymond

General Raymond. Chair McCollum, Ranking Member Calvert,
Ranking Member Granger, and distinguished members of the
committee, it is an honor to appear before you today with
Secretary Kendall and General Brown.
On behalf of the almost 14,000 guardians stationed around
the world, let me begin by thanking each of you for your
continued leadership and your strong support of our guardians
and their families.
As we testify before you today, we find ourselves at a
strategic inflection point where we are faced with an acute
threat from Russia and a pacing challenge from China.
The Russian invasion of Ukraine has showcased the
importance of space to all instruments of national power.
Information derived from space, including commercial imagery,
has been instrumental in dominating the information
environment, communicating with forces, and detecting missile
threats. It is clear that the character of war has changed, and
space is foundational to that change.
However, Russia's recent direct-ascent anti-satellite
missile test last November is just the latest evidence of
efforts to deny our Nation the advantages that space provides.
Just as concerning, our pacing challenge, China, is
integrating space into their military operations to detect,
track, target, and strike the Joint Force, putting our sailors,
soldiers, airmen, marines, and guardians on the ground, in the
air, and on the sea at high risk.
We cannot allow potential adversaries to gain an
unchallenged ability to conduct space-enabled attacks. Our
joint forces will remain at risk until we can complete the
transformation to a resilient space architecture and protect
the Joint Force from space-enabled attacks.
This is critical to supporting all aspects of the National
Defense Strategy, integrated deterrence campaigning, and
building enduring advantage.
To remain the world's leader in space, this President's
budget request prioritizes space and invests $24.5 billion to
ensure our assured access to and freedom to maneuver in space.
The largest share is research, development, testing, and
evaluation funding, almost $16 billion, to modernize our
forces, a portion of which will begin the pivot to a more
resilient and mission-capable missile warning and missile
tracking force design.
Notably, this includes funding for the Space Development
Agency, which is included in the Space Force budget for the
first time this year.
In contrast to legacy approaches, this architecture will be
built to survive and degrade gracefully under attack, help
manage escalation, and be rapidly reconstituted. This
transformation will also allow us to capitalize more fully on
two of our national advantages--our commercial industry and our
allies and partners.
To increase readiness, we are funding operational test and
training infrastructure. This ensures that we can get the right
capability on orbit and in the hands of operators trained in
operating in a contested domain. Robust test and training
capabilities are also critical to fielding our next-generation
systems.
Other key investments include increased funding for weapons
system sustainment and a more resilient Global Positioning
System and next-generation satellite communications.
Finally and most importantly, we invest in our guardians
and their families. Over the past 2 years, we have overhauled
how we recruit, assess, train, develop, promote, employ, and
take care of guardians. Resilient space power isn't just about
satellites; it is also about guardians.
This is one of the reasons why we are seeking the
integration of Active Duty and Reserve forces into a single
hybrid component structure. This space component is central to
our human capital plan and will allow us to best align our
full-time and part-time members. This is our number-one
legislative proposal, and we look forward to working with this
committee to implement this bold and transformational approach.
As Secretary Kendall has mentioned, change is hard and
losing is unacceptable. The transformation we are beginning now
is essential to protecting the Joint Force and for the security
of space.
Thank you again for your leadership and support of our
Space Force. It is an honor to appear before you, and I look
forward to your questions.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

SPACE FORCE ACQUISITIONS AND PROGRAMS

Ms. McCollum. Thank you all.
For members who have just come in, we are going to adhere
to the 5-minute rule, as we don't know when votes are going to
be called, for all of us asking questions today.
Gentlemen, as you know, delivering space systems on time
and within budget has been a challenge for quite some time.
Examples: GPS ground control segment was more than 6 years late
and 70 percent over budget; GPS handsets for warfighters are
years behind schedule; and the current missile warning system
was delivered 9 years late and $15 billion over budget.
So, fixing acquisition is one of the primary reasons why
Space Force was created.
So, Secretary Kendall, you and I are going to have an
opportunity to talk later today, so I am going to focus on
Space Force.
We need to make sure the overall Space Force 5-year budget
is executable and it is affordable. The next 5-year budget
estimate is basically flat, rising a bit in 2024 before falling
below the 2023 proposed budget level.
Secretary Kendall and General Brown, do you feel that the
fiscal year 2023 request and then the out-year projections
reflect what it will actually take to deliver successful
acquisitions and programs?
There are significant budget shortfalls that you are aware
of over the next few years, and if so, what programs could
possibly be put at risk?
Does Space Force believe it can really carry out its
mission with that flat budget, reprioritizing current
activities, and if so, what would you prioritize?
Secretary Kendall and then General Raymond.
Secretary Kendall. Chair McCollum, that is a great
question. I think it is a very perceptive one.
The transformation I talked about and the difficult choices
that lie ahead are related to what you just asked me. We are
starting the transformation of our capabilities in space with
the missile warning architecture and the communications
architectures that we are investing in in 2023.
We are also working to define our other needs, both to
provide the services that enable the Joint Force from space and
also to protect the Joint Force from possible attack based on
targeting by our enemies from space. We have a lot of work
still to do there, but we are off to, I think, a very solid
start.
I do not anticipate that future budgets will remain flat or
go down for the Space Force. Quite the opposite. But we still
have to define our requirements. We have to make sure that the
programs we put in place, as you indicated, are structured for
success, so that we don't have massive schedule and cost
overruns. We all want to avoid that.
There are opportunities through emerging technologies and
through commercial best practices that I think will make that
possible. But we are going to still have to be disciplined and
we are going to have to be smart about how we invest in space.
So I think that is the picture that we see coming, okay? At
this point, I think the 2023 budget is a good start, gives us a
good start towards those types of architectures, and gives us
the resources we need to decide what next steps we need to
take.
General Raymond. Yes, ma'am, I agree wholeheartedly with
Secretary Kendall. We still have work to do. We have a great
force design; it has united the Department around this force
design. Now we have to acquire it.
If we acquire this force design the same way we do legacy
systems, it would be unaffordable. We have to change the way we
do business. Central to that is the work that we have done to
modernize our acquisition system.
You had mentioned previous--the current Constellation and
the overruns it had. The current program, Next-Gen GEO, is on
schedule. It has met every performance parameter--it has met
all of its key performance parameters. It completed its
critical design review. And it is currently 25 months ahead of
the average time it takes from start to launch of a program.
So we are keeping laser-focused on this to make sure that
we can deliver on a cost and time that is critical to our
Nation.
Ms. McCollum. Well, thank you, gentlemen. I am impressed
with your enthusiasm that you are going to be on time, on
target, on budget. But I do have some concerns, especially in
light of what both the ranking member and I brought up--
inflation.
Inflation is something that wasn't fully, I am sure, baked
into this budget. But inflation in general doesn't mean an
across-the-board increase. And I appreciate your due diligence
in making sure that when we have contracts or concerns about
inflation that we are counting the right things in the right
basket for inflation and not just taking across-the-board
increases.
So we will follow up with some more questions for the
record, but for right now, I thank you.
And, members, I am yielding back time.
Mr. Calvert.

MQ-9 REAPER

Mr. Calvert. Thank you, Madam Chair.
General Brown, you are aware of my disagreement with the
Air Force views on the future of the MQ-9 Reaper. It seems that
when you do not want to keep an aircraft in your inventory, you
label it ``not survivable'' without clearly describing what it
means and requesting to divest it.
I understand that if we are in a kinetic war with China
that the MQ-9 will not be able to collect ISR on adversarial
territory. But most of the world is uncontested airspace, and
COCOMs in these areas desperately need more ISR. Every single
combatant commander I talk to wants more ISR and specifically
the MQ-9.
I have four questions I would like you to answer.
One, can you put more context and specifics into the term
``survivability''?
Two, are we meeting our geographic combatant commanders'
operational needs?
And, three, the Air Force seems to have no problem
justifying the purchase of fourth-gen manned fighter aircraft
at a higher cost than the more survivable fifth-gen, yet it
refuses to see any value in a fourth-gen unmanned affordable
ISR platform. I can see value in a mix of the fourth- and
fifth-generation platforms, so how do you explain the Air
Force's differing positions on these platforms?
And, finally, if the Air Force position is to maintain the
current fleet until 2030 and then retire the MQ-9s, when will
its replacement be prototyped, tested, and then fielded.
So, I will leave the rest of the time to answer that.
General Brown. Appreciate the question, Representative
Calvert. Let me put the--all of it into context.
There is a mix of capabilities that we are bringing forth
specific to the MQ-9 and to ISR and, really, more broadly
across the Air Force. The Air Force is in high demand from our
combatant commanders, and I speak to them quite often.
As you look at the MQ-9s in this particular budget, there
are 100 of them that will actually get transferred to an
intergovernment transfer, but there will be no impact to the
combatant commanders on MQ-9--no impact to the combatant
commanders. We will maintain the number of combat lines. And
the same thing with our----
Mr. Calvert. Well, why do they--they disagree with that.
Why is that?
General Brown. You know, they are--I know they are
demanding customers, but we are providing them the ISR that we
do have. And this is why, again, the Air Force is in high
demand. As far as their needs, there is a balance of needs
between what the combatant commands--not only from MQ-9s but
the other platforms.
And to put the survivability piece in context, I can talk
to you more in the classified session on the specifics of these
platforms. So there will be a mix of the kinetic and survival
persistent with the MQ-9s. And so we will continue to have MQ-
9s in our inventory.
Versus the fourth- and fifth-gen. Just like the mix on our
fighter fleet between fourth- and fifth-gen, we will have the
same kind of mix with our ISR platforms. And you will have
platforms like the MQ-9 and some of our other big-wing ISR.
With the other classified forums, we will have more chance to
talk about in the classified session.
And so, there is a balance between the current fleet that
we have today and the fleet we will have to have in the future,
and we have to balance it against the threat. And the threat we
have been up against for the past 30 years, particularly in the
Middle East, has been very permissive. The threats that we face
in the future and we are facing today are less permissive,
which is why we have to have a mix of capability to operate
both in that permissive environment and the less permissive
environment that we expect to see from our growing adversaries,
particularly the People's Republic of China.
Mr. Calvert. Well, I would point out that, not just the
Middle East is permissive, but Africa is permissive, South
America is permissive. About 90 percent of the globe is.
And, also, when we take a look at the cost differential
between so-called survivable ISR versus what you define as not
survivable, it is significant. So we need to look at that and
determine whether or not that risk is really worth it, both in
the short term and the long term.
I look forward to working with you on that, but, as you
know, I disagree with your basic premise on this.
General Brown. And this is an area where, you know, we
don't do this just blindly. Part of this is, we do levels of
analysis to go through this and make sure we, to the best of
our ability, get the right mix.
But I am very happy to work with you and the rest of the
committee and be able to talk to you in more detail about our
approach, particularly as we get into our classified session.

SERVICES AND ISR CAPABILITIES

Mr. Calvert. Just one last point. I just want to point out,
as you know, the Marine Corps is buying more for INDOPACOM. So
obviously they believe that they can't count on the Air Force
to provide that service, which is really frustrating to me.
Because, in the beginning of this thing, the Air Force was
going to run all the ISR. Then the CIA had to do it, and the
Army had to do it, and then now the Marine Corps is going to do
it. And it should have been, quite frankly, all under one
umbrella, the United States Air Force. But, obviously, that
genie is out of the bottle.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I yield back.
Ms. McCollum. Thank you, Mr. Calvert.
Mr. Ruppersberger, you are recognized.

SPACE DEVELOPMENT AGENCY

Mr. Ruppersberger. General Raymond, in recent years, the
Space Development Agency, SDA, has accelerated its pursuit of
low Earth orbit constellations. Now, I believe that the
proliferation of a LEO satellite constellation is critical to
our Nation's future efforts in data, communication, missile
defense, projectile navigation, and battlefield operations in
war.
Now, as Space Force fully absorbs SDA in fiscal year 2023,
how does your budget ensure that we maintain the authorities
and efficiencies we need at SDA to remain on track with our
important programs?
General Raymond. Thank you for the question, sir.
I, too, believe that proliferation of a low Earth orbit
satellite constellation is critical. The cornerstone of our
budget is exactly that. The Space Development Agency has helped
inform that. They have been working side-by-side with us.
As we bring SDA in, their capabilities, their prototypes
are included in this. The way Secretary Kendall has worked with
R&E, the parent of SDA today, is that we have already treated
them like they are part of our team. We are already integrating
them. And as we are going to bring them in, we want to bring
them in as they are to give them the flexibility to be able to
operate as they are, and then we are going to provide support
to make sure that they stay lean and efficient and go fast.

INTEGRATION OF SPACE

Mr. Ruppersberger. Okay.
Secretary Kendall, now that we are more than 2 years in,
how do you assess the Department of the Air Force's management
of building and integrating the Space Force? And what hard
budget decisions did you have to make in fiscal year 2023 to
ensure we maintain our advantage in the space domain?
And I realize it is a broad question, but give it a shot.
Secretary Kendall. No, I think, overall, I am very happy
with what I inherited as I came into office about a year ago. I
think General Raymond and his team have done a fantastic job.
They have really laid out a path forward to acquire resilient
capabilities, and they are also dealing with what we need to do
to protect the Joint Force from targeting from space by our
adversaries.
So, we are on the right track, and we have made some good
steps in the right direction, but there is an enormous amount
of work still to be done. We have to define the rest of the
architectures that we are going to need for space services. And
we have a number of things underway we will talk about in the
classified forum that are important as well.
One of the key things we need to do is work closely with
the intelligence community to ensure that the ISR, which came
up earlier in the hearing, that we need from space is provided
effectively from space. The intelligence community has an
intelligence mission, but it also understands it needs to
support operational forces. And we are working in close
collaboration with the intelligence community to define
requirements that meet both of our needs and then systems that
will do that as well.
So, that is a work in progress, and that is one of the
things that we will be addressing in the budget in future
submissions.
Mr. Ruppersberger. Yes, there was a lot of debate about
that, whether we should do it, whether we shouldn't do it.
There were a lot of different opinions. But we have done it,
and we need to stand behind it.
Secretary Kendall. ``We,'' the Space Force?
Mr. Ruppersberger. Yes.
Secretary Kendall. Absolutely, Congressman.
Mr. Ruppersberger. And we need to stand behind it, whatever
the thoughts were----
Secretary Kendall. We are fully committed to making it a
success.
Mr. Ruppersberger [continuing]. And move forward. And this
committee feels the same way. I think.
I yield back.
Ms. McCollum. I think we all want Space Force to be a huge
success.
We are next going to hear from Ms. Granger and then Mr.
Kilmer.

F-35 REDUCTION IMPACT

Ms. Granger. The commander of the U.S. European Command
testified about the incredible capabilities of the F-35
deployed in the region. However, the budget request reduced the
number of F-35s the Air Force wants to buy.
Secretary Kendall, can you please explain the reduced
number in your request and if the Air Force is still committed
to the F-35 and to what degree?
Secretary Kendall. Congressman Granger, I will answer the
second part first.
Absolutely committed to the F-35. It is the cornerstone of
our fighter fleet and will be for many years to come. And
people ask me if we are committed to the program. We are 15
years into production, and I expect we will be buying it for
another 15 years.
The reduction we took this year--and we will probably
extend it the next year--was based on a number of factors.
There are a number of things we need to do in the TacAir
portfolio. One of them was to buy out the remaining number of
inventory of F-15EXes that we need for the capabilities that
the F-15EX would provide. We want to increase the funding for
the next generation of air dominance, which will be the follow-
on to the F-22. We have some other programs that we need to
move forward as well.
We also are very interested and insistent on getting the
Block IV capabilities for F-35. And the contractor has been
late in delivering them so far, so we want to see evidence that
they will be able to accomplish that before we increase the
production. So that was a major factor as well.
Ms. Granger. Thank you.
Ms. McCollum. Is the gentlewoman yielding back or does the
gentlewoman have another question?
Mr. Kilmer.

REALIGNMENT OF THE KC-135

Mr. Kilmer. Thanks, Madam Chair.
And thanks for being with us.
I was hoping to quickly cover two topics.
Secretary Kendall, as you know, Air Mobility Command is the
critical backbone of our Nation's response to global threats.
Air refueling is a key part of Mobility Command's operations.
We are fortunate to have both the 92nd Air Refueling Wing and
the Air National Guard's 141st Air Refueling Wing at Fairchild
Air Force Base on the other side of my State, in Spokane.
Despite its critical role, the 141st Air Refueling Wing
still operates as a classic associate unit without KC-135s.
As the Air Force brings more KC-46s into service, is the
Air Force exploring options to realign KC-135s to units like
the 141st to provide added capability for the Air Force?
Secretary Kendall. We are in the process of assessing where
KC-46 will be based for the remainder of the fleet that we
currently have, we project.
We are constantly looking at the basing for cost of force
basically. One of the things that we do pay attention to, of
course, is that there is an enormous amount of political
interest in retaining capability. One of the things we are
asking people to look at is that flying capability isn't always
the best thing for you to have. There are other capabilities,
such as cyber and battle management capabilities, that we need
as well.
A lot of our older aircraft are going to be retired. KC-135
has served us very well, but I was on one recently and that is
a very old airplane. We will be bringing down in our request
and going through the FYDP the total number of tankers
modestly. That is a request we have of the committee.
But we are going to recapitalize that fleet, and we are
going to continue to do that. Tankers are an incredibly
important part of our force structure. But they are not the
only thing that is important. I mean, you have to balance an
awful lot of competing things as we do our planning for the
future.

HOUSING FOR SERVICE MEMBERS

Mr. Kilmer. The other thing I wanted to quickly touch on
was just housing. I know that you are dealing with issues
related to recruitment and retention of servicemembers.
We have seen across the country a big spike in the cost of
single-family homes. In my neck of the woods, it has gone up 24
percent from the last year. Rent is up about 19 percent since
the beginning of the pandemic.
And that affects everybody but particularly our
servicemembers since, unlike civilians, they can't really
choose where they live and have to deal with an increasingly
competitive housing market.
I applaud the DOD for increasing the Basic Allowance for
Housing at the beginning of this year, but it is clearly not
enough. I was hoping you could talk about what is being done to
ensure that servicemembers can actually afford rent or purchase
a house at their new duty station and whether you are exploring
any ways to increase on-base housing options as well.
Secretary Kendall. We are looking at all sorts of ways to
address this.
What has happened, of course, as you indicated, is that the
cost of housing has gone up fairly dramatically and fairly
quickly. Secretary Austin is personally very concerned about
this, and we have had a number of conversations about it.
We are taking steps to, in some places, increase Basic
Allowance for Housing, you know, out of cycle, if you will.
Mr. Kilmer. Yes.
Secretary Kendall. And we need the support of the committee
as we go forward, particularly as inflation continues, making
adjustments at interim periods, not just on an annual basis. So
it is something we are tracking very carefully.
We are trying to make sure that we maintain the quality of
our on-base housing as well. That is an important thing for us
too.
Mr. Kilmer. Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I will yield back.
Ms. McCollum. Thank you.
Thank you, members, for being so considerate of everyone.
Mr. Cole and then Mrs. Kirkpatrick.

EARLY WARNING AND CONTROL SYSTEMS

Mr. Cole. Thank you very much, Madam Chair.
Gentlemen, great to have you.
I want to begin by just associating myself with the remarks
of the ranking member of both the full committee and the
subcommittee about these concerns about divestiture and about
the overall size of the budget. It is just frankly, with all
due respect, too low in the kind of world that we are living in
today. And I suspect that will be something the full committee
and certainly the subcommittee will struggle with going
forward.
An example of this, or one of my concerns, is--number one,
I want to begin with a compliment. Thank you for beginning to
replace our airborne early warning and control systems. They
are way out of date, they are old, they are aging. But I am a
little worried about the speed with which you are retiring E-
3s.
And, again, we had this fight during the Obama years, and I
remember talking to the chief then. He said, ``Look, I am
having to cannibalize planes I don't want to give up to keep
planes flying that I need.'' I understand that dilemma. We
should never put you in that dilemma. But I think you are in it
again right now. These are, again, high-demand assets from
combatant commanders' standpoint.
So give me an idea of how you are balancing this off,
retiring some. Because I am very worried, at the end, we will
retire capabilities that we need right now, not have them when
we need them right now, and then, frankly, probably not have as
much on the other side of this as we would like to have.
Secretary Kendall. Thank you, Congressman.
We have a gap today in airborne early warning capability.
The current AWACSes are not where they need to be to deal with
the threats that we are currently facing, and it is very
difficult to maintain them. Their availability rate is less
than 50 percent.
So what we hope to do by retiring 15 this year is to be
able to increase the availability of the balance. A couple of
ways we can do that: We transfer people over to those aircraft
to do maintenance on them, and then we also have parts
available from the aircraft that we are retiring.
What we need to do is to accelerate the capability that we
really need, which in the interim is the E-7, and get that as
quickly as possible. There are limited possibilities to do
that. It takes about 2 years to get the new airplanes that we
are going to be modifying and then another 2 years, roughly, to
modify them.
We are looking at creative ways to try to accelerate that
process and to reduce the risk in it. And we are all very aware
this is an important priority for the Air Force. We are trying
to do everything we can to move as quickly----
Mr. Cole. Well, I appreciate that, but this is not like the
KC-135, where there are hundreds of them--15 out of 32. And
then say we are going to have capability 4 years out is really
high-risk. I mean, you are going to have a period of time there
where you just simply don't have the aircraft that you need for
early warning and control.
Secretary Kendall. The problem is, we don't have the
aircraft we need today. The AWACSes that we have today are not
adequate for the threats that we----
Mr. Cole. I totally agree. I have been making this argument
for years. So, again, I praise you for that. I think you are
right to be bringing on new capability.
What I worry about is losing over the next 4 years--and 4
years is a long time. And I have watched us--again, I would
rather replace capability; as it comes on, retire aircraft. But
this idea of retiring this many now and hoping that we will
have what we need in 4 years is a big risk, to me, and one that
I think is not wise to take.
And, again, we are putting you in that spot, in my view, by
not giving you the budget that you need to add capabilities,
you know, or replace capabilities in a timely fashion.
But, anyway, that is--and, you know, just to be honest with
you, I see that throughout the budget. And, again, I put the
blame for that on us, not on you. We have stretched some of
these platforms way too long, you are exactly right, on things
like the KC-135 or things like the E-3s. We just should have
done this a long time ago.
But retiring them too quickly now, I think, is a risk. And
I would rather us give us more resources and have you bring on
capabilities and, sort of, retire as you bring on, as opposed
to have a period where we drop from 32 planes down to 17 or so.
I mean, that is just--I don't see how you could meet the needs
that you have from your combatant commanders if we made that
kind of decision.
And I suspect we see that again in area after area. I think
that is really where the ranking member was at with her
concerns on the F-35. Same thing.
I don't have a lot of time, and I want to follow the good
example set by others, Madam Chair, so I will yield back.
Ms. McCollum. Thank you.
Mrs. Kirkpatrick, then followed by Mr. Womack.

A-10 AIRCRAFT

Mrs. Kirkpatrick. Thank you, Madam Chair.
And thank you to all of the witnesses.
Secretary Kendall and General Brown, as you are well aware,
my district is home to the largest concentration of A-10
aircraft in the world, with 89 based at Davis-Monthan Air Force
Base. These uniquely capable aircraft have been called upon
time and time again to deliver incredibly effective close air
support in a way that no other platform has been able to do,
saving countless allied lives in the process.
The budget request proposes a divestment of the fleet to
260 airframes, but the budget documents make clear that the Air
Force only intends on procuring wing replacement kits for a
fleet size of no more than 218 aircraft.
You both have indicated that you do not believe there will
be many viable mission sets for the A-10 in the near future.
This is something we have heard from the Air Force for more
than a decade, and yet the A-10 continues to be called upon.
The security situation in Ukraine--which is largely a
mission the A-10 was designed for, by the way--demonstrates
that the world is an incredibly dangerous and unpredictable
place. I was glad to read this week that A-10s are deploying to
Eastern Europe to support the Army's Swift Response exercise,
underscoring the jet's utility there.
I was also glad to read this week that the Air Force has
determined that the A-10, and in particular its unique gun
system, is capable of destroying even the most modern armor in
contested environments, with the Air Force's own press release
stating, quote, ``The A-10 is well-suited for agile combat
employment roles, and this test proves the A-10 can continue to
deliver massive rapid fire power with devastating effects on
enemy vehicles in a contested environment,'' end quote.
Clearly, there remains a mission for the A-10 beyond
counterinsurgency. So my question for Secretary Kendall and
General Brown: Do you agree that new wing sets must be procured
in order to keep these aircraft flying into the 2030s?
Ms. McCollum. Mr. Secretary, I am going to give you an
additional 30 seconds beyond what you have to answer that, and
then we will go to the next question.
Secretary Kendall. Our plan with the A-10 this year is to
remove 21 aircraft and replace them with F-16s in Indiana. So
we have a relatively modest request this year. Over time,
though, we do intend to divest the A-10s. We don't want to re-
wing airplanes that we intend to divest in the not-too-distant
future.
I am an Army officer, former Army officer, and I am a big
proponent of close air support, and I have been a fan of the A-
10 for almost my entire career. The problem is that it is an
old aircraft that was designed for an environment that is not
the one that we are most concerned about now. It was designed
to be very survivable against ground fire in particular. It is
not survivable against modern threats.
And when we look at our pacing challenges, we really have
to get on to our next generations of capability. And,
unfortunately, the A-10 just is not a cost-effective platform
in that environment.
Let me ask General Brown to say a little bit more about
that.
General Brown. The key part for the A-10 is to be able to
operate in an area that has air superiority. And that is an
area that, when we think about the A-10, we have to actually be
able to take down the threat before it becomes air.
And I can just tell you from practical experience when I
was the air component commander at United States Central
Command, when the Russians came into Syria, we had to move the
operations for the A-10 because they could not protect
themselves from the fighter aircraft above.
And so, there are aspects really concerning the threat that
drives the reason why we are making a move away from the A-10
and to a portfolio of fighter capabilities. It is multirole.
And as I work with our combatant commanders and talk to them--I
know they are exercising in EUCOM right now, but the aspect of
what they want on a recurring basis is this multirole
capability, particularly even at CENTCOM today, as I have
talked to the new CENTCOM commander.
So, it is a transition to a future portfolio capability
that is designed for the threats that we expect to see--we see
today and threats we expect to see in the future.
Mrs. Kirkpatrick. Thank you very much. Thank you to the
witnesses.
And, Madam Chair, I yield back. My time has expired.
Ms. McCollum. Thank you.
Mr. Womack and then Ms. Kaptur.

BRIDGE TANKER PROGRAM

Mr. Womack. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Generals, thank you for your service to our great country
and the work that you are doing presently.
To the distinguished Secretary, I want you to know that you
are not alone that first week in November, even though you are
situated between two Air Force generals, that when you try to
channel that inner Black Knight loyalty, that I will be with
you. I will have your back.
Secretary Kendall. Thank you, Congressman.
Mr. Womack. Football aside, I would like to just ask a
question about the bridge tanker program. I know it is a
program you are tracking closely, one you have been asked about
in your other hearings on the Hill.
I know the Air Force has not determined the requirements
yet for this bridge tanker. Can you share with us when you
expect the requirements to be finalized and what AMC is looking
at in developing these requirements? A critical piece of our
National Defense Strategy.
Secretary Kendall. Thank you, Congressman.
We are looking at what our operational needs will be going
forward and what the cost-effectiveness would be of various
options.
Key to that is what we need operationally first, right? And
Air Mobility Command is looking at that. They are evaluating
what class of tanker, in terms of capacity and range and so on,
will be the best in the mix as we go forward.
At one time, it looked as if we would be moving towards a
platform that was significantly different than the KC-46. That
is not at all clear at this point. So I have been trying to be
very clear with people about the fact that the likelihood of a
competition has diminished as we have gotten to understand the
requirements better.
But we are not through with that process yet. We should be
making a decision later this calendar year on exactly what the
path forward will be. But I want to be as transparent as
possible about where the situation is. There is no decision at
this point in time, though.

AIRCRAFT READINESS

Mr. Womack. I share some of the same concerns that my
colleague from Oklahoma, Mr. Cole, rose, particularly where it
concerns the E-3 AWACS program.
But, generally speaking, I have concerns about aircraft
readiness. And when you look across the spectrum of our aerial
platforms, mission-capable rates are a big concern of mine, and
I know they are a big concern to the force as a whole.
And, ironically enough, I might be wrong, but I think the
A-10 probably has a mission-capable rate that is higher than a
lot of the other platforms. But I do support the divestiture
targets that you are looking at for terms of efficiency and
need and to be able to free up resources to address some of our
other needs.
How does that fiscal year 2023 budget process address this
issue? And what are your overall goals and expectations for
some of these numbers moving forward?
Secretary Kendall. We are working to increase and improve
the availability of our aircraft. You know, I talked about
balance in my opening statement. We are trying to balance
current capabilities, which is a function of what resources we
put into that, versus resources we put into other things that
are important to us.
And I think we have struck a reasonable balance. We are
trying to meet the needs of our combatant commanders around the
world. We are trying to focus, in particular, on the pacing
challenge in the Indo-Pacific region. But, also, with
developments in Europe, we are having to basically make sure
that we are as capable there as we can be, as well as support
ongoing requirements in other places.
So, when we look at all that, we try to make sure that we
can maintain that forward presence and capability as well as a
surge capability if it might be needed. At the same time, we
are, of course, investing in the future.
So we think we have the balance about in the right place at
this point in time, but we are always looking for ways to
improve it.
Let me ask General Brown to add a few words to that.
General Brown. Very much so. And that is the analysis we
do. And we do a number of--and what I really focus on is the
analysis to look at what we project the threat to be but also
how we balance doing what the combatant commanders need.
And as I talk to combatant commanders and talk in the
building, I talk about balancing risk over time. It is the risk
that we take today with the combatant commanders, as you look
to the future, the risk that we take in the future. And so how
do you balance that so that we don't buy down all our risk here
today and then, actually, when we get to a future, we have a
lot more risk? And so that is part of the conversation we are
having as we move forward.
Mr. Womack. Well, I share the same concerns that Mr. Cole
broached. Look, this problem is on you, and it is really from
us, and I do believe that we need to increase the spending so
that we can buy down some of that risk. And so that will be an
effort, I think, that a lot of us will continue to fight going
forward.
But I do appreciate the service to your great country, and
thank you so much.
And I will yield back my time.
Ms. McCollum. Thank you.
Ms. Kaptur and then Mr. Carter.

AIR FORCE ASSISTANCE TO HUMANITARIAN GROUPS FOR UKRAINE

Ms. Kaptur. Thank you, Madam Chair, very much.
Gentlemen, thank you for your great service to our country.
Secretary Kendall, I wanted to just ask you a question. In
terms of the current conflict in Europe with Russia's war on
Ukraine, has the Air Force, both in terms of regular as well as
Guard, been integrated in a manner that allows excess space
that may exist on cargo flights that are going over to Europe
anyway be made available to humanitarian groups in our country
that are attempting to get goods there?
For example, rotary. There are many humanitarian groups,
church groups, hospitals, and so forth. It is so expensive by
air.
Have you been asked to identify flights that are going over
anyway that might take goods into some of our allies that then
assure that it gets into Ukraine?
Secretary Kendall. Representative Kaptur, I am not aware of
that. I can--we can check and take that for the record, General
Brown.
Our activities have largely been about supporting the
conflict and providing things that--as you are aware, the
President has provided a lot of aid to Ukraine.
Ms. McCollum. Yes.
Secretary Kendall. The Defense Department has been very
active in providing that and in moving it over to Europe. So we
have had a lot of flights that are going for that purpose.
I am not aware to the extent to which there may be, you
know, additional capacities that wasn't used. It could be used
for the purpose you described, but it sounds like a reasonable
thing for us to be doing. I would have to take it for the
record to see what has been done or what could be done there.
General Brown.

SPACE FORCE LOCATIONS

Ms. Kaptur. Thank you. I really appreciate that. Yes.
General Brown. Very much, Secretary.
I am not aware of any requests so far, but we are willing
to take a hard look at that and see where we can assist.
Ms. Kaptur. There are certain assets sitting on the ground
all over this country, and I appreciate your interest in
looking at that. If someone could get back to me at some point,
I would be very grateful for that. Thank you very much.
I wanted to ask, General Raymond, you have to stand up
something brand new. That is really hard. And I wanted to ask
you, as you look at where the Space Force is currently arrayed
across the country, both in terms of physical space as well as
human infrastructure, is it largely centered on one of the
coasts? Is it like East Coast? Is it arrayed across the
country? Is there anything in the Great Lakes? Could you give
us a sense of what that looks like across our country, not
specific locations but just in general?
General Raymond. Thank you. And I am privileged to stand up
the Space Force, and I have a great team and I am proud of that
team.
Largely, with space being a global domain, you have to have
capabilities around the globe to be able to operate. In CONUS,
we operate in about six big hubs from California to the East
Coast. We have got California, Colorado, a couple of different
places in Colorado. Florida, New Mexico are some of the big
hubs. And then we have smaller sites stationed in northern
California, Cape Cod, North Dakota; Thule, Greenland; Clear,
Alaska. So, we are a global--in Europe.
So, we are a global enterprise, again, in very small
numbers, 8,400 Active Duty folks by the end of this year. But
it is a global presence.
Ms. Kaptur. Well, I would just like to say, in terms of
Ohio, the home of John Glenn and Neil Armstrong, the Great
Lakes always seems to get left out. And I am just making a
plea. I can't make anything happen in this city; I have tried
for a long time. But just pay attention to the Great Lakes.
Look at the number of enlistments that come from our region,
for each of you. And I know about Wright-Patt, you know. But I
am just saying, as we move forward, don't forget us. You don't
have to respond.
General Raymond. I won't forget you, and we do rely heavily
on the folks at Wright-Patt. We have Guardians stationed at
Wright-Patt as well.
One of the big benefits that we received, quantifiable
benefits that we have received in standing up the Space Force
is our ability to attract talent. We have more people knocking
on our door from around the world, around the country than we
can take. So we will make sure we keep a close eye in getting
the right talent to the Force.

180TH FIGHTER WING

Ms. Kaptur. Thank you very, very much.
And I have two other items very briefly. I am wondering, in
terms of the reduction in requests for F-35s, I am privileged
to represent the 180th Fighter Wing, which is a National Guard
unit that is always war-ready in Toledo, Ohio. And I am just
wondering whether or not that unit is still on the list for
consideration for F-35s--it was in the past--in view of the
fact that you are suggesting that the procurement be reduced.
Ms. McCollum. Ms. Kaptur, do you want to do your other
question so they can take it for the record?

HYPERSONICS AT PLUM BROOK RESEARCH STATION

Ms. Kaptur. Yes. And also, is Plum Brook Research Station
in Ohio on your list of potential sites for hypersonic missile
activities?
Ms. McCollum. Thank you, Ms. Kaptur.
Secretary Kendall. We will take those for the record.
Ms. McCollum. Thank you, Ms. Kaptur.
Ms. Kaptur. Thank you very much.
Ms. McCollum. Mr. Carter and then Mr. Crist.

AIR DOMINANCE AND THE FUTURE

Mr. Carter. Thank you, Madam Chairman.
Secretary Kendall, since World War II, midway through it,
we have dominated airspace in our wars throughout the history
of the United States. We political leaders and ordinary
citizens are very fully aware of the progress going on in
China. In your opinion, the fight tonight and in the future as
we go through these process changes, are we going to be able to
dominate airspace so that we can win, fight and win, in the
fight tonight?
Secretary Kendall. No potential adversary of the United
States should doubt for a moment the capability or the resolve
of the United States or the capacity of the United States Air
Force to do what it would be asked to do. We are the most
formidable fighting machine on the planet, but we are being
challenged and we are being challenged very effectively.
The threat briefing that I talked about earlier lays out
the ways in which we are being challenged. So we have to move
to a next-generation capabilities as quickly as we can. There
is no doubt about that.
The Chinese have been watching the American way of
projecting power since the first Gulf war 30 years ago, and
they spent the last 20 or 30 years investing in things designed
to defeat the United States. So we have to respond to that. And
as Secretary Brown has said, you know, we have to accelerate
change or we will lose, and that is an exactly accurate
statement. And that is what we are trying to do with the budget
in 2023 is to effect some of that change.
CQ, do you want to add anything?
General Brown. The one other thing I would also add that is
the quality of our airmen. It is not only the equipment we put
in their hands, but it is the hard work that they do day in and
day out to ensure we are able to do what the Nation has asked
us to do. And I am very confident that we can do that. By the
same token, though, I do not want to put ourselves in a
position where we have any doubt. And this is why we want to
make that transition to the future.
Mr. Carter. As we look at what is going on in the world,
and we are seeing a lot of people are commenting based on what
happens in Ukraine is going to have an influence on whether
China decides to invade Taiwan, which will put that fight over
in the Pacific. And being in charge of helping out the heavy
Army, that is my job. We have got to dominate the airspace for
our armor to be effective, and we have got armored fighters
here and they know that.
And, therefore, I am worried about the drawdown. That is
what I am thinking. I think that is the first question that Mr.
Calvert asked. As we draw down--and I read through that next
question that you all submitted. And it looked like you were
just taking down an awful lot of platforms in the hopes that we
get to the future quickly. But our history is we don't.
I would say: Would you take a look at the F-35, how long it
took to get it there? And we saw that many, many other
platforms. Historically, we are bureaucratically bogged down in
our forces by some of the ways we procure and go forward. And
if we are going to draw down in anticipation of being able to
dominate in the future, it brings great concern to me. So I am
depending on you to--that question is going to stand for the
next 5 or 6 years.
Thank you.
Ms. McCollum. Thank you, Mr. Carter.
Mr. Crist and then Mr. Rogers.

CLIMATE CHANGE IMPACT ON READINESS

Mr. Crist. Thank you, Madam Chair, very much.
Mr. Secretary, as we see powerful storms and more frequent
flooding impacting our military installations, I am concerned
about the effects of climate change on our security and at our
readiness. We have already seen catastrophic flooding and wind
damage at Offutt Air Force Base in Nebraska and Tyndall Air
Force Base in my State of Florida. Many other facilities, like
MacDill Air Force Base in Tampa Bay near my district, face
similar risk.
I wonder if you could talk about the threats posed by
extreme weather events and what we are doing to respond to
them.
Secretary Kendall. Congressman, you give two great examples
of the effect. Offutt, Tyndall Air Force Base also, there are
others, right, where we have seen the implications of more
extreme weather. We are trying to take that into account in our
plans to ensure that we are as resilient as possible.
There are also other effects of climate change around the
world which will change geopolitical behaviors and patterns
around the world that change our threat environment that we
have to operate in. So there are a wide number of effects. The
Department is very aware of this and is trying to plan for it
as best as we possibly can.
Mr. Crist. Thank you very much.
I will yield back.
Ms. McCollum. Thank you.
Next is Mr. Rogers, then Mr. Aguilar, and then we will end
with Mr. Aderholt.
Mr. Rogers.

NUCLEAR POSTURE

Mr. Rogers. Secretary Kendall, General Brown, General
Raymond, thank you for your service to the country and for
being here today with us.
Since Putin put his finger on the nuclear button, has that
changed our nuclear posture in any way?
Secretary Kendall. Congressman, the short answer to your
question is no. We have maintained a posture which we think is
adequate, given the threat situation. But we are bringing a
great deal of attention to President Putin and the potential
for something to happen there. It is a concern that we are
watching.
CQ, you want to add to that?
General Brown. Our posture has not changed. And, you know,
I am very proud of our airmen in the work that they do day in
and day out to ensure we maintain our nuclear posture. And then
we also work that very closely with the United States Strategic
Command, as well as our Air Force Global Strike Command, which
are the operational commanders that have that responsibility as
we ensure that our airmen are organized, trained, and equipped
to support our nuclear portfolio to make sure it is safe,
secure, and reliable.
Mr. Rogers. At what level of threat are we under now?
General Brown. I mean, the way I would characterize this is
we really have increased it just based on the rhetoric that
comes from President Putin and based on the current events. And
I would also offer that we do pay attention to ensure that we
maintain our range, our nuclear port--not only our nuclear
portfolio but really across all of our portfolios. So increased
awareness, and we are paying closer attention particularly
based on current events and how things are playing out for Mr.
Putin in Ukraine.

JADC2 MODERNIZATION

Mr. Rogers. Let me bring up the issue of JADC2
modernization. As we see China and Russia both increase their
missile stockpiles and advance hypersonic capabilities, I
believe it is of the utmost importance that we are able to
detect incoming threats before it is too late.
Secretary Kendall, in your opening statement, you mentioned
that the fiscal 2023 budget provides for an interim airborne
warning and control replacement. I am glad to see that we are
modernizing, but I worry about the word ``interim.'' What steps
are being taken to ensure that this interim solution remains an
interim solution?
Secretary Kendall. Well, there are two or three things in
that question, Congressman.
The E-7 is an interim solution because we envision that at
some point we are going to need something that is even more
survivable than that. What the threat is doing for airborne
surveillance is, and for any aircraft which performs that type
of a mission, is trying to reach further out with lethal
mechanisms that can defeat those.
Traditionally, they survive to a large extent by standing
off, being further away from the threat. China understands that
and is trying to build systems that reach out further, and they
are pretty far down that path.
With regard to hypersonics, the critical issue there is
missile attack warning. And we have capability now that can
detect launches very well, and it does a very good job of
tracking ballistic missiles. Hypersonic missiles are much more
uncertain in their trajectories and are more difficult to
track. So the new architecture that General Raymond has talked
about is designed to do that mission from space.
In general, we would like to move towards space-based
capabilities for surveillance against a variety of threats. It
is the most efficient place for us to do it. It gives us global
coverage. So if we can do it technically, as well as have
resilient architecture, that is an ideal solution for us. And
that is one of the reasons I use the word ``interim'' when I
talked about the E-7.
General Raymond may want to take--say a little bit more
about the hypersonics problem and what the new architecture
will do for that.
General Raymond. I think you hit it right on the head, Mr.
Secretary.
The architecture that we are--that you will see in this
President's budget request does two things. One, it allows us
to detect and track maneuverable hypersonics, which are more
challenging today. And the second thing it does is it
diversifies our architecture. Just like you diversify your
financial portfolio, it builds resilience to a threat on orbit.
Mr. Rogers. Are we able to keep up with the recent Chinese
advances?
General Raymond. That is why we are here. I am very
comfortable that we are the world's best today. And I am very
comfortable that we have the team and, with your support, the
resources to be able to stay ahead of that threat. But there is
work to be done, and we have to stay focused on that and move
fast.

CAPABILITIES OF OBSERVATION OF HYPERSONICS

Mr. Rogers. The Russians deployed hypersonics in Ukraine in
the last few days. Did our current systems prove useful in that
observation?
General Raymond. We have world coverage on being able to
detect missiles. I can go into more details with you in the
classified setting.
Mr. Rogers. All right. Thank you.
Thanks, gentlemen, for your service.
Ms. McCollum. Remember we have about five votes pending
shortly.
Mr. Aguilar, then Mr. Aderholt, and Mr. Ryan has not joined
us.

AIR-LAUNCHED RAPID RESPONSE WEAPON

Mr. Aguilar. Mr. Secretary--thank you, Madam Chair.
Mr. Secretary, you previously stated--I wanted to follow up
on the hypersonic discussion. You previously stated that China
has an asymmetric advantage over the U.S. in relation to
hypersonics. And like you, I believe that we are crucial to
invest in systems that we can compete with our peer and near-
peer adversaries and--however, the Air-Launched Rapid Response
Weapon, the Air Force's hypersonic glide missile, has faced
numerous challenges, including three launch test failures in
2021. And in the fiscal year 2023 budget, the Air Force is only
requesting RDT&E funding for this program.
You stated that you aren't satisfied with the pace. What is
the long-term strategy for the ARRW? And if we provide this
funding this fiscal year, do you anticipate it being able to
move into production in 2024?
Secretary Kendall. The ARRW is one of our hypersonic
programs. It is one of multiple programs we have in the
Department of Defense. The program has not been successful in
research and development so far. It has had, as you indicated,
three flight test failures. So we want to see proof of success
before we make a decision about commitment to production. So we
are going to wait and see.
The overall situation we have got with hypersonics, I think
people are a little--it is more complex than people, I think,
often understand. We don't want to mirror image the Chinese
necessarily. They have invested heavily in hypersonics, and
they have done some tests, including the one that was an
orbital capability, basically, last fall.
The U.S. has a different operational problem than China
does. They are trying to keep our forces out of the region, and
there is a target set that we present because of that to them.
They present a different target set to us, and what we want to
look at is, what is the most cost-effective mix of weapons?
There is certainly a role for hypersonics in that, and we need
to invest in that and procure them in some quantities. But
there is still an open question in my mind about what is the
most cost-effective mix.
Hypersonics have some attractive features, but they are
also very expensive.
People have asked me where we are relative to the Chinese.
Basically, I think it is comparable from the point of view of
technology. They have been very aggressive about boost-glide
vehicles and trying to move forward with those. We have been
less aggressive, but I think in terms of our technological
capabilities, comparable. We have had more success with air-
breathing hypersonic weapons and the development of those, but
it is still fairly early stages of development for those.
So it is a fairly complicated picture, and we do need to
get into some classified information to discuss it fully.
Mr. Aguilar. Yes. I am not interested in mimicking the
Chinese. I am just trying to understand the budgetary
implications and the requests that you put before us, which
include $115 million to continue testing in this respect.
You are also requesting $634 million in hypersonic attack
cruise missiles, which is a large increase over the $190
million provided in fiscal year 2022. The Air Force has spent a
few hundred million on hypersonic prototyping program, HCSW or
HCSW, only to end that effort.
So could you continue to expand? You have mentioned
multiple layers. You have also mentioned we can go into other
venues and talk about this. But from a budgetary perspective,
can you give us your thoughts on what the priorities are for
hypersonic, and how do we continue to put money for research
and to advance our interests without putting dollars into
things that can't get to production?
Secretary Kendall. Overall, what we need to get to with
hypersonics is the ability to engage moving targets, and
current systems are limited in that capability. They generally
are designed for fixed targets. And there are some fixed
targets that we might want hypersonics to attack cost
effectively, but for the future, we want to get to another
class of targets. And I can't really say very much more without
getting into a classified session with you, Congressman.
Mr. Aguilar. Thank you. I will yield back, Madam Chair.
Ms. McCollum. Thank you.
And reminding members we have five votes currently on the
floor, and we will be going into a classified briefing with the
Secretary immediately after votes. So, please, after the last--
the five votes, go directly up if you are able to join us for
that classified briefing.
Mr. Aderholt and then Mr. Ryan.
And, Mr. Ryan, I will stay to make sure you can ask your
question.
Mr. Aderholt.

SPACE COMMAND HEADQUARTERS LOCATION

Mr. Aderholt. Thank you.
Thank you, gentlemen, for being here.
In reviewing last year's Space Command basing decision to
relocate Space Command headquarters to Huntsville, Alabama, the
inspector general ultimately found the basing decision, quote,
complied with Federal law and DOD policy and that the process
was reasonable.
Representing northern Alabama, I can personally tell you
that Huntsville does have a perfect combination for defense--of
defense experts, businesses, skilled workers, educational
opportunities, and quality of life that will help Space Command
accelerate our Nation's capabilities into the next generation.
I look forward to seeing the GAO report when it is released, as
I understand it will be any day now.
Mr. Secretary, let me address this question to you.
Assuming for this question that the GAO report does not
recommend overturning the original basing decision, can you
briefly explain the process for reaffirming the basing decision
and the timeline to stand up Space Command in Huntsville?
Secretary Kendall. We are all hoping to move forward with
the final decision as quickly as we can. We do need to see the
final reports and assess those. And then the normal process at
this point would be, we have picked a preferred location and
some acceptable alternatives, basically; a total of, I think,
six. And so we need to do under the NEPA process an evaluation
of environmental impacts and so on, as well as look at some
other considerations before we finalize the decision.
Normally, that process would take on the order of 4 months
total. There would be about 3 months of which we would be doing
the assessments, at the end of the month a public comment. So I
am very hopeful that one way or the other we get a final
decision within the next several months.
Mr. Aderholt. So what would be the actual timeline to stand
up? What would be the actual timeline to stand up the
Huntsville, assuming that it is----
Secretary Kendall. Oh, to stand up after the decision?
Mr. Aderholt. Yes.
Secretary Kendall. I would have to get you that for the
record. I understand it requires a new building to be built for
the headquarters, and there is a lot of lead time associated
with that.

AIR NATIONAL GUARD

Mr. Aderholt. Okay. I see that the fiscal year 2023 request
seeks to cut more than 100 aircraft in order to focus on the
Air Force modernization priorities, and I understand that and
support your attempts to modernize U.S. Air Force to tomorrow's
challenges but concerned about the price in terms of aircraft
and force structure that the budget proposes to pay to
modernize.
Furthermore, even while we modernize, we must stay laser-
focused on defending the homeland. That is a given. The
National Guard and the Reserve have long been low-cost
solutions for national defense. And, in fact, the Air National
Guard performs 93 percent of the homeland defense alert
missions.
My question: Has the Department made any attempts to seek
cost savings by transferring force structure to the Air
National Guard rather than eliminating from the total force?
Secretary Kendall. Well, I will let General Brown offer his
views on that too.
We look at force posture all the time. And we try to have a
balance between the Active, the Guard, and the Reserve, which
is sustainable over time and which provides us the mix of
immediately available capabilities and capabilities that are
available on a certainly longer timeframe to meet all our
needs. The role of the Guard, in particular in homeland
defense, is really appreciated. That is a very cost-effective
mission for the Guard.
CQ.
General Brown. Congressman, we do a couple of things as we
do our reviews. We look at the Active Guard and Reserve mix,
but we also look at our overseas and stateside mix to ensure we
maintain a healthy force, because there is the dynamic to make
sure we have the health of the force for both--for all three
components: Active, Guard, and Reserve.
And as we do that, I look at it from a total force
perspective. And so our laydown is not just, you know, not just
the Guard or not just the Active Duty or not just the Reserve.
It is how we lay that across to make sure we have the
capability to do all the missions the Nation has asked us to
do. And homeland defense is a high priority for us. And you are
right, the Guard does an outstanding job working homeland
defense, and so they do play in our decision very highly as we
lay out the--in this case, the fighter force structure across
the United States Air Force.
Mr. Aderholt. Thank you. And I certainly think that is
something that should be taken into consideration.
Has the Department considered accelerating modernization of
the Air National Guard alert units out of the F-16 and F-15D
airframes into the FEX and the F-35 aircraft?
Ms. McCollum. Gentlemen, if that is going to take more time
than you have, please submit that for the record. But I will
extend it for another minute.
Secretary Kendall. I think we need to take it for the
record anyway.
Ms. McCollum. Mr. Aderholt.
Mr. Aderholt. Okay. Thank you.
Ms. McCollum. I want to make sure you get a satisfactory
answer.
Mr. Aderholt. Okay. Thank you.
Ms. McCollum. Mr. Ryan.

AIR FORCE RESERVE

Mr. Ryan. Thank you, Madam Chair. I appreciate it. I will
try to be brief here, knowing that the votes are going.
Mr. Secretary, I want to thank you, first, for speaking
with me recently about the eight C-130Js that this committee
appropriated specifically for the Air Force Reserve. And I have
spoken with General Scobee, the chief of the Air Force Reserve,
many times over the years about these planes, which I fought
very hard for and which I am very grateful for Chair McCollum
and her staff, for their diligence as well, and understanding
of the need for helping our units upgrade from the H models to
the J models.
But I did want to note a couple of things as your team and
the Air Force Reserve seek to finish the basing study that will
ultimately determine where these planes go.
Firstly, the subcommittee has twice passed report language
to the Air Force Reserve that was written with the C-130Js in
mind. And both the fiscal year 2016 and fiscal year 2017 HAC-D
report state in nearly identical language, quote: The Air Force
Reserve includes units that have a designated specialized
mission as well as a traditional tactical mission. And the
committee encourages the chief of the Air Force Reserve to
review the requirements to ensure that specialized units are
allocated equipment upgrades necessary to address safety
concerns associated with these missions, end quote.
So General Scobee, in testimony in 2019 before this
subcommittee, said the following: Our fundamental basis is
going to be that we put those aircraft in our special missions,
which include the firefighters and the aerial spray unit in
Youngstown.
So point number two is that, under the prior
administration, this basing study was already delayed once. It
was put on ice after site visits, which you may know, after
these site visits had already been completed at the aerial
spray unit at Youngstown and the firefighting unit in Peterson,
Colorado.
So I want to urge you to use the work that has already been
completed and complete this basing study in the most
expeditious manner possible. And just want your assurances, Mr.
Secretary, that the Air Force and the Air Force Reserve will
complete a basing study whose criteria is in line with the
criteria laid out by this subcommittee and that is consistent
with the past statements of the chief of the Air Force Reserve
and that is complete--completed as expeditiously as possible so
that our pilots are not forced to fly older, less safe aircraft
any longer than they already have to.
Secretary Kendall. Congressman Ryan, we want to move
forward and make those decisions as soon as we can. So I can
certainly commit to you that. We are still in the early stages
of that process, but we fully appreciate the importance of the
special mission, such as spraying and firefighting and even the
Arctic mission we have. So the C-130s provide a variety of
functions that are important to both to the Department and to
the country. So we are going to take that into account as we
move forward through the basing process.

FOOD TRANSFORMATION

Mr. Ryan. Great. Yeah. I mean, we--you know, the base is
not far from my house. And I talked to the pilots over there.
And, you know, it is time for us to get moving on this. And I
know the pandemic has contributed to a certain extent, but we
seem to have the information we need. So I really appreciate
it, and if you could just stay in touch with me on that.
I have another question, Madam Chair, I am going to submit
for the record for General Brown on food transformation.
General, I have been working on this for a long time. And
as I stated to, you know, the panel that we had with the
Secretary of Defense a few days ago, you know, we also, the
Appropriations Committee also funds VA health. And the high
rates of diabetes, the higher rates of obesity is driving up
healthcare costs both for Active Duty and for our veterans. And
it is something that I think can tie direct--ties directly back
to the issues around food.
So I want to submit a question on food transformation and
engage on, you know, some of the changes that we have been
pushing for. But I appreciate that.
And, Madam Chair, I will yield back the balance of my time.

CLOSING REMARKS

Ms. McCollum. I appreciate that, Mr. Ryan.
Mr. Calvert, as we wind up, I have some questions for the
record that I will be submitting, besides some technical
questions staff have on the Arctic. Hypersonics, we will talk
about that a little more classified, the block upgrade that you
were talking about with the F-35s, other things related to the
F-35s and nuclear modernization.
Mr. Calvert, anything before I adjourn?
Mr. Calvert. Just that I also will have some questions for
the record. And when we move into the classified session, I
want to obviously get into the hypersonic issue in more detail.
So look forward to doing that. Thank you.
Ms. McCollum. And, members, the few remaining, I will just
remind again, immediately after the fifth vote, we will go up
into classified session within the Capitol.
Once again, I want to thank Secretary Kendall, General
Brown, and General Raymond for being here today. Please, once
again, thank all those who serve alongside of you, those who
wear uniforms and those who come to work wearing civilian
clothes. They all play an important role in our national
security.
And, with that, that concludes today's hearing. This
subcommittee now stands adjourned.
[Answers to submitted questions for the record follow:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Tuesday, May 17, 2022.

U.S. INDO-PACIFIC COMMAND

WITNESSES

ADMIRAL JOHN C. AQUILINO, U.S. NAVY, COMMANDER, U.S. INDO-PACIFIC
COMMAND
GENERAL PAUL J. LACAMERA, COMMANDER, UNITED NATIONS COMMAND: COMMANDER,
UNITED STATES-REPUBLIC OF KOREA COMBINED FORCED COMMAND; AND
COMANDER, UNITED STATES FORCES OF KOREA
[Clerk's note.--The complete hearing transcript could not
be printed due to classification of the material discussed.]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[Clerk's note.--The complete hearing transcript could not
be printed due to classification of the material discussed.]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Tuesday, May 17, 2022.

UNITED STATES ARMY

WITNESSES

HON. CHRISTINE WORMUTH, SECRETARY OF THE ARMY
GENERAL JAMES C. McCONVILLE, CHIEF OF STAFF, U.S. ARMY

Opening Statement of Chair McCollum

Ms. McCollum. I now call the hearing on the Department of
the Army's fiscal year 2023 budget request.
This is a hybrid meeting, so I am going to go over a few
housekeeping matters.
Members joining us virtually, once you start speaking,
there is a slight display before you are displayed on the main
screen. Speaking into the microphone activates the camera,
displaying the speaker on the main screen. Do not stop your
remarks if you do not immediately see the screen switch. The
screen does not change until after several seconds, so please
make sure you are not muted.
To minimize background noise and ensure that the correct
speaker is being displayed, we ask that you remain on mute
unless you have sought recognition. Myself or a staff designee
may mute participants' microphones when they are not under
recognition to eliminate inadvertent background noise.
Members who are virtually part of this hearing, you are
responsible for muting and unmuting yourself. However, if I
notice that you are recognized and you have not unmuted
yourself, I will ask the staff to send you a request to unmute
yourself, and you will probably hear me ask you if you are
unmuted. Please accept that request, though, from the staff so
that you are no longer muted.
Finally, House rules require me to remind you that we have
set up an email address to which members can send anything they
wish to submit in writing at any of our hearings, and that
email address has been provided to your staff ahead of this
meeting.
So we are going to adhere to a strict 5-minute rule today,
because we have to adjourn at a set time in order to
accommodate major activity on the House floor.
This morning, the subcommittee will receive testimony on
the fiscal year 2023 budget request for the Department of the
Army. Our two witnesses are The Honorable Christine Wormuth,
Secretary of the Army; and General James McConville,
Secretary--excuse me--Chief of Staff of the Army. I should slow
down. I am trying to get this all in in 5 minutes.
Both of you have had long, distinguished careers, and we
thank you for appearing here with us today.
This is an extraordinary time for the United States Army.
Over 175,000 soldiers are deployed around the world, including
those in Eastern Europe supporting Ukraine. And Mr. Womack and
I had a chance to see some of them, along with Mr. Carter.
Soldiers are the Army's most critical resource, and we care
deeply about their welfare and quality of life. So today we
will talk about the training, equipment, and resources needed
to give our soldiers the skills and tools that they need to
accomplish their mission.
We know that your public message is ``People First.'' And I
commend you for adding $70 million to your request for
childcare, but we must do more to reduce the waitlist and
expand eligibility. We want to find out how your policies and
budget reflect the people as your top priority.
We are also keeping a close eye on equipment modernization.
The request invests heavily in your signature modernization
programs, and we are excited to see many of these capabilities
in the hands of soldiers soon.
This committee has overwhelmingly supported your
modernization strategy by providing the necessary resources to
advance these acquisition programs. However, I don't want to
lose sight of existing capabilities and the support our
soldiers need to keep them safe right now.
One example is vehicle rollovers. Congress made a
significant investment in fiscal year 2022 to help prevent
future vehicle accidents. I am interested in knowing what the
Army is doing to address this issue, both from the vehicle
standpoint and also making sure everyone buckles up.
Finally, turning to Ukraine, I am interested in knowing how
the U.S. equipment supporting Ukraine land forces has improved
their success on the battlefield and how it is impacting the
U.S. stock of equipment here at home, what lessons you are
learning, and what will help guide you for operational strategy
in the future.
Now, before I yield to the distinguished ranking member,
let me say once again, we have a joint session at 11 o'clock on
the floor, and House rules will prohibit us from meeting during
the joint session.
So, with that, I turn to you, Mr. Calvert.

Opening Remarks of Mr. Calvert

Mr. Calvert. Thank you. Thank you, Chair McCollum.
And thank you, Secretary Wormuth and General McConville,
for your time today as we discuss the Army's fiscal year 2023
budget.
In addition to my disappointment with the overall request
for defense spending, I am concerned that the Army continues to
be the bill payer for the needs of the other services. On top
of an inadequate top-line number, the Army's unfunded
priorities list comes at a whopping $5.1 billion. This
indicates to me that the Department of Defense is not properly
budgeting for the needs of the U.S. Army.
As we have seen in Ukraine, a potential war with China is
not the only type of conflict that the U.S. military needs to
be ready for. We need to maintain, modernize, and equip our
Army.
Further, it is critical that we remain laser-focused on the
Army's top modernization priorities. I don't know how you are
going to do that by returning to traditional acquisition
bureaucracy.
I am increasingly frustrated by the DOD budgeting for items
unrelated to warfighting. For example, in fiscal year 2023, the
Army is going to spend nearly $726 million on climate-change
initiatives. With that amount of money, the Army could fund all
the research personnel needs of its unfunded priority list and
still have $145 million left.
I am also concerned about end strength. This budget request
shrinks the force from the fiscal year 2022 enacted level of
485,000 to 473,000. The Army's explanation is that it is
difficult to recruit in the current job market. So the
question, obviously, will be, how is the Army planning to
overcome this issue?
The Nation needs a capable and ready Army, prepared to
deploy anywhere in the world on a moment's notice. I don't
believe this request is sufficient or addresses the impact
inflation is going to have on your purchasing power. I look
forward to hearing how Congress and the Army can work together
this fiscal year to meet these challenges.
And, with that, thank you for taking the time to be with
us, and I yield back.
Ms. McCollum. Thank you.
Madam Secretary, would you please proceed?

Summary Statement of Secretary Wormuth

Secretary Wormuth. Good morning, Chair McCollum, Ranking
Member Calvert, distinguished members of the committee. Thank
you all for your ongoing support of the Army as we
significantly transform to meet future threats.
We have accomplished a lot this year, but we have a lot
more work to do. We remain very focused on our top three key
priorities: people, readiness, and modernization.
The fiscal year 2023 budget enables us to support the
National Defense Strategy, take care of our people, and meet
operational demands here at home and abroad. We are investing
$35 billion in modernization, almost $2 billion in military
housing and infrastructure, and we are funding 22 Combat
Training Center rotations in fiscal year 2023.
We are modestly reducing our end strength, and we are doing
this because we want to preserve a high-quality force. We did
not want to have to lower our recruiting standards as we face a
challenging recruiting environment.
We are looking at--Ranking Member, to your point, we are
looking at what we can do immediately this summer to help
ourselves and the kinds of changes to our recruiting enterprise
that we may need to make to help ourselves over the next couple
of years.
We are committed to maintaining momentum on our six major
modernization portfolios. In fiscal year 2023 alone, we will
field four Long-Range Precision Fire systems, the Long-Range
Hypersonic Weapon, our ship-sinking midrange capability, the
Precision Strike Missile, and the Extended-Range Cannon
Artillery.
We are also modernizing our air and missile defense
systems, and we are funding development of both FARA and FLRAA,
which we intend to field in fiscal year 2030.
As important as it is to maintain momentum on
modernization, people are the strength of our Army and our
greatest asset. This budget increases soldier and Department of
Army civilian pay and funds a number of quality-of-life
improvements, including barracks, family housing, and various
childcare initiatives.
To reduce harmful behaviors, we are building out a
prevention workforce that will help us with our efforts to
build cohesive teams that are trained, disciplined, and fit.
Our SHARP Fusion Directorate Center pilot brings together in
one place all of the resources for victims of sexual harassment
and sexual assault. And those pilots are up and running in
installations around the country.
We are also striving to prevent suicide in our ranks. We
have started conducting 100-percent mental health wellness
checks in some of our units. And we are surging behavioral
health resources where they are most needed, even as we
confront a nationwide shortage of providers.
As we focus taking care of soldiers and their families and
transforming to meet future threats, the Army is also playing a
key role in the here and now. Today, we have over 47,000
soldiers in Europe to help reassure our allies, deter
aggression against NATO territory, and to help Ukraine defend
itself. As you all know, the Army has provided a wide range of
lethal assistance to Ukraine.
And while we are focused on Europe, we have not taken our
eye off the pacing challenge of China in the Indo-Pacific.
Through Operation Pathways, we have deployed thousands of Army
forces and equipment sets to the region for exercises that
strengthen joint force integration, demonstrate combat
capability, and promote interoperability. In just the last 2
years, for example, the Fifth Security Force Assistance Brigade
has sent 40 advisory teams to over 14 countries in the region.
To continue our transformation efforts, we are pursuing
cutting-edge experimentation and innovation. Much of our
experimentation activity will culminate this fall in Project
Convergence 2022, where our sister services will join us with
operational units and new technologies to work together to
solve important operational challenges.
America's Army is fit, trained, and ready when called upon
to fight and win the Nation's wars. We are transforming for the
future--something we absolutely have to do in the dangerous
environment we face. I am very proud of all our soldiers are
doing do protect our country and look forward to your questions
this morning.
Ms. McCollum. Thank you very much.
Sir, please, your testimony.

Summary Statement of General McConville

General McConville. Well, good morning, Chair McCollum,
Ranking Member Calvert, distinguished members of the
subcommittee. Thank you for the opportunity to be here today
and for your continued support to the Army and its people--our
soldiers from all three components; our families; our
civilians; and our soldiers for life, our retirees and
veterans.
The men and women of the United States Army stand ready
today to fight and win our Nation's wars as a member of the
joint force, and I could not be more proud of each and every
one of them.
The Army is well-aligned with the National Defense Strategy
through our existing priorities of people, readiness, and
modernization. We win through our people. They are our greatest
strength, and they are our most important weapon system. That
is why people remain the Army's number-one priority.
We are in a war for talent. That means recruiting our
Nation's best and modernizing our talent management systems.
That means retaining our best. We recruit soldiers, but we
retain families. So we are ensuring access to quality housing,
healthcare, childcare, spouse employment, and PCS moves.
When our soldiers get the call that it is time to deploy,
we want them to be laser-focused on their mission, knowing that
their families are well taken care of at home. Above all,
putting our people first means building cohesive teams that are
highly trained, disciplined, and fit and ready to fight and
win.
Being ready today is not good enough, though. We must also
make sure we are ready tomorrow. And that is what modernization
is all about: future readiness. The Army continues to undergo
its greatest transformation in over 40 years, and we remain
committed to our six modernization priorities. We have 24
signature modernization systems--we will have--in the hands of
soldiers by fiscal year 2023 either for testing or fielding.
Also in fiscal year 2023, we will stand up the third of our
five multidomain task forces.
The U.S. Army never fights alone, so we continue to invest
in strengthening our relationships with allies and partners
across the globe. We can see the return on those investments in
our response to Russia's invasion of Ukraine. Never before have
we asked so many to move so quickly, and we could not do it
without the access and presence our allies and partners
provide.
In less than a week, the First Army Brigade and Third
Infantry Division was able to deploy from Fort Stewart,
Georgia, and be on the ground in Germany starting live-fire
exercises with tanks drawn from our Army prepositioned stocks
in Europe. That is a testament to our tactical and strategic
readiness, to the quality of our incredible logisticians, and
to the investments Congress has made over the past several
years in setting the European theater.
When it is time to go, we go with the Army we have. And the
Army we have is the world's greatest fighting force. We must
ensure it stays that way, and with your continued support, we
will.
I look forward to your questions.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

ACQUISITION ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIES

Ms. McCollum. Thank you so much for your testimony.
The sum of what you both said is, we need to be prepared
for today and ready for tomorrow and putting our people first.
I just wanted to point out that I am very pleased with what
the President is doing in focusing on climate change in this
budget. The DOD--and I quote from it: ``Climate change is
reshaping the geostrategic, operational, and tactical
environment, with significant implications for the United
States' national security.''
The request prioritizes the departmental investments that
enhance operational capability, mission resilience, and
readiness. And the DOD being the largest consumer of energy,
anything that we can do to make sure that you have the energy
you need in a timely fashion that is also green, that reduces
greenhouse gasses, is a win-win for the United States
taxpayers, the Army, and our climate at large.
And we are witnessing now conflicts already starting to
take place because of climate change. So, just for the record,
I want you to know you have the chair's support on that.
I would like to talk about the Army's acquisition roles and
responsibilities.
On May 3, the Army issued a new directive which clarifies
ArmyFutures Command roles and responsibilities. The commanding
general of Army Futures Command will now coordinate with the
Assistant Secretary of the Army for acquisitions, logistics,
and technology and then on research, development, and
acquisition efforts.
This responsibility for all-over supervision of acquisition
and oversight of the services' research and development
activities, including science and technology, effectively puts
that person in charge of acquisition issues after several years
of ambiguity which have existed.
So I have a couple of questions for you. Why was this
change necessary? And this recent directive, you know, seems to
have shifted some of the influence away from ArmyFutures
Command, something I really delved into as my State was one of
the States in competition for this. So I actually kind of know
the details on how this was presented to Congress pretty well.
And if you keep this change and you move forward with it,
do you intend to keep the ACF as a four-star command? And what
does that mean for the cross-functional teams? I am very
concerned about this change in determining acquisition
requirements in the Army.
Secretary Wormuth. Thank you, Chair, for the opportunity to
clarify what we are trying to do around our modernization
enterprise with this directive.
First of all, we are not downgrading Army Futures Command.
Army Futures Command will remain a four-star command. I am a
big supporter of Army Futures Command. I think they are doing a
great job. And I think they have been very, you know,
instrumental, frankly, in a lot of the progress that the Army
has made in the last few years.
There have been some ambiguities in the previous directive
that talked about the relationships between Army Futures
Command and the Assistant Secretary for Acquisition, and this
directive was just trying to clean up some of that ambiguity.
The approach the Army takes to modernization is a team
approach. We have multiple organizations inside the Army that
are playing roles, and we just wanted to clarify that.
This directive does not change the role of the cross-
functional teams. It does not downgrade the role of Army
Futures Command. It really just tries to clarify some ambiguity
to make sure that all parts of the Army enterprise for
modernization are clear on what they are doing.
And, really, at the end of the day, you know, the proof is
in the pudding. We do not want to slow down the progress that
we have been making. And if I see any indication that that is
happening, we will deal with it immediately.

MEDICAL CARE OF SERVICE MEMBERS

Ms. McCollum. Thank you. I will be having a conversation
with the authorizers to make sure we are all on the same page
as to what you have intentions of doing.
I have a couple of questions I am going to be putting in
for the record. I only have a minute remaining. I just want to
highlight, though, this one for the record that I am putting in
about what is happening with medical billets.
I am very concerned that the Army still to this day has not
shown me that they have really thought ahead, what it is going
to do to the communities placing all these Army families and
some of the other medical care that our soldiers are going to
need out in the community.
Even before COVID, we were short of doctors, nurses, and
facilities in some areas. And we owe it to their families and
we owe it to those who wear the uniform that they have the
healthcare that they need.
The other thing I am very concerned about is, the
Department of Defense right now is doing amazing work in
picking up and doing what it can by channeling within career
opportunities and also getting people from outside the Army to
come in to work on medical research as well as deliver care.
Army hospitals, clinics provide the backbone for training a lot
of our physicians, physician's assistants, nurse practitioners,
and the rest. So expect some more conversation on that.
Ms. McCollum. With that, I yield to Mr. Calvert.
Mr. Calvert. Thank you, Madam Chair.

ARMY PROGRAMS CURRENT STATUS

Secretary, I am glad to hear that you are bolstering Army
Futures Command, in the sense that you are going to make sure,
from your testimony, that the acquisition enterprise that is
taking place there continues to develop the agility and the
speed that warfighters need. And so we will be keeping an eye
on that to make sure that that occurs.
You know, I am a critic of the procurement process in
general out of DOD, as are a number of our colleagues. And
certainly the Army is no exception, and we need to fix that.
Future Vertical Lift, Secretary. Please update us on the
Future Vertical Lift program. Do both the Future Long-Range
Assault Aircraft and the Future Attack Reconnaissance Aircraft
programs remain on track?
Also, I asked this last year as well: What is the Army
doing to keep doing to keep nontraditional firms, such as those
that participated in the competition for FARA, engaged to
ensure a robust industrial base for innovation?
And, lastly, for both platforms, what is the Army doing to
ensure that the digital engineering practices that made NGAD so
successful are being maximized? We should be doing that across
the services, by the way.
Secretary Wormuth. Thank you, Congressman.
I would say, both FARA and FLRAA programs are on track.
This budget continues to fund those efforts.
You know, we are in the process right now of sort of the
final stage of down-selecting for FLRAA, so I won't say more
about that. But we are very pleased with the progress that that
particular program is making right now.
And we are also on track with FARA. We will be choosing a
vendor for FARA in fiscal year 2024. There have been some
challenges with the ITEP engine, looking at FARA, so that has
created a little bit of a delay in terms of integrating that
engine into the prototypes. But I think we are confident that
we are going to be able to make that work. And that engine is
very important in terms of the energy efficiency that it is
going to bring.
I think, you know, we have been working very, very closely
with industry in both of these programs.
And, certainly, to your question about smaller companies, I
think it is very important that we focus on making sure that we
have a healthy defense industrial base. And certainly the
experience with providing lethal assistance to Ukraine, I
think, underscores that. So we are always looking to find
opportunities to make sure that we can include smaller
companies where we can, to try to make sure that we have more
choices there in terms of competition.
I don't know; given that General McConville is an aviator,
he may want to add.
General McConville. Well, thank you, Secretary.
And both these platforms are what I would call
transformational. They will bring much greater capability when
it comes to speed, when it comes to range. And, also, Ranking
Member, as you talked about, with open architecture, it will be
able to operate with convergence with the other systems that we
are developing.
Also, the capability. There are a lot of systems we are
adding onto this aircraft, Air Launch Effects, that are going
to provide some very unique capabilities, with much
longerrange, you get much more capability. And also the ability
to operate with manned/unmanned teaming both these aircraft
will provide.
And one final thing that I am pleased with is, we are
flying before we are buying. So we are getting the chance to
see from industry what they can actually do with the aircraft.
We are putting soldiers and pilots on it, getting a chance to
take a look at it, and then we are coming back with a final set
of requirements.
Mr. Calvert. Is this critical?
General McConville. Well, I think that is absolutely
critical. I probably didn't do a good job explaining, but the
intent with the open architecture system, the intent with
Project Convergence, which is the ability to use digital and
move data and a data fabric between systems, we think is
absolutely critical to getting the lethality we need in our
future systems.
Mr. Calvert. I am going to submit a question on end
strength and readiness.

MUNITION STOCKPILES

Mr. Calvert. But, real quickly, on munitions, obviously we
are providing Ukraine with needed Stinger and Javelin missiles,
and I suspect we have significantly depleted our own stockpiles
in doing so. How quickly can we replenish those stockpiles?
Secretary Wormuth. Congressman, we have begun, you know,
using--I think we started--a billion dollars from the
supplemental that you all have given us to start replenishing
Javelins right now.
I think, you know, it is going to take some time. As you
know, we have not had an open production line for Stinger. We
do have an open production line with Javelin. But I think it
will probably take in the 18-months area to be able to fully
replenish our stocks. But we are working with both Raytheon and
Lockheed to see what they can do to speed up their production.
Mr. Calvert. Thank you.
Ms. McCollum. Thank you, Madam Secretary.
We are going to go next to Mr. Rogers and then--Mr.
Ruppersberger, then Mr. Rogers, and then Mrs. Bustos.

CYBERSECURITY

Mr. Ruppersberger. Thank you.
Secretary Wormuth and General McConville, in Congress we
are witnessing a massive overhaul of modernization efforts and
promises from each branch of military service.
Can you hear me now? You got it. Okay.
Secretary Wormuth--I will start over--General McConville,
in Congress we are witnessing a massive overhaul of
modernization efforts and promises from each branch of military
service.
I agree that people are our greatest asset, and I applaud
the efforts of investing in the Army's workforce and
modernization talent management. And when it comes to managing
the talent the Army has in cybersecurity, what initiatives do
you currently have and how are you looking to expand any of
them in fiscal year 2023 in order to maintain our people?
Additionally, I have asked Secretary Austin last week, but
I am interested in the Army's perspective on the importance of
cybersecurity partnerships and any cyber or information
operations lessons learned from the Russian invasion of
Ukraine.
And I have a followup too.
Secretary Wormuth. Congressman, we certainly are very much
committed to growing our cyber force in the Army. And I think
the Army, frankly, has really led the way in a lot of its focus
on building up its cyber teams. You know, we have put a lot of
focus on Army Cyber.
One initiative that we have that I want to see us explore
this year is the authorities that Congress has given us for
excepted service for cyber so that we may be able to--you know,
one of our challenges is, frankly, competing with the private
sector. You know, everyone is looking for cyber experts, and in
the private sector they are obviously well-compensated. So that
is something I want to see us explore.
You know, we are working very hard at Fort Gordon with the
Army Center of Excellence to train our cyber warriors. We have
the software factory down at Army Futures Command that is
finding, frankly, cyber and coding expertise all over the Army
in places that you wouldn't expect and training those people
and giving us the capability to really have Army soldiers kind
of at the tactical edge who can code and develop applications
for us.
So I think we are doing a lot to try to build out our cyber
workforce.
And, certainly, to your question on lessons learned from
Ukraine, you know, I think what we see there, obviously, are
two things: One, the information domain is incredibly
important, and, you know, the force that can dominate in the
information space, I think, will have the advantage in future
conflicts. So there is a lot of a cyber dimension there.
And then, obviously, while we haven't seen, sort of,
certainly here in the United States, major attacks, major cyber
attacks on infrastructure, I think that is something that we
can expect in the future. So we are looking a lot at how can we
shore up vulnerabilities, whether it is, you know, with our
suppliers or in our own networks, to make sure that we are not
vulnerable to cyber attacks.
Mr. Ruppersberger. Okay.
General McConville. What I would add, Congressman, is, a
couple things that we are doing is--first of all, we are very
blessed that we have a lot of young men and women that want to
go into cyber. So, if you go up to West Point, you go to ROTC,
that is one of the most competitive branches that they are
competing for. We are giving direct commissions, so we are
going out to qualified young men and women that want to serve
in cyber.
And the other program we are working on is really
identifying talent. You know, the Secretary met a--we have a
young specialist. He is a medic down at our software factory.
He codes at the Ph.D. Level. And, you know, what we want to be
able to do is be able to credential that capability--no formal
training, but because of his skill set. So how do we keep that
person in the Army, how do we credential that person, and then
incentivize him to stay? And we are working on those type of
programs.

JOINT SYSTEM INTEGRATION

Mr. Ruppersberger. Okay.
I know the Army leads the joint force experiment called
Project Convergence. And it is imperative for the military to
talk and share data.
Now, I will be touring the Joint System Integration
Laboratory at Aberdeen this Friday, in my district.
What type of experimentation do you have planned for this
year? And, additionally, as the Army invests significant
resources in network modernization, how are you coordinating
with other services to ensure joint interoperability?
Secretary Wormuth. Congressman, I think, you know, the
ability of the services to be able to share data is going to be
one of the most important things that we have to figure out if
we are going to be effective in the future conflicts. And that
is exactly what we are trying to do at the Joint Service
Integration Lab.
We are really working there, with other services and
ultimately in Project Convergence this fall, to figure out how
can we share data not just among Army platforms, from sensors
to our platforms, but also with the other services.
So, for example, we have a program called Rainmaker that is
actually an artificial intelligence kind of program that helps
us knit together data from different platforms and different
services. Because if we can't share that, we are not going to
be able to connect, you know, the sensor to the best shooter
and then to the target that it needs to find.
So that is exactly what we are working on. You know, I
think what we are doing at Project Convergence is, frankly,
some of the most innovative stuff, looking at JADC2. And
delighted to hear that you are going up to JSIL later this
week.
Mr. Ruppersberger. Okay.
Ms. McCollum. Thank you.
Mr. Ruppersberger. And my time is up. I yield back.
Ms. McCollum. Yes.
If we are quick and other members, you know, come in and
out, we might get a second round in.
So Mr. Rogers, then Mrs. Bustos, Mr. Womack.
Mr. Rogers.

EUROPEAN DETERRENCE INITIATIVE

Mr. Rogers. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Welcome to the subcommittee. We are glad you are here, and
we thank you for your service to the country.
Let me ask you about the European Deterrence Initiative. We
all know that the countries of Europe are shivering, frightened
by what is going on in Ukraine. And I want to ask you, what
happened? The European Deterrence Initiative was designed to
prevent the kind of thing we are seeing in Europe writ large
today.
We have poured billions of dollars since 2014 into the
Defense Deterrence Initiative. How does that fit in with NATO,
other European-based defense groups, and the like?
Secretary Wormuth. Congressman, I would say, you know, I
think, frankly, we are seeing today the value of the
investments that Congress has supported in the European
Deterrence Initiative over the last few years.
You know, as one example, for example, I would point to the
investments that the Army has been able to make into its
prepositioned equipment in Europe. So, because of the fact that
we have invested in having modernized stocks in Europe ready to
go, you know, stuff that were in warehouses, where the
batteries worked, and, you know, when our troops fell in on it,
they were able to take it right out of the warehouses and go
into live-fire training in less than a week. And that, I think,
was, you know, very much because of the benefit of the European
Deterrence Initiative.
So, you know, I think that has been very valuable. I think
you have seen that Putin understands, I think, and does see the
Article 5 commitments and NATO territory as a red line.
I think, given how focused he seems to be, despite the fact
that his invasion into Ukraine was clearly a strategic major
miscalculation, even as his forces continue to suffer setbacks,
I think whether he could have been deterred from going into
Ukraine is tough to say. I think he was just intent on doing
that, even though, frankly, it is clearly backfiring on him.
Mr. Rogers. Well, we all know that he has indicated over
the years the inclination to annex to the Soviet Union, the
old--the new Soviet Union, Sweden and others.
How does the EDI play in that kind of warfare?
Secretary Wormuth. I think what EDI has enabled us to do is
to invest in our infrastructure in NATO countries, invest in
exercises so that we are able to demonstrate the combat
capability of our forces. And all of that, I think, contributes
to showing Putin that the NATO alliance is not something that
he wants to tangle with.
And I think, you know, should Finland and Sweden join NATO,
I think, you know, that will strengthen the alliance only
further.

LEGACY CAMOUFLAGE SYSTEMS

Mr. Rogers. Switching topics, let me bring up quickly a
matter, an issue often thought about at your level, but it is
my understanding that the Army plans on divesting from the
legacy camouflage systems by 2023, with the intention of
modernizing to ultra-lightweight camouflage net systems, or
ULCANS.
This technology is phenomenal. When a soldier dons it, I am
told, they virtually become invisible to even the most advanced
enemy sensors. In fact, we have seen this technology pay off in
spades in Ukraine. Simply put, this technology will undoubtedly
save lives.
Currently, the onus of procurement lies upon each
individual unit, in which they must use their limited funds to
acquire this life-saving technology. This is where my concern
arises. Despite the upcoming divestment deadline, the Army has
yet to wrap up procurement of ULCANS, leaving the industrial
base at risk of shutting down and denying us this equipment for
many years to come.
Can you please provide some more detail as to how the Army
plans on replacing the legacy camouflage systems by 2023?
Secretary Wormuth. Congressman, certainly we want to make
sure that our soldiers are well-camouflaged, and, you know, in
the future battlefield, being able to be camouflaged, you know,
in an environment where, frankly, our adversaries are going to
be able to see quite a bit, is very important.
I am not familiar with the specific camouflage equipment
that you are referring to. I will look into that. You know,
again, I think we want to make sure that our soldiers are well-
camouflaged. So that is something I would be happy to look into
and talk with you further.
Mr. Rogers. Thank you.
Ms. McCollum. Thank you, Madam Secretary.
Mrs. Bustos.

JOINT MUNITIONS COMMAND

Mrs. Bustos. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Secretary Wormuth and General McConville, thank you very
much for your leadership.
Briefly, the district that I represent is the entire
northwest corner of the State of Illinois. And, as my
colleagues on this subcommittee know, we are home to the Rock
Island Arsenal. I typically have a question about the Rock
Island Arsenal, and I want to do that today.
It is literally located on an island between the States of
Iowa and Illinois. The Rock Island Arsenal, though, is probably
best known for its factory there, and I am going to get to that
in a second question. But it also houses several other critical
organizations, including the Joint Munitions Command that we
all know as ``JMC.'' And it is responsible for the management
of ammunition, production of storage, distribution and
demilitarization for all U.S. military services.
And so, as you can imagine, the men and women at JMC,
including several now who are deployed from the Rock Island
Arsenal, have been working very, very hard to make sure that
our needs and our allies' needs are met in Eastern Europe and
Ukraine since Putin's invasion.
I am hoping that if either one of you could speak to the
work that JMC is doing to oversee the logistics involved in
this conflict, if we can talk about that and just a couple
other followup questions all interrelated there.
But are there ways that I should be aware of or this
subcommittee should be aware of that we can make that work
easier or support that, where we can make sure that they are
getting the job done? And really, in short, how is it going,
and how can we be of help?
Secretary Wormuth. Thank you, Congresswoman.
You know, I think, frankly, one of the things we are seeing
that has proved very problematic for the Russians are their
challenges with logistics. And I think that is one of the
things that sets our Army apart. And part of why we have been
able to do the amazing things that we have done in support of
Ukraine is because of our logistics system.
And AMC and JMC have done a fantastic job. It has been
remarkable, frankly, to see how quickly they have been able to
move ammunition.
And I think, you know, obviously, we are going to have work
to do in terms of replenishing our stock. So, you know, we will
continue to support our workforce that works on ammunition
because we are seeing just how important it is. And that is
something that the Army has invested more in, frankly, in the
last couple of budget cycles.
I don't know, Chief, if you want to add anything.
General McConville. I just think they are doing fabulous
work. We like to say that professionals study logistics and
amateurs, tactics. And we are seeing that play out.
And when we take a look at all the weapons and ammunition
that they have supported the Ukrainians with, it is making a
huge difference. And we certainly have to replenish those
weapons systems and that ammunition, and they are working that
right now as we speak.

ADVANCED MANUFACTURING CENTER

Mrs. Bustos. All right. Thanks to you both.
So let's look at that factory that I mentioned at the start
of my questions. So the Rock Island Arsenal is designated as
the Army's Advanced Manufacturing Center of Excellence, and
that supports the Army's broad goals for this capability. And
the type of work that they are doing really could change how we
address supply-chain issues and allow us to completely rethink
how we develop certain weapons systems, really with, also, a
goal of having significant savings.
So, you know, one quick example. They are currently
developing a jointless hull or chassis for the Next Generation
Combat Vehicle, which we see it as it could streamline
manufacturing and make the vehicle safer.
So I would like to get both of your perspectives, if I
could, on the importance of advanced and additive manufacturing
to the Army and how the Army plans to move forward for
maximizing the use of this type of technology.
Secretary Wormuth. Well, as you said, Congresswoman, I
think additive manufacturing, you know, offers a lot of
opportunity for us.
Among other things, it would give us, you know, and does
give us in many cases, the capability to produce parts that are
much farther away, if you will, from the defense industrial
base. So, you know, we are able to resupply and maintain our
equipment much farther away than we have been able to do in the
past.
So I think there is a lot of opportunity here. We are
certainly proponents of additive manufacturing and using it to
its maximum effect.
I think one of the issues that we do have some work to do
on is looking at standards for parts and making sure that we
have a common set of standards in terms of the safety of parts,
and that is something that we are working on. But I think there
is a lot of opportunity here.
Mrs. Bustos. Very good.
General, anything to add in the remaining 18 second?
General McConville. Oh, I just think there is a lot of
efficiency and effectiveness by being able to manufacture
parts. Historically, we have used the Iron Mountain, where we
take a whole bunch of parts and have to bring them around with
us. And then, by having this capability, it is an insurance
policy we can quickly make the parts we need.
Mrs. Bustos. Thank you, General.
Thank you, Madam Secretary.
And, Madam Chair, I yield back.
Ms. McCollum. Your timing was perfect. You were better than
the rest of us so far.
Mr. Womack, then Mrs. Kirkpatrick, and then Mr. Carter.

END STRENGTH

Mr. Womack. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Madam Secretary and General McConville, thank you again for
being with us this morning and for your continued service to
this country.
You know, just as kind of an opening, some of our
colleagues went over to Europe and spent a little time with the
Third I.D. Over at Graf, spent some time with the 82nd in
Poland. And I have to tell you, the ability for us to be able
to move those forces into those postures with the speed and
professionalism that we did, I think, speaks well of the Army's
ability to surge. And I congratulate you for that.
I have a question about end strength. I was reminded by one
of my district's soon-to-be-newest West Point graduates that
she chose the Army over other service academies because she
wanted to lead people. And while I understand this budget
request will not eliminate her chance to be a platoon leader or
company commander, the proposed end-strength cuts equate to
that of almost three entire brigade combat teams in numbers.
Chief, the Army has been our response force to the ongoing
war in Europe, and their ability to cultivate and sustain
personal and longstanding mil-to-mil relationships is an
absolute requirement. It is invaluable to assets that leaders
like Admiral Aquilino and General Flynn have discussed with me
as crucial to building capacity in the Indo-Pacific region.
So I am concerned that we are increasing our demand for
Army formations but shrinking our overall number of soldiers.
Can you explain to the committee the challenges the Army is
facing in terms of recruitment and operational capacity?
General McConville. Well, thank you, Congressman. And we
appreciate you visiting our troops. I had a chance to see them
over there. And the investments you all have made, that is why
the 82nd could draw vehicles over there, that is why the First
and the Third Infantry could draw vehicles.
But, you know, as far as young men and women, what we have
found is, 23 percent of Americans are qualified to come in the
military right now, and 83 percent of the young men and women
that are coming into the Army are coming from military
families. So what we think is we have to get more exposure.
An interesting factoid is, 44 percent of the young men and
women that come into the military are coming from schools with
JROTC--not necessarily in JROTC, but the fact they have had
some exposure to the military is really important.
So we need help from everybody to explain the advantages of
going into the military. I signed all three of my kids up, and
I have a son-in-law. And I think it is a great place for young
men and women to get an education and to develop their skill
sets, and I think we ought to offer that to everybody.

INDO-PACIFIC REGION

Mr. Womack. Well, I congratulate you on your talent
management strategies, because I think it is paying off.
I want to pivot to the Indo-Pacific region. It has been
made obvious to this committee the Army is being pivoted to the
region measurably slower than, say, the Navy and the Air Force.
While some of that is obviously inherent, based on capabilities
and planning for a future A2/AD environment, I know that your
formations continue to train and plan for their role in that
region.
Can you briefly describe for the committee how certain
training and mission exercises--say, Pacific Pathways--enables
the Army to uniquely prepare for a future fight in the Indo-
Pacific and how important the Army will be in that case?
General McConville. Well, I think our peace in the region
comes through strength, and that strength comes from allies and
partners. You all have been over to see Europe. And, you know,
what I took away from that is, having American soldiers on the
ground makes a huge difference.
And in a lot of things we did, even with Ukraine, there was
a lot of training, a lot of exercising that was done before
that actually began. And we have a very strong relationship
with Pacific Pathways, working with those countries, helping
them build their capabilities and capacity and, quite frankly,
their will to defend their country.
And I think it is very, very important we continue those
exercises and that we have a robust capability in the region
with U.S. Army troops.

TROOP DEPLOYMENT POSTURE

Mr. Womack. Madam Secretary, last week, the administration
advised Congress that in the coming months DOD is looking at
one-for-one unit replacements for about 10,500 personnel that
have been deployed in response to the Ukrainian situation. Of
note, I believe, is General McConville's former division
headquarters will be some of those tagging in.
My question centers around these new deployments and the
likelihood of them becoming cyclical in nature, or perhaps even
part of a permanently established footprint in some places, and
the effect these courses of action could have on the Army's new
regionally aligned readiness and modernization model.
I understand that the decisions about this are still kind
of out there a few weeks, maybe, from now, but can you comment
briefly on it?
Secretary Wormuth. Certainly, Congressman. And that is a
great question. I appreciate you shining the spotlight on that.
You are right; there is--you know, the discussion about
what, ultimately, posture in Europe is going to look like, you
know, after the conflict ends is still ongoing and, I think,
you know, will come to a head probably at the Madrid summit
later this summer. But I think it is possible that we would
see, you know, potentially some rotational deployments over and
above what we have seen a year ago.
And we are going to have to factor that into ReARMM. And
we, frankly, have been keeping a very close eye on that,
because, you know, the units that are scheduled to go into the
modernization windows, that has been very carefully crafted. It
has been very carefully crafted to make sure that the right
people are in those units.
So we may have to make some adjustments, but I think we are
going to be able to do that. And the planning to do that has
already started.
Mr. Womack. Thank you very much.
I look forward to seeing both of you at West Point this
weekend for graduation. Go Army. Beat Navy.
Sorry, Dutch.
Mr. Ruppersberger. That is okay.
Mr. Womack. I yield back.
Mr. Ruppersberger. We will see you next year.
Ms. McCollum. I have no favorites.
Mrs. Kirkpatrick and then Mr. Carter.

CURRENT STOCK OF EQUIPMENT

Mrs. Kirkpatrick. Thank you.
My first question is for the Secretary.
Congress has previously appropriated $3.5 billion to
backfill U.S. military equipment transferred to Ukraine. The
second Ukraine supplemental request includes an additional $1.3
billion in procurement funding, plus additional draw-down
authority for critical munitions.
To date, the U.S. has transferred more than 5,500 Javelin
missiles, more than 1,400 Stinger missiles--which, by the way,
are made in my district--and more than 50 million rounds of
ammunition, in addition to tactical vehicles, UAVs, and other
small arms.
Our ability to backfill existing stock is critical to our
national security. So, Secretary, given that the United States
has provided a significant amount of munitions to the
Ukrainians, are you concerned about the current stock of
equipment, such as Stinger and Javelin systems?
Secretary Wormuth. Congresswoman, as you noted, we have
provided quite a number of Javelins and Stingers to the
Ukrainians, as well as any number of other types of military
equipment, ranging from helicopters to body armor. And we have
been keeping a close eye on what our minimum requirements are
as we do that.
And we have also, as I noted earlier, been working closely
with industry to try to ramp up their production capability,
particularly with Javelins.
With Stingers, you know, we are looking at designing a
replacement eventually for Stinger. You know, obviously, we
have that on our M-SHORAD system, so that is something we are
going to--you know, we certainly have a vested interest in
that.
But I think the funding that Congress had provided in the
supplemental will help us, working with industry, to replenish
our stocks of munitions.

LONG-RANGE PRECISION FIRES

Mrs. Kirkpatrick. My second question is for the General.
Thank you for testifying today and for everything you do in
support of our soldiers.
I understand that the Army is seeking to improve its
ability to deliver what it refers to as Long-Range Precision
Fires by upgrading current artillery and missile systems,
developing new longer-range cannons and hypersonic weapons, and
modifying existing air- and sea-launched missiles and cruise
missiles for ground launch by Army units.
General, please describe the Army's unique role in
advancing our long-range fire capabilities and how your
investment here is not duplicative of other services.
General McConville. Yes, Congresswoman. Our number-one
priority is our Long-Range Precision Fires, and it begins with
hypersonic missiles. We believe that we need to have a land-
based capability that is available 24/7, that is rapidly
deployable. And we are developing that capability, and we will
have that capability next year.
We have also been asked by the combatant commanders to
develop a capability to sink ships. And we are developing that
midrange capability, and that will be delivered next year.
We also are developing a precision-strike missile
capability in excess of 500 kilometers. We could see how that
could be very, very effective in some of the combat we are
seeing right now, the ability to out-range our adversaries and
get after their logistics and get after their command and
control.
We are also developing extended-range cannon, which, again,
allows us to reach out and touch our adversaries further than
they have.
And all of this is being brought together as part of the
joint force and part of the sensor-to-shooter linkage that we
are working on with Project Convergence.
Mrs. Kirkpatrick. Thank you.
Madam Chair, I yield back.
Ms. McCollum. Thank you.
Next we have Mr. Carter, Ms. Kaptur, and Mr. Kilmer.

MILITARY HOUSING

Mr. Carter. First, I would like to thank you, Madam Chair,
for emphasizing the Futures Command. That is one my big
concerns, and I thank you for that.
I have had a great visit with you folks this morning.
One of the things we have going on in Texas--and, quite
frankly, if you read closely, around the country--is that the
price of housing and the price of rentals is going up
exponentially. And about 70 percent of the people that work for
the military live off-post, sometimes as high as more. But the
rentals are putting them out of ability to be out there. And
they are, quite honestly, having real issues with trying to
buy, because the bidding process is taking the values way out
of proportion to what they should be.
And then, finally, I am told by people that do this for a
living that the VA loans, people just won't take them. They
would rather have cash. So these cash operations that are out
there are just literally making us be unable to use VA loans.
Are you aware of this situation? Have you got any ideas
about doing something better? Maybe increasing the BAH?
Secretary Wormuth. Thank you, Congressman. And I appreciate
you highlighting this challenge because I think it is an issue,
you know, that we all see with housing costs going up in a
number of places around the country. And that is something, you
know, we certainly want to make sure, that our soldiers and
their families are able to live in good housing and to afford
housing off-post.
That was one of the reasons that the Department increased
BAH in, I think, about 50 different locations around the
country this year. I think, you know, we are open to looking at
something like that, you know, again.
But I think one of the challenges we have to work our way
through, as we think about that, is the fact that, you know, if
we raise our BAH rates, landlords can sort of see that coming,
and then they raise their rents, and you get into a little bit
of an unhelpful upward cycle.
But I think we do want to look at housing, and, you know,
we will have to work with OSD, as you know, since they are the
ones who ultimately set the BAH rates.
Mr. Carter. And that is an issue. I have discussed it when
I was over in Korea with the commanding general over there
many, many years ago. The Koreans watched--instantly raise
their rents.
Finally, I talked to you today about the fact that--and it
is kind of interesting--in the Department of Defense, 94
percent of the borrowers in the Department of Defense were
denied loan forgiveness, because they didn't want do a 10-year
commitment of 120 payments for the loan forgiveness to come
together.
The rest of the government doesn't have that burden. Now,
why is that? And what can we do to change that?
Secretary Wormuth. Congressman, I think this is, again, an
area that we want to look into. As we were talking with you
earlier this morning, we are in a war for talent, and we are
competing against the private sector in a very, very tight job
market. So I think we need to be looking at our benefits, our
pay, to make sure that we are competitive, and we need to be
thinking creatively about what more we can do to make ourselves
attractive. And I think this issue of loan forgiveness is
something we can look into.
We are looking at, as I alluded to in my opening statement,
our whole recruiting enterprise and, you know, what kinds of
changes we may need to make to make ourselves more attractive
in the future over the longer term. And I think this is
something that we could include in that.
Mr. Carter. Thank you, Madam Chairman.
Ms. McCollum. Thank you, Mr. Carter.
Ms. Kaptur.
And then we will go to you, Mr. Kilmer.

NUTRITIONAL CONTENT OF MEALS

Ms. Kaptur. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Secretary Wormuth and General McConville, thank you so much
for your service, your exemplary service, to our country. I
think each of us feels we would like to do more to help you.
But let me try to ask a couple questions.
First, I will ask what I asked Secretary Austin and General
Milley. We were recently in Germany and Poland, and the
accomplishments of moving that many soldiers, the logistics of
that, you just--you were outstanding. But I will tell you one
thing that really bothered me, and that was the food that the
soldiers ate.
And so my question to you is, who is the highest-ranking
person at Army that could work with us to look at the
nutritional content of what those soldiers eat?
I was struck by the fact that the MRAs sat there in the
bags. And after I talked to the soldiers, ``Why didn't you take
that?'', they said, ``That is the worst.''
And I noticed the bread that we had been served was white
bread. And I am going, ``Hmm. Okay, I need to get into this.''
Because nothing's more important to a soldier than food,
especially when they have some of the tank commands and some of
the units that we were with, the 82nd Airborne. We need to feed
the best to our soldiers.
So I need a briefing on that to better follow up and be
useful up here as a Member on the food front. You don't have to
answer, but I think we need to do some repair work there. That
is number one.

GREAT LAKES LOGISTICS

Number 2, I come from the Great Lakes part of the United
States where General Eisenhower built the St. Lawrence Seaway,
the Great Lakes St. Lawrence Seaway. I am asking myself the
question, in terms of logistical support to Central Europe, how
better can we utilize that corridor, which is the shortest
distance between the United States and the ports of Northern
Europe and the Baltics, to move humanitarian goods, the,
really, billions of dollars that we voted for to try to help?
I represent places like Parma, Ohio, where we have the
third-largest Ukrainian-American population in the country. We
have over 140,000 Polish-Americans that live in northern Ohio.
I can guarantee you, goods are backed up that could be used in
that part of the world, starting with medical, starting with
tourniquets, starting with Kevlar vests, you name it.
And I just think the Army's ability to deal with logistics
could help, working with some of these organizations in our
region. And that fourth seacoast, this is the moment for which
it exists. And so I just ask you to think about that.
If there is anybody you could send up here to meet with
some of us--I co-chair the Ukraine Caucus. We have 90 Members.
From this particular corridor, we are underperforming. A
lot of our folks are enlisted, but I am telling you, with back
hauls, with available space on vessels that are moving through
that seaway right now, if we have to move grain this year,
guess where we grow it.
And so, just wanted to mention that. And if you have
someone you could send up, believe me, we can gather more
Members than you would want to shake a stick at, in terms of
the unmet potential in this corridor.

NONCOMBAT TACTICAL VEHICLE INCIDENTS

Number 3, mechanics. I am very interested in this. And from
statistics we were given, in terms of the number of
servicemembers who have died due to noncombat tactical vehicle
mishaps over the past decade and those who have been injured, I
am wondering--the Army is such a great place for training of
mechanics; our country is 1 million mechanics short right now--
if there would be more opportunity for the Army to work with
local schools--General, you mentioned this--where there are
bases that exist, where we could look at the local school
program and do a partnership in terms of mechanics and training
and some kind of educational effort.
I don't know if you think like that. It may be more in the
Guard and Reserve that we have to work. But the country has a
real problem. If we are going to do this conversion, we are not
ready. We don't have the mechanics that are out there.
And so, I think this specialty is one that I would very
much like to work with Army on, because I think that you really
do have the capacity to help the Republic more in this sector.
So, whether it is on Ukraine or on mechanics or on food, if
you want to comment before my time is up, I would appreciate
it.
Ms. McCollum. Ms. Kaptur, they have about 28 seconds, so
they might want to take it for the record.
Ms. Kaptur. Okay.
Secretary Wormuth. We will take it for the record and
definitely make sure you get briefings on those topics.
Ms. Kaptur. Thank you.
Ms. McCollum. Thank you. And we will have a second round of
questions, if you would like that then.
Mr. Kilmer, and then I will explain how the second round of
questions are going to work.
Mr. Kilmer.

ARMY CLIMATE STRATEGY

Mr. Kilmer. Thanks, Madam Chair.
And thank you both for being with us.
Madam Secretary, I want to start by just applauding you on
the February 2022 Army Climate Strategy. I think it does an
excellent job encapsulating the problem we face today that the
Army both contributes to and is threatened by, the extreme
weather events caused by climate change.
I also want to commend you for committing the Army to track
implementation of their strategy and to hold itself accountable
moving forward. And I guess that is where I wanted to just dig
in a little bit.
I specifically wanted to discuss the Army's efforts to
procure construction materials with lower embodied carbon
emissions, including mass timber, which could help the Army in
achieving its objectives. Studies have shown that mass-timber
buildings, compared to concrete buildings, would save 36
percent on energy costs and reduce carbon emissions by 43
percent.
I give the Army credit for adopting this new building
material and constructing five hotels out of cross-laminated
timber at installations across the U.S., including at Joint
Base Lewis-McChord in my neck of the words. Those hotels went
up at least 37 percent faster than comparable construction
projects and with 40 percent less labor. And so the benefit of
that I think could be really helpful in terms of addressing the
construction backlog and just recognizing that there is
heightened competition for construction labor right now with
private industry.
So, I guess, to turn this into a question, can you update
the committee on the Army's plans to achieve this procurement
objective? To what extent is the Army looking to utilize mass
timber's benefits? And has the Army shared any lessons learned
from the construction of its mass-timber hotels with the other
services to ensure that the DOD can realize some similar
environmental benefits?
Secretary Wormuth. Thank you, Congressman.
You know, I think there are definitely some advantages to
the cross-laminated timber that you have talked about, you
know, certainly in terms of its strength relative to steel and
concrete, for example. You know, also, as I understand it, it
is fairly expensive as a building material, as well, as a
result of that. So I think, you know, we want to take a case-
by-case approach to it and look at where it makes sense to use
it.
As you pointed out, some of our IHD hotels have used it,
and I think that is, you know, a great demonstration of the
value of it in terms of a construction material. And I think,
you know, we would be happy to talk to--if we are not already,
we would be happy to talk to other services about the
experience we have had using that material up in the Northwest.

CHILDCARE

Mr. Kilmer. Super.
I guess, in the time I have left, the other issue I wanted
to address was childcare. Access to childcare is an issue for
military families. We consistently hear from folks in my region
about their struggles accessing military childcare. I noted and
was pleased that you mentioned that in your written remarks.
As you know, the DOD currently spends more than a billion
dollars annually to provide childcare to military families. I
know the Department and the Army are working hard to ensure
that our servicemembers receive the support that they deserve.
Despite the relative affordability of military childcare,
particularly compared to civilian providers, the DOD still has
over 15,000 servicemembers on childcare waiting lists.
So how can Congress work with the Army to reduce those
waiting lists and make sure our servicemembers don't have to
worry about finding someone to look after their kids? And how
does childcare impact the Army's readiness and our soldiers'
ability to serve our country?
Secretary Wormuth. Thanks, Congressman, for this question.
My children are grown now, but for a long time I was a working
mom, so I am very familiar with the challenges--both the
importance of quality childcare and the challenges of finding
it and paying for it.
And I would say there are really two big issues for us as
we look at waitlists. One, obviously, is capacity. You know,
the more capacity we can have, the shorter we can have
waitlists. So that is why we have, you know, included money,
for example, in this budget for a CDC at Fort Polk. And we
built a handful of CDCs in last year's budget, as well, with
your support.
The other thing that helps us with our waitlist is
obviously staffing at our childcare centers. And that is an
area where we are facing challenges now, because, again, the
labor market is very tight, and we are competing with the
civilian sector for staff. And we have authorized, for example,
our commanders to be able to hire at 110 percent to try to make
sure that we have the staff so that we can fully man our CDCs.
But those are definitely--you know, just continuing to
support in our budget funding for MILCON for CDCs, for our fee
assistance program, for the incentive program that we have for
our in-home childcare, where folks, you know, who are PCSing,
if they are participating in our in-home childcare program and
then do it at the location they move to, that is very helpful.
So you all continuing to support that is very helpful to us.
Mr. Kilmer. Thanks very much.
And thank you, Madam Chair. I yield back.
Ms. McCollum. Thank you. And childcare is something that
Members are coming up to me on the floor talking about already,
especially some of the waivers that you had available.
Members, we have time for a couple more questions. We are
going to go through. It is going to be 2 minutes. And at about
5 to the hour, I will make my last question then and close it
up.
But Mr. Calvert would like to do his last question now.
Mr. Calvert?

Mr. Calvert's Closing Remarks

Mr. Calvert. Yes, and a couple comments.
First, as Mr. Womack is very well aware of, the State
Partnership Program is a program with the Guard that works very
well. And, obviously, the California Guard, we are very proud
of what they did in Ukraine to train up the Ukrainian military,
obviously with great success.
On the Stinger missile program, the Brits--I think you
probably are aware of this--have a missile called Starstreak
that would maybe be a comparable replacement for us. I know it
would be a foreign acquisition, but it is, I understand, a more
capable missile--it goes to 16,000 feet, goes up to Mach 4--
and, I think, a similar price point.
The other issue is small-arms ammo. I know we talk about
hypersonics and other long-range fires, and it is all
important, but also we need ammunition. And, last year, we had
an insufficient amount of money that was requested. We added
$80 million to that, which obviously was needed.
But I worry about the small-arms industrial base. If we can
continue to make sure that we ramp up small-arms production to
make sure we have sufficient stores in case of a conflict like
we are having right now.
So I would hope you would agree with that. And if you have
any quick comments, I would be happy to hear them.
Secretary Wormuth. Congressman, I think it is important,
obviously, that we make sure that we have sufficient ammunition
stocks, you know, small arms and otherwise.
And I think one of the things, I believe, in the last
supplemental request that came over was a new authority, I
think, to try to help us stay ahead, if you will, on critical
munitions and make sure that we are able to stockpile in
advance. So I think that is something that might be helpful as
well.
Mr. Calvert. Thank you.
Thank you.
Ms. McCollum. Thank you.
Mr. Ruppersberger.

ARMY RESEARCH LAB

Mr. Ruppersberger. Yes.
Secretary Wormuth, based on the details in your budget
documents for fiscal year 2023, your basic research, applied
research, and advanced technological development accounts are
trending down, and you are now aligning 82 percent of your
science and technology funding to the Army modernization
priorities--Long-Range Precision Fires, next-generation combat
vehicles, future vertical lift, network, air and missile
defense, and soldier lethality.
How are you ensuring that legacy S&T organizations like
Army Research Lab, headquartered in Maryland, in Aberdeen, and
your basic accounts are appropriately sustained throughout your
modernization sprint?
And I am going to be there this Friday, so----
Secretary Wormuth. Congressman, certainly the work of Army
Research Lab remains important, and I think, you know, we have
seen them make some very important contributions.
So, what we are trying to do in our budget now is to
balance, obviously, you know, the finite resources we have. We
are trying to make sure that we continue to maintain our
momentum across all six of those modernization portfolios that
you mentioned. We are trying to also make sure that we continue
to invest prudently in enduring systems that are important,
like tanks and Bradleys and Strykers, for example. And we are
trying to make sure that we continue our S&T work.
So, you know, those accounts may go up and down a little
bit from year to year, but the work of the Army Research Lab
remains very important.
Mr. Ruppersberger. I yield back.
Ms. McCollum. Thank you.
Mr. Rogers, do you have a----
Mr. Rogers. No further questions.
Ms. McCollum. Thank you, Mr. Rogers.
Mr. Womack.

NATIONAL GUARD

Mr. Womack. Yes, just quickly about the National Guard. Ken
talked a minute ago about the fact that his California folks,
who have done a great job--and I credit the work of the Guard
in Ukraine with helping prepare the junior officers over there
for quite a remarkable resistance to this invasion.
And not lost on me is the fact that in the Guard you can
serve your country, if you are predisposed to serving your
country, and still work in a civilian environment, where, as we
all know, it is a very competitive job climate out there. So I
know what the Army is trying to do and attract more and more
people to come in. You are competing with the civilian
workforce and the increased wages there and this sort of thing.
What can you tell us--either one of you--what can you tell
us about the role of the Guard in the future Army and whether
it is going to continue to be part of our operational strategy
or whether it will one day be relegated to, more or less, a
strategic-type reserve, as we once knew it?
Secretary Wormuth. Congressman, you know, I think the
National Guard, the Army Guard is incredibly important. And I
spent a lot of time working Guard issues as the debate about
moving from a strategic reserve to an operational reserve was
underway.
You know, I think we have gained enormous lessons learned
from--and the components, I think, have come together in an
amazing way in the last 20 years because they have served
overseas in the field together. And I think we are very much
going to continue that operational reserve approach. You know,
the Army Guard has been incredibly busy the last couple of
years, both overseas and here at home, and I think will
continue an operational reserve.
My son-in-law is in the Pennsylvania National Guard, the
Army Guard, and he deployed in support of COVID last year and,
you know, I think has had an amazing experience just, as you
said, being able to be a member of the Guard but then also have
a civilian job.
Mr. Womack. Thank you.
Ms. McCollum. Ms. Kaptur.

NATIONAL GUARD PARTNERSHIPS

Ms. Kaptur. Yes. I just wanted to state for the record, in
terms of Central Europe and Ukraine, bringing you back to the
part of the country I represent, Cleveland, Ohio's sister city
is Gdansk, Poland. Parma, Ohio's sister city is Lviv, Ukraine.
If we look at the State partnerships under the Guard, if we
look at Illinois, their sister country is Poland. Michigan I
think is partnered with Lithuania; I am not sure. Ohio is
partnered with Hungary and Serbia.
I am just saying that there are traditional relationships
on the ground that you might not think of because you think of
major bases. Our part of the country has Guard and Reserve, but
we also have these traditional relationships that are really
important. And so I look forward to speaking with someone from
Army about just the logistical potential--the unmet logistical
potential of our region.
Secondly, I will say this also for the record. Madam
Secretary, I appreciate very much the work of the Department in
helping to review the case of a soldier who fought in Vietnam.
What was missing from the letter from the Department of Army
was the historical context in which they fought. There was no
more costly battle than Ia Drang Valley in that war.
And when a determination comes back that there were no
corroborating statements pertaining to a given soldier's
duties--they were all dead, but for one. And I could find
nothing in the manual that deals with last soldier standing. In
this case, he wasn't standing; he was dying on the ground.
And so I am going to write you a reply and hope that it
can--I don't know if this can be appealed in any way, but I
would like to find a way do that and have the historical
context of Seventh Cav in the battle of Ia Drang Valley at
Landing Zone X-Ray as part of the review.
Thank you very much.
Ms. McCollum. Thank you, Ms. Kaptur.
And just so my constituents back home don't think that I
don't care about Minnesota: It has not been mentioned yet at
this hearing, we are aligned with Croatia.
Mr. Carter.

SMALL BUSINESS

Mr. Carter. Thank you, Madam Chairman.
Army Futures Command stated they would place an emphasis on
working with small business. GAO reported last year that the FC
could do a better job in working with small business,
especially in the area of research and development.
Please share with us the steps that you are talking to
ensure that small business is an equal partner.
Secretary Wormuth. Thank you, Congressman.
And General McConville may want to add to this, but my
understanding is, certainly when I've gone down to see Army
Futures Command, they have been working very closely with small
business and work regularly and have quarterly, if not monthly,
sort of meetings with the small-business community not just in
Austin but in other places as well.
I think, you know, we view the small-business community as
an important source of innovation and new ideas, new
technologies. And part of why the Army decided to place Futures
Command in Austin, which, as you know well, is an incredible
hub for tech, was precisely that, to give us some connective
tissue with the small-business community.
So I will look into if there needs to be more work there,
but that is front and center in AFC's work.
Mr. Carter. Thank you.
General.
General McConville. Well, Congressman, one of the things I
have seen with the approach that Futures Command has taken,
rather than--historically, the old, slow process was come out
with a huge requirements document, probably piled to the
ceiling. Only a very large industry could take that on. Now
what they do is they put out a problem, they bring in all the
industry partners and small businesses, and they say, ``Hey, we
would like to solve this problem. Give us some ideas.''
They come back with white papers. They get a little money
if they make the cut. And so they might come up with an
innovative way that helps us define the characteristics for the
next round; then come back with the design. And that allows
them to get their ideas in and get under contract and then,
eventually, actually compete at a much higher level.
So we are trying that. We probably have more work to do on
it. But we do want in that innovation in Army Futures Command.
Mr. Carter. Well, I am glad to hear that. I think that is
very important, and I appreciate what you are doing.
About 2006, a guy came into my office with a plastic
windshield. He said, ``This will take 15 30-caliber rounds
without shattering.'' And I showed it to folks out at Fort
Hood, and they went, ``Boy, do we need that.'' I don't know----
Ms. McCollum. Thank you----
Mr. Carter. He never could get through.
Ms. McCollum. Thank you, Mr. Carter.
Mr. Carter. We have to look for these people with those
ideas.
Ms. McCollum. Thank you, Mr. Carter.
Mr. Kilmer.

MEDICAL CARE

Mr. Kilmer. Thanks, Madam Chair.
Madam Secretary, I understand the need for the Army to
increase readiness to combat global threats, and the shifting
medical billets is part of that balancing act. I know the chair
referenced this in her opening remarks.
I do just want to raise the concern that these reductions
and the inability to backfill them could seriously impact
access to care for servicemembers and their families. I have
heard from both military and civilian providers in my neck of
the woods that they are already struggling to hire medical
professionals. I am afraid these billet reductions will
exacerbate that problem.
I understand that the Defense Health Agency is responsible
for backfilling civilians or contractor replacement, but what
happens if they are unable to rehire those positions? And what
impact will that have on the Army's readiness?
Secretary Wormuth. Thank you, Congressman.
You know, as you noted, this is, I think--you know, we are
working with the Defense Health Agency, as are the other
services, as we sort of, you know, complete this transition.
But I, too, have heard the concerns about the reduction in
billets, and I have heard concerns as I have gone around to
installations and communities about what that is going to mean
in terms of access to care.
So I think, you know, we are trying to work closely with
the Defense Health Agency and talk to them about what we are
seeing and make sure that they understand with urgency the need
to bring on new hires.
I think some of this has been exacerbated by the fact that
a number of our medical professionals were drawn in to
supporting the COVID response in communities all around the
country. You know, a lot of those folks have now returned to
the Department of the Army and are going back into our
hospitals. But we do, I think, have to keep a close eye on
this, because we don't want our readiness to be affected.
Mr. Kilmer. Thanks, Madam Chair. I yield back.

Chair McCollum Closing Remarks

Ms. McCollum. Thank you.
So, just to add onto what Mr. Kilmer said, one of the
discussions I had at one of the installations out in
California--and it was several years ago--I don't think it was
an Army installation--when this was first being discussed. We
have more women than ever serving in the military. That is a
good thing. But then when you start saying we are going to
limit obstetrics, gynecology, and even pediatricians with
childcare, getting your child in and out for wellness checkups,
it is going to affect, you know, readiness, morale, and, I
think, retention into the future.
I know you are well aware of it, as you shared, you know,
your personal experiences. I have had them as a mom too. I
think our voices need to be heard at the table, sitting along
with our brothers and other fathers, who are sitting at the
table with us.
Which leads me to a question that I am just baffled by.
General, I am beyond concerned that your unfunded requirement
list includes female body armor for the second year in a row.
Unfunded? This should be a priority.
And I quote from a budget justification document: ``If not
funded, this will create personal safety issues due to lack of
proper fit of small-statured body armor.''
I have been in theater when I have been handed, you know,
body armor that would fit you a lot better than it would me.It
is not just the fit, the protection, but it is also the ability
for that soldier, for her to be able to fill her job, to have
herself not only protected but be able to have the back of the
soldier next to her.
Can you explain to me why this is on your unfunded priority
request?
General McConville. Well, Chair, we have a program and we
are aggressively getting after that capability. We have been
fielding it along. And what we have done is to accelerate--many
of these programs we have are 4- or 5-year programs. And, in
order to complete the program faster, we put it on the unfunded
priority list and try to get it fielded faster.
Ms. McCollum. Well, sir, I have never done this before in a
hearing. That is just not a satisfactory answer.
General McConville. Okay.
Ms. McCollum. Women are not a second-class priority in the
United States military, and their protection. I know you
personally don't feel that way, so I don't mean it directed at
you. I am directing it to Big Army. This needs to get fixed and
fixed now.
My question for the record is going to be on the--besides
the staff's budgetary questions--is on the Arctic strategy.
And, as we know, as with climate change, as the Arctic thaws
out, Russia is a major player in that area, being an Arctic
nation right across the water from us. China considers itself a
near-Arctic nation, which is, you know, baffling to geography
teachers, but they do nonetheless.
This is going to be very contested space. And this is why
climate change, as part of our national security, we have to
address it, but we also have to be prepared and build
resiliency in. So I am going to have some questions about
weather modernization and all-terrain vehicles and other
things.
Ms. McCollum. I want to thank you for being here today. I
want to thank you for your understanding that we cannot be in
session much longer here because of the joint session on the
floor.
I want to thank you again, Madam Secretary. I want to thank
you, General. But please share our gratitude to the men and
women who serve both in uniform and in civilian clothes
alongside with you who are working to keep our country safe,
strong, and secure.
With that, this concludes today's hearing.
[Whereupon, at 10:53 a.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

W I T N E S S E S

----------
Page

Aquilino, Admiral John C., U.S. Navy, Commander, U.S. Indo-
Pacific Command................................................   158

Austin, Hon. Lloyd J., III, Secretary, Department of Defense.....     5

Brown, General Charles Q., Chief of Staff, U.S. Air Force........    84

Kendall, Hon. Frank, Secretary, U.S. Air Force...................    82

LaCamera, General Paul J., U.S. Army, Commander, United Nations
Command; Commander, United States, Republic of Korea Combined
Force; and Commander, U.S. Forces of Korea.....................   191

McConville, General James C., Chief of Staff, U.S. Army..........   210

Milley, General Mark A., U.S. Army, Chairman, Joint Chiefs of
Staff..........................................................    20

Raymond, General John W., Chief of Space Operations, U.S. Space
Force..........................................................    86

Wormuth, Hon. Christine, Secretary, U.S. Army, accompanied by
General James C. McConville, Chief of Staff, U.S. Army.........   209
