- PATHWAYS TO SUCCESS: SUPPORTING ENTREPRENEURS AND EMPLOYEES WITH DISABILITIES

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

PATHWAYS TO SUCCESS: SUPPORTING
ENTREPRENEURS AND EMPLOYEES WITH
DISABILITIES

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON INNOVATION,
ENTREPRENEURSHIP, AND WORKFORCE
DEVELOPMENT

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON SMALL BUSINESS
UNITED STATES
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

HEARING HELD
JANUARY 30, 2024

__________

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Small Business Committee Document Number 118-037
Available via the GPO Website: www.govinfo.gov

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
54-640                     WASHINGTON : 2024

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

HOUSE COMMITTEE ON SMALL BUSINESS

ROGER WILLIAMS, Texas, Chairman
BLAINE LUETKEMEYER, Missouri
PETE STAUBER, Minnesota
DAN MEUSER, Pennsylvania
BETH VAN DUYNE, Texas
MARIA SALAZAR, Florida
TRACEY MANN, Kansas
JAKE ELLZEY, Texas
MARC MOLINARO, New York
MARK ALFORD, Missouri
ELI CRANE, Arizona
AARON BEAN, Florida
WESLEY HUNT, Texas
NICK LALOTA, New York
CELESTE MALOY, Utah
NYDIA VELAZQUEZ, New York, Ranking Member
JARED GOLDEN, Maine
KWEISI MFUME, Maryland
DEAN PHILLIPS, Minnesota
GREG LANDSMAN, Ohio
MARIE GLUESENKAMP PEREZ, Washington
SHRI THANEDAR, Michigan
MORGAN MCGARVEY, Kentucky
HILLARY SCHOLTEN, Michigan
JUDY CHU, California
SHARICE DAVIDS, Kansas
CHRIS PAPPAS, New Hampshire

Ben Johnson, Majority Staff Director
Melissa Jung, Minority Staff Director

C O N T E N T S

OPENING STATEMENTS

Page
Hon. Marc Molinaro...............................................     1
Hon. Morgan McGarvey.............................................     3

WITNESSES

Mr. Keith Wargo, President and Chief Executive Officer, Autism
Speaks, Washington, DC.........................................     6
Ms. Iva Walsh, Owner, Maeve's Place, Phoenicia, NY...............     8
Mr. Cody Clark, Founder and Owner, Cody Clark Magic, Louisville,
KY.............................................................     9

APPENDIX

Prepared Statements:
Mr. Keith Wargo, President and Chief Executive Officer,
Autism Speaks, Washington, DC..............................    20
Ms. Iva Walsh, Owner, Maeve's Place, Phoenicia, NY...........    23
Mr. Cody Clark, Founder and Owner, Cody Clark Magic,
Louisville, KY.............................................    31
Questions for the Record:
None.
Answers for the Record:
None.
Additional Material for the Record:
American Association of People with Disabilities (AAPD)......    37
Autism Society of America....................................    44
Consumer Technology Association (CTA)........................    49
Gallaudet University.........................................    51
National Disability Institute (NDI)..........................    59

PATHWAYS TO SUCCESS: SUPPORTING
ENTREPRENEURS AND EMPLOYEES WITH DISABILITIES

----------

TUESDAY, JANUARY 30, 2024

House of Representatives,
Committee on Small Business,
Subcommittee on Innovation, Entrepreneurship, and
Workforce Development
Washington, DC.
The Subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 10:03 a.m., in
Room 2360, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Mark Molinaro
[chairman of the Subcommittee] presiding.
Present: Representatives Molinaro, Mann, Salazar, Ellzey,
Crane, McGarvey, Thanedar, Pappas, Philips, and Chu.
Also Present: Representative Williams.
Chairman MOLINARO. Good morning, thank you for joining us.
Before we get started this morning, I would like to recognize
Mr. McGarvey to lead us in the pledge and a prayer.
Mr. MCGARVEY. I pledge allegiance to the flag of the United
States of America. And to the Republic for which it stands, one
nation under God, indivisible, with liberty and justice for
all.
Chairman MOLINARO. I now call the Committee, the Committee
on Small Business, Subcommittee on Innovation,
Entrepreneurship, and Workforce Element to order. Without
objection, the Chair is authorized to declare a recess of the
Committee at any time. I would now like to recognize myself for
an opening statement.
First, as I said, good morning. I am thrilled to have our
witnesses here and thank you all for joining us. We appreciate
your time and appreciate the testimony that you are about to
present to the Committee. I am particularly looking forward to
hearing from Mr. Keith Wargo, President and CEO of Autism
Speaks. Let me say on behalf of kids like my own, your
leadership and vision for such an impactful organization does
not go unnoticed. As the parent of four children, one of whom
on the autism spectrum, I am certainly interested, as are my
colleagues, in hearing from you about the work of the
organization and what you are all doing to enhance the lives of
those with autism and supporting their families.
Now, I am also very excited to be joined today by Ms. Iva
Walsh. I also want to take this moment to recognize, even more
importantly, her daughter Maeve, who is with us today as well.
Iva is the Founder and Owner of Maeve's Place. This is a
popular coffee shop in Phoenicia, New York, and upstate New
York, located in my district. Earlier this month, I visited
again to present Iva with a congressional certificate for
recognition for her amazing work and service to our community.
But more importantly, she has been doing amazing work.
Inspired by her daughter Maeve, who has down syndrome, Iva has
made it her mission to employ and support those with
intellectual disabilities through her small business. I am
eager, as are my colleagues, to hear from you and your unique
perspectives on the positive impacts individuals with
disabilities bring to the workplace. And I am thankful that you
are here with us today.
Today, the Subcommittee on Innovation, Entrepreneurship,
and Workforce Development hearing will focus on highlighting
the Pathways to Success: Supporting Entrepreneurs and Employees
with Disabilities. As we all recognize, hiring people with
disabilities is not only sound economic investment for any
business of any side, it also has significant economic and
societal advantages. Everyone puts forth a unique perspective
and skill set that makes them attractive and earnest employees.
Fortunately, with the current labor shortage, remote work
opportunities, and tax incentives, we have seen a significant
rise in the number of individuals with disabilities joining the
workforce. However, far too many remain unemployed. We must
together continue to encourage and provide resources to
individuals with disabilities for job opportunities, creating
pathways to success.
There are various programs that exist for this purpose and
do an outstanding job of assisting those who participate
alongside many others. Programs like the Partnership on
Inclusive Apprenticeship and Partnership on Employment and
Accessible Technology currently exist to help guide self-
employed entrepreneurs. The PIA has designed apprenticeship
programs and works to fund and connect disabled entrepreneurs
to mentors, employment opportunities, and training programs.
Meanwhile, PAT program promotes employment retention and career
advancement by fostering collaborations in the technology space
to build an inclusive workplace for people with disabilities.
Having access to these programs can make a world of difference
for these entrepreneurs, creating a more productive and
innovative environment on main streets across America.
Furthermore, in the post pandemic workforce, unique
employment opportunities have arisen for people with
disabilities. Research has shown that people with disabilities
are highly motivated to work, can create a more positive work
environment, and are more loyal and less frequently absent from
their employment. While entrepreneurs and employees with
disabilities may face significant barriers to entry when
considering opening a business or applying for a job, it is
critical we continue to promote the opportunities available to
them and ensure this community has access to the resources
needed to thrive. And no matter the role, every unfilled
position on main street represents a missed opportunity for a
small business to serve its local community, increase their
bottom line, and grow its operation. As policymakers, we must
improve our understanding of those barriers faced by those in
this area of the workforce, as well as to encourage future
participation, as we prepare the next generation of people with
disabilities to enter the workforce.
Now, I hope today's hearing can help shape how Congress can
work to promote the initiatives that already exist and produce
additional legislation and initiatives to pave pathways to
success for entrepreneurs and employees of every ability. I
thank our witnesses again for being here today. We look forward
to the conversation ahead.
And lastly, I would ask unanimous consent to submit a
letter from the Consumer Technology Association, for the record
and without objection, so ordered. With that, do you want to
yield to the Chairman first or Mr. McGarvey first? Okay, sorry.
Apologize. With that, let me yield to my distinguished Ranking
Member from Kentucky, Mr. McGarvey.
Mr. MCGARVEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you very much,
not just for holding this incredibly important hearing today,
but for also being willing to lead and to share your personal
experience. I know that is not easy, but we really appreciate
it, particularly in this important topic.
I would also like to take one brief moment to recognize--
thank you all of our people here testifying today, but I would
like to give a special thanks to Mr. Cody Clark, who came up
here from Louisville, Kentucky today. He is the Founder and
Owner of Cody Clark Magic. And as the Chairman and I had
discussed with you earlier, Mr. Clark, we could use little
magic in DC these days, so we appreciate you being up here.
Every American deserves the opportunity to take a chance on
themselves and contribute to society's productive
entrepreneurs. This is the fundamental promise of the American
dream, that any person in this country can work. They can work
hard, they can take risks, and they can hopefully find success.
Yet Americans with disabilities, like other groups we see, have
fewer opportunities to make this dream a reality. In fact, 74
percent of people with disabilities do not participate in our
nation's labor force.
But we can find reasons for optimism through data.
Americans with disabilities have a higher self-employment rate
than non-disabled Americans. Of Americans, over 33 million
small businesses, nearly 2 million are owned by people with
disabilities. Entrepreneurship is just as important a path to
prosperity for Americans with disabilities as it is for other
Americans. Meaningful full-time jobs are also a critical way to
empower people with disabilities to succeed and leave and live
independent lives.
Still, there are barriers, physical and intangible, that
block the way to self-sufficiency and independence for people
with different abilities. As we examine the benefits of
including Americans with disabilities in the workforce and
business community, it is also crucial for us to help them
through the gate in the first place. People with disabilities
cannot reap the rewards of hard work if they do not first have
access to affordable health care. This is why President Biden
signed the Inflation Reduction act and President Obama signed
the ACA, to make health care more accessible and affordable so
Americans can focus on working and owning small businesses.
In Kentucky alone, the ACA and Medicaid expansion brought
health insurance coverage to over 400,000 Kentuckians for the
first time. I say this, the ACA is one of the greatest economic
development policies that we ever passed in our state and helps
so many small businesses in particular.
But there is more we need to do. We need to make it easier
for Americans with disabilities to enter the labor force and
launch small businesses. We can do this by improving the public
programs that serve them and implementing policies that make
work and entrepreneurship more accessible, through
accommodations and tackling ableism. Together, we have the
capacity to help unleash the potential that Americans with
disabilities have always had. We just need the courage to
invest in their success.
With that, Mr. Chairman, I ask unanimous consent to enter
into the record the written statements of the American
Association of People with Disabilities, the National
Disability Institute, and the Autism Society of America. Thank
all the witnesses for joining us today and yield back.
Chairman MOLINARO. Without objections, so ordered. Thank
you, Mr. McGarvey. Let me offer an opportunity to Chairman of
the Small Business Committee from the Great State of Texas,
Chairman Williams. Mr. Chairman, on behalf of the countless
Americans of every ability, we are grateful that you have
supported today's hearing. And with that, I know you wanted to
offer some comments.
Mr. WILLIAMS. Thank you, Chairman. I want to say good
morning to all of you. And I want to thank my colleague,
Chairman Molinaro, for holding today's subcommittee hearing.
Opening a small business and working within your community is
one of the most rewarding things a person can do. This holds
true for all individuals, including those with disabilities.
This hearing will shine a light on the amazing work that these
individuals are doing in their communities and the challenges
disabled individuals face when applying for traditional jobs or
considering self-employment. Over the past few years, we have
seen increased accommodations being made to increase the number
of people with disabilities joining the workforce. However, it
is good practice to take a deeper dive to see what is working
and what could be improved.
Back home, I employ hundreds of people, and we have several
persons with disabilities that work for us. One of which comes
to my mind this morning, who handles thousands, thousands of
dollars of cash flow that are required for us to stay open in
our business. And she does a fantastic job, and I am so glad we
have her working for us. And I will always be inspired by any
individual that bets on themselves to start their own small
business.
From the very first hearing we had in this Committee, this
Congress, we invited a 17-year-old who started his own hot
sauce company--and it was hot, let me tell you--who was born
with cerebral palsy. His inspirational story showed that with
hard work, you can overcome anything. It is important to
continue motivating entrepreneurs with disabilities and take
risk and open their own small businesses.
So with that in mind, I want to thank again, Chairman
Molinaro, for holding this hearing. I want to thank the
witnesses for being here today, and I yield my time back.
Chairman MOLINARO. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank my
colleagues for joining us. Let me introduce today's witnesses.
First with us is Mr. Keith Wargo. Mr. Wargo is the President
and CEO of Autism Speaks. Autism Speaks is a nonprofit
organization that has remained at the forefront of creating an
inclusive world for people with autism. Mr. Wargo, who joined
the organization in October 2021, is responsible for leading
Autism Speaks nationwide.
Prior to joining Autism Speaks, Mr. Wargo worked for a
number of leading global financial institutions, where he
developed a track record of building effective teams and
helping to grow and scale businesses across sectors. Mr. Wargo
was also the owner of Monarch Cyprus, an amenity manufacturer,
with a mission to employ individuals with autism and developed
a long-standing passion for supporting the autism community,
both within the workplace and beyond. Mr. Wargo graduated from
Boston College with a Bachelor of Finance degree and earned a
Master's of Business Administration degree from Harvard
Business School. We are grateful that you are joining us here
today and we look forward to the conversation ahead.
Our next witness, as I mentioned, is Ms. Iva Walsh. Ms.
Walsh is the owner of Maeve's Place, located in Phoenicia, New
York. Maeve's Place has been a staple in upstate New York since
it opened its doors in 2018. Inspired by her daughter Maeve,
who is again with us here today, who has down syndrome, Iva
founded this coffee shop as part of her mission to break down
barriers for those with disabilities and change the world one
cup of coffee at a time, and I have had many cups of coffee.
The staff at Maeve's Place intentionally includes a mix of
neurotypical and developmentally disabled individuals. The
business also works with the R. Hudson Valley, an organization
dedicated to empowering our disabled community on prevocational
training for adults with developmental disabilities.
Ms. Walsh had a deep background in the hospitality industry
prior to opening Maeve's Place, managing a catering hall. A
native of Prague, the Czech Republic, she moved to Long
Island--we wo not hold that against her--in 1989 before coming
to the Hudson River Valley in 2003. I am tremendously grateful
that you are joining us today for this important conversation
and grateful that your daughter Maeve is with us.
Now let me recognize the Ranking Member from Kentucky, Mr.
McGarvey, to briefly introduce our last witness appearing
before the Committee today.
Mr. MCGARVEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I am excited to
welcome Mr. Cody Clark, the Founder and Owner of Cody Clark
Magic. Mr. Clark is a professional magician, he's a
motivational speaker, and he is an entrepreneur with autism. He
received his diagnosis at 15 months old but was mainstreamed
into his local elementary school where he received the right
support and accommodations for academic success.
Today, he crisscrosses the entire country as the sole
proprietor of an outstanding small business. His shows combine
magic, comedy, and storytelling to share with his many
audiences his experiences with autism, and how he is different
but never lesser. Mr. Clark is also an activist for people with
disabilities and draws upon his experiences to advocate vocally
for anti-ableism and equal rights for his community. Mr. Clark
holds a Bachelor's Degree in Marketing from the University of
Louisville, and we are so glad to have you with us today.
Chairman MOLINARO. Thank you, Mr. McGarvey. If Mr. Clark
can produce some magic in producing a budget, we would be
thrilled with his work. Before recognizing each of the
witnesses, let me just take this moment to remind them that
their oral testimony is restricted to 5 minutes. If you see the
light in front of you turn red, it means your 5 minutes has
concluded. I will begin to tap and then loudly gavel you out of
order, but I suspect that wo not happen. And if that light does
kick on, please wrap up your testimony. And so with that, let
me recognize Mr. Wargo for your 5 minute opening remarks.

STATEMENTS OF KEITH WARGO, PRESIDENT AND CHIEF EXECUTIVE
OFFICER, AUTISM SPEAKS; IVA WALSH, OWNER, MAEVE'S PLACE; AND
CODY CLARK, FOUNDER AND OWNER, CODY CLARK MAGIC

STATEMENT OF KEITH WARGO, PRESIDENT & CEO, AUTISM SPEAKS

Mr. WARGO. All right, thank you, Chairman Molinaro, Ranking
Member McGarvey, Chairman Williams, and all the Members of the
Committee for hosting this hearing today and inviting me to
testify on this critical issue.
My name is Keith Wargo. I am the president and CEO of
Autism Speaks. We are a national nonprofit organization
dedicated to creating an inclusive world for people with autism
throughout their lifespan. We do this through advocacy,
services, supports, research, and advances in care. And as an
organization, we are particularly proud of the work that we
have done to develop and scale innovative solutions to help
ensure that more autistic people can secure meaningful
employment.
As well as my role as president of Autism Speaks, I also
come to you as a father. My wife and I, Anne is my wife, are
the parents of two adult children. One of whom is on the
spectrum, his name is AJ. And we have observed firsthand AJ's
employment journey, witnessed firsthand with him the
challenges, the struggles, and the triumphs.
Also, as mentioned, prior to joining Autism Speaks, I had
nearly three decades of private sector service, including and
remain the owner of Monarch Towel Company. We are a hospitality
amenity company based in New Jersey, which has, as part of its
mission to employ autistic individuals. These experiences have
cemented for me the belief in the necessity for the potential
and inclusive employment for neurodiverse and other individuals
with disabilities, which can be a key driver, we believe, for
economic growth for our nation.
Despite the strides that have been made in the autism
disability community for awareness and acceptance, we still
face staggering challenges. In 2022, only 21 percent of
individuals with disabilities, including autism, were employed.
That data underscores the persistent gap in the employment
market. Further, over half of individuals with autism who have
graduated from high school or have aged out of high school in
the last two years, only half are employed or are not enrolled
in any postsecondary education. This compares unfavorably with
other disabilities. These statistics highlight the ongoing need
for targeted employment, support and opportunities in the
community. As a paradox to this, many individuals with
disabilities have the skills and the desire to work, and hiring
newer, diverse people benefits the companies they work for and
the overall economy.
A recent study shows the companies that actively seek to
employ people with disabilities outperform companies that do
not. They have higher revenues, they have higher net income,
they have higher profit margins. And at a national level, this
analysis revealed that the US GDP could get a boost of up to
$25 billion if there was more disability employment going on in
the labor force. But beyond these numbers, we know that there
is additional benefits that accrue at individual workplaces and
our society when employers embrace inclusivity. These include
increased creativity and innovation in the workplace, diminish
stereotypes, and reduce social stigma and discrimination.
What I have learned through my personal experience with
both my son and with Monarch, as well as through work the
Autism Speaks, is that small but meaningful steps taken by
employers make a huge difference. This can include changing
hiring practices to considering alternative processes and
interviews, which can serve as a Barrett entry for many,
particularly in the autistic community. It can include
providing training courses to foster acceptance of neurodiverse
individuals in the workplace. And it can include major and
minor changes to create adaptable workplaces through flexible
schedules, making accommodations for sensory needs.
One initiative that I want to focus on for a moment is what
we call Workforce Inclusion Now. This is a program we started
several years ago. We call it WIN. WIN is an evidence-based
workplace development program promoting diversity in hiring and
helping create an inclusive workplace culture, in which not
just the individuals with autism, but also all employees can
thrive. The WIN model is really based on an ecosystem that has
three parts. Employers that are committed to creating inclusive
workplaces, autistic job seekers who have the skills and desire
to be there and to succeed, and communities supported with
resources that promote inclusive hiring.
Our WIN model offers scalable solutions to diverse
industries nationwide. Collaborating with the Virginia
Commonwealth University's Autism center of Education, we have
created online courses accessible nationally. These courses
emphasize support for higher need individuals, raise awareness
of neurodiversity, and provide inclusive workplaces. They cater
to autistic job seekers and to employment specialists, covering
topics from understanding autism to self-advocacy.
And we see this model work, one example being Greif,
formerly named Lee Container, which is a national leader in
industrial packaging. In their Iowa facility, our collaboration
led to them hiring multiple nontraditional employees. Making
alongside operational changes has been a true success.
Chairman MOLINARO. Mr. Wargo, I will have to ask you to
conclude. Be happy to continue that conversation and question
and answer in just a moment.
Mr. WARGO. Thank you, Chairman.
Chairman MOLINARO. Thank you. And with that, we will
recognize Ms. Walsh for your 5 minute remarks.

STATEMENT OF IVA WALSH, OWNER, MAEVE'S PLACE

Ms. WALSH. Thank you, Mr. McGarvey, Molinaro, Ellzey, and
Williams for having me here today and I am going to go right to
it. There are about 7 million people with intellectual
developmental disability in the United States. Of those, 80
percent are unemployed. I am mother of adult of four adult
children. 25-year-old Maeve who lives with down syndrome, as
well. I have spent my life heavily involved in education and
advocacy for my daughter and those with IDDs.
I became a small business owner in order to provide a
meaningful workplace where Maeve, and others like her could
learn, succeed and know the feeling of making their own money.
A job promotes self-esteem, independence, and all around growth
as contributing member of a society. Maeve's place serves
breakfast, lunch, and sells retail items. We employ nine
employees, two of whom are individuals with learning and
developmental disabilities, offering job opportunities from
kitchen staff to customer service. Located in Phoenicia, New
York, our resources, transportation, and support aid, are
limited and hard to access, making the obstacles for employer
and someone living with IDD more complicated.
There is a huge gap between school and starting a job for
people with IDDs. While most high schoolers experience weekend
or summer jobs learning employable skills, a person with IDD
does not often. Once people with IDDs find work, lack of access
to transportation can prevent success, as most people with IDD
do not or cannot obtain drivers license. Obstacles are not
limited to education and transportation. Job coaches are
limited and not everyone who needs one will get one. Some
people with IDDs who do get work are unemployed or employed
under limiting conditions. Oftentimes they are in positions
with limited customer exposure, work hours, earn income
limitations, and if they are working for employer under 14(c)
certificate will make less than half federal minimum wage. They
must learn skills for job which might not have been adopted or
modified for their disability. Along with navigating in a world
with limited accessibility and information.
With lack of prevocational work training and knowledge of
available aid, it is up to employer to ensure the fair hiring
and long-term investment into their employee. Cost efficiency,
repeated training, and lack of on hand job coaches play heavy
role in the end decision of hiring a prospective employee.
Obstacles to employing people with IDDs can be daunting,
but the benefits are great for those who persevere. Employees
with IDD are grateful to have their jobs and demonstrate high
work quality. They tend to have increased focus, attention to
detail, higher enthusiasm, great customer service, and
engagement and appreciation for routine, reducing turnover for
the company. Maeve has been part of the business for the
entirety of the process. Her growth cannot be ignored. Maeve
has learned professionalism, the meaning of money, and how to
be fully functioning coworker with her peers.
Partnered with ARC of Mid-Hudson Valley in their
prevocational program, once a week, three to five individuals
from age 20 to 40, in need of work experience and exposure,
come to our shop to learn and practice different tasks from in
kitchen prep to customer service. We have been told that we are
the only partner location which allow the ARC individual to
process sales, manage money, and to use a cash register. The
partnership with ARC also brings our small community exposure
to different people with different disabilities. It benefits
everyone as well, as we all become more informed of the
problems and solutions that people with IDDs face. In our shop,
diversity it is not only appreciated, but it is celebrated.
Small businesses and rural communities need more tools in
place to support efforts to employ people with IDDs. These
would include internship opportunities, direct affordable
transportation access, and incentives to employers. Internship
opportunities such as Project Search Program in New York City
would be a vital addition to our area. Another helpful tool
would be to stop issuing new 14(c) certificates.
In closing, I like to consider how important your job is to
you. Our jobs define us, make us whole and give us purpose.
This should be achievable to every individual regardless of
ability. Our society benefits when everyone has access to
employment. I believe respect, opportunity, and inclusion for
people with IDDs are three pillars needed to end segregation in
the workforce and have growth in our community. Together, with
government action, we can overcome the obstacles and enjoy the
benefits, one cup of a coffee at a time.
Chairman MOLINARO. Thank you, Ms. Walsh. And with that, let
me recognize Mr. Clark for your 5 minute remarks.

STATEMENT OF CODY CLARK, FOUNDER & OWNER, CODY CLARK MAGIC

Mr. CLARK. Chairman Mark Molinaro and Ranking Member Morgan
McGarvey, thank you for inviting me. My name is Cody Clark
Magic and for the past decade I have been self-employed on a
full-time basis with my business called Cody Clark Magic. In
spite of being diagnosed with autism at 15 months young and my
parents being warned by doctors, I never walk, talk or hold
down any sort of job, I do all three, every day, as I share
magic shows and talks which educate students, corporate
leadership, and young adults with disabilities about what being
autistic is like.
I credit my success to many factors, but most pertinent to
this meeting is the various government policies which have
reduced or removed many barriers to entry. To start, I get my
health insurance through the Affordable Care Act. It allowed me
to remain on my parents health insurance until the age of 26.
Then afterward I was able to transition onto Medicaid because
of the expansion of eligibility to include any individual with
a diagnosed disability.
I was also able to navigate the COVID-19 pandemic's impact
on live presentation businesses thanks to the government
extending unemployment benefits to self-employed people and the
SBA's EIDL emergency grants. I utilized this direct funding to
create a path forward in which, through presenting shows
virtually and getting business coaching to expand my client
base, I could remain self-employed.
And lastly, the Rehabilitation Act in 1973's 2014 amendment
called the Workforce Innovations Opportunity Act, WIOA for
short, created a series of programs known as Pre-Employment
Transition Services, pre ETS for short. These programs are a
large portion of my client base and I admire how program
participants are given the personal agency to determine their
own career path, at least for the most part.
A major issue I have noticed is that pre ETS, vocational
rehabilitation, and other programs of this nature are
structured to support wage employment over other employment
option. Which I feel is short sighted because, according to the
Department of Labor, people with disabilities are self-employed
at a higher rate than the rest of the population. This is
likely because self-employment allows us to create our own
accessible workplaces, to solve problems related to our
disabilities, and offer those solutions to our peers, because
many wage based positions for people with disabilities are in a
sub minimum wage salary, and because Social Security's
disability payments require asset and monthly income caps, few
wage based positions fall within.
The main reason for my testimony today is because I feel
that programs which serve work ready people with disability
should, within the scope of their efforts, include self-
employment as a valid employment option. This can be
accomplished by plugging resources currently available from
programs like SBA into existing pre ETS and vocational
rehabilitation program structures, by extending pre ETS's
philosophy of factoring in personal agency into all forms of
disability services and to make direct support and funding of
self-employed businesses as a whole a normal practice.
I am thankful to live in a country whose policies have
directly enabled me to live my dream of being a professional
magician and autism advocate. I testify so that the policies I
benefited from can be ones other disability owned businesses
can benefit from, too. By enabling people with disabilities to
become self-employed, if that is their goal, we can take the
blank check that we know as American life, and as our founding
fathers have said all the time, we can help people with
disabilities have life, liberty and full pursuit of happiness.
And by the way, there is your budget. Thank you for this
honor.
Chairman MOLINARO. Thank you, Mr. Clark. I do not know if
that was the first magic trick performed before the Small
Business Committee, but we certainly appreciate it and we
certainly could use more of that. Thank you all very much, we
will now move to the Member questions under our 5 minute rule.
And for that purpose, I will recognize myself for 5 minutes.
Let me offer in 2015, I launched an initiative called Think
Differently in my home county, meant to break down barriers and
create opportunities for all those of every ability. I readily
admit it was born out of the failings of a loving but incapable
father, me. Doing for my daughter the things that she could do
for herself, but also the knowledge that local governments do
have the profound ability to make impact. And this is an
appropriate moment because I should acknowledge this came at
the unyielding encouragement of my wife, Corinne, who knew our
daughter could achieve the things that too often I thought that
she might not.
Let me offer that we have touched thousands upon thousands
of lives and really has become a model at the local level.
Autism Speaks, as we acknowledge, has a similar and certainly
more broad mission as it relates specifically to those
neurodivergent and with autism.
According to a survey data collected from Source America,
57 percent of Americans with disabilities believe that their
disability has limited their career opportunities. It is clear
that we need to do more to help those of every ability find
their way to jobs. Mr. Wargo, if you could, let us just speak
for a moment, if you would speak for a moment of some of the
lessons learned that you can share with businesses who want to
employ those with disabilities.
Mr. WARGO. Yes, thanks. Thank you for that. So, I would say
there is really three things that we have learned in our
journey of helping companies think through a neurodiverse
employment that really move the needle. The first is really
rethinking hiring processes. For many in the autism community,
communication challenges exist. And so the traditional
employment interviews that most of us have gone through, in
some points in our lives, oftentimes are very challenging and
are a barrier. And so we try to encourage companies to think
about alternatives to those. One example would be practical
skills applications, bringing somebody in, giving the
opportunity to apply those practical skills versus a
traditional just going back and forth, asking and answering
questions. But I would say particularly with enhancements in
technology, Zoom, video, et cetera, there are other ways of
approaching it, but thinking about that fundamental hiring
process just differently.
The second thing I would say is back to the workforce
development training programs, such as I talked about with WIN,
we think are highly effective, and they are not just highly
effective for the job seeker. What we try to do in those
programs is to introduce them to everybody. From the most
senior management to human resource areas to really frontline
workers. And we think that really creates a much more accepting
and embraced universe. We have a lot of companies now are
coming to us and saying we want our entire staff to use these.
And then the final one, I would just say, is looking for
opportunities to create a more accessible workplace. Sometimes
that is difficult. A lot of times it is really not. To make
accommodations in a workplace can mean simply addressing
lighting. It can mean simply addressing some noise issues, to
allowing job coaches, more flexible hours, et cetera. All that
can make a huge amount of difference both for the individual
job seeker and for the company and have the opportunity to have
that efficiency and have that opportunity to grow their team.
Chairman MOLINARO. Thank you, Mr. Wargo. Ms. Walsh has
noted 20 percent of those with disabilities are employed,
meaning that 80 percent are unemployed. And it is simply
inexcusable as a society. Could you speak to some of the
obstacles that you confronted in growing your business?
Ms. WALSH. Well, everybody knows that there is an extreme
shortage of employees, but the people with all different kinds
of disabilities are pretty much lined up. They all, that I have
experienced, would love to have a job. Now for us, it is a
little bit difficult. Transportation getting to us, it is a
little bit of an issue. When I am hiring people to my coffee
shop, people with disabilities, it is a little bit different
hiring process. I am not going to ask, this is what I need you
to do, but my question is what you are at best, what you can
do, what is your best thing that you do? And then we go from
there. People without disabilities, the question first that I
would ask is, can you work shoulder to shoulder with somebody
with all different kinds of disability and ability. A lot of
people might be uncomfortable. And I said, please voice out,
whatever it is, and let us see if we can help you cross the
bridge. And, you know, you are going to be surprised how much
you are going to enjoy really working with somebody who has
some sort of disability.
Chairman MOLINARO. Thank you, Iva. My time has expired, but
I do want to thank you. And with that, I would like to
recognize Mr. McGarvey for 5 minutes.
Mr. MCGARVEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you again for
sharing your stories with us. Thank you all for being here and
sharing your stories. This is really inspiring. Mr. Clark,
thank you. I have not been here very long, but I am just going
to go out on a limb and say that is the best magic trick ever
performed in the Small Business Committee. So we appreciate
you----
Mr. CLARK. Thank you.
Mr. MCGARVEY.--you being here. Thank you also for telling
us about a vulnerable time for your business during the
pandemic. I think that is something that is small businesses
across our country experience, regardless of where you are or
who you are, and I am glad to hear that you were able to
navigate that with the resources available to you.
I think the beauty of owning a small business is what you
are talking about. And what I hear from you, Iva as well, with
one cup of coffee at a time. It is that ability to showcase
your passions, to put your dreams out there, and hopefully find
success. I think that is why we need to continue to work to
promote opportunities for self-employment. I think it is why we
have to continue to decrease these barriers to entrepreneurship
and make sure that everyone has access to the support they need
to start their own business.
Mr. Clark, one of the things you mentioned was access to
affordable health insurance as a key driver of your ability to
start a business or even just keep stable work. If you did not
have access to health care, that met your needs, would you be
able to consider working or owning a small business?
Mr. CLARK. Very unlikely, because although not impossible,
it is much harder for self-employed businesses to find
affordable health insurance, given the way most health
insurance companies work. So there would have been a lot more
barriers present than with the Affordable Care Act. And what
that has done for me is allowed me to have the health insurance
and take a major expense off the table.
Mr. MCGARVEY. And I will give my home state a plug here.
Kentucky did a wonderful job implementing the Affordable Care
Act, and we have had a lot of people benefit from it. How
important was that to you in preserving and expanding the
access to health care, that entrepreneurs and employees with
different abilities need?
Mr. CLARK. Well, being able to not just have access to
affordable, or, in my case, free health insurance, but to be
able to make it as easy and plain as day so that we do not have
to sacrifice time. We could be building our business to instead
go find health insurance. That is freeing in multiple senses of
the word.
Mr. MCGARVEY. Thank you for that. I am going to open this
up to the whole panel. I am a lawyer by training. They say in
court, never ask a question to which you do not know the
answer. This is not court. This is one where we do not know the
answer and we want it. We want you to tell us, which is, you
all have a lot of expertise, and as we all know, workers with
disabilities, they add tremendous value to the businesses they
serve. Too often, though, employers are unaware of this fact, I
think, and they might choose not to hire an applicant with
differing abilities. How can we best engage businesses on the
benefits of hiring people with disabilities and moving past
misguided reservations, particularly from a policy standpoint.
I just open it up.
Ms. WALSH. I will go. I think really by employing people
with disabilities in communities and show everybody else around
is quite possible and it is really beneficial to business. As I
mentioned before, it is a long-term investment in your
employee, but once you really go past the training and
everything else, they will never leave you. You are going to
have amazing employee for life. So really showing that to
community and modifying a job or--that is just really what is
needed.
Mr. WARGO. Yeah, I mean, I was looking at the SBA
information about diversity employment and neurodiverse
employment last night on the website. I thought it to be quite
impressive. So I say there is a good start there. I would say
it is enforcing and encouraging policies that will provide
benefits, tax incentives, et cetera, to programs.
But importantly, I think one thing I want to emphasize is,
that oftentimes a lot of programs are designed to provide an
upfront payment to make an accommodation, whether it is a
physical or otherwise. In some in our community, particularly
in the autistic community, what is more appropriate is ongoing
support. So whether that is a job coach or some kind of
training that continue on, assisted technology, and that sort
of thing being put in place up front is fantastic for many, but
it is not applicable to both. So that kind of flexibility of
thinking through the different needs there as we design
programs that have benefits and incentives are important.
Mr. MCGARVEY. Thank you. My time is up. I yield back.
Chairman MOLINARO. Thank you. With that, I would recognize
Representative Ellzey from Texas.
Mr. ELLZEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you all for
being here today. I walked in the building and looked at the
line wrapped around the Judiciary Committee room today, a bunch
of doom scrollers waiting to see some fireworks. We have had
hearings like this, especially in Small Business, where we are
inspired by the people who show up in front of us. And if you
want to talk about the goodness of America, you all three
represent that, and everybody in the audience does too. I wish
those people would stop waiting in line to see bad things and
come up here to see good things.
Integration and inclusion must be central to any of these
initiatives we are talking about. One of the barriers
individuals with disabilities face is bias from employers in
the hiring process. Often education and training programs for
individuals with disabilities are done in isolation, and as a
result, individuals responsible for hiring do not understand
the idiosyncrasies of individuals with disabilities and often
misinterpret them. And as a veteran myself, that sounds like a
very familiar refrain from a very large and willing group of
people who want to work hard, both veterans and the folks that
we are talking about today, and they are an untapped resource
for this country.
I would like to start with Mr. Wargo. If kids are in
school, kids with disabilities like your sons, are in school
sometimes until 21, what is one thing, in our limited time,
that K through 12 could do better to integrate and prepare
young folks for employment?
Mr. WARGO. Thanks for your question. I think that the one
thing that would make a material difference would be to start
vocational rehabilitation earlier. Vocational rehabilitation--
and we work closely with numerous VR systems through our work.
But they are underfunded, they are under resourced, and
depending on the area of the country, it can be a real desert,
a real pocket. That starting early in the high school years,
making it part of a student young individual's IEP and trying
to map out that destination together, VR can be a very
important part of that. I think that would be the one thing I
would point to.
Mr. ELLZEY. Thank you very much. Ms. Walsh, ahoy, dobry
den. Glad you are here. Mr. Chairman, I think we made a mistake
here. We should have taken the 5 hour and 20 minutes road trip
up to Phoenicia, to Maeve's place, because I have been perusing
your website, and in addition to Maeve having a beautiful
smile, that is, I am sure, drawing everybody into your shop. I
see this cake here, and I do not know what that is, but I am
suddenly very hungry. And I have been looking at the five-star
reviews of your shop, and I think it points to, when you talk
about folks like Maeve. Outstanding customer service, a
beautiful smile, joie de vivre--that is from Texas. I know what
that means. But the wonderful environment that you have
provided your customers, and your daughter is an inspiration to
all of us, and so I want to do a CODEL. If I may suggest a
CODEL to Phoenicia. It is 5 hours and 20 minutes. We do have to
drive through New Jersey, but I am willing to take that
adventure and go do that. So thank you for being here.
Mr. CLARK. Without objection, so approved.
Mr. ELLZEY. So truly an inspiration, Maeve. You are an
inspiration, too. And, Cody, did you tell me that your doctors
said that you would never speak?
Mr. CLARK. Oh, I am repeating what my parents told me, but,
yep, that is what they have told me happened.
Mr. ELLZEY. That doctor needs to have that license pulled
because one of your gifts is the ability to speak. And I have
been looking at your website, too, by the way. Anybody
listening looking to employ Cody? It is codyclarkmagic.com, so
check it out. Give him a holler. You, too, are an inspiration,
too, because you have literally pulled yourself up by your
bootstraps. I do not think anybody would have any idea that at
15 months, how you were diagnosed, and so the love of your
parents--are your parents here?
Mr. CLARK. Unfortunately, they could not make it here. They
are at home in Louisville. But I have a feeling, based on my
phone vibrations, they watch the live stream.
Mr. ELLZEY. Okay, and what are their names?
Mr. CLARK. Andrew and Christy Clark.
Mr. ELLZEY. Andrew and Christy, thank you for not giving up
on your boy and helping him out. This is kind of an emotional
type of a hearing, and I am so proud that you have put this
together, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Chairman and thank you all for
being here. I yield back.
Chairman MOLINARO. Thank you, Mr. Ellzey. I would note that
Mr. Clark speaks better than, I mean, some Members of Congress,
not all Members of Congress. With that, let me recognize my
colleague from California, Ms. Chu.
Ms. CHU. Thank you all for testifying today. You certainly
give compelling testimony as to why we should encourage people
with disabilities to become entrepreneurs and also why we
should hire people with disabilities.
Mr. Clark, your business has led you to interact with a
number of vocational rehab programs and services which help
young people with disabilities identify their career goals and
prepare for employment as they enter adulthood. However, I was
concerned to hear you say that many of these programs do not
seem well equipped to provide students with information about
starting a small business. Considering that many people with
disabilities choose to become self-employed, it is crucial that
we ensure that they have all the information and resources that
they need to make the best decision for their futures.
So when you decided to pursue entrepreneurship and begin
the process of planning and launching your business, what
resources did you take advantage of? And how should today's
vocational rehab programs be expanded to include business
development and entrepreneurial skills resources?
Mr. CLARK. Great question, Ms.--is it, Chu?
Ms. CHU. Yeah.
Mr. CLARK. Great. Great question, Ms. Chu. I was given a
vocational rehabilitation counselor by my high school, but
unfortunately, they pretty much admitted all we can do for you
is get you state funded driving lessons. Although, given that
Mr. McGarvey is right, I do travel all over the country through
driving and flying. That was a big help. But otherwise, they
were like ehh. So the good thing about these programs is that
they are already well structured. So all they have to do is
include the SBA alongside, including the local businesses that
also come into these programs. The structures are there. We
just need to plug SBA counselors in, other self-advocates like
myself in, and potentially colleges of business.
Ms. CHU. Very good. And also, Mr. Clark, you talk about not
being able to qualify for Social Security disability insurance.
There is a complex set of rules and regulations, including
strict income and asset limitations. And they govern the
public's access to benefit programs such as SSDI, Medicare, and
Medicaid. And yet these programs can be essential to ensuring
that people with disabilities can meet the cost of living.
But you talk about the fact that the asset requirements are
so low that you and your family have almost never qualified. So
based on your experiences helping young people with
disabilities as they transition to adulthood, how have you seen
these income and asset restrictions influence the people with
disabilities to decide whether to launch a small business or
join the workforce? How do you think these asset restrictions
should be changed so that people with disabilities can be
helped as they pursue their dreams?
Mr. CLARK. Well, with this being the Small Business
Committee, I am sure we would understand that restricting
yourself to 6 thousand in assets, not cash, but assets, period,
in exchange to receive only 19 thousand a year, that is not a
good business deal by any measure. And a lot of people with
disabilities are having to choose, not just between self-
employment and receiving Social Security, but any employment
and receiving Social Security. So it should at least be raised
from 6 thousand. And in an ideal world, there should be no
limit. But I know it is not an ideal world, but one that is way
higher than it is right now. And although this is not quite a
business issue, there is lots of people with disabilities who
can not even get married because it is the joint couple's
income that is considered in that.
Ms. CHU. And Mr. Clark, right now, many employees with
disabilities are paid at or even below $3.50 an hour, which is
under half the federal minimum wage of $7.25 an hour. What do
you think about this and should employers pay so much less than
what the minimum wage is?
Mr. CLARK. My simple answer there is no. We should be, at
the very least, at the same minimum wage as the rest of our
country citizens are, and ideally paid to reflect our true
worth. That is a big reason I considered self-employment,
because along with the risk is the reward of no income limits
at all. And that is one reason such a high percentage of us are
self-employed. If the only other options are a three buck wage
and the abuse from employers that invites, might as well go big
and own a business.
Ms. CHU. Thank you. I yield back.
Chairman MOLINARO. Thank you, Ms. Chu. With that, I
recognize Chairman Williams from Texas for five minutes.
Mr. WILLIAMS. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. This is a great
hearing. We are so glad you all are here. And Mr. Wargo, your
testimony makes it clear how the beneficial Autism Speaks WIN
program is, for both employers hiring people with disabilities
and individuals seeking employment. So can you tell us about
the economic and cultural benefits of hiring individuals with
disabilities? We have talked a lot about that, but I know there
is more that we can talk about. So if you would do that.
Mr. WARGO. Yes, most certainly. So, just a couple of
statistics. One in 45 adults in this country are autistic. We
have 5.4 million adults in the population who have been
diagnosed with autism, and we have strong reason to believe
that that is an underrepresented number. And there are 70 to
100 thousand students, or young adults, every year that age
into that, you know, come out of the school system at 22. So we
have a huge population there that is ready.
Again, what we have found through our research and through
studies is that organizations benefit from an increased
productivity, their financials are stronger, and that
individuals who are autistic, or with any IDD on their staff,
to increase loyalty, increase innovation, and increase
efficiency, once often small accommodations are made. So, at
the end of the day, we look at it as being something that is an
opportunity for a huge win. And again, the number that is put
together by an Accenture report recently was that the potential
upside of increased disability hiring could be a $25 billion
increase in productivity to the U.S. economy.
Mr. WILLIAMS. Well, that is big because so many of us are
looking for employees right now. Ms. Walsh, some of the most
successful American businesses were built around a need that a
company's founder saw in the market. Maeve's Place is no
exception. You saw a need for employment opportunities for
people with disabilities and built your company around that
with your daughter in mind. So, can you please tell the
Committee about how working with Maeve's Place has benefited
your daughter and all the people that you employ, both those
with disabilities and those without?
Ms. WALSH. Well, for Maeve, she learned really how to
navigate herself in a community with her peers, how to act
properly in social settings, and also she learned the benefit
of making her own money. She loves opening her wallet and see
money in there.
Mr. WILLIAMS. She is a capitalist.
Ms. WALSH. If she does not see money in her wallet, she
said, I have to go back to work. And until then, you know,
learning this in school and pretending play, so to speak, how
you work, what do you do that really did not click. Really
being in a job place and doing a real thing, that really made a
huge difference for her. With other employees that we employ,
or they came through our store through last couple of year, it
is the same thing. Gives tremendous self-confidence, allows you
to really blossom, and the limitations limits are sky high.
Mr. WILLIAMS. Well, thank you for that. And Mr. Clark, in
the time I have remaining left, what denomination was that
bill?
Mr. CLARK. The denomination? It was a Ben Franklin.
Mr. WILLIAMS. Can I order a $5 thousand bill from you?
Mr. CLARK. I am working on that.
Mr. WILLIAMS. So here, really quick. It was great hearing
your testimonies we have all talked about and having you share
your story with anyone that might be watching this hearing
today. It is a great story. And I see so many young people that
are afraid to take a chance and bet on themselves and become an
entrepreneur. And that is the great thing about America. We are
all capitalists. We are entrepreneurs. You mentioned risk, but
you got reward, and that is what built this country. And I
appreciate you being one person that understands that. It is a
prime example of it. And too many people have lost hope and do
not even know where to start as they look to self-employment
opportunities. They get a government check instead of getting a
check, like Maeve does, and make it. So, what message would you
have to other people that may have a disability as they are
thinking about starting their own business?
Mr. CLARK. That it is definitely a risk. Be aware that it
is a risk. It is indeed not as guaranteed as getting a check,
but also be aware that the reward is there. And that, although
not easy, there is lots of training resources from the SBA,
from vocational rehab, from pre ETS, even as we are talking
about how they can be improved, and from the private sector.
There is plenty of people who are there willing to support you.
And kind of like how I was reassured knowing my parents
supported me, I hope that our citizens with disabilities who
want to become self-employed and own businesses, can be
reassured knowing that their government supports them.
Mr. WILLIAMS. Well said. Mr. Chairman, I yield my time
back.
Chairman MOLINARO. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. We are going
to, because I care deeply about this issue, going to open up
for a 1 second round. I have one question I am going to leave
open for the three witnesses. And I think, out of respect to
all of my colleagues, if you have a second round and wish to
keep it somewhat abbreviated, we will try to do that.
I know this firsthand, the power of seeing my daughter
achieve not only as a benefit to her, but the people around
her. We know this, that by employing those with disabilities,
we not only empower them as individuals, we see the humanity
that each person can bring to a workplace, but the workplace
benefits.
And so, in my only question in this last second round. If
the three of you could, could you give voice to either your
child or the employees? They are not at the witness table. For
an employee or an individual living with a disability, what is
the one thing that they would want you to tell us we ought to
pay attention to, in order to break down a barrier and create a
job opportunity? Mr. Wargo.
Mr. WARGO. Thank you for the question. So I will comment
from the context of my co-ownership of Monarch Cyprus, where we
hire--we have four individuals on the spectrum who work in our
organization of 23. And I think what any of them would share
was, number one, how valuable that has been to them to have
this experience. All of them came directly out of vocational
rehab Programs. The value of the experience that they've had
for them, the purpose, and integrity it has brought to them, in
their time with us, the ability to continue to grow. And we
have been very dedicated to trying to make sure that increased
skill sets along the way as well. That it has been just
something that has been incredibly valuable and that programs
like VR and job coaching have made that happen, as well as our
dedication to doing it.
Chairman MOLINARO. Thank you. Ms. Walsh, what would Eric
Wolf want us to know?
Ms. WALSH. Well, Eric would say that--actually I do not
have probably any other employee than Eric, who would text me
ahead of time and telling me how much he can not wait to come
back to work tomorrow. So this is--and he is example of
employees with learning disabilities. They just loyal employee.
Just give them opportunity and they can show you they can shine
just like everybody else.
Chairman MOLINARO. Thank you. Mr. Clark, you have been very
good at articulating your story. What would your adoring fans
want us to know?
Mr. CLARK. Just in general or about anything specific?
Chairman MOLINARO. About what we can do to make
opportunities more abundant for folks like yourself.
Mr. CLARK. Give self-employment a seat at the table. It can
be as simple as inserting the Small Business Administration
into the existing pre ETS structures, or it can be as
complicated as more direct funding for small businesses,
especially within the disabilities community. And making sure
there is more awareness of what the SBA does. I only ever
received help from them one time, and I have only learned,
because of Mr. McGarvey, how much I could have done. And also
that website could use a lot of updating. It is tricky to
navigate.
Chairman MOLINARO. Mr. Clark, on that there may be
unanimous agreement. We have spent a lot of time talking about
that platform. With that, I want to thank all of our witnesses.
I yield back my time. And thank all of our witnesses for your
testimony today and appearing before us and on behalf of those
you speak for. We are very grateful that you would spend time
enlightening and informing us.
Without objection, Members each have five legislative days
to submit additional materials and written questions for
witnesses, to the Chair, which will be forwarded to the
witnesses if submitted. Now, I would ask the--oh, I am sorry. I
apologize. Oh, yes. So I would ask witnesses to attempt to
respond promptly, should we provide you with those questions.
And if then, there is no further business, without
objection the Committee is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 11:03 a.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]

A P P E N D I X

[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
