- AVENUES TO SUCCESS: EXAMINING WORKFORCE TRAINING PROGRAMS FOR EMPLOYEES

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

AVENUES TO SUCCESS: EXAMINING WORKFORCE TRAINING PROGRAMS FOR EMPLOYEES

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON INNOVATION, ENTREPRENEURSHIP,
AND WORKFORCE DEVELOPMENT

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON SMALL BUSINESS
UNITED STATES
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION
__________

HEARING HELD
SEPTEMBER 25, 2024
__________

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Small Business Committee Document Number 118-060
Available via the GPO Website: www.govinfo.gov
__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

57-370                    WASHINGTON : 2024

HOUSE COMMITTEE ON SMALL BUSINESS

ROGER WILLIAMS, Texas, Chairman
BLAINE LUETKEMEYER, Missouri
PETE STAUBER, Minnesota
DAN MEUSER, Pennsylvania
BETH VAN DUYNE, Texas
MARIA SALAZAR, Florida
TRACEY MANN, Kansas
JAKE ELLZEY, Texas
MARC MOLINARO, New York
MARK ALFORD, Missouri
ELI CRANE, Arizona
AARON BEAN, Florida
WESLEY HUNT, Texas
NICK LALOTA, New York
CELESTE MALOY, Utah
NYDIA VELAZQUEZ, New York, Ranking Member
JARED GOLDEN, Maine
DEAN PHILLIPS, Minnesota
GREG LANDSMAN, Ohio
MARIE GLUESENKAMP PEREZ, Washington
SHRI THANEDAR, Michigan
MORGAN MCGARVEY, Kentucky
HILLARY SCHOLTEN, Michigan
JUDY CHU, California
SHARICE DAVIDS, Kansas
CHRIS PAPPAS, New Hampshire

Ben Johnson, Majority Staff Director
Melissa Jung, Minority Staff Director

C O N T E N T S

OPENING STATEMENTS

Page
Hon. Marc Molinaro...............................................     1
Hon. Morgan McGarvey.............................................     3

WITNESSES

Ms. Ashley Gamba, Executive Director, Community Options Inc.,
Binghamton, NY.................................................     6
Mr. Frank A. Stento, Director of Business Development, Building &
Construction Trades, IUPAT (International Union of Painter's &
Allied Trades), Binghamton, NY.................................     8
Mr. Neal Strange, Director of Education, Indiana Kentucky Ohio
Regional Council of Carpenters Joint Apprenticeship & Training
Fund, Greenwood, IN............................................     9

APPENDIX

Prepared Statements:
Ms. Ashley Gamba, Executive Director, Community Options Inc.,
Binghamton, NY.............................................    20
Mr. Frank A. Stento, Director of Business Development,
Building & Construction Trades, IUPAT (International Union
of Painter's & Allied Trades), Binghamton, NY..............    22
Mr. Neal Strange, Director of Education, Indiana Kentucky
Ohio Regional Council of Carpenters Joint Apprenticeship &
Training Fund, Greenwood, IN...............................    24
Questions for the Record:
None.
Answers for the Record:
None.
Additional Material for the Record:
ABC (Associated Builders and Contractors)....................    27
Statement of Lisanne McNew, President & CEO..................    29

AVENUES TO SUCCESS: EXAMINING WORKFORCE TRAINING PROGRAMS FOR
EMPLOYEES

----------

WEDNESDAY, SEPTEMBER 25, 2024

House of Representatives,
Committee on Small Business,
Subcommittee on Innovation,
Entrepreneurship, and Workforce Development,
Washington, DC.
The Subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 10:03 a.m., in
Room 2360, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Marcus J.
Molinaro [chairman of the Subcommittee] presiding.
Present: Representatives Molinaro, Williams, Mann,
McGarvey, Thanedar, and Chu.
Chairman MOLINARO. Good morning, everybody. Thank you for
joining the Subcommittee on Innovation, Entrepreneurship, and
Workforce Development.
Before we get started, I would like to recognize the
Ranking Member, Representative Mc Garvey, to lead us in the
pledge and a prayer.
Mr. MCGARVEY. We thank you for the opportunity to be here
today and to be together. We ask for your wisdom. We ask for
your grace. We ask for your patience in these matters. We ask
that you bless all of us to make decisions in the testimony the
best we can.
In your name we pray. Amen.
All. I pledge allegiance to the Flag of the United States
of America, and to the Republic for which it stands, one
nation, under God, indivisible, with liberty and justice for
all.
Chairman MOLINARO. Thank you, sir.
I now call the Committee on Small Business to order.
Without objection, the Chair is authorized to declare a
recess of the Committee at any time.
I would now like to recognize myself for an opening
statement and appreciate you all for being here. And I welcome
those of you on our panel to the Subcommittee.
First, to each of our witnesses, thank you. We recognize
your time is valuable and hope you know we appreciate you
spending time with us and look forward to your testimonies.
The current labor shortage in the United States is
disproportionately affecting small businesses, with 40 percent
of small employers unable to fill job openings as of August.
This crisis is exacerbated by economic pressures from the
Biden-Harris Administration, with many businesses struggling to
find qualified talent amid rising costs and inflation. The
construction, healthcare, and automotive sectors are
particularly in need, facing significant deficits in skilled
labor that could hinder growth and increase project delays.
These on-the-ground issues small businesses face are
exacerbated in rural and underserved communities like the ones
I represent in upstate New York. The labor shortage is not
confined to small employers, as we likely know. The broader
labor market is facing one of the most challenging years in
recent history. Contributing factors include an aging
workforce, with projections indicating that 41 percent of
workers nearing retirement by 2031 will lead to a substantial
loss of institutional knowledge.
Additionally, younger individuals are entering the
workforce at a lower-than-expected rate. Many workers laid off
during the pandemic and economic shutdown are unwilling to
return to jobs--jobs lacking remote work options, reflecting a
shift in employment--in employee expectations.
And despite these challenges, I would note that people with
disabilities still represent an untapped workforce. This
Subcommittee has spent some time focused, in fact, on this
population. Their participation in the labor market has surged
since the pandemic, with 1.8 million joining, bringing their
employment rate up to 25 percent, the highest in 15 years.
Organizations like Community Options, Inc., represented here
today, are crucial in providing training and job placement,
partnering with major companies to support individuals with
disabilities. Hiring these workers not only promotes
inclusivity but also boosts workplace morale and results in
lower turnover and absentee rates.
For me, that is why I introduced the Think DIFFERENTLY
Initiative and Think DIFFERENTLY About Disability Employment
Act, to help small businesses address accessibility issues for
employees with disabilities, encouraging the hiring of those
with intellectual, physical, and developmental disabilities,
and help entrepreneurs with disabilities succeed.
We were proud to see this piece of legislation pass the
House. And I was also proud to co-lead the Entrepreneurs with
Disabilities Reporting Act, alongside Ranking Member Mc Garvey,
to better understand the challenges entrepreneurs with
disabilities face.
Addressing the skills gap through workforce development is
essential. Traditional education paths may not suit everyone,
and we know this. And skilled trades offer viable alternatives.
Combatting the ongoing labor shortage by supporting our skilled
trade schools and apprenticeship programs is a bipartisan
effort.
And I worked alongside my colleagues and fellow Small
Business Committee Member, in this case Representative
Scholten, to introduce the Honoring Vocational Education Act,
which ensures individuals who attend job training programs,
trade schools, union apprenticeships, and other like programs
are recognized as obtaining a post-secondary nondegree award.
Additionally, I was proud to co-lead the Small Business
Workforce Pipeline Act to help small businesses offer more
apprenticeships and on-the-job training opportunities.
In order to alleviate the labor shortage and support small
businesses, it is vital to harness the potential of people with
disabilities and to also promote skilled trades. By focusing on
these areas, there is potential for significant improvement in
the labor market, ultimately benefiting both small businesses
and the broader economy.
First, want to thank our witnesses again for joining us
today. I look forward to the conversation ahead.
And with that, I yield to our distinguished Ranking Member
from Kentucky, Mr. McGarvey.
Mr. MCGARVEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you for
bringing us together today to discuss how we can tackle one of
the most persistent challenges that faces small businesses and
our economy. That is the workforce shortage.
Everywhere I go--I bet it is the same in your district
too--everywhere I go, we are hearing the same thing: Small
business owners are struggling to find and keep qualified
workers. It is not just anecdotal, though. There are survey
upon survey upon survey confirming that finding workers is the
top operational challenge facing small businesses. More than
inflation, more than supply chains, more than regulations.
This isn't new. Even before the pandemic, there were
workforce shortages, particularly in the skilled trades. Part
of the problem is the longstanding misconception that the only
path to the middle class is through a 4-year college degree.
Unfortunately, we know that college, while right for some, is
not right for everyone. But our focus on college has led to a
chronic underfunding of career and vocational training programs
that would help fill those jobs in the highest demand today.
Thankfully, over the past few years, we are doing better,
and we are seeing real investment in workforce training and
apprenticeships and a surge in interest by young people. For
instance, apprenticeships have more than doubled over the past
decade, helping younger people earn while they learn and enter
high-paying jobs without shouldering the cost and the debt of a
college degree.
In Kentucky alone we have seen a 144 percent increase in
apprenticeship enrollment in the last decade. That number
continues to grow. Programs at the high school level, such as
career and technical education programs, are gaining popularity
as well. And they help students develop skills that can guide
them into apprenticeships on traditional education pathways.
Because of their newfound popularity, the biggest problem
with these programs is now finding available instructors rather
than convincing students to enroll.
It is time for Congress to invest in career and technical
education so that we can reap the full benefits of our
investments, and transformative legislation, like the
Bipartisan Infrastructure Law, the CHIPS and Science Act, the
Inflation Reduction Act. These laws create millions of jobs,
but those jobs require specific skill sets, and we must ensure
that we are providing the training needed to fill them.
Apprenticeship programs too are not only essential for
training workers but offer avenues to entrepreneurship. For
apprentices interested in starting their own businesses, union
trainers can help them access courses that introduce them to
the management side of the industry.
While I am optimistic about the progress we have made, we
know there is still a long way to go. Other industrialized
nations are investing far more in workforce development than we
are. The U.S. currently invests less than $20 billion across 43
federal employment and training programs, less than .01 percent
of our GDP, while our peers are putting up five times that
amount.
Workforce Innovation and Opportunity Act programs, the
backbone of the federal government's workforce development
efforts, are both underutilized and underfunded, and since
2019, unauthorized. Earlier this year, the House overwhelmingly
passed the bipartisan reauthorization of the Workforce
Innovation and Opportunity Act, and we hope to see the Senate
follow suit soon.
Any of you who are sports fans will understand what I mean
when I say that our workforce development system, like the
University of Kentucky and the University of Louisville
basketball teams, is in a rebuilding phase. But with the right
investments and approach, we can build something stronger that
meets the needs of our economy, supports small businesses, and
gives every American the chance and opportunity to get ahead.
Building the workforce of tomorrow begins with our investments
today.
I look forward to hearing from our witnesses, and I yield
back.
Chairman MOLINARO. Thank you, Mr. McGarvey.
For the record, as a New York Mets fan, we are always in
the rebuilding phase. This may, however, be our year.
Somebody who knows a little bit about sports as well, let
me recognize the distinguished gentleman from Texas, the
Chairman of the full Committee, Mr. Williams.
Mr. WILLIAMS. Well, thank you. And I don't know if this is
the year for the Mets. Don't get too--they are close right now.
Chairman MOLINARO. It is never the year for the Mets.
Mr. WILLIAMS. Good morning. And I want to thank my good
friend, Chairman Molinaro, for holding today's Subcommittee
hearing to discuss our nation's current labor shortage and
workforce development issues.
To start off, I would like to thank our witnesses for being
here. Thank you very much. We appreciate you taking the time to
come out and contribute to a very important discussion today.
And to put this simply, main street is facing a dire labor
shortage, with 90 percent of businesses reporting few or no
qualified applicants in August. Industries like construction
are particularly affected, with the projection showing the need
for over 500,000 additional workers annually. This is why it is
more important than ever that we promote skilled trades to grow
our economy and combat the workforce shortage. These jobs are
not only in demand but also allow people to learn a valued
skill without needing to take on tens of thousands of dollars
in student loan debt in order to get the proper training.
So additionally, there is another segment of our population
that has been overlooked as we look to have more people enter
the workforce, and people with disabilities are very
entrepreneurial and can add value to many businesses. We have
already heard about the first hearing we held with Congress
where we had a 16-year-old, Drew Davis, come before us, talk
about his story of creating his own hot sauce company. He has
cerebral palsy, but he did not let it hold him back as he
pursued his dream. His story was inspiring, and it showed that
with a little help, anyone can be an entrepreneur in America.
So I want to again thank Chairman Molinaro for--and the
Ranking Member for bringing the Committee to--attention to
these workforce issues that are affecting main street
businesses, and I look forward to today's conversations.
And I yield back.
Chairman MOLINARO. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Let me now introduce our witnesses.
First, with us here today is Ms. Ashley Gamba. Ms. Gamba is
the executive director of Community Options, Inc., located in
Binghamton, New York. Founded in 1989, Community Options is a
nationwide nonprofit organization that develops housing and
employment opportunities for people with intellectual,
physical, and developmental disabilities. Since its founding,
Community Options has expanded their services to over 10
States, partnering with local governments to provide employment
opportunities across the country.
Throughout my time in public service, I can tell you that
Community Options has been a leader and a voice for our
disability community, especially throughout Broome County in
New York State.
One of the organization's most memorable events is the
annual Cupid's Chase in Binghamton, which brings together our
community in support for those with disabilities. From hosting
job training events to building out their new pharmacy
technician workforce program to creating an internship program
with Legends at Yankee Stadium, Community Options empowers
those with disabilities to meaningfully contribute to main
street and lead more independent lives.
Ms. Gamba has been with Community Options, Inc., since
2017, when she began as the State Director of Employment
Services before moving to her current position last year as
Executive Director. Ms. Gamba attended the University of
Buffalo, where she earned her Master's of Science in Vocational
Rehabilitation counseling.
And I am certainly grateful to you for joining us here
today for today's discussion.
Our next witness is Mr. Frank Stento. Mr. Stento is the
Director of Business Development in District Council Number 4
Painters & Allied Trades, located in Binghamton, New York.
District Council 4 represents 2,000 active and retired men and
women in 33 counties throughout western and central New York.
Representing those in the finishing trades, District 4 has been
a leader in providing high-quality, work-based training
programs for those seeking a career in the trades.
Mr. Stento has been involved with District 4 since 2018,
where he began as Business Development Specialist. In addition
to his position as Director of Business Development, Mr. Stento
serves as the President of District Council 4 Local 178 and is
Vice President of the Binghamton-Oneonta Building Trades.
Mr. Stento earned his Associate's of Arts and Science in
workforce development and training from Mountwest Community &
Technical College. I'm a big fan of community colleges.
Thank you, sir, for joining us today for this conversation.
And now let me recognize Ranking Member McGarvey to
introduce our last witness appearing before us today.
Mr. MCGARVEY. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Our final witness today is Mr. Neal Strange. He is director
of education at the Indiana Kentucky Ohio Regional Council of
Carpenters. Three States, but one gets a little more emphasis
there from us. And he is part of the Joint Apprenticeship &
Training Fund.
Mr. Strange is a 15-year Member of the United Brotherhood
of Carpenters and Joiners of America, and currently serves as
director of education, overseeing the operations of nine
training centers across Indiana and Kentucky. These centers
support over 4,000 apprentices as well as the continuing
education program.
Mr. Strange is himself a graduate of UBC's 4-year
apprenticeship program and holds an associate of applied
science in construction technologies and a journeyman carpenter
designation.
After working in the field, he transitioned to a career in
education, becoming a full-time instructor in 2022.
Thank you, Mr. Strange, for joining us today.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Chairman MOLINARO. Thank you, Mr. McGarvey.
We appreciate you all being here today with us.
I do want to extend our appreciation to the staff of the
Small Business Committee and, of course, our two offices for
coordinating today's hearing.
And before recognizing the witnesses, let me also remind
each of you that your testimony today is restricted to 5
minutes. If you see the light turn red in front of you, it
means your time is up. And Mr. McGarvey gets very, very
anxious. And to the extent you can, please just wrap up your
testimony at that point.
And with that, let me recognize Ms. Gamba for your opening
remarks. Thank you.

STATEMENTS OF MS. ASHLEY GAMBA, EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR, COMMUNITY
OPTIONS, INC.; MR. FRANK STENTO, DIRECTOR OF BUSINESS
DEVELOPMENT, PAINTERS AND ALLIED TRADES UNION DISTRICT COUNCIL
#4; AND MR. NEAL STRANGE, DIRECTOR OF EDUCATION, INDIANA
KENTUCKY OHIO REGIONAL COUNCIL OF CARPENTERS JOINT
APPRENTICESHIP AND TRAINING FUND

STATEMENT OF MS. ASHLEY GAMBA

Ms. GAMBA. Dear Chairman Williams, Ranking Member McGarvey,
Members of the U.S. House Committee on Small Business, as the
executive director for Community Options New York, I am pleased
to have the opportunity to provide written testimony, or verbal
testimony, to the U.S. House Committee on Small Business
regarding workforce training programs that are available to
help small business owners expand their labor pool.
Over the past year, we have supported over 5,000 people
with disabilities, including 2,100 people receiving employment
services, assisting them with developing the skills needed to
obtain and maintain meaningful, competitive, integrated
employment.
Community Options has had the opportunity to develop
innovative training programs in partnership with numerous
businesses to assist with positive employment outcomes for
people with disabilities across New York State. We have
partnered with Legends at Yankee Stadium to provide hands-on
integrated training in the following areas: merchandising, food
service, customer service, and retail. By providing work
readiness training to assist participants with building the
soft skills related to employment, hands-on experience to
develop transferable work skills, and on-site training and
support, we have successfully placed over 200 individuals in
paid work experiences that have resulted in 80 percent of
placement in competitive employment settings.
Additionally, through partnership with the NBA Foundation,
Community Options has received funding to provide training and
employment supports to minority youth with disabilities across
several States. This funding has enabled us to identify youth
with disabilities and provide work readiness training, career
exploration counseling, job placement, and job coaching
services. This couldn't be done without our small business
partners, local businesses and organizations that have assisted
with allowing us the opportunity to provide on-site training
and job coaching supports to the individuals that we work with.
Most recently, we have had the opportunity to partner with
CVS Health to provide retail, front and back store, supervisor
training, and a Department of Labor-funded pre-apprenticeship
training program for pharm technicians, or pharmacy
technicians. Through this partnership we have had the
opportunity to build a career readiness center offering hands-
on training to further develop the transferable work skills
required for competitive employment.
In our ever-evolving economy, it has become apparent that
hiring to meet the needs of many small businesses has proven to
be difficult. In a recent survey conducted by SCORE, more than
50 percent of small businesses reported that it was very or
somewhat difficult to fill open positions, citing it has been
most problematic to find skilled or qualified workers.
Additionally, according to the Society for Human Resources
Management, approximately 97 percent of HR professionals and 92
percent of people managers say that employees with disabilities
often perform at the same or better level than their coworkers
without disabilities, yet this population often faces
significant challenges when attempting to obtain meaningful
employment.
As always, we are very thankful for our small business
partners who work closely with our agency to provide employment
opportunities for people with disabilities. We encourage small
businesses across the country to partner with local agencies to
increase the availability and accessibility to training
programs designed to train and develop the skills of this
underrepresented population.
And we also urge Congress to continue to strengthen funding
for the vocational and pre-apprenticeship opportunities for
both youth and adults with disabilities.
Chairman MOLINARO. Thank you, Ashley. Appreciate that very
much.
I now recognize Mr. Stento for your 5-minute opening
remarks.

STATEMENT OF MR. FRANK STENTO

Mr. STENTO. Thank you.
Good morning, Chairman Williams, Chairman Molinaro, and
esteemed Members of the Subcommittee. Thank you for the invite
to give testimony today on my experience with registered
apprenticeship programs and the--and how they can impact
positively workforce development moving forward.
So I have got a great--I have a great deal of gratitude for
my organization, the International Union of Painters and Allied
Trades; for the small business owners, also known as the
subcontractors, who employed me out in the field; for my
instructors and journey workers that supported and trained me
to become a skilled craftsman; and then to my mentors that
challenged me and took the time to help me develop.
What do those all have in common? The workforce model of a
registered apprenticeship program, which has a rich history in
the United States and has a bright future to come.
Like many others before me, this system provided me an
opportunity, a purpose, and the tools to achieve success.
Apprenticeship in the skilled trades offers a unique
opportunity to gain hands-on experience while earning a living.
Unlike traditional classroom education, as Ranking Member
McGarvey said, an earn-while-you-learn apprenticeship allows
you to gain knowledge by working under the guidance of
experienced professionals in the industry. Practical training
ensures that you develop the technical skills necessary to
excel in your chosen field, whether it is plumbing, electrical,
carpentry, or like myself, in the finishing trades. This leads
to full-time employment, providing a clear path to a stable
career without the burden of student loan debt.
The other 4-year degree is what we commonly reference a
registered apprenticeship program. Although the timeframe
depending on a craft and curriculum can be anywhere from 3 to 5
years.
Beyond the technical skills, apprenticeships also foster
personal development. They teach you how to work in real-world
environments, solve problems on the spot, and communicate
effectively on job sites and beyond. These skills are
invaluable across many areas of life and make apprentices
highly sought after by employers.
Furthermore, the demand for skilled tradespeople continues
to grow, offering long-term job security and competitive wages.
With the abundance of mega products on the horizon, combined
with a workforce that is aging, there is an urgency to get new
candidates in the pipeline to sustain the industry for those
small business owners long term.
Apprenticeship not only builds expertise but sets the
foundation for a rewarding and sustainable career. In
apprenticeship school, our instructors teach hands-on
applications and best practices. A large component is dedicated
to health and safety to minimize accidents in the field. There
is conversations around tools, equipment, and technologies in
the craft. Training around financial literacy, social skills,
the history of the trade, and advances in the industry are also
incorporated. We complete mockups in-house for repetition in
the craft and perform projects for nonprofits in the community.
After apprenticeship school, there is a huge focus on
journey worker upgrading, as we have an obligation to maintain
our reputation as the most highly skilled, safe, and productive
workforce performing our crafts.
We have--pardon me. We have an online learning management
system with hundreds of courses to choose from, including
blueprint reading, estimating essentials, and project
management. This helps with the retention of our workforce, and
the constant training makes those involved more employable.
The way we have our apprenticeship set up, it is called
block training, which is 4 full weeks a year during the months
of January through April. The rest of the apprenticeship is
made up of on-the-job training with our contracted partners and
our skilled journey workers.
A high-paying and sustainable career with benefits in the
construction field is the ultimate purpose of a registered
apprenticeship program. With continuing education and training
opportunities, additional pathways can be accessed in the
industry.
Some of the best and brightest foremen, superintendents,
project managers, contractors--and the list goes on--came
through an apprenticeship program with--and had field
experience.
I completed my apprenticeship in 2016. I received 40
college credits through an articulation agreement with
Mountwest Community & Technical College, which I am grateful
for. I then finished my associate's degree. I was running
projects in the field and started instructing part time through
our district council, which then eventually led to a full-time
staff position in business development, also known as
organizing.
Now one of the best parts of my career is seeing others
come in and find similar success and watching their
trajectories and life change. An apprenticeship program is a
great way to start a career, as well as a necessary system to
continue the pipeline of skilled journey workers to business
owners.
Any opportunities that we have to increase apprenticeships
will greatly assist the challenges surrounding supply and
demand that dominate recent conversation in the industry, while
simultaneously raising up those middle-class workers.
I thank you for your time, and look forward to your
questions.
Chairman MOLINARO. Thanks, Frank.
Mr. Strange, for your opening remarks.

STATEMENT OF MR. NEAL STRANGE

Mr. STRANGE. Yes. So good morning, Chairman Molinaro,
Ranking Member McGarvey, and Members of the Committee. Thank
you for the opportunity to speak with you today.
My name is Neal Strange, as addressed earlier by Mr.
McGarvey. I am the director of education for the Indiana
Kentucky Ohio Regional Council of Carpenters Joint
Apprenticeship and Training Fund, also a 15-year Member of the
UBC, and a graduate of the program myself.
I am here to provide an overview of our apprenticeship
program and the continuing education we offer to our Members.
This program is not just about learning a trade. It is about
ensuring our Members are equipped with the skills and knowledge
needed to thrive in an ever-changing industry. Our council
consists of 38,000 Members within Indiana, Kentucky, and Ohio,
and over 550,000 Members across the United States and Canada.
We represent the carpenters, millwrights, piledrivers, and
floor layers who are building our country's bridges, highways,
manufacturing sites, hospitals, schools, and power production
facilities.
At the core of our training philosophy is the belief that
our contractors must remain relevant and prepared for both
existing and emerging construction markets. To achieve this, we
partner closely with contractors, manufacturers, and local
universities to meet their specific needs. Together, we provide
a robust training curriculum that emphasizes both productivity
and safety, ensuring that our Members deliver high-quality
product on every site.
One of the greatest strengths of our program is that all
training is provided at no cost to the individual Members.
Funding for our programs comes from contributions made for
every hour worked on a job site by our signatory contractors.
Nevertheless, we lift the financial burden off of those
contractors, allowing them to focus on project execution
without worrying about additional expenses related to training
workers and ensuring their workforce has the proper
certifications necessary for specific jobs. Our members benefit
from a top-tier education while our contractors benefit from a
highly skilled workforce.
In terms of compensation, our apprentices are paid on a
scaled wage basis. The wage structure provides apprentices with
fair compensation as they build their skills, which further
incentivizes retention and productivity. This model also allows
our contractors to remain competitive in the market while
employing highly trained and motivated workers.
We offer multiple pathways into our program, creating
accessibility for our diverse group of candidates. We have
partnerships with high school career and technical education
programs, adult education initiatives, State and county reentry
programs, and military veteran organizations, such as Helmets
to Hardhats and our own internal military veterans program.
These pathways ensure that we are tapping into a wide range of
talent allowing for diversity and inclusion in our workforce.
In the past 4 years, our apprenticeship enrollment has
grown by 40 percent, reflecting both the demand for skilled
labor and also the increasing awareness of the opportunities
our program offers for career growth and development. Current
enrollment across our three States totals more than 6,900
apprentices. This includes 22 percent minority enrollment and 6
percent female enrollment.
From the moment an apprentice begins our program, safety
becomes an integral part of their education. Beginning with an
OSHA 10 certification and continuing throughout their
apprenticeship, safety protocols are embedded into every aspect
of training. A safe worker is an effective worker, and this
foundation is key to the longevity of their career and the
protection of our job sites.
For Members who aspire to further advance their careers
beyond the apprenticeship, we offer additional pathways into
leadership roles, project management, and business ownership.
Whether a Member seeks to move into superintendent or
management positions or has an entrepreneurial spirit and
wishes to start their own contracting business, our continuing
education resources equip them with the skills and confidence
to succeed.
We recognize the importance of nurturing leadership from
within, and our specialized programs allow our Members to
thrive in roles that require strategic thinking and operational
oversight.
Our program's reach extends well beyond training the
individual. We play a crucial role in economic development by
placing our skilled workers on the jobs that span from small
business ventures to large-scale national projects. For smaller
contractors looking to explore new markets, we provide access
to a pool of well-trained workers who can meet the demands of
these new opportunities.
Meanwhile, larger contractors, particularly those involved
in mega projects related to the CHIPS and Science Act, the
Inflation Reduction Act, and Infrastructure Investment and Jobs
Act, also benefit from our training programs.
Since 2023, more than 4,500 Members within our three-State
council have been employed in projects stemming from these
acts, including Intel, Ford Blue Oval, and numerous renewable
energy projects, covering solar, hydro, and wind. These
initiatives require a workforce that is both large and highly
skilled, which our program delivers.
Since our inception in 1881, the UBC has organized the
membership necessary to meet contractor and end-user needs. Our
privately funded training keeps us ahead of the curve. We
understand that if our signatory contractors are not
successful, we will not be successful. We have no seniority in
our collective bargaining agreements, and no contractor is
bound to employ a Member they find unproductive. This
competitive environment is necessary for our success, and this
is done at no cost to the taxpayer.
In summary, our apprenticeship program and continuing
education initiatives are designed to support both our Members
and the contractors they serve. We provide cost-free, high-
quality training that focuses on safety, competitiveness,
career advancement, and long-term development. By doing so, we
help drive economic growth, foster innovation, and build a
workforce that is ready to meet the challenges of today and
tomorrow.
Thank you for your time.
Chairman MOLINARO. Well done. Thank you.
I appreciate all of you.
We will begin the question round under the 5-minute rule.
And with that, I recognize myself for 5 minutes.
Ms. Gamba, I want to start with you. We have talked about
this extensively. Certainly, acknowledging that, since the
pandemic, nearly 2 million Americans with disabilities have
joined the workforce; it is a 28 percent increase from pre-
pandemic levels. Yet as we all recognize, approximately 70
percent of those with intellectual, physical, and developmental
disabilities remain unemployed and outside the workforce. And
that is obviously both a challenge and an opportunity.
Could we start by just talking, if you would, what are some
of the challenges that business owners either articulate or you
know face when hiring those with disabilities, and what steps
might we take to make that transition into the workforce easier
for the employer?
Ms. GAMBA. I think they are often worried or concerned
about, like, the stigma or the liability of hiring somebody
that might need additional supports. As an agency, we--if we
are going in to provide any intensive----
Chairman MOLINARO. You can continue.
Ms. GAMBA.--intensive, you know, job training support, we
will add the employer on to our liability insurance, which will
kind of, I guess, alleviate some of the concerns that an
employer may have.
Chairman MOLINARO. Those--so those supports through likely
the support staff and what have you, what are the challenges,
then, the agency faces in providing those--that support?
Ms. GAMBA. Employers may be concerned about having the
individuals onsite. They might not communicate very well,
allowing us to provide any intervention that may be needed. And
then workplace accommodations, there is often a concern about
any money that a small business would have to spend.
Chairman MOLINARO. So why don't you tell us one of the
benefits or at least we identify the benefits that that
employer would see by bringing in and ultimately employing an
individual with a disability.
Ms. GAMBA. I think that it helps with turnover. Our--the
individuals that we put into different small businesses have
identified that they have the skills for the job and the
interest in working there. So if we are in there helping with
any intensive job training or supports, they tend to remain
employed for longer periods of time and it reduces turnover.
Chairman MOLINARO. Thank you, Ashley.
Frank, let me say this without question. The skilled trades
are the backbone of upstate New York.
Mr. STENTO. Thank you.
Chairman MOLINARO. And, frankly, you all contribute both to
our economy, keeping our neighbors employed, and I will say,
making sure that projects are staffed by New Yorkers and not
employment from out of State or out of country.
You talk a lot about--and, of course, Mr. McGarvey
acknowledged--the earn-while-you-learn apprenticeship model.
Can you just expand a little bit on the benefits of registered
apprenticeships? And within the time I have, what steps can we
take to expand access to and support those registered
apprenticeship programs?
Mr. STENTO. Sure. Thank you.
You know, one thing in addition to what I had already
mentioned in my testimony would be hour one our apprentices are
starting to gain contributions towards their healthcare and
towards their retirement. In addition, they have structured pay
raises that are--that we work with the New York State
Department of Labor throughout their apprenticeship program as
they move--as they progress through that. They have eligibility
for employee assurance programs.
And then the biggest thing that I would say an advantage
for an apprentice coming in would be they are building up a
skilled craft that is highly--that is in very high demand,
highly marketable. And once they learn that skilled craft from
our journey workers and our small business owners when they are
out in the field, there is nobody that can take that away from
them. They are going to have the ability to go and provide for
themselves and their families for the rest of their lives.
So one thing that I will say that something that our
government partners could assist with would be looking into
more apprenticeship language on all projects moving forward,
which would incentivize our small business owners, our
contractors, to increase the ratios of apprentices on projects
upcoming.
Chairman MOLINARO. Thank you for that. I will say, in local
government, the first step we took was to require apprentice
language in our major contracts, which just enhances the
pipeline and gets folks from maybe K-12, right, into the
workforce and prepared.
I do want to note before acknowledging Mr. McGarvey, the
more usual than you would imagine bipartisan support for both
trying to advance those with disabilities into the workforce
and the trades on the ground.
And with that, let me acknowledge Mr. McGarvey for his 5
minutes.
Mr. MCGARVEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you to all of the witnesses for being here today, for
your incredibly thoughtful testimony. We really appreciate it.
And want to give a special thanks to Mr. Strange who came up
here from my region of the country.
And, Mr. Chairman, you talked about how the trades are the
backbone of upstate New York, and certainly in Louisville,
Kentucky, we feel the same way. I say all the time, Louisville
is a union town. And truly, from the fact that every Ford
Escape and every Ford F-250 and above is made in Louisville,
Kentucky, and that our baseball bats and even our bourbon are
made with union labor right there in Louisville, Kentucky. And
we--we appreciate all the carpenters from Local 175 do for our
city and our community.
With apprenticeships' proven track record of success--I
think that is important here. We are not talking about
something theoretical. We know that these apprenticeship
programs work--it seems that it is a wasted opportunity to not
continue investing in these programs. So I am excited to have
this hearing today to uplift these initiatives, as the Chairman
said, in a bipartisan way.
Mr. Strange, I am going to start with you. How has the
increased availability and popularity of the apprenticeship
programs changed the calculus of young people who are looking
for the next step, and what are you seeing on the ground?
Mr. STRANGE. Well, as I addressed in my opening remarks, we
have seen 40 percent growth in 3 years alone inside of our
apprenticeship programs. We are seeing more and more involved
at the CT level at the high schools, increased partnerships at
high schools, and also other entry-level pathways for us.
So with that, we are just seeing more and more
availability, more opportunities to grow. And also, we are
seeing a better view of the general public on who we are and
what we have to offer, especially with parents of children that
are coming out of these programs. We actually do nights with
them specifically to be able to explain to them who we are, why
we are going to provide that safe work environment for their
children whenever they come out. That is a big concern from
parents. So we found some trade on those type of efforts.
Mr. MCGARVEY. Appreciate that. I think two things we have
agreed on today and that we know, we know apprenticeship
programs work, we know that small businesses right now need
qualified workers. And so we are trying to get that done.
When you are looking at the apprenticeship program, how
many of your apprenticeship programs are--your apprentices are
going to small businesses to work in those sectors, and how are
they kind of helping small businesses fill those gaps and meet
their goals in terms of having qualified workers?
Mr. STRANGE. So as Frank talked about earlier in his
portion as well, you know, with the larger projects that are
coming along, that is offering opportunity for a lot of smaller
businesses to step in. By us providing the skilled workforce
for them to be able to have to go provide the workforce they
need on these projects, and then also the training that they
need to be able to--and we are seeing a lot of job sites that
have requirements on them for certifications for Members to be
able to hold--we provide that training opportunity for them and
also provide that opportunity for that workforce.
Mr. MCGARVEY. And, Mr. Stento, I will go over to you as
well. Mr. Strange just mentioned a 40 percent increase in their
apprenticeship programs. Are you seeing similar type numbers in
your area?
Mr. STENTO. We are seeing significant increases. We
actually just had our largest apprenticeship class since I have
been on staff, which is over 6 years, about 250 apprentices
that are going to be coming in for this coming school year. So
there has been, and it has been intentional, right.
We see the need to work with our retirees that are coming
up with the mega projects that we are going to have to have
some urgency that has to be strategic and how we intend to
fulfill these projects. So there has been, yes, a major
increase in our Members as well and other trades in the Broome
County region.
Some of our apprenticeship programs, the carpenters up
there just a little north of Broome County, in Onondaga, just
opened up a new training facility. Plumbers and pipefitters are
doing the same thing, all in the anticipation of increased
apprenticeship numbers so that we are able to fulfill pipeline
to our small business owners in years to come.
And then these apprentices will eventually be the future of
our--they are the future of our workforce and of the industry,
and they will be able to, in a short period of time,
relatively, have the skills necessary to be then mentoring and
teaching the generation following them.
Mr. MCGARVEY. And thank you so much. As we run out of time,
I will just underscore your point. You said that they are, in
fact, the future of your workforce. We have got these major
projects coming up, things coming up from the Bipartisan
Infrastructure Law, et cetera.
But by being the future, we also know and agree that is the
backbone of our community, the future of our community as well.
So we appreciate that testimony.
Chairman MOLINARO. Thank you, Mr. McGarvey.
Let me now recognize for 5 minutes the gentlewoman from
California, Ms. Chu.
Ms. CHU. Well, I want to thank all the witnesses for all
your great work in putting people to work. So thank you for
that.
Mr. Strange, you have helped individuals from so many walks
of life enter the job market prepared and trained in the
incredibly important field of carpentry, which is especially
critical for taking full advantage of the investments made by
the Inflation Reduction Act and the Bipartisan Infrastructure
Law.
I believe local workforce training facilities are a key
component to meeting this growing need and supporting our
nation's workers, which is why I secured community project
funding for two workforce development and job training
facilities in my district. This includes the Pasadena
facilities for jobs creation training and education center. It
recognizes the fact that a 4-year college degree is not for
everybody. And this will help connect high school age students
to vocational training for so many different fields, including
EMT training, automotive technology, construction, and building
trades, and even robotics.
So I would like to hear you talk about how community-based
job training programs like this one can help support
apprenticeship programs offered by unions like yours. How can
these types of programs work together to help build a bigger
pipeline into important trades like carpentry?
Mr. STRANGE. Yes. So one of the ways that we already have
established in our area is that we can provide an articulation
agreement along with them. So if they have the requirements met
inside of their training facilities, that can be a direct entry
pathway into our programs.
So with that, as long as everything inside of those
facilities is there in line, we work together with to create
that, and we also provide a curriculum pathway to be able to
provide for those that want with our own internal UBC-designed
program for that type of need.
Ms. CHU. Okay. That is wonderful.
I would like to have Mr. Strange and then Mr. Stento answer
this question, which is, the work you do is a testament to the
strength and importance of our nation's unions. Because
Democrats passed and President Biden signed into law the
landmark Inflation Reduction Act, so many new job opportunities
in the green energy space have become available, which you
mentioned in your testimony.
And because the Inflation Reduction Act provided special
bonus tax credits to businesses that pay prevailing wages and
support registered apprenticeship programs on their projects,
unions play a critical role in providing the specialized on-
the-job training to apprentices on these projects.
So can you talk about the role that unions and their
workers play in developing the diverse and skilled workforce
that our country needs?
Mr. STRANGE. I can speak to that one directly in our area.
So first off, you addressed on there because of the strong
apprenticeship requirements on these projects that has given
our contractors a leg up and be able to. With the solar
industry in particular, we have partnered together with many
manufacturers that have come in. We provided the training that
they have had for their specific products, and we have been
able to meet the needs going out on to those. And currently,
this year alone, we have produced over 2 million work hours in
our three-State council to be able to meet the needs on and--
because of those acts.
Mr. STENTO. Okay. So in our industry, we cover--two of the
crafts that we cover, I think, would fall underneath this.
Industrial coatings, bridges, tanks, water towers, which we
have certifications for--for the coatings applicators, as well
as for the contractors that are performing these. And as you
mentioned, part of some of these tax credits are tied into
apprenticeships.
So we are seeing an uptick in--you know, from the
engineers, as well as developers, working more in tandem with
our signatory contractors.
Another craft that we cover is glass glazing architectural
metal. So you have got dynamic glass, you have got 179D tax
credits that are--that do have some overlap with that industry
as well. Green energy, total building envelope.
So this is something that we have, what is called a--it is
a third-party certification, North American contractor
certification on the small business owner's side. And then with
the actual installer, it is an architectural glass and metal
technician certification.
But you are seeing these specified in a lot more projects
so that there is less rework, but also so that the design is--
that is intended, especially when you are looking for energy
reduction, is completed by--by a competent installer and
contractor as well. So we are seeing the architects working on
those tax credits with our contractors.
Ms. CHU. Thank you. I yield pack.
Chairman MOLINARO. Thank you, Ms. Chu.
We have gone through the first round of questions. We are
going to actually just do a second round. I know Chairman
Williams wanted to also ask a couple questions.
So without objection, we will begin a second round. We will
make that relatively quick for all of you.
I will start with Ms. Gamba. Just--let's--we talked a
little bit about the pieces of legislation that we have worked
together on, the Think DIFFERENTLY About Disability Employment
Act, the Think DIFFERENTLY Small Business Accessibility Act,
really trying to get the federal government to partner and use
the resources it has to assist organizations like your own.
If you had a magic wand, what would be the support or
resources necessary to expand your workforce opportunity
programming? Other than money, which, of course, we recognize
is necessary.
Ms. GAMBA. I think that the onboarding process for many
small businesses has to be more accessible. So I think if my--
if I could use a magic wand, that would be it. I think a lot of
the individuals that we support in our labor pool are often not
able to pass the initial assessments or anything that pertain
to online onboarding.
So I think that right now that would be my biggest barrier.
And if that is something that I had a magic wand, I would fix.
Chairman MOLINARO. Terrific. Thanks very much.
Frank, just because you both come from my neck of the
woods, what would you want folks at home to know about both the
location of opportunities, apprenticeship language, and
confront at least maybe one or two of the, how shall I say,
perhaps--I don't want to say stigmas, but observations people
have about sometimes employing the trades. How would you
overcome some of those--some hesitance in the community and
make those connections that would keep our friends employed?
Mr. STENTO. Okay.
Chairman MOLINARO. If you know what I am asking.
Mr. STENTO. I am. I think I am following.
So as far as--you know, we refer a lot of times not--
discussing union labor, but local labor. So this is a smart way
of our taxpayers to be spending their money.
For every dollar invested with our local union workforce in
our surrounding areas, it is having a direct impact in the
community and the taxpayer base that are funding these
projects. So that would be one way that I would dissuade anyone
who was hesitant in utilizing union workforce.
Back to the first part of the question discussing the tax
incentives and subsidies, apprenticeship language, it makes
sense. We are here talking about the lack of skilled personnel
in our--in the workforce in various industries, specifically
for me, construction.
So it would--to me, that would be a way to get more
contractors hiring, putting apprentices on, boosting our
ratios, so that we are flush with skilled workforce 5 to 8
years from now.
Chairman MOLINARO. I thank you, Frank.
That concludes my questions. I will yield the balance of my
time. My colleagues physically to my right, metaphorically to
my left, are going to pass, and we will acknowledge Chairman
Williams for his 5 minutes.
Mr. WILLIAMS. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And some of you may not know, but I played professional
baseball for the Atlanta Braves. And notice I said some and not
many of you would know. There is a difference. But I did play
with the Atlanta Braves, and there is really nothing that
brings people together like the America's pastime.
And, Ms. Gamba, I noticed that your organization, we talked
about it this morning, partnered with the Legends of Yankee
Stadium to help people with disabilities find meaningful
employment. So my question is, what types of roles are these
individuals performing at the historic Yankee Stadium, and are
there other opportunities your organization is exploring?
Ms. GAMBA. So Legends operates concessions at Yankee
Stadium. So the individuals that we--are placed in there are
working in merchandising, retail, and food service primarily.
If we have any individuals that have a specific interest,
such as maybe human resources, they have been open to putting
them in internships in those sites as well.
Mr. WILLIAMS. A lot of opportunities.
Ms. GAMBA. And I would love to get into the Mets, but
that----
Mr. WILLIAMS. Well, there is your Met man right there.
Ms. GAMBA. I know.
Mr. WILLIAMS. He is ready to make the deal. That is a great
program.
Ms. GAMBA. Yep.
Mr. WILLIAMS. I think MLB is familiar with it, aren't they,
Major League Baseball?
Ms. GAMBA. Well, our partnership is with Legends, so that
is all I can speak to.
Mr. WILLIAMS. Yeah. But it could be some--it could grow.
That is very good.
There has been a significant shortage in skilled labor
across the country for way too long. And when I was secretary
of state of Texas, we were always looking into infrastructure
projects, but we kept running into the issue of finding enough
welders and other skilled tradesmen to complete the projects.
We actually lost a lot of business because we didn't have
welders in Texas.
Mr. Stento, I have worked with different community colleges
around my district to emphasize their trade school programs.
And so how do you think we should be promoting these options to
young people so we can build up the skilled workforce and let
them know there is options out there other than being a lawyer
or an architect or something?
Mr. STENTO. Thank you, Chairman Williams. I appreciate the
question.
It is something that over the last 2 years I have spent a
lot of time within our district council working on is
increasing our branding and our awareness, and that doesn't
happen with just one touch or one conversation with our youth.
This has to happen early and it has to happen often.
I am talking about getting in and speaking with youth in
elementary school or even earlier, and working with them over
years bringing an identity to what we do in the trades, to the
projects that we worked on in the community, to testimonials
from those community members who would be able to speak to how
these careers have helped transform their lives.
So early, often, and getting in before discussing with
seniors in high school, who have already had time to make up
their minds elsewhere.
Mr. WILLIAMS. We lose 100,000 kids a year in Texas. They
are dropping out of the ninth grade. And those are the kids we
need to reach out to and let them learn a trade and be very
successful in the economy.
Mr. STENTO. I agree.
Mr. WILLIAMS. Yeah. Mr. Strange, I wanted to ask you a
similar question. Can you talk about some of the work you are
doing to try to get high schoolers who may not know what they
want to do with their futures into the skilled workforce?
Mr. STRANGE. Absolutely. First off, real quick, I want to
address the welding concern. We have seven training facilities
that we have CWI certifications inside of and, therefore,
provide the welding needs that are needed in our area. So if
Texas is needing, we got them for you.
Mr. WILLIAMS. Tell them to call Governor Abbott.
Mr. STRANGE. So one of the ways--and we are actually in the
season right now where we are doing this. We have open house
events. So we are currently--yesterday we hosted one at one of
our facilities. We have another one to follow tomorrow.
As of right now, at five of our facilities to point this
year, we have had over 2,500 high school students come through
our facilities to be able to see and tour that. Along with
that, we also do a program where we invite back those students
that come, we invite their parents to come meet with us. We do
an evening with them, and we tell them about the opportunity we
have, the career options that we have for their kids--for their
students to possibly enter into. We have actually even had some
parents enroll in our program after they have come and seen who
we are and what we do.
Mr. WILLIAMS. Well, that is great. You may--I am sure you
have already touched on it, Mr. Chairman. But we have a bill
that basically in simple terms makes the State colleges show
these kids what it costs to go to a State university as opposed
to a trade school. Big difference; affecting student debt and
all the things we hear about that come from that. So we need to
continue to do that.
I don't think the economy is complete until we have a
workforce who is complete with trades. And we will never run
out of that. So appreciate what you are doing.
I yield my time back.
Chairman MOLINARO. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. We appreciate
that.
As a long-suffering Mets fan, if we never had to travel to
Atlanta again, we would be much happier. Just saying.
With that, that concludes our round of questioning. I do
want to thank all three of you for your testimony today and
being here in Washington with us.
Again, as mentioned, clearly bipartisan, and this Committee
does distinguish itself under Mr. Williams--Chairman Williams'
leadership in acting in a bipartisan way.
So without objection, Members have 5 legislative days to
submit additional materials and written questions for the
witnesses to the Chair which will be forwarded to the
witnesses.
The Ranking Member and I would love at the conclusion of
the meeting just to take a quick photograph with our witnesses
to show our continued support.
If you would, to any written requests, we would ask
witnesses to promptly respond.
And if there is no other business to come before the
Committee, without objection, the Committee is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 10:56 a.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]

A P P E N D I X

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
