- MARKUP OF: H.R 1644, "7(A) LOAN AGENT OVERSIGHT ACT", H.R. 1651, "THE SMALL BUSINESS 7(A) LOAN AGENT TRANSPARENCY ACT", H.R 1541, "SMALL BUSINESS WORKFORCE PIPELINE ACT OF 2023", H.R 1730, "SUPPORTING SMALL BUSINESSES AND CAREER AND TECHNICAL EDUCATION ACT OF 2023", H.R 1606, "VETERAN ENTREPRENEURSHIP TRAINING ACT OF 2023", H.R 3511, "SERVICE-DISABLED VETERAN OPPORTUNITIES IN SMALL BUSINESS ACT"

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

MARKUP OF: H.R. 1644, ``7(A) LOAN AGENT
OVERSIGHT ACT'', H.R. 1651, ``THE SMALL
BUSINESS 7(A) LOAN AGENT TRANSPARENCY
ACT'', H.R. 1541, ``SMALL BUSINESS WORK-
FORCE PIPELINE ACT OF 2023'', H.R. 1730,
``SUPPORTING SMALL BUSINESSES AND CAREER
AND TECHNICAL EDUCATION ACT OF 2023'',
H.R. 1606, ``VETERAN ENTREPRENEURSHIP
TRAINING ACT OF 2023'', H.R. 3511, `SERVICE-
DISABLED VETERAN OPPORTUNITIES IN SMALL
BUSINESS ACT''

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

COMMITTEE ON SMALL BUSINESS
UNITED STATES
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

HEARING HELD
MAY 23, 2023

__________

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Small Business Committee Document Number 118-015
Available via the GPO Website: www.govinfo.gov

________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
52-326                  WASHINGTON : 2024

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

HOUSE COMMITTEE ON SMALL BUSINESS

ROGER WILLIAMS, Texas, Chairman
BLAINE LUETKEMEYER, Missouri
PETE STAUBER, Minnesota
DAN MEUSER, Pennsylvania
BETH VAN DUYNE, Texas
MARIA SALAZAR, Florida
TRACEY MANN, Kansas
JAKE ELLZEY, Texas
MARC MOLINARO, New York
MARK ALFORD, Missouri
ELI CRANE, Arizona
AARON BEAN, Florida
WESLEY HUNT, Texas
NICK LALOTA, New York
NYDIA VELAZQUEZ, New York, Ranking Member
JARED GOLDEN, Maine
KWEISI MFUME, Maryland
DEAN PHILLIPS, Minnesota
GREG LANDSMAN, Ohio
MORGAN MCGARVEY, Kentucky
MARIE GLUESENKAMP PEREZ, Washington
HILLARY SCHOLTEN, Michigan
SHRI THANEDAR, Michigan
JUDY CHU, California
SHARICE DAVIDS, Kansas
CHRIS PAPPAS, New Hampshire

Ben Johnson, Majority Staff Director
Melissa Jung, Minority Staff Director

C O N T E N T S

OPENING STATEMENTS

Page
Hon. Roger Williams..............................................     1
Hon. Nydia Velazquez.............................................     2

APPENDIX

Additional Material for the Record:
H.R. 1644, ``7(A) Loan Agent Oversight Act''.................    30
H.R. 1651, ``The Small Business 7(A) Loan Agent Transparency
Act''......................................................    33
H.R. 1541, ``Small Business Workforce Pipeline Act of 2023''.    37
H.R. 1730, ``Supporting Small Businesses and Career and
Technical Education Act of 2023''..........................    40
H.R. 1606, ``Veteran Entrepreneurship Training Act of 2023''.    43
H.R. 3511, ``Service-Disabled Veteran Opportunities in Small
Business Act''.............................................    53

MARKUP OF: H.R 1644, ``7(A) LOAN AGENT OVERSIGHT ACT'', H.R. 1651,
``THE SMALL BUSINESS 7(A) LOAN AGENT TRANSPARENCY ACT'', H.R 1541,
``SMALL BUSINESS WORKFORCE PIPELINE ACT OF 2023'', H.R 1730,
``SUPPORTING SMALL BUSINESSES AND CAREER AND TECHNICAL EDUCATION ACT OF
2023'', H.R 1606, ``VETERAN ENTREPRENEURSHIP TRAINING ACT OF 2023'',
H.R 3511, ``SERVICE-DISABLED VETERAN OPPORTUNITIES IN SMALL BUSINESS
ACT''

----------

TUESDAY, MAY 23, 2023

House of Representatives,
Committee on Small Business,
Washington, DC.
The Committee met, pursuant to call, at 9:48 a.m., in Room
2360, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Roger Williams
[chairman of the Committee] presiding.
Present: Representatives Williams, Luetkemeyer, Stauber,
Crane, Bean, LaLota, Velazquez, Golden, Mfume, Davids, and
Pappas.
Chairman WILLIAMS. Good morning, everyone. And before we
get started we are going to say the Pledge of Allegiance and a
short prayer. And we will let Congressman Bean from Florida do
that for us, please.
Mr. BEAN. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. And good
morning to you, and good morning, Small Business.
Let's go to the Lord in prayer.
Heavenly Father, we are so grateful for so many blessings
you have bestowed on us for faith, for fellowship, for family
and freedom. We ask a blessing upon this Congress and that may
we do the Lord's work. And we pray for a debt deal. How about
that? We pray for negotiations to bring us in for a landing. As
Memorial Day approaches, we want to be mindful for everybody
that has lost somebody, family and friends that have lost
people that have defended that freedom. Let us always remember
their sacrifice so that we may have this day. Keep Guam safe
from this typhoon. We ask that that storm go somewhere else
other than hit Guam. Lord, we are grateful. Thank you. And all
this we ask in your name, and everybody said together Amen.
Please join me in the Pledge of Allegiance to the greatest
nation on the planet.
Chairman WILLIAMS. Okay. Before we get started I want to
let everybody know we are having some technical issues. I
reminded my staff we put a man on the moon in 1969. We put a
man on the moon and here we are later. So the 5-minute clock
that we have is not working in front of you but we have a
temporary clock up over where the other clock is, so that is
what we will follow. So remind everybody to keep your remarks
under 5 minutes and we will be controlling that time from here.
Okay?
The Committee will now come to order and a quorum is
present. And without objection, the Chair is authorized to
declare a recess of the Committee at any time. Pursuant to
Committee Rule 13 and House Rule 11, all votes will be rolled
to the end of the meeting.
I now recognize myself for opening remarks.
Welcome to today's markup to discuss six bipartisan bills
that address the various needs of Main Street America. Frankly
put, our nation's small businesses, entrepreneurs, and
innovators have faced some of the strongest economic headwinds
in recent memory of the past 2 years. Here on this Committee,
it is our job to be the strongest advocate for small businesses
as they are the heart of each of our communities and employers
of nearly 62 million Americans. That is why our work here is so
important and why we must get our economy back on track and our
workforce motivated.
Before us today are bills that support our veterans,
entrepreneurs, make common sense oversight changes to the 7(a)
Loan Program, alleviate the labor shortage crisis, and enhance
workforce development in our company. All four of these topics
have been discussed widely by our Members and I am proud that
our hearings are resulting in legislative action. Five of the
six bills we are considering today passed the House last
Congress with resounding support, and I am proud that we are
starting this process today so we can get them across the
finish line and hopefully signed into law.
I want to thank our Members for bringing these bills
forward as they represent the work and devotion of our
Committee as a whole, as well as the Ranking Member and her
staff for helping us to come together with this bipartisan
package of bills.
With that I yield to the Ranking Member Velazquez for her
opening statement.
Ms. VELAZQUEZ. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you for
holding this markup to discuss six bipartisan bills that will
go a long way to help our nation's 33 million small businesses
and exercise our oversight of the SBA.
All but one of these bills unanimously passed through our
Committee in the previous year and on suspension with
overwhelming bipartisan support. Two of the bills under
consideration today strengthen the oversight of 7(a) loan
agents to help address some of our workforce challenges that
are especially acute for small businesses and to provide
service members and veterans the dedicated focus on
entrepreneurial development and contracting assistance.
Today's legislation showcases this Committee's bipartisan
tradition to enact legislation that fosters a nurturing
environment for small businesses, as well as conduct rigorous
oversight on SBA's programs.
To that end, I am pleased to lend my support to these bills
and I hope that this is a sign of more bipartisan work to come.
Small businesses depend on it. They play a critical role in the
growth of our economy by creating jobs and supporting our local
communities. They are innovative and resilient but face
challenges that we must be committed to solving together.
That is why it is important that we are able to come
together today and take steps to help small businesses address
some of these challenges and celebrate all the good they do for
this nation, particularly our transitioning service members and
veterans.
I look forward to our discussion and I yield back.
Chairman WILLIAMS. Thank you, Ranking Member Velazquez.
Does any other Member seek recognition for the purpose of
making an opening statement?
Seeing none, we will now move to consideration of the first
bill.
H.R. 1644
The first bill we will mark up today is H.R. 1644, the 7(a)
Loan Agent Oversight Act introduced by Mr. Meuser and Mr.
Phillips.
I now recognize the bill's sponsor, Mr. Meuser, for an
opening statement on H.R. 1644.
Mr. MEUSER. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
As this Committee has discussed extensively already in this
Congress, it is imperative that the SBA has the oversight
capabilities in place to manage its access to capital programs.
Without accurate information, we cannot perform the oversight
that is needed to safeguard and protect American taxpayer
dollars. This bill, H.R. 1644, the 7(a) Loan Agent Oversight
Act will ensure Congress receives the data it needs to conduct
proper oversight of loan agents that participate in the SBA's
flagship 7(a) lending program. The SBA's Inspector General has
reported that nearly 15 percent of all 7(a) loans include a
loan agent. Unfortunately, the OIG has already reported that
over the last decade there has been more than $335 million in
documented loan agent fraud. H.R. 1644 will provide information
on how many loans have been processed with the assistance of
loan agents and the default rate of loans that are associated
with a loan agent.
Additionally, the legislation requires the SBA to perform a
risk analysis on agents who operate within the program. At the
end of the day, these are the government programs that were
developed to assist American small businesses to obtain access
to capital. Given this important mission, Congress and the SBA
must conduct the appropriate level of oversight. The
information that will be provided to Congress under H.R. 1644
will be paramount as we measure the effectiveness of these
programs and whether the SBA has the correct oversight
requirements in place to administer such a significant program.
As more small businesses utilize the SBA's program, it is
increasingly important for Congress to understand how different
groups assist small businesses and lenders through the lending
process.
Mr. Chairman, I thank you for bringing these bills forward.
I appreciate my colleague, Congressman Phillips, for his
partnership on this. I look forward to working with all
colleagues to ensure the SBA's access to capital programs like
7(a) are serving our small businesses well and we remain good
stewards of taxpayer dollars. And I yield back.
Chairman WILLIAMS. Thank you.
And I would now like to recognize the cosponsor of the
bill, Mr. Phillips, for an opening statement.
Mr. PHILLIPS. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I am pleased to
voice my support for the measure before us, legislation
introduced by my good friend and colleague, Mr. Meuser.
As a cosponsor of the 7(a) Loan Agent Oversight Act, I
thank Mr. Meuser for his leadership and partnership on the
important issue at hand, which is oversight of loan agent
participation in the 7(a) program.
We have heard it for years from the SBA's Office of Credit
Risk Management and the Office of Inspector General that we
can, and must, do more to supervise and track 7(a) loans
generated by third-party loan agents. Although loan agent
activity can make up as much as 11 percent of the entire 7(a)
portfolio, there do remain gaps in SBA's oversight of these
individuals. As Mr. Meuser noted, the legislation would require
OCRM to submit a report to Congress every year detailing the
performance and risk factors with regards to the 7(a) loans
generated through the services of a loan agent. By better
understanding loan agent participation in the program, we can
continue to ensure the integrity of SBA's flagship program, the
protection of taxpayer dollars, and most importantly, the
success of small businesses across the nation.
As those of us on the Committee continue to work in a
thoughtful and bipartisan manner to increase access to capital
for small businesses, it is essential that we provide effective
oversight over the SBA and give it the tools it needs to manage
risk within its loan portfolios.
I look forward to voting in favor of the legislation and
urge the Committee and my colleagues to adopt the measure and
report it favorably to the house. With that I yield back.
Chairman WILLIAMS. Thank you.
Are there any other Members who wish to be recognized for a
statement on H.R. 1644?
Seeing none, I would like----
Ms. VELAZQUEZ. Mr. Chairman?
Chairman WILLIAMS. Yes, ma'am.
Ms. VELAZQUEZ. Yes. I would like to be recognized.
Let me begin by thanking Mr. Meuser, the Chair of Economic
Growth, Tax, and Capital Access Subcommittee and the
Committee's party Ranking Member, Mr. Phillips, for working
together to make sure SBA has the proper oversight in place to
address the increased risk introduced by loan agents in the
7(a) program. Over the years, the Office of Inspector General
has identified increased risk associated with loans originating
through agent activity as a top agency challenge and is a
concern that I shared.
In February 2020, we held a hearing to examine the
management of the Office of Credit Risk Management, which is
responsible for the oversight of SBA lenders and the 7(a)
program. The two bills we are considering today are a direct
result of our Committee's oversight work on this issue and will
enable SBA to monitor loan agent involvement in the 7(a)
program and better manage the risk. In the interim, the IG
reports the SBA has made great progress in addressing this
longstanding challenge. I am pleased with the SBA's progress
and the bipartisan effort we are seeing today to find a common
sense solution. I urge my colleagues to support H.R. 1644.
And Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Chairman WILLIAMS. Okay. Any other Members who wish to be
recognized for a statement on H.R. 1644?
Okay. Seeing non, we will move on. And I want to thank you
for that, Ranking Member. And I now recognize myself to speak
in support of this legislation.
H.R. 1644, the 7(a) Loan Agent Oversight Act is a critical
piece of legislation that would require the Small Business
Administration's Office of Credit Risk Management to submit an
annual report containing specific information related to 7(a)
loan agents. Plain and simple, this bill is about providing
common sense accountability and protections for the American
taxpayer and Main Street America.
I want to thank my colleague from Pennsylvania, Mr. Meuser,
for introducing this bill, as well as the gentleman from
Minnesota, Mr. Phillips, for cosponsoring this important piece
of legislation, and I urge my colleagues to support H.R. 1644.
If there is no further discussion, the Committee now moves
to consideration of H.R. 1644.
The clerk will report the bill.
The CLERK. H.R. 1644, to amend the Small Business Act----
Chairman WILLIAMS. Without objection, H.R. 1644 is
considered as read and open for amendment.
Does anyone wish to offer an amendment?
Okay. Seeing none, the question is now on adoption of H.R.
1644 and ordering it favorably reported to the House.
All those in favor, say aye.
All those opposed, say no.
In the opinion of the Chair, the ayes have it and H.R. 1644
is agreed to and ordered favorably to the House.
Mr. MEUSER. Mr. Chairman?
Chairman WILLIAMS. Yes?
Mr. MEUSER. I do request a recorded vote.
Chairman WILLIAMS. All right. A recorded vote has been
requested. And pursuant to Committee Rule 13 and House Rule 11,
further proceedings on the bill are postponed.
H.R. 1651
The next bill we will mark up today is H.R. 1651, the Small
Business 7(a) Loan Agent Transparency Act, also introduced by
Mr. Phillips and Mr. Meuser.
I now recognize the bill's sponsor, Mr. Phillips, for an
opening statement on H.R. 1651.
Mr. PHILLIPS. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I am pleased to
speak in support of my bill, the Small Business 7(a) Loan Agent
Transparency Act.
Over the past few weeks, this Committee has engaged in some
spirited debate about the future of SBA's Capital Access
programs. Regardless of where we all stand on SBA's proposed
changes to the 7(a) and 504 Loan Programs, I know that we all
understand the importance of SBA continuing to provide access
to capital for small businesses. The 7(a) program is the SBA's
flagship capital access program, providing over $25 billion in
working capital to small businesses in the last year alone. The
7(a) program is a staple of the small business lending
ecosystem reaching those who may not otherwise be able to
obtain a loan for their businesses. Notably, the program aims
to carry out its critical mission at no cost to the taxpayer.
Let me say that again. At no cost to the taxpayer.
And that brings me to the legislation before us. As I
mentioned earlier, up to 11 percent of the entire 7(a)
portfolio can be generated through loan agents who are third-
party intermediaries that connect borrowers with SBA lenders
and provide them with loan application services, usually for a
fee. Despite their significant presence in the 7(a) program,
OCRM lacks the capability to uniquely identify and
systematically monitor loan agent activity. Instead, OCRM is
left to rely on self-reporting lender reviews to track the
participation of 7(a) agents who are responsible for processing
billions in taxpayer dollars.
We know this dynamic adds potential uncertainty to the 7(a)
program. As OIG has identified, increased risk introduced by
loan agents is one of the agency's biggest challenges. Although
SBA has made progress in its oversight efforts, there is more
that can and should be done to limit exposure in the 7(a)
portfolio and maintain its integrity and reliability for small
businesses in need of capital.
The Small Business 7(a) Loan Agent Transparency Act takes
three simple steps to improve SBA's oversight of loan agent
participation in the 7(a) program.
First, it requires that OCRM create a mandatory
registration system to uniquely identify loan agents who
participate in the 7(a) program.
Second, it requires OCRM to establish an accompanying
database to track the services offered by 7(a) loan agents and
their performance within the 7(a) portfolio.
And lastly, it authorizes OCRM and the SBA Lender Oversight
Commission to take enforcement action against 7(a) loan agents.
This legislation is straightforward, it is bipartisan, and most
of all, common sense, and adopting it will help us take a
crucial step towards strengthening the 7(a) program.
I want to thank the Chairman and Ranking Member for their
collaboration in drafting the legislation, and to my friend,
Mr. Meuser, for his participation on this issue.
I once again urge my colleagues to vote in favor of the
legislation, and I hope to see it reported favorably to the
House.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. And with that I yield back.
Chairman WILLIAMS. Thank you. And I would now like to
recognize the cosponsor of the bill, Mr. Meuser, for an opening
statement.
Mr. MEUSER. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And as we examine
access to capital for small businesses, it is imperative that
we also look at the SBA's existing 7(a) loan program. As we
are, I do want to very much thank my friend and colleague from
Minnesota, Mr. Phillips, for working on the role of loan agents
within this program. Mr. Phillips introduced H.R. 1651, the
Small Business 7(a) Loan Agent Transparency Act which addresses
concerns presented to us by the SBA's Inspector General. Mr.
Phillips's bill, H.R. 1651, takes the steps to ensure the SBA
contract the role of loan agents within the SBA's largest
traditional lending program.
I do look forward to working in a bipartisan manner to
ensure the SBA has the correct level of oversight in place for
the growing population of agents within its flagship 7(a) loan
program.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Chairman WILLIAMS. Thank you.
And are there any other Members who wish to be recognized
for a statement on H.R. 1651?
Seeing none, I would like to recognize the Ranking Member
to speak on the bill.
Ms. VELAZQUEZ. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I commend Mr. Phillips and Mr. Meuser for their bipartisan
work on H.R. 1651, the Small Business 7(a) Loan Agent
Transparency Act. The 7(a) program is SBA's largest traditional
lending program. It provides access to capital for small
businesses that cannot find it elsewhere.
In Fiscal Year 2022, SBA approved more than 47,000 SBA
loans totaling more than $25 billion. Loan agents are an
integral part of the 7(a) program, oftentimes facilitating
access to capital by connecting borrowers with SBA lenders or
by offering other products.
As reliance on loan agents increases, it is essential that
the agency manage their involvement to minimize fraud.
Competent loan agents can screen borrowers, help prepare forms,
and better reach underserved communities, but dishonest agents
can cast a stain on the 7(a) program, hurting borrowers and
lenders alike. That is why I am pleased to support the bill
before us today, which requires SBA to establish a registration
system that collects data on 7(a) loan agents to better track
and evaluate the performance of loans generated through loan
agent activity.
I urge the Committee to adopt this measure and I yield
back, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman WILLIAMS. Thank you for that.
And I now recognize myself to speak in support of this
legislation.
H.R. 1651, the Small Business 7(a) Loan Agent Transparency
Act continues this Committee's efforts to ensure proper
safeguards are in place at the SBA to protect taxpayers and to
small businesses that rely on the longevity of the program.
This bill would enact new oversight of the 7(a) loan program by
establishing a registration system for 7(a) agents and this
change will allow for greater transparency to root out bad
actors in the system.
Once again, I want to thank my distinguished colleague from
Minnesota, Mr. Phillips, for introducing this bill, as well as
my good friend from Pennsylvania, Mr. Meuser, for cosponsoring
it.
I urge my colleagues to support H.R. 1651.
If there is no further discussion, the Committee now moves
to consideration of H.R. 1651.
The clerk will read the report.
The CLERK. H.R. 1651, to amend the Small Business Act----
Chairman WILLIAMS. Without objection, H.R. 1651 is
considered as read and open for amendment.
Does anyone wish to offer an amendment?
Seeing none, the question now is adoption of H.R. 1651 and
ordering it in favor of the report of the House.
All those in favor, say aye.
All those opposed, say no.
In the opinion of the Chair, the ayes have it. H.R. 1651 is
agreed to and ordered favorably to the House.
Mr. MEUSER. Mr. Chairman?
Chairman WILLIAMS. Yes, sir, Mr. Meuser.
Mr. MEUSER. I request a recorded vote.
Chairman WILLIAMS. A recorded vote has been requested
pursuant to Committee Rule 13 and House Rule 11. Further
proceedings on the bill are postponed.
H.R. 1541
The next bill we will mark up today is H.R. 1541, the Small
Business Workforce Pipeline Act of 2023. This bipartisan
legislature was introduced by Mr. Crow and cosponsored by Mr.
Molinaro, Mr. Thanedar, and Ms. Salazar.
I now recognize one of the bill's cosponsors, Mr. Molinaro,
for an opening statement on H.R. 1541.
Mr. MOLINARO. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I am proud to have introduced the Small Business Workforce
Pipeline Act alongside my colleagues on both sides of the
aisle, including Mr. Thanedar and Ms. Salazar. This bipartisan
legislation seeks to address an issue that affects communities
all across America and certainly throughout Upstate New York,
the part of New York State I represent.
This will address workforce shortages for local small
businesses by directing small business development centers to
establish and facilitate the implementation of apprenticeship
and training programs for small businesses. We know that we
need to improve workforce development for our nation's small
businesses, and this bill will help address the issues that
continue to hold main street back. Certainly, as we all travel
around our districts as I do mine, we continue to hear from
small business owners on how they cannot find enough people to
work. We had the opportunity of one of my constituents, Mr.
Bruno Schickel to present just a month ago before a hearing of
this Committee. As the owner of Schickel Construction in
Ithaca, New York, he told us as many contractors and
construction companies have explained, it is becoming
increasingly more difficult to recruit skilled employees.
I look forward, Mr. Chairman to the swift passage of this
bill. I thank my colleagues on both sides of the aisle and
thank you, Mr. Chairman, for your work on this important issue
and this piece of legislation.
And with that I yield back.
Chairman WILLIAMS. Thank you.
I would now like to recognize the cosponsor of the bill,
Mr. Thanedar, for an opening statement.
Mr. THANEDAR. Thank you, Mr. Chair. I also thank
Representative Crow and Representative Molinaro, and
Representative Salazar for working on this great bill. I am
here to support H.R. 1541.
Small businesses face great challenges, including hiring,
recruiting, and retaining qualified workers. In my district and
across our nation, small businesses are struggling to find the
skilled workforce they need to thrive. However, H.R. 1541 can
make a significant difference in addressing this issue. H.R.
1541 is a forward-thinking bill that aims to create
opportunities through apprenticeship networks. These networks
will be established in collaboration with leading universities,
colleges, development agencies, the private sector, and other
key shareholders. By bringing together these diverse entities,
we can leverage their expertise, resources, and connections to
build a robust workforce development infrastructure. One of the
greatest advantages of this bill is its focus on providing
alternative pathways to success and a dignified career.
As the cost of college education continues to rise,
apprenticeships offer an attractive and viable option for
individuals seeking meaningful employment. By combining on-the-
job training with classroom instruction, apprenticeships equip
workers with the skills and experience needed to excel in their
chosen fields. Moreover, this bill has the potential to uplift
underserved communities and help individuals escape poverty. By
providing apprenticeships with good wages and opportunities for
career growth, we can empower individuals to improve their
lives and contribute to the economic prosperity of their
communities.
Supporting H.R. 1541 is not just an endorsement of small
businesses but a commitment to fostering economic growth,
reducing unemployment, and strengthening our communities. This
bill will create a workforce pipeline that connects small
businesses with the talented individuals they need to succeed.
By investing in workforce development through apprenticeships,
we are investing in the future prosperity of our nation. I am
proud to cosponsor H.R. 1541.
Thank you, and I yield back.
Chairman WILLIAMS. Are there any other Members who wish to
be recognized for a statement on H.R. 1541?
Seeing none, I would like to recognize, oh, Mr. Crane, I am
sorry.
Mr. CRANE. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I understand the shortage of qualified workers that we have
out there right now as a former entrepreneur. I have many
friends that are entrepreneurs, and this is one of the number
one issues they deal with.
That being said, when I talk to them about the causation
and the reason they are having a tough time finding qualified
workers never once have I heard any of them say that it is
because the SBA does not have an apprenticeship program. I want
to point out that it is my opinion that this town, the
bureaucracies up here do not do anything well, and so it does
concern me when we start tasking the SBA to do jobs like this
because there is really no accountability up here. Even if we
do have oversight studies and whatnot, when we find out that
these groups are not doing what we tasked them to do, nobody
ever gets fired. And so it is concerning to me. I understand
the intent of this. I think it is great that it is bipartisan,
but I just have concern that this is just going to be one more
of these programs where nothing actually gets done, small
businesses do not get help. If we want to help small
businesses, we need to really improve the economy. We need to
quit pumping you know tens of billions of dollars into the
economy that we do not have causing record inflation. Those are
the types of things that actually will help small businesses.
I yield back. Thank you.
Chairman WILLIAMS. Thank you, Mr. Crane.
Are there any other Members who wish to be recognized for a
statement on H.R. 1541?
Okay. Seeing none, I would like to recognize the Ranking
Member to speak on the bill.
Ms. VELAZQUEZ. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And I would like to correct for the record that SBA is not
given responsibility in creating an apprenticeship program.
This is for the network of Small Business Development Centers
across the nation, and they are stakeholders that work in
partnership with the SBA.
I am pleased to support H.R. 1541, the Small Business
Workforce Pipeline Act, which was introduced by Representatives
Crow, Molinaro, Thanedar, and Salazar. This bill allows SBDCs,
Small Business Development Centers, to assist small firms in
establishing job training and apprenticeship programs. ``Earn
while you learn'' programs are proven ways for small businesses
to attract and retain qualified workers. By empowering our
nation's SBDCs to share job training and apprenticeship
information from federal agencies with small employers, we can
address one of the most pressing programs facing many
businesses today.
Small firms have been hit particularly hard by tightening
labor markets. As the recovery continues, unemployment drops
and job openings grow. I constantly hear from the smaller
employers in my district that it is getting harder than ever to
recruit and retain qualified workers. The legislation will take
an important step to help American workers gain new skills and
assist small businesses in finding qualified workers.
I want to thank Mr. Crow, Mr. Molinaro, Mr. Thanedar, and
Ms. Salazar for their bipartisan work on this bill. I urge
Members to support this bill and I yield back.
Chairman WILLIAMS. Thank you for that.
And I now recognize myself to speak in support of this
legislation. H.R. 1541, the Small Business Workforce Pipeline
Act of 2023 expands the services of Small Business Development
Centers to include the information on how small businesses can
establish and improve work-based learning and apprenticeship
programs.
Just this past month, Mr. Molinaro led an Innovation
Entrepreneurship and Workforce Development Subcommittee hearing
highlighting the serious labor shortage issues facing far too
many small businesses across this country.
I want to thank Mr. Crow for introducing this bill, as well
as my distinguished Committee colleagues, Representatives
Molinaro, Thanedar, Salazar for cosponsoring this bill.
To close, I urge my colleagues to support H.R. 1541.
If there is no further discussion, the Committee now moves
to consideration of H.R. 1541.
The clerk will report the bill.
The CLERK. H.R. 1541, to amend the Small Business Act to
include requirements----
Chairman WILLIAMS. Without objection, H.R. 1541 is
considered as read and open for amendment.
Does anyone wish to offer an amendment?
There is no amendment at the desk so we will briefly pause
while staff--no, I am sorry.
Seeing none, the question is now on adoption of H.R. 1541
and ordering it be favorably reported to the House.
All those in favor, say aye.
All those opposed, say no.
In the opinion of the Chair, the ayes have it and H.R. 1541
is agreed to and ordered favorably to the House.
Mr. CROW. Mr. Chairman, I would like to request a recorded
vote.
Chairman WILLIAMS. A recorded vote has been requested, and
pursuant to Committee Rule 13 and House Rule 11, further
proceedings on the bill are postponed.
H.R. 1730
The next bill we will mark up today is H.R. 1730,
Supporting Small Business and Career and Technical Education
Act of 2023.
I introduced this bipartisan legislation along with Ms.
Gluesenkamp Perez, Mr. Allen, Mr. Fitzpatrick, and Mr.
Magaziner.
I now recognize myself for an opening statement on H.R.
1730.
H.R. 1730, Supporting Small Business and Career and
Technical Education Act of 2023 ensures federal resources are
being used to support entrepreneurs and connect businesses with
qualified employees. This legislation directs the Small
Business Development Centers and Women's Business Centers to
assist small businesses in hiring graduates from career and
technical education programs. Additionally, this legislation
supports career and technical education graduates by directing
the SBDCs and WBCs to assist them in starting a small business.
There are too many young people who feel like they have no
choice but to attend a 4-year college and incur tens of
thousands of dollars in debt even though their skills and
interests do not fit the typical 4-year college education.
College is not for everyone and this bill helps those people
that choose an alternative educational path to get employed or
start their own small business. I believe this legislation will
help engage with the career and technical education community
to support small business growth.
And I want to thank my distinguished committee colleagues,
Ms. Gluesenkamp Perez for cosponsoring this legislation.
And to close, I urge my colleagues to support the bill.
And I would now like to co-sponsor of the bill, Ms.
Gluesenkamp Perez for an opening statement.
Ms. GLUESENKAMP PEREZ. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thank
you for including this bill in today's markup.
Like the Chairman, I came from the automotive industry. He
comes from the dealership side; I come from the independent
side. And before coming here I owned an auto repair and a
machine shop.
My district is home to a number of auto technician and
technology training programs, including the programs at Lower
Columbia College and Clark College. These are family wage jobs
that you do not need a 4-year degree to get into. You see a guy
driving down the road with a big truck, nice truck, he has got
a snowmobile, does not have roommates. That is a guy that is
working in the trades.
One of the best parts of my job is getting to go to these
programs and visiting and encouraging these young people in the
path that they have chosen. And the reality is we are desperate
for technicians. By 2024, we are going to be about 600,000
technicians short in America. So there is a desperate need.
The program is that after graduating it can be hard for
these students to find the right fit. It is true that if you
are a big player, you have got a lot of employees, you can
probably staff a job fair and go down there and recruit. But if
you are a Mom and Pop shop struggling with all of the
bureaucracy and all the things that it takes to run a small
business, you cannot just take a day off to do recruitment.
And what is really important about this bill is that it
encourages the Small Business Development Centers and the
Women's Business Centers to provide resources to help the
smaller guys, the growing guys, to get in there and find the
right fit. Find the right employees.
And one of the things I love about this bill is that it
also works to direct these centers to help CTE graduates start
their own businesses. So many of these people are brilliant
entrepreneurs. They are hungry to grow our economy and succeed
in their dreams of owning their own shop. But the financial
hurdles it takes to open a small business are almost impossible
to clear.
My husband spent 10 years laying in the street, jacking up
cars, fixing them up, building up his own business, his own
clientele. A lot of people give up in that time. This bill
helps ensure that the resources come to small businesses, to
the trades, and start their own businesses and be successful in
that.
So for all the talk that we do about the American dream, I
think it is really encouraging that this Committee is putting
the resources and the elbow grease behind actually supporting
career and technical programs succeed and find the right fit in
their hiring and start their own businesses.
So thank you, sincerely, Mr. Chairman, for your leadership
in this. And I yield back.
Chairman WILLIAMS. Thank you.
And are there any other Members who wish to be recognized
for a statement on H.R. 1730?
All right. Seeing none, I would like to recognize the
Ranking Member to speak on the bill.
Ms. VELAZQUEZ. Thank you, Mr. Williams.
I really commend you and Ms. Gluesenkamp in your efforts to
allow SBA resource partners to connect small employers with
graduates of career and technical education programs and also
give graduates the tools to launch their own enterprises. While
a college education is a sure and fast way to secure a
successful career in today's global economy, it may not be the
most prudent part for every high school graduate.
CTE programs offer viable alternatives by training students
with a wide variety of skills oftentimes tailoring the
curriculum to the workforce needs of the local community.
I want to thank Mr. Williams and Ms. Gluesenkamp Perez for
their meaningful work on this bill.
And I urge Members to support this bipartisan piece of
legislation. And I yield back my time.
Chairman WILLIAMS. Thank you for that.
And I once again reiterate my support for this legislation.
If there is no further discussion, the Committee now moves
to consideration of H.R. 1730.
The clerk will report the bill.
The CLERK. H.R. 1730, to amend the Small Business Act to--
--
Chairman WILLIAMS. Without objection, H.R. 1730 is
considered as read and open for amendment.
Does anyone wish to offer an amendment?
Seeing none, the question is now on adoption of H.R. 1730
and ordering it favorably be reported to the House.
All those in favor, say aye.
All those opposed, say no.
In the opinion of the Chair, the ayes have it.
H.R. 1730 is agreed to and ordered favorably to the House.
Mr. ELLZEY. Mr. Chairman, I request a recorded vote.
Chairman WILLIAMS. A roll call vote is ordered.
Pursuant to Committee Rule 13 and House Rule 11, further
proceedings on the bill are postponed.
Before we consider H.R. 1606, I would like to ask unanimous
consent to waive the sponsor of the bill, Mr. Schneider on the
Committee for the purpose of speaking on their legislation.
Ms. VELAZQUEZ. No. Yes.
Chairman WILLIAMS. Without objection, so ordered.
H.R. 1606
Now we mark up H.R. 1606, the Veteran Entrepreneurship
Training Act of 2023.
This bipartisan bill was introduced by Mr. Schneider and
cosponsored by myself, Mr. McGarvey, and Mr. Ellzey.
I now recognize myself for an opening statement.
H.R. 1606, the Veteran Entrepreneurship Training Act of
2023 that authorized the Boots to Business program which helps
transitioning service members start and grow their own
businesses. After dedicating their lives to protecting the
freedom of all Americans, it is critical we give our veterans
the tools and resources to be successful when transitioning to
civilian life. Veterans are natural leaders and the dedication
necessary to thrive in the private sector with the right
training. I was fortunate enough to see firsthand the work this
program does when I visited Fort Hood with Administrator Guzman
this past March. I am proud to have had the opportunity to work
with my colleagues on this bipartisan legislation to improve
the Boots to Business program and I want to thank my
distinguished Committee colleagues, Representatives McGarvey
and Ellzey for cosponsoring this legislation.
And to close, I encourage my colleagues to support H.R.
1606.
I would now like to recognize the Democratic sponsor of the
bill, Mr. McGarvey, for an opening statement.
Mr. MCGARVEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman, for your leadership, for your support of H.R. 1606,
and for including it in today's markup. I am proud to join you
and Representative Ellzey as the sponsor of this bill, which is
led by our colleague, Representative Brad Schneider.
In addition to this Committee, I serve on the Veterans
Committee, and we talk all the time about the importance of
having strong systems to ensure smooth transition from service
to civilian life. SBA's successful Boots to Business program
plays a crucial role in that warm handoff, supporting our brave
men and women as they return home.
Members of our military and their spouses have the
entrepreneurial spirit and skills necessary to become
successful business owners and this program provides critical
help in unlocking their potential. I look forward to its
success for years to come with this authorization.
I encourage all my colleagues to support this bill and
yield back.
Chairman WILLIAMS. I would now like to recognize the other
leading Republican, Mr. Ellzey, for an opening statement.
Mr. ELLZEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And I want to say
thank you, Mr. Chairman, Mr. Schneider, and Mr. McGarvey, for
leading on this bill.
The bipartisan Boots to Business program is an important
step toward helping military veterans start and grow
businesses. Helping the veteran will obviously help the entire
family of the veteran. Going from active duty to veteran status
is difficult because the service member is leaving the support
system of their military family. But the Boots to Business
program will help show a path forward toward success.
As I have said many times, the military does a great job
training our service members to do their military job. They are
trained to be the most lethal force on the planet and how to
best defend and protect the people of the United States. But
the military does not do a good job at all of training them to
be civilians. The Boots to Business program will help to fill
that gap. Helping veterans be successful in civilian lie is
critical for their well-being and the well-being of their
entire family and the communities where they live.
I look forward to this bill passing the House, the Senate,
and being signed into law by the president. I yield back.
Chairman WILLIAMS. I would now like to recognize the
Democratic sponsor of the bill, Mr. Schneider, for an opening
statement.
Mr. SCHNEIDER. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And let me again
thank you for allowing me to join you today. Having served 3
terms on this Committee, it is always a joy to be back in this
room and with this group.
I also want to thank the Committee for its consideration
today of this legislation, the Veteran Entrepreneurship
Training Act of 2023, which I am very proud to introduce with
Chairman Williams, Mr. McGarvey, and Mr. Ellzey. And I look
forward to, as was just noted, seeing it pass the House, the
Senate, and be signed by the president.
As was noted, our military are the best and the brightest
we have to offer. They reflect who we are as a nation. They
serve in places far away, laying their lives on the line to
protect us and protect our freedoms. Success in their endeavors
depends to a great extent on their natural leadership
abilities, their innovation, their entrepreneurship, taking
uncertain circumstances and finding ways to get things done.
This is the exact same success that we are looking for in
today's business leaders and why this program is so important.
The skills our veterans learn and develop in the military have
true application to what we are looking for in the private
sector. And the Boots to Business program helps translate those
skills. It helps our veterans translate those skills as they
begin civilian life.
Our bill builds on proven outcomes by codifying the already
successful program. In fact, more than 100,000 veterans and
their spouses have already benefitted from this program since
2013.
According to the Department of Labor, in April, the April
Jobs Report, the unemployment rate among veterans is a mere 2.2
percent compared to 3.4 for the rest of the U.S. population.
Historic lows. This is in no small part due to the transition
programs like Boots to Business that are helping our veterans
move into their lives. Through the Boots to Business program,
service members and their spouses enroll in a multiweek in-
depth course. This course teaches participants everything from
the process of market research to the art of securing funding
for a new business. By codifying the Boots to Business program
into law, we can ensure future service members are able to take
advantage of the program so many have already benefitted from.
I appreciate Chairman Williams co-leading this bill and
working with me to get it through the finish line. Over the
years, I have heard from many service people turn small
business owners who have directly benefitted from training
provided by the Boots to Business program. With so many
communities seeming to replace the businesses that did not
survive the pandemic, this program is even more important.
I am pleased that this bill has also enjoyed bipartisan
support and I urge all my colleagues on both sides of the aisle
to show their support by voting in favor of it today.
Once again, I want to thank the Committee staff who have
drafted this legislation, and my colleague, Roger Williams. I
look forward to seeing this legislation go one step closer to
being finally signed into law.
And with that I yield back.
Chairman WILLIAMS. Thank you.
And are there any other Members who wish to be recognized
for a statement on the bill?
Seeing none, I would like to recognize the Ranking Member
to speak on the bill.
Ms. VELAZQUEZ. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
In light of the upcoming Memorial Day holiday, it is an
honor to support the Veteran Entrepreneurship Training Act that
greatly benefits our nation's veterans.
Representative Schneider has been a long-time champion of
this bill which codifies the SBA's Boots to Business program to
help transitioning service members launch and grow their own
small businesses. And I applaud Chairman Williams for his
leadership as well as the other two co-sponsors,
Representatives McGarvey and Ellzey.
As Members of this Committee know, starting a business is
not for the faint of heart. It takes courage, perseverance,
resourcefulness, and leadership to launch a successful
enterprise. Many of these qualities are inherent in those that
serve our country. Despite their skills and expertise, many
service members have difficulty transitioning to civilian life.
A recent survey conducted by the Syracuse University
Institute for Veterans and Military Families found 44 percent
expressed difficulty with transitioning from military life and
53 percent said they did not know what they wanted to do as
civilians. Entrepreneurship is one path service members can
pursue to make the transition a success.
In Fiscal Year 2022, nearly 24,000 veterans, transitioning
service members, and military spouses received Boots to
Business entrepreneurship program. The program has been a
shining example of how the SBA and its resource partners can
make sure the American dream is accessible to the valued men
and women of our military as well as veterans and military
spouses.
That is why I urge all the Members today to support this
bill.
Thank you. I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman WILLIAMS. Thank you for that. And I once again
voice my support for this bill.
If there is no further discussion, the Committee now moves
to consideration of H.R. 1606.
The clerk will report the bill.
The CLERK. H.R. 1606, to amend the Small Business Act----
Chairman WILLIAMS. Without objection, H.R. 1606 is
considered as read and open for amendment.
Does anyone wish to offer an amendment?
All right. Seeing none, the question is now on adoption of
H.R. 1606 and ordering it favorably be reported to the House.
All those in favor, say aye.
Opposed, say no.
In the opinion of the Chair, the ayes have it and H.R. 1606
is----
Mr. ELLZEY. Mr. Chairman? Request to record a vote.
Chairman WILLIAMS. All right.
And a roll vote is ordered.
And so pursuant to Committee Rule 13 and House 11, further
proceedings on the bill are postponed.
H.R. 3511
The final bill we will mark up today is H.R. 3511, Service
Disabled Veteran Opportunities and Small Business Act
introduced by Mr. LaLota and Mr. McGarvey.
I now recognize sponsor of legislation, Mr. LaLota, for an
opening statement.
Mr. LALOTA. Thank you, Chairman Williams, for recognizing
this important piece of legislation to help the veteran
community specifically service disabled veterans. Those who
have served our nation in uniform, putting our great country
before themselves, deserve our utmost thanks, support, and
respect. We owe an even greater debt of gratitude to our
service-disabled veterans.
As service-disabled veterans transition to civilian life
and look to enter the government contracting space, this
Committee should identify and implement ways to make that
transition earlier. Proudly, Mr. Chairman, this bill does just
that.
The Service-Disabled Veteran Opportunities and Small
Business Act provides greater opportunities to our nation's
disabled veterans by allowing for additional contracts to be
awarded to them through the small business administration and
Office of Veterans Business Development. Currently, agencies
must set a goal to procure at least 3 percent of their
contracting dollars with service-disabled, veteran-owned small
businesses. Unfortunately, many agencies are failing to meet
this statutory requirement. In fact, the entire federal
government failed to meet this 3 percent goal to subcontract to
service disabled veterans.
This legislation helps to solve that problem by requiring
the Small Business Administration and the Office of the
Veterans Business Development to provide training to federal
agency officials who fall below that 3 percent goal on how to
increase the number of contracts awarded to service-disabled
veterans who own or control a small business. Together, the SBA
and the Office of Veterans Business Development will issue
guidance on the best practices on how to increase the number of
contracts to our nation's heroes.
I urge my colleagues to support the Service-Disabled
Veteran Opportunities in Small Business Act and I yield back.
Chairman WILLIAMS. Thank you, Mr. LaLota.
And I would now like to recognize the other sponsor of the
bill, Mr. McGarvey, for an opening statement.
Mr. MCGARVEY. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. Again, I
appreciate you helping bring this bill forward. Thank you to
Representative LaLota. Thank you, Representative LaLota, for
your service, for your leadership on this, for always working
to help our veterans.
This weekend we are going to observe Memorial Day and
remember those who gave as President Lincoln said, ``The last
full measure of devotion for our country.'' We will take Monday
to honor those who made the ultimate sacrifice, but this
Congress should work every single day to serve those who served
us, especially those who return home with the wounds of their
service, both visible and invisible.
So I am proud to join Representative LaLota as a sponsor of
the Service Disabled Veteran Opportunities in Small Business
Act, and I am grateful it was included in today's markup.
This bill would require the SBA to issue guidance for
agencies to better meet contracting goals for service-disabled,
veteran-owned small businesses and provide training for each
agency that fails to achieve the goals. The bill also requires
a report to Congress detailing the agencies that do not meet
their goals so this Committee can better understand what works
and what does not and continue to improve business
opportunities for service-disabled business owners.
I urge my colleagues to support the bill. I look forward to
its passage today.
I yield back.
Chairman WILLIAMS. Are there any other Members who wish to
be recognized for a statement on H.R. 3511?
All right. Seeing none, I would like to recognize the
Ranking Member to speak on the bill.
Ms. VELAZQUEZ. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I am pleased to lend my support to the Service-Disabled
Veteran Opportunities in Small Business Act, which is being led
by Mr. LaLota, Chairman of the Subcommittee on Contracting and
Infrastructure, and Mr. McGarvey, Ranking Member of the
Innovation, Entrepreneurship, and Workforce Development
Subcommittee.
In an effort to increase the number of contracts to
service-disabled, veteran-owned small businesses, the bill
requires SBA to issue guidance for each agency to better meet
the current SDVOSB goal and provide training for agencies that
come up short. Building our small business base within the
federal procurement space is a vital component of providing the
government with the best products and services, while also
investing in the economic growth of America. Holding agencies
accountable for meeting government set-aside goals and
adequately training and funding our contracting personnel can
deliver tangible results to the small contractors fighting for
limited opportunities.
Thank you to both Mr. LaLota and Mr. McGarvey for your
commitment to our nation's veterans and your bipartisan work to
find a practical approach to increase the awards to service-
disabled, veteran-owned small business owners.
I urge a yes vote and yield back.
Chairman WILLIAMS. Thank you.
I now recognize myself to speak in support of this
legislation, H.R. 3511, the Service-Disabled, Veteran-
Opportunities in Small Business Act would amend the Small
Business Act to require training to increase the number of
contracts awarded to small businesses that are owned and
operated by service-disabled veterans.
Our veterans have fought bravely and served our country
with honor, and they deserve our support as they transition
from military to civilian life, especially as they are looking
to break into the government contracting space.
I want to thank my distinguished colleagues for introducing
this bill and urge all my colleagues to support.
If there is no further discussion, the Committee now moves
to consideration of H.R. 3511.
The clerk will read and report the bill.
The CLERK. H.R. 3511, to amend the Small Business Act----
Chairman WILLIAMS. Without objection, H.R. 3511 is
considered as read and open for amendment.
Does anyone wish to offer an amendment?
Seeing none, the question is now on adoption of H.R. 3511,
is agreed to and ordered favorably reported to the House.
All those in favor, say aye.
All those opposed, say no.
In the opinion of the Chair, the ayes have it.
H.R. 3511 is agreed to and ordered favorably to the House.
Mr. LALOTA. Mr. Chairman, I request a recorded vote,
please.
Chairman WILLIAMS. All right. A recorded vote has been
requested. So a roll call vote is ordered pursuant to Committee
Rule 13 and House Rule 11. Further proceedings on the bill are
postponed. The Committee stands in recess. Subject to the call
of the Chair, we will resume later today, 2:30 p.m., to vote on
the outstanding business.
[Recess]
Chairman WILLIAMS. The Committee will now resume
consideration of the bills on which roll call votes were
requested and postponed.
There are six postponed recorded votes and we will start
with H.R. 1644, the 7(a) Loan Agent Oversight Act.
The question now is on adopting H.R. 1644 and ordering it
favorably reported to the House.
The clerk will call the roll.
The CLERK. Mr. Luetkemeyer?
Mr. LUETKEMEYER. Yes.
The CLERK. Mr. Luetkemeyer votes aye.
Mr. Stauber?
[No response.]
Mr. Meuser?
Mr. MEUSER. Aye.
The CLERK. Mr. Meuser votes aye.
Ms. Van Duyne?
Mr. VAN DUYNE. Aye.
The CLERK. Ms. Van Duyne votes aye.
Ms. Salazar?
[No response.]
Mr. Mann?
[No response.]
Mr. Ellzey?
Mr. ELLZEY. Aye.
The CLERK. Mr. Ellzey votes aye.
Mr. Molinaro?
[No response.]
Mr. Alford?
[No response.]
Mr. Crane?
Mr. CRANE. Aye.
The CLERK. Mr. Crane votes aye.
Mr. Bean?
[No response.]
Mr. Hunt?
Mr. HUNT. Yes.
The CLERK. Mr. Hunt votes aye.
Mr. LaLota?
Mr. LALOTA. Aye.
The CLERK. Mr. LaLota votes aye.
Mr. Golden?
[No response.]
Mr. Mfume?
Mr. MFUME. Mr. Mfume votes aye.
The CLERK. Mr. Mfume votes aye.
Mr. Phillips?
[No response.]
Mr. Landsman?
Mr. LANDSMAN. Yes.
The CLERK. Mr. Landsman votes aye.
Mr. McGarvey?
[No response.]
Ms. Gluesenkamp Perez?
Ms. GLUESENKAMP PEREZ. Aye.
The CLERK. Ms. Gluesenkamp Perez votes aye.
Ms. Scholten?
[No response.]
Mr. Thanedar?
Mr. THANEDAR. Aye.
The CLERK. Mr. Thanedar votes aye.
Ms. Chu?
Ms. CHU. Aye.
The CLERK. Ms. Chu votes aye.
Ms. Davids?
[No response.]
Mr. Pappas?
Mr. PAPPAS. Aye.
The CLERK. Mr. Pappas votes aye.
Ranking Member Velazquez?
Ms. VELAZQUEZ. Aye.
The CLERK. Ranking Member Velazquez votes aye.
Mr. Chairman?
Chairman WILLIAMS. Aye.
The CLERK. Mr. Chairman Williams votes aye.
Chairman WILLIAMS. Okay. Are there any other Members who
have not voted or wish to change their vote?
Ms. SALAZAR. I would like to vote.
Mr. ALFORD. Yes, sir.
Chairman WILLIAMS. Okay. For what purpose does the
gentleman seek recognition?
Mr. ALFORD. Mr. Chairman, I would like to vote aye.
The CLERK. Mr. Alford votes aye.
Chairman WILLIAMS. For what purpose does the lady----
Ms. SALAZAR. From Florida.
Chairman WILLIAMS.--from Florida?
Ms. SALAZAR. Yeah. I vote yes.
The CLERK. Ms. Salazar votes aye.
Chairman WILLIAMS. Ms. Davids?
Ms. DAVIDS. Mr. Chairman, I would like to vote aye.
The CLERK. Ms. Davids votes aye.
Chairman WILLIAMS. Mr. Phillips?
Mr. PHILLIPS. Phillips votes aye.
The CLERK. Mr. Phillips votes aye.
Chairman WILLIAMS. Mr. McGarvey?
Mr. MCGARVEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would like to vote
aye.
The CLERK. Mr. McGarvey votes aye.
Chairman WILLIAMS. Ms. Scholten?
Ms. SCHOLTEN. I would like to vote aye.
The CLERK. Ms. Scholten votes aye.
Chairman WILLIAMS. Mr. Golden?
Mr. GOLDEN. Aye.
The CLERK. Mr. Golden votes aye.
Chairman WILLIAMS. Are there any other Members who have not
voted or wish to change their vote?
Okay. The clerk will report.
The CLERK. Mr. Chairman, on that vote 22 ayes and 0 nays.
Chairman WILLIAMS. Thank you.
The motion is agreed to and H.R. 1644 is adopted and will
be reported favorably to the House.
The question now is on adopting H.R. 1651, the 7(a) Loan
Agent Transparency Act and ordering it favorably reported to
the House.
The Clerk will call the roll.
The CLERK. Mr. Luetkemeyer?
Mr. LUETKEMEYER. Yes.
The CLERK. Mr. Luetkemeyer votes aye.
Mr. Stauber?
[No response.]
Mr. Meuser?
Mr. MEUSER. Aye.
The CLERK. Mr. Meuser votes aye.
Ms. Van Duyne?
Mr. VAN DUYNE. Aye.
The CLERK. Ms. Van Duyne votes aye.
Ms. Salazar?
Ms. SALAZAR. Aye.
The CLERK. Ms. Salazar votes aye.
Mr. Mann?
[No response.]
Mr. Ellzey?
Mr. ELLZEY. Ellzey, aye.
The CLERK. Mr. Ellzey votes aye.
Mr. Molinaro?
[No response.]
Mr. Alford?
Mr. ALFORD. Aye.
The CLERK. Mr. Alford votes aye.
Mr. Crane?
Mr. CRANE. Aye.
The CLERK. Mr. Crane votes aye.
Mr. Bean?
[No response.]
Mr. Hunt?
Mr. HUNT. Aye.
The CLERK. Mr. Hunt votes aye.
Mr. LaLota?
Mr. LALOTA. Aye.
The CLERK. Mr. LaLota votes aye.
Mr. Golden?
Mr. GOLDEN. Aye.
The CLERK. Mr. Golden votes aye.
Mr. Mfume?
Mr. MFUME. Mfume votes aye.
The CLERK. Mr. Mfume votes aye.
Mr. Phillips?
[No response.]
Mr. Landsman?
Mr. LANDSMAN. Aye.
The CLERK. Mr. Landsman votes aye.
Mr. McGarvey?
Mr. MCGARVEY. Aye.
The CLERK. Mr. McGarvey votes aye.
Ms. Gluesenkamp Perez?
Ms. GLUESENKAMP PEREZ. Aye.
The CLERK. Ms. Gluesenkamp Perez votes aye.
Ms. Scholten?
[No response.]
Mr. Thanedar?
Mr. THANEDAR. Aye.
The CLERK. Mr. Thanedar votes aye.
Ms. Chu?
Ms. CHU. Aye.
The CLERK. Ms. Chu votes aye.
Ms. Davids?
[No response.]
Mr. Pappas?
[No response.]
Ranking Member Velazquez?
Ms. VELAZQUEZ. Aye.
The CLERK. Ranking Member Velazquez votes aye.
Mr. Chairman Williams?
Chairman WILLIAMS. Aye.
The CLERK. Mr. Chairman Williams votes aye.
Chairman WILLIAMS. Are there any other Members who have not
voted or wish to change their vote?
Mr. PHILLIPS. Mr. Chairman, Mr. Phillips.
Chairman WILLIAMS. Mr. Phillips?
Mr. PHILLIPS. Yeah, I vote aye.
The CLERK. Mr. Phillips votes aye.
Chairman WILLIAMS. Any others?
Okay. The clerk will report.
Mr. Molinaro, how do you vote?
Mr. MOLINARO. Yes, sir. Aye.
Chairman WILLIAMS. Okay. Aye.
Ms. Scholten?
Ms. SCHOLTEN. Yes.
The CLERK. Mr. Molinaro votes yes.
And Ms. Scholten votes yes.
Mr. Chairman, on that vote 21 ayes and 0 nays.
Chairman WILLIAMS. Okay. The motion is agreed to and H.R.
1651 is adopted and will be reported favorably to the House.
The question now is on adopting H.R. 1541, the Small
Business Workforce Pipeline Act of 2023 and ordering it
favorably reported to the House.
The clerk will call the roll.
The CLERK. Mr. Luetkemeyer?
Mr. LUETKEMEYER. Aye.
The CLERK. Mr. Luetkemeyer votes aye.
Mr. Stauber?
[No response.]
Mr. Meuser?
Mr. MEUSER. Aye.
The CLERK. Mr. Meuser votes aye.
Ms. Van Duyne?
Mr. VAN DUYNE. Aye.
The CLERK. Ms. Van Duyne votes aye.
Ms. Salazar?
Ms. SALAZAR. Aye.
The CLERK. Ms. Salazar votes aye.
Mr. Mann?
[No response.]
Mr. Ellzey?
Mr. ELLZEY. Ellzey, aye.
The CLERK. Mr. Ellzey votes aye.
Mr. Molinaro?
Mr. MOLINARO. Aye.
The CLERK. Mr. Molinaro votes aye.
Mr. Alford?
Mr. ALFORD. Aye.
The CLERK. Mr. Alford votes aye.
Mr. Crane?
Mr. CRANE. Nay.
The CLERK. Mr. Crane votes nay.
Mr. Bean?
[No response.]
Mr. Hunt?
Mr. HUNT. Aye.
The CLERK. Mr. Hunt votes aye.
Mr. LaLota?
Mr. LALOTA. Aye.
The CLERK. Mr. LaLota votes aye.
Mr. Golden?
Mr. GOLDEN. Aye.
The CLERK. Mr. Golden votes aye.
Mr. Mfume?
Mr. MFUME. Mfume votes aye.
The CLERK. Mr. Mfume votes aye.
Mr. Phillips?
[No response.]
Mr. Landsman?
Mr. LANDSMAN. Yes.
The CLERK. Mr. Landsman votes aye.
Mr. McGarvey?
Mr. MCGARVEY. Aye.
The CLERK. Mr. McGarvey votes aye.
Ms. Gluesenkamp Perez?
Ms. GLUESENKAMP PEREZ. Aye.
The CLERK. Ms. Gluesenkamp Perez votes aye.
Ms. Scholten?
[No response.]
Mr. Thanedar?
Mr. THANEDAR. Aye.
The CLERK. Mr. Thanedar votes aye.
Ms. Chu?
Ms. CHU. Aye.
The CLERK. Ms. Chu votes aye.
Ms. Davids?
Ms. DAVIDS. Aye.
The CLERK. Ms. Davids votes aye.
Mr. Pappas?
[No response.]
Ranking Member Velazquez?
Ms. VELAZQUEZ. Aye.
The CLERK. Aye, or sorry. The Ranking Member Velazquez
votes aye.
Mr. PHILLIPS. Phillips votes aye.
The CLERK. Mr. Phillips votes aye.
Mr. STAUBER. Stauber votes aye.
The CLERK. Mr. Stauber votes aye.
Chairman WILLIAMS. The Chairman votes aye.
The CLERK. The Chairman votes aye.
Chairman WILLIAMS. Are there any other Members who have not
voted or wish to change their vote?
Okay. The clerk will report.
The CLERK. Mr. Chairman, on that vote 21 ayes and 1 nay.
Chairman WILLIAMS. The vote is agreed to and H.R. 1541 is
adopted and will be reported favorably to the House. The
question now is on adopting H.R. 1730, the Supporting Small
Business and Career and Technical Education Act of 2023, and
ordering it favorably reported to the House.
The clerk will call the roll.
The CLERK. Mr. Luetkemeyer?
Mr. LUETKEMEYER. Aye.
The CLERK. Mr. Luetkemeyer votes aye.
Mr. Stauber?
[No response.]
Mr. Meuser?
Mr. MEUSER. Aye.
The CLERK. Mr. Meuser votes aye.
Ms. Van Duyne?
Mr. VAN DUYNE. Aye.
The CLERK. Ms. Van Duyne votes aye.
Ms. Salazar?
Ms. SALAZAR. Aye.
The CLERK. Ms. Salazar votes aye.
Mr. Mann?
[No response.]
Mr. Ellzey?
Mr. ELLZEY. Ellzey, aye.
The CLERK. Mr. Ellzey votes aye.
Mr. Molinaro?
[No response.]
Mr. Alford?
Mr. ALFORD. Aye.
The CLERK. Mr. Alford votes aye.
Mr. Crane?
Mr. CRANE. Aye.
The CLERK. Mr. Crane votes aye.
Mr. Bean?
[No response.]
Mr. Hunt?
Mr. HUNT. Aye.
The CLERK. Mr. Hunt votes aye.
Mr. LaLota?
Mr. LALOTA. Aye.
The CLERK. Mr. LaLota votes aye.
Mr. Golden?
Mr. GOLDEN. Aye.
The CLERK. Mr. Golden votes aye.
Mr. Mfume?
Mr. MFUME. Mfume votes aye.
The CLERK. Mr. Mfume votes aye.
Mr. Phillips?
[No response.]
Mr. Landsman?
Mr. LANDSMAN. Aye.
The CLERK. Mr. Landsman votes aye.
Mr. McGarvey?
Mr. MCGARVEY. Aye.
The CLERK. Mr. McGarvey votes aye.
Ms. Gluesenkamp Perez?
Ms. GLUESENKAMP PEREZ. Aye.
The CLERK. Ms. Gluesenkamp Perez votes aye.
Ms. Scholten?
Ms. SCHOLTEN. Aye.
The CLERK. Ms. Scholten votes aye.
Mr. Thanedar?
Mr. THANEDAR. Aye.
The CLERK. Mr. Thanedar votes aye.
Ms. Chu?
Ms. CHU. Aye.
The CLERK. Ms. Chu votes aye.
Ms. Davids?
Ms. DAVIDS. Aye.
The CLERK. Ms. Davids votes aye.
Mr. Pappas?
[No response.]
Ranking Member Velazquez?
Ms. VELAZQUEZ. Aye.
The CLERK. Ranking Member Velazquez votes aye.
Mr. Chairman Williams?
Chairman WILLIAMS. Aye.
The CLERK. Mr. Chairman Williams votes aye.
Chairman WILLIAMS. Okay. Are there any other Members who
have not voted or wish to change their vote?
Mr. MOLINARO. Mr. Chairman?
Chairman WILLIAMS. Welcome, Mr. Molinaro.
Mr. MOLINARO. Mr. Molinaro votes aye.
The CLERK. Mr. Molinaro votes aye.
Chairman WILLIAMS. All right. Mr. Phillips?
Mr. PHILLIPS. And Mr. Phillips votes aye.
The CLERK. Mr. Phillips votes aye.
Chairman WILLIAMS. Anyone else?
Okay. The clerk will report.
The CLERK. Mr. Chairman, on that vote, 22 ayes and 0 nays.
Chairman WILLIAMS. Okay, the motion is agreed to and H.R.
1730 is adopted and will be reported favorably to the House.
The question now is on adopting H.R. 1606, the Veteran
Entrepreneurship Training Act of 2023 and ordering it be
favorably reported to the House. The clerk will call the roll.
The CLERK. Mr. Luetkemeyer?
Mr. LUETKEMEYER. Aye.
The CLERK. Mr. Luetkemeyer votes aye.
Mr. Stauber?
[No response.]
Mr. Meuser?
Mr. MEUSER. Aye.
The CLERK. Mr. Meuser votes aye.
Ms. Van Duyne?
Mr. VAN DUYNE. Aye.
The CLERK. Ms. Van Duyne votes aye.
Ms. Salazar?
Ms. SALAZAR. Aye.
The CLERK. Ms. Salazar votes aye.
Mr. Mann?
[No response.]
Mr. Ellzey?
Mr. ELLZEY. Ellzey, aye.
The CLERK. Mr. Ellzey votes aye.
Mr. Molinaro?
[No response.]
Mr. Alford?
Mr. ALFORD. Aye.
The CLERK. Mr. Alford votes aye.
Mr. Crane?
Mr. CRANE. Aye.
The CLERK. Mr. Crane votes aye.
Mr. Bean?
[No response.]
Mr. Hunt?
Mr. HUNT. Aye.
The CLERK. Mr. Hunt votes aye.
Mr. LaLota?
Mr. LALOTA. Aye.
The CLERK. Mr. LaLota votes aye.
Mr. Golden?
Mr. GOLDEN. Aye.
The CLERK. Mr. Golden votes aye.
Mr. Mfume?
Mr. MFUME. Mfume votes aye.
The CLERK. Mr. Mfume votes aye.
Mr. Phillips?
Mr. PHILLIPS. Phillips votes aye.
The CLERK. Mr. Phillips votes aye.
Mr. Landsman?
Mr. LANDSMAN. Aye.
The CLERK. Mr. Landsman votes aye.
Mr. McGarvey?
Mr. MCGARVEY. Aye.
The CLERK. Mr. McGarvey votes aye.
Ms. Gluesenkamp Perez?
Ms. GLUESENKAMP PEREZ. Aye.
The CLERK. Ms. Gluesenkamp Perez votes aye.
Ms. Scholten?
[No response.]
Mr. Thanedar?
Mr. THANEDAR. Aye.
The CLERK. Mr. Thanedar votes aye.
Ms. Chu?
Ms. CHU. Aye.
The CLERK. Ms. Chu votes aye.
Ms. Davids?
[No response.]
Mr. Pappas?
[No response.]
Ranking Member Velazquez?
Ms. VELAZQUEZ. Aye.
The CLERK. Ranking Member Velazquez votes aye.
Mr. STAUBER. Stauber votes aye.
The CLERK. Mr. Stauber votes aye.
Mr. Chairman Williams?
Chairman WILLIAMS. Aye.
The CLERK. Mr. Chairman Williams votes aye.
Chairman WILLIAMS. Are there any other Members who have not
voted or wish to change their vote?
Okay. None being, the clerk will report.
Ms. Scholten, did you vote?
Ms. SCHOLTEN. Yes.
The CLERK. Ms. Scholten votes aye.
Chairman WILLIAMS. Mr. Molinaro?
Mr. MOLINARO. Mr. Chairman, I vote aye.
Chairman WILLIAMS. Ms. Davids?
Ms. DAVIDS. Aye.
Chairman WILLIAMS. The clerk will report.
The CLERK. Mr. Chairman, on that vote, 23 ayes and 0 nays.
Chairman WILLIAMS. Okay, great. The motion is agreed to and
H.R. 1606 is adopted and will be reported favorably to the
House.
The question now is adopting H.R. 3511, the Service-
Disabled Veteran Opportunities in Small Business Act and
ordering it favorably reported to the House.
The clerk will call the roll.
The CLERK. Mr. Luetkemeyer?
Mr. LUETKEMEYER. Aye.
The CLERK. Mr. Luetkemeyer votes aye.
Mr. Stauber?
Mr. STAUBER. Aye.
The CLERK. Mr. Stauber votes aye.
Mr. Meuser?
Mr. MEUSER. Aye.
The CLERK. Mr. Meuser votes aye.
Ms. Van Duyne?
Mr. VAN DUYNE. Aye.
The CLERK. Ms. Van Duyne votes aye.
Ms. Salazar?
Ms. SALAZAR. Aye.
The CLERK. Ms. Salazar votes aye.
Mr. Mann?
[No response.]
Mr. Ellzey?
Mr. ELLZEY. Ellzey, aye.
The CLERK. Mr. Ellzey votes aye.
Mr. Molinaro?
Mr. MOLINARO. Aye.
The CLERK. Mr. Molinaro votes aye.
Mr. Alford?
Mr. ALFORD. Aye.
The CLERK. Mr. Alford votes aye.
Mr. Crane?
Mr. CRANE. Aye.
The CLERK. Mr. Crane votes aye.
Mr. Bean?
[No response.]
Mr. Hunt?
Mr. HUNT. Aye.
The CLERK. Mr. Hunt votes aye.
Mr. LaLota?
Mr. LALOTA. Aye.
The CLERK. Mr. LaLota votes aye.
Mr. Golden?
Mr. GOLDEN. Aye.
The CLERK. Mr. Golden votes aye.
Mr. Mfume?
Mr. MFUME. Mfume votes aye.
The CLERK. Mr. Mfume votes aye.
Mr. Phillips?
Mr. PHILLIPS. Aye.
The CLERK. Mr. Phillips votes aye.
Mr. Landsman?
Mr. LANDSMAN. Aye.
The CLERK. Mr. Landsman votes aye.
Mr. McGarvey?
Mr. MCGARVEY. Aye.
The CLERK. Mr. McGarvey votes aye.
Ms. Gluesenkamp Perez?
Ms. GLUESENKAMP PEREZ. Aye.
The CLERK. Ms. Gluesenkamp Perez votes aye.
Ms. Scholten?
Ms. SCHOLTEN. Aye.
The CLERK. Ms. Scholten votes aye.
Mr. Thanedar?
Mr. THANEDAR. Aye.
The CLERK. Mr. Thanedar votes aye.
Ms. Chu?
Ms. CHU. Aye.
The CLERK. Ms. Chu votes aye.
Ms. Davids?
Ms. DAVIDS. Aye.
The CLERK. Ms. Davids votes aye.
Mr. Pappas?
[No response.]
Ranking Member Velazquez?
Ms. VELAZQUEZ. Aye.
The CLERK. Ranking Member Velazquez votes aye.
Mr. Chairman Williams?
Chairman WILLIAMS. Aye.
The CLERK. Mr. Chairman Williams votes aye.
Chairman WILLIAMS. Are there any other Members who have not
voted or wish to change their vote?
Okay. If none, the clerk will report.
The CLERK. Mr. Chairman, on that vote, 23 ayes and 0 nays.
Chairman WILLIAMS. Okay, thank you.
The motion is agreed to and H.R. 3511 is adopted and will
be reported favorably to the House.
Without objection, Committee staff is authorized to make
technical and conforming changes and Members have 2 business
days to file additional, supplemental, descending, and minority
views.
I want to thank all of you for being here today. This was a
good day today. We got some business done for America.
And if there is no further business, this concludes today's
markup.
Without objection, the Committee stands adjourned.
[Whereupon, 12:17 p.m., the committee was adjourned.]

A P P E N D I X

[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
