- MARKUP OF: H.R. 5450, THE ENHANCING COMPETITION IN CONTRACTING ORDERS ACT; H.R. 6591, THE ENCOURAGING SUCCESS ACT; H.R. 7102, THE NATIVE AMERICAN ENTREPRENEURIAL OPPORTUNITY ACT; H.R. 7103, THE AGENCY ACCOUNTABILITY ACT OF 2024; H.R. 6156, THE CHILD CARE SMALL BUSINESS INSIGHT AND IMPROVEMENT ACT OF 2023; H.R. 7104, THE NATIONAL SBDC ADVISORY BOARD IMPROVEMENT ACT; H.R. 7105, THE WOSB CERTIFICATION AND OPPORTUNITY EXPANSION ACT; H.R. 7128, THE WOSB INTEGRITY ACT OF 2024; AND H.R. 7129, THE PUT AMERICA ON COMMISSION ACT OF 2024.

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

MARKUP OF: H.R. 5450; H.R. 6591; H.R. 7102; H.R. 7103; H.R. 6156; H.R.
7104; H.R. 7105; H.R. 7128; AND H.R. 7129

=======================================================================

HEARING

before the

COMMITTEE ON SMALL BUSINESS
UNITED STATES
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

HEARING HELD
JANUARY 31, 2024

__________

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Small Business Committee Document Number 118-038
Available via the GPO Website: www.govinfo.gov

_______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

55-405                   WASHINGTON : 2024

HOUSE COMMITTEE ON SMALL BUSINESS

ROGER WILLIAMS, Texas, Chairman
BLAINE LUETKEMEYER, Missouri
PETE STAUBER, Minnesota
DAN MEUSER, Pennsylvania
BETH VAN DUYNE, Texas
MARIA SALAZAR, Florida
TRACEY MANN, Kansas
JAKE ELLZEY, Texas
MARC MOLINARO, New York
MARK ALFORD, Missouri
ELI CRANE, Arizona
AARON BEAN, Florida
WESLEY HUNT, Texas
NICK LALOTA, New York
CELESTE MALOY, Utah
NYDIA VELAZQUEZ, New York, Ranking Member
JARED GOLDEN, Maine
KWEISI MFUME, Maryland
DEAN PHILLIPS, Minnesota
GREG LANDSMAN, Ohio
MARIE GLUESENKAMP PEREZ, Washington
SHRI THANEDAR, Michigan
MORGAN MCGARVEY, Kentucky
HILLARY SCHOLTEN, Michigan
JUDY CHU, California
SHARICE DAVIDS, Kansas
CHRIS PAPPAS, New Hampshire

Ben Johnson, Majority Staff Director
Melissa Jung, Minority Staff Director

C O N T E N T S

OPENING STATEMENTS

Page
Hon. Roger Williams..............................................     1
Hon. Nydia Velazquez.............................................     3

APPENDIX

Additional Material for the Record:
H.R. 5450....................................................    41
H.R. 6591....................................................    43
H.R. 7102....................................................    46
H.R. 7103....................................................    51
H.R. 6156....................................................    54
H.R. 7104....................................................    57
H.R. 7105....................................................    59
H.R. 7128....................................................    65
H.R. 7129....................................................    69
Amendment in the Nature of a Substitute to H.R. 5450.........    87
Amendment in the Nature of a Substitute to H.R. 6591.........    89
Amendment in the Nature of a Substitute to H.R. 6156.........    91
Minority Views H.R. 5450.....................................    93
Minority Views H.R. 7102.....................................    95
Minority Views H.R. 7103.....................................    96
Minority Views H.R. 6156.....................................    98
Minority Views H.R. 7104.....................................    99
Minority Views H.R. 7105.....................................   100
Minority Views H.R. 7128.....................................   102
Minority Views H.R. 7129.....................................   103
DOJ Compelling Interest Document.............................   105
Hon. Morgan McGarvey Letter..................................   164
Joint Letter Supporting SBA ONAA Bill........................   165

MARKUP OF: H.R. 5450, THE ENHANCING COMPETITION IN CONTRACTING ORDERS
ACT; H.R. 6591, THE ENCOURAGING SUCCESS ACT; H.R. 7102, THE NATIVE
AMERICAN ENTREPRENEURIAL OPPORTUNITY ACT; H.R. 7103, THE AGENCY
ACCOUNTABILITY ACT OF 2024; H.R. 6156, THE CHILD CARE SMALL BUSINESS
INSIGHT AND IMPROVEMENT ACT OF 2023; H.R. 7104, THE NATIONAL SBDC
ADVISORY BOARD IMPROVEMENT ACT; H.R. 7105, THE WOSB CERTIFICATION AND
OPPORTUNITY EXPANSION ACT; H.R. 7128, THE WOSB INTEGRITY ACT OF 2024;
AND H.R. 7129, THE PUT AMERICA ON COMMISSION ACT OF 2024.

----------

WEDNESDAY, JANUARY 31, 2024

House of Representatives,
Committee on Small Business,
Washington, DC.
The Committee met, pursuant to call, at 9:50 a.m., in Room
2360, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Roger Williams
[chairman of the Committee] presiding.
Present: Representatives Williams, Luetkemeyer, Stauber,
Meuser, Van Duyne, Salazar, Mann, Ellzey, Molinaro, Alford,
Crane, Bean, Hunt, LaLota, Maloy, Velazquez, Golden, Mfume,
Landsman, McGarvey, Gluesenkamp Perez, Scholten, Thanedar, Chu,
Davids, and Pappas.
Chairman WILLIAMS. Okay. If I can have everyone's attention
If we can have everybody's attention. Before we get started, I
want to recognize Congressman Alford from the great state of
Missouri to say the Pledge of Allegiance and a short prayer.
Mr. ALFORD. Well, let's start with a prayer, Chairman.
Dear God, we just thank you for providing us a place and a
manner and a time to conduct the business of this nation. I
thank you for our Chair and our Ranking Member, for the
guidance and leadership they provide each day in this
Committee. God, thank you for the Members here. Bless us. Give
us strength, courage, wisdom, and discernment as we move
forward for the American people.
And God, I just thank you for our small businesses. Thank
you for the men and women who roll up their sleeves, who empty
their wallets, who spend time with their families, who dedicate
their lives, basically, to starting a small business. And I
just ask that every decision we make here, every rule we put
forward or bill we put forward, as we are doing today, it is
your will and your guidance to help those families succeed in
America.
Through Christ, I pray. Amen.
I pledge allegiance to the flag of the United States of
America. And to the Republic for which it stands, one nation
under God, indivisible, with liberty and justice for all.
The Committee will now come to order. A quorum is present.
Without objection, the Chair is authorized to declare a recess
of the Committee at any time. As required by the House rules, a
copy of the legislative measures have been made available to
Members and the public at least 24 hours in advance. Pursuant
to Committee rule 13 and House rule XI, all votes will be
rolled to the end of the meeting.
I now recognize myself for opening remarks.
Good morning again to everyone, and I welcome today's
markup, where we will be discussing nine bills that address the
various needs of our nation's small businesses. I am going to
be speaking on each of the bills we bring up today in greater
detail, so I want to keep my opening statement brief and just
highlight a few points.
When I took over as the Chairman of this Committee, I
wanted to bring my private sector experience to the forefront.
And I employ hundreds of people back home in Texas at my car
dealerships, and almost all of them work on commission. It
incentivizes them to work hard and take ownership of what they
are selling. This was the inspiration behind one of the bills
we were marking up today, and I want to thank our colleague,
Chairman Luetkemeyer, for a lot of his input on this very
thing.
This was the inspiration behind one of the bills we are
marking up today. It is Put America on Commission Act of 2024.
This bill creates a whistleblower program that will align the
incentives of the public and the government to help achieve the
shared goal of holding criminals that took advantage of the
government lending programs during the COVID-19 pandemic
accountable.
When Congress passed the Pandemic Assistance Program here,
there was a need to strike the balance between getting money
out quickly and having appropriate fraud mitigation tools in
place. There was always the assumption that we would be able to
catch the fraudsters on the back end. However, as the inspector
general shared with the Committee, he knew this would lead to a
disaster and the after action report show he was correct. There
has been an estimated $200 billion in fraud in the SBA pandemic
programs and the OIG has 100-year backlog. A 100-year backlog
to get through all of these cases. This is not an issue that
can simply be fixed by throwing money at the existing problem.
We need something that will speed up the process.
That is where this bill will come into play. By creating
this new whistleblower program within the SBA, the inspector
general will receive a higher quality information that will
lead to more and quicker convictions.
Whistleblower programs have been proven to be effective in
many other agencies, such as the IRS and the SEC, and I am
confident that this bill will lead to more convictions of COVID
fraud when we look to replicate it at the SBA.
I will have more to say on this bill when it is brought up
later today, but I want to thank the staff on both sides of the
aisle for making this bill a reality.
And in closing, I would like to thank our Members for
bringing all of the bills forward for consideration in today's
markup. Every piece of legislation we are going to look at
today is the product of hearings and our oversight efforts that
we have conducted, and I am proud to see our Committee activity
being turned into legislation that will make main street even
stronger.
With that, I look forward to today's markup, and I yield to
distinguished Ranking Member from New York, Ms. Velazquez.
Ms. VELAZQUEZ. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for holding this
markup today.
I plan to lend my support to the nine bills we are
considering. They make important improvements to the
contracting programs at SBA, codify the Office of Native
American Affairs, takes a good first step on childcare, and
works to recover fraudulent pandemic funds.
This Committee has a long tradition of working together to
get things done for small businesses, and I appreciate Chairman
Williams and his staff for their efforts to work with us. I
would like to also commend the Members of the Committee to put
differences aside and improve SBA programs for small
businesses.
Small business growth has proven resilient in uncertain
times. Since President Biden took office, 16 million Americans
have filed to start new businesses and more than 14 million
jobs have been created. Our nation's 33 million small
businesses play an important role in driving our nation's
economy, and I am committed to supporting entrepreneurs as they
create good paying jobs in our local community.
Thank you, Mr. Williams for joining forces with me on
behalf of small businesses and I look forward to a productive
markup.
I yield back.
Chairman WILLIAMS. Yields back. And does any other Member
seek recognition for the purpose of making an opening
statement?
Okay, if none, seeing none, we will now move to the
consideration of the first bill.
H.R. 5450
The first bill we will mark up is H.R. 5450, the Enhancing
Competition in Contracting Orders Act, introduced by
Representatives Scholten and Salazar. The clerk will report.
The CLERK. H.R. 5450 to amend the Small Business Act----
Chairman WILLIAMS. Without objection, H.R. 5450 is
considered as read and open for amendment. The bill sponsor,
Ms. Scholten, has an amendment in the nature of a substitute at
the desk. The amendment has been predistributed to all Members
and the clerk will report the amendment.
The CLERK. Amendment in the nature of a substitute to H.R.
5450 offered by Ms. Scholten.
Chairman WILLIAMS. Without objection, the amendment is
considered as read and the substitute will be considered base
text of the bill for the purpose of amendment.
I now recognize the bill's sponsor, Ms. Scholten, for her
statement.
Ms. SCHOLTEN. Thank you so much, Mr. Chair. I am proud to
speak on behalf of my bill, the Enhancing Competition in
Contracting Orders, which is cosponsored by my wonderful
colleague, Congresswoman Salazar.
The job of this Committee is to foster small business
growth, which means uplifting small businesses from
historically underutilized business zones, HUBZones, and
ensuring that they can compete and continue contributing to the
American economy. My district in Michigan is home to several
HUBZones where businesses who qualify for the program are
eligible for certain contracting opportunities, including
contract set-asides, sole source awards, and price evaluation
preferences.
My bill would provide additional clarification to federal
agencies on how and when to apply price evaluation preferences
to HUBZones. Currently, the HUBZone price evaluation preference
is not widely used because some agencies have incorrectly
interpreted that the preference does not apply to orders. As
the federal government increasingly drives its spending through
indefinite delivery and indefinite quantity contracts,
significant opportunities for HUBZone small businesses are
being lost because the HUBZone price evaluation is not being
applied in the award of orders.
Importantly, the price evaluation preference language in
the Small Business Act is broad and does not exclude orders. It
states, in fact, that, ``In any case in which a contract is to
be awarded on the basis of a full and open competition, the
price offered by a qualified HUBZone small business concern
shall be deemed as lowering--or, excuse me, as lower than the
price offered by another offerer.''
The only exception in the Small Business Act for the
application of the HUBZone price evaluation preference is for
procurements of agricultural commodities. The fact that
Congress explicitly provided one exception, but did not provide
an exception for orders indicates that Congress did not intend
there to be an exception for orders. How could it? The price
evaluation preference applies to orders because orders are
contracts.
Given the broad language in the statute and the fact that
there is only one explicit exception and that orders are
themselves contracts, the HUBZone price evaluation preference
should be applied as broadly as possible. And my bill, the
Enhancing Competition for Contracting Orders, would do just
that, leveling the playing field for all qualifying small
businesses under the HUBZone program. Many small businesses are
unable to competitively bid on large contracts--on contracts
against these larger companies, and this would make it more
tenable to do so.
The 10 percent price preference granted by the HUBZone
program has been game-changing for HUBZone small businesses and
their ability to participate in the contracting marketplace.
This legislation would further clarify HUBZone benefits and
ensure even more businesses in West Michigan and across the
country can compete for government contracts. I strongly urge
Members to vote yes on this important legislation.
Thank you so much, Mr. Chair, and I yield back.
Chairman WILLIAMS. Yields back. And I now recognize the
bill's cosponsor, Ms. Salazar, for a statement.
Ms. SALAZAR. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thank you very
much for calling me your wonderful colleague. Very good.
You see, this is the way we have to work in Congress, in a
bipartisan fashion. And I think this is a fantastic bill
because it is called Enhancing Competition in Contracting
Orders. Basically what it does is that the pie, it cuts the
pie, the big pie of a government contract and gives big pieces
to the small guy. And that is what I like.
We have 250 HUBZones in Florida, 22 in the city of Miami
that I proudly represent. So that means that the big guys are
now need to share the pie with the small people. Those people
that up to now have not been able to bid and become what we
consider the American dream, which is to be a client of the
federal government. What a fantastic bill. So thank you very
much for cosponsoring with me. And thank you, Mr. Chairman, for
allowing me to speak. I am very, very excited that we are going
to be able to bring the American dream down to the small
business owners. I yield back.
Chairman WILLIAMS. Yields back. And are there any other
Members who wish to be recognized for a statement on this bill?
Okay. I now recognize the gentlewoman, Ranking Member Ms.
Velazquez.
Ms. VELAZQUEZ. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I commend Ms.
Scholten and Ms. Salazar for their bipartisan work to bring
H.R. 5450 before the Committee today.
When the government invests in small businesses, they in
turn invest in their communities by creating jobs and buying
local products. This is a driving force behind the HUBZone
program. Unfortunately, the program has not reached its full
potential. In the more than 25 years since Congress created
HUBZones, the federal government has never achieved the 3
percent procurement goal.
It is clear that efforts like the HUBZone preference can
work. This preference is now providing HUBZones with a
competitive advantage when bidding against larger companies,
but the authority has not been properly interpreted and it is,
therefore, underutilized. This bill will clarify the original
intent of Congress that the preference be applied to all
contracts and specifically to task orders.
Again, I appreciate the sponsors for prioritizing this bill
and the HUBZone program.
I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman WILLIAMS. Ranking Member yields back. And I now
recognize myself to speak in support of this legislation.
H.R. 5450, the Enhancing Competition in Contracting Orders
Act, seeks to encourage business development and hiring in
areas that are historically underutilized from a business
perspective. This bill provides the needed certainty about
price preference when the SBA HUBZone firm is competing for
task order contracts. HUBZone firms have the ability to utilize
this price preference tool for other government contracts. This
allows them to compete against some of their larger
counterparts.
Unfortunately, there has been some confusion on if specific
task orders are also able to utilize this price preference
tool. This legislation looks to end unnecessary confusion for
HUBZone firms and make it clear that task orders do qualify for
the same price preference as normal contracts.
The legislation should increase the ability for small
businesses to do business with the federal government and I
urge my colleagues to support H.R. 5450.
Do any Members seek recognition for the purpose of offering
an amendment to the amendment in the nature of a substitute?
Okay. If there is no further discussion, the question is
now on the amendment in the nature of a substitute, H.R. 5450
offered by Ms. Scholten.
All those in favor, say aye.
All those opposed, say no.
In the opinion of the Chair, the ayes have it, and the
amendment in the nature of a substitute, H.R. 5450 offered by
Ms. Scholten is agreed to.
Okay. The question is now on favorably reporting H.R. 5450,
as amended, to the House.
All those in favor, say aye.
Opposed?
In the opinion of the Chair, the ayes have it, and H.R.
5450 is amended as agreed and to and ordered favorably to the
house.
H.R. 6591
The next bill we will mark up is H.R. 50--or I am sorry
6591, the Encouraging Success Act introduced by Representatives
Ellzey and Thanedar and the clerk will report.
The CLERK. H.R. 6591, to amend section----
Chairman WILLIAMS. Without objection, H.R. 6591 is
considered as read and open for amendment. The bill sponsor,
Mr. Ellzey, has an amendment in the nature of a substitute at
the desk. The amendment has been predistributed to all Members
and the clerk will report the amendment.
The CLERK. Amendment in the nature of a substitute to H.R.
65----
Chairman WILLIAMS. Without objection, the amendment is
considered as read and the substitute will be considered based
text of the bill for the purpose of amendment.
I now recognize the bill sponsor, Mr. Ellzey, for an
opening statement.
Mr. ELLZEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would like to thank
Mr. Thanedar for joining me on this bill.
Thanks for allowing us to mark up H.R. 6591, the
Encouraging Success Act. The amendment in the nature of a
substitute is a technical correction by striking language on
page 3, line 5 in the original bill. Retained is the CutGo
language stating no additional amounts are authorized to be
appropriated to carry out this act or the amendments made by
this act.
The Small Business Administration's 8(a) program was
established in the '70s to help small businesses compete with
large corporations for U.S. Government contracts. A qualifying
small business can only be a part of the program for up to 9
years. To initially qualify and remain in the 8(a) program,
there is a cap as to the value of a small business' assets.
Since the program's inception, the asset cap has only been
raised twice and is currently capped at $6-1/2 million. That
asset threshold is set through SBA-determined regulation, and
the law does not outline any process of when or how the SBA
should reassess the threshold to remain in line with market
changes.
Unfortunately, because the requirements to initially
qualify for the program or remain in it haven't kept up with
market changes, the cap is set to a level at which a small
business is disadvantaged to compete in the open market at the
end of the 9-year program. The SBA's slow to change attitude
with the asset cap can limit the success of an 8(a) small
business.
With the threat of being graduated out of the 8(a) program,
small business owners must decide whether their firm's growth
is worth being removed from the program. My bill, H.R. 6591,
with the amendment, helps solve this situation and encourages
success of small businesses by compelling the SBA administrator
to review the qualification caps with greater frequency to
ensure that small businesses participating in the 8(a) program
are allowed to grow big enough to compete with larger companies
once their participation in the program ends.
This bill is needed because if an 8(a) participating small
business surpasses the SBA-determined asset threshold, the
small business will then be graduated or removed from the 8(a)
program. This has literally killed many small businesses.
Although the graduated small businesses would still complete
existing contracts, they would not be able to compete for
future 8(a) contracts while not having grown big enough to
compete with the big companies.
Mr. Chairman and Members, by supporting this bill, you are
supporting small businesses while ensuring they are not
punished for their success. Mr. Chairman and Members, I humbly
request your support for H.R. 6591, as amended, to send to the
full House for consideration.
Thank you, Chair Williams. I yield back.
Chairman WILLIAMS. Yields back. Now, Mr. Thanedar, the
bill's cosponsor, is not here. Are there any other Members who
wish to be recognized for a statement on the bill?
Ms. VELAZQUEZ. Mr. Chairman?
Chairman WILLIAMS. Ranking Member.
Ms. VELAZQUEZ. Mr. Thanedar is here.
Chairman WILLIAMS. Oh, he just walked in, huh? You are
late, but early.
So, Mr. Thanedar, I recognize you as the bill's cosponsor
for an opening statement.
Ms. VELAZQUEZ. Getting his glasses.
Mr. THANEDAR. Good morning and thank you, Mr. Chair. And
also thank you, Representative Ellzey, for introducing this
important bill.
I am proud to strongly support this bill as regular
monitoring and assessment of thresholds for the 8(a) program
will ensure that this invaluable program is helping those it is
intended to. In my home state of Michigan, there were 217
million worth of 8(a) contracts in fiscal year 2022, making up
almost 5 percent of Michigan's firms that received federal
contracts in that year, according to the Small Business
Administration.
Fostering entrepreneurship is a key goal. Empowering
individuals to start their own businesses not only helps
achieve their dreams, but also adds to the economic vibrancy of
our nation. Entrepreneurs drive innovation and job creation.
Minority entrepreneurs bring diverse perspectives and valuable
skills to our local economy. However, they often face unique
challenges when starting or growing their businesses, including
continued discrimination and discriminatory barriers.
The 8(a) program helps address these challenges by
providing access to resources, mentorship, and federal contract
assistance to the minority community. This supports not only
helps minority and immigrant owned businesses thrive, but also
enriches our district by contributing to its cultural and
economic diversity. It is a win-win.
Federal contracts can significantly boost the growth and
revenues of local businesses. Programs like the 8(a) program
are essential for providing these opportunities.
Small business owned by minorities enhance diversity.
Encouraging the growth of small businesses owned by minorities
and underrepresented groups not only promotes diversity, but
also creates economic opportunities and growth for all Members
of our community. A diverse economy with thriving small
business is more resilient. By fostering a diverse range of
small businesses, we ensure that our economy can weather
economic challenges more effectively. A resilient economy
benefits everyone in our district.
In conclusion, the support and encouragement of minority-
owned small businesses through continued refinement of the 8(a)
program not only benefits the entrepreneurs, but also
contributes to the overall wellbeing and prosperity of our
community. I urge all Members to support this bipartisan bill.
As a serial entrepreneur, Mr. Chair, I have been benefited
by small business and small business programs, one of the small
business programs, 504, which helped me grow my business. And I
have experienced firsthand what these programs can do to help
minorities, immigrants, and others to start small businesses
create jobs.
So I strongly urge support for this and I yield back.
Chairman WILLIAMS. Yields back. Are there any other Members
who wish to be recognized for a statement on the bill?
Yes, ma'am. Refer to the Ranking Member on her statement.
Ms. VELAZQUEZ. Thank you, Chairman Williams, and thank you
to Representatives Ellzey and Thanedar for their work on H.R.
6591, which will require SBA to regularly update the thresholds
for determining economic disadvantage.
This bill is designed to help keep the 8(a) program
relevant and current, and that is needed. Last week, for only
the second time, the SBA released small business federal
contracting data disaggregated by race. While I applaud the SBA
for releasing it, I and many of my colleagues on the Committee
asked them to do it. The data shines a bright light on the
inequities in our federal procurement system. It highlights the
need to prioritize and protect programs like the 8(a) a program
that assists minority business owners who have been subject to
discrimination.
Seeing that minority-owned businesses do not receive a fair
share of contracting dollars does not come as a surprise. We
know that discrimination persists and creates barrier. In fact,
the Department of Justice annually compiles a report on
discrimination and discriminatory barriers faced by women and
minority business owners in government contracting. It is
compelling, and, Mr. Chairman, I ask unanimous consent to
insert that into the record.
Chairman WILLIAMS. So moved.
Ms. VELAZQUEZ. This bill is a productive step designed to
ensure that minority business owners can succeed and thrive in
the 8(a) program and the federal marketplace. That is why I am
pleased to support it, and I urge my colleagues to support as
well.
Chairman WILLIAMS. Yields back, thank you. I now recognize
myself to speak in support of this legislation.
H.R. 6591, the Encouraging Success Act, requires the SBA to
reassess the 8(a) business development program asset threshold
every 4 years. The SBA 8(a) program allows certain small
businesses to compete for valuable contracting opportunities.
Small businesses can participate in the program for 9 years.
However, there are certain circumstances where a firm will be
removed from the program. One of these if the owner's assets
reach a certain threshold, essentially punishing a business
owner for their success.
The goal of this program is to ensure small businesses are
not crowded out from the competing for government contracts.
With the prices of everything rising the past few years, we
should ensure that the SBA is appropriately tailoring this
program to true small businesses. The Encouraging Success Act
will ensure that this threshold matches current market
realities by requiring the SBA to reevaluate it every few
years.
I encourage all my colleagues to support H.R. 6591.
Do any Members seek recognition for the purpose of offering
an amendment to the amendment in the nature of a substitute?
Okay. If no, there is no further discussion. The question
is now on the amendment in the nature of a substitute to H.R.
6591 offered by Mr. Ellzey.
All those in favor, say aye.
All those opposed, say no.
In the opinion of the Chair, the ayes have it. The
amendment in the nature of a substitute to H.R. 6591 offered by
Mr. Ellzey is agreed to.
The question is now on favorably reporting H.R. 6591, as
amended, to the House.
All those in favor, say aye.
Mr. STAUBER. Mr. Chairman?
Chairman WILLIAMS. Yes.
Mr. STAUBER. Request a recorded vote.
Chairman WILLIAMS. Okay. A recorded vote is requested and
pursuant to rule 13 and House rule XI, further proceedings on
the bill are postponed.
H.R. 7102
Next is consideration of H.R. 7102, the Native American
Entrepreneurial Opportunity Act. The next bill we will mark up
is H.R. 7102, the Native American Entrepreneurial Opportunity
Act, introduced by Representatives Davids and Crane.
I now recognize the bill's sponsor, Ms. Davids, for an
opening statement.
Ms. DAVIDS. Thank you, Chairman Williams and Ranking Member
Velazquez.
Look, it is no secret that our nation's entrepreneurs face
challenges in starting and operating their small businesses. I
can attest that these challenges are often more pronounced in
Tribal communities. Native Americans are twice as likely to
live in poverty than other Americans. This affects their
ability to use their savings and assets to finance a small
business, to access credit, and to undertake just the general
risk of entrepreneurship.
Also, these business owners face geographical barriers with
longer distances for supply deliveries, lack of reliable
broadband and telephone service. These long distances have also
made it harder for Native American entrepreneurs to network, to
find mentors, to reach their consumer base, and ultimately, it
reduces their chances of success.
Native entrepreneurs also frequently face bigger challenges
in attracting private investment and accessing federal
contracting opportunities. We really must do everything that we
can in our power to find solutions to these challenges, to
level the playing field for Tribal small businesses and to
boost our overall economy.
Currently, the U.S. Small Business Administration Office of
Native American Affairs does work diligently to connect Native
business owners with entrepreneurial development, with lending
and procurement programs. However, the SBA currently lacks a
congressional mandate for this office, limiting the capacity
for the office to do the work that it needs to do, and leaves
it vulnerable to challenges or changes from one administration
to the next.
This is why we really need to advance my Native American
Entrepreneurial Opportunity Act. This bill codifies the SBA's
Office of Native American Affairs into federal law and
establishes an assistant administrator role to oversee the
operations and report directly to SBA leadership.
It also directs the office to report to Congress on its
success or maybe challenges in Indian Country.
Native-owned entities employing over 300,000 Americans are
vital drivers for our national economy, which is why these
Tribal businesses deserve a seat at the table to advocate not
only for the challenges, as I mentioned earlier, but also for
their successes and their achievements.
I do want to thank Congressman Crane for his partnership in
introducing this bill, and I absolutely encourage my colleagues
to support the Native American Entrepreneurial Opportunity Act
and vote in favor of successful entrepreneurship in Tribal
communities.
And with that, I yield, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman WILLIAMS. Yields back. I now recognize the bill's
cosponsor, Mr. Crane, for an opening statement.
Mr. CRANE. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I am proud to colead
H.R. 7102, which officially establishes the Office of Native
American Affairs under the Small Business Administration. I
want to thank my colleague, Representative Davis, for your
leadership and the opportunity to work in a bipartisan way.
Tribal entrepreneurs face complex hurdles when it comes to
running a business. This can come in the form of property
rights questions, tax implications, regulatory burdens, and
lending opportunities, to name a few. Entrepreneurs should have
the flexibility to start a business on a Reservation, just like
anywhere else. But in reality, the federal government has
created barriers to enter the market. Tribal communities could
especially benefit from specialized expertise SBA offers to
assist business owners in navigating the unique complexities of
running a business on a Reservation.
I am hopeful that passing this bill will bring attention to
these complexities, as this office will ensure Tribal
businesses are not overlooked. Starting a dialogue with our
Tribal small business owners, who may be unaware that this
office even exists, could spur economic development that
supports our entire nation's economic growth and prosperity,
which protects freedom for all.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Chairman WILLIAMS. Yields back. And are there any of the
Members who wish to be recognized for a statement on this bill?
Ms. VELAZQUEZ. Yes, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman WILLIAMS. Refer to the Ranking Member.
Ms. VELAZQUEZ. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I strongly support
the Native American Entrepreneurial Development Opportunity
Act.
Let me begin by commending Ms. Davids for her leadership on
efforts to codify the Office of Native American Affairs at the
Small Business Administration. The office has been a valuable
resource for American Indians, Alaskan Natives, and Native
Hawaiians seeking to launch and grow their small businesses.
Codifying the office will ensure that Tribal small businesses
will have access to SBA full range of business development
tools, regardless of the administration. Importantly, the
legislation requires the assistant administrator report
directly to the administrator, ensuring the voices of their
Tribal communities will be heard at the SBA.
Native American owned businesses are economic engines,
contributing over $33 billion to the U.S. economy every year
and employing 200,000 people in their communities. Statutorily
authorizing the Office of Native American Affairs as SBA will
increase access to federal programs and services that support
Native American entrepreneurs across the country and promote
economic development.
I would also like to thank Mr. Crane for coleading this
bill with Ms. Davis. I urge Members to support the bill and I
yield back, Mr. Chairman, thank you.
Chairman WILLIAMS. Yields back. And I now recognize myself
to speak in support of this legislation.
H.R. 7102, the Native American Entrepreneurial Opportunity
Act, establishes the Office of Native American Affairs within
the Small Business Administration. The SBA Office of Native
American Affairs has been providing services like counseling,
training, and Tribal consultations for many years. However, the
office has not been codified into law. This bill will codify
this office and provide Congress with better oversight and
performance metrics that could be tracked. This will require
the office to provide a report on the services this office
provides to ensure that this office is performing their task
appropriately.
I want to thank my colleagues for introducing this bill and
urge my colleagues to support H.R. 7102.
If there is no further discussion, the Committee now moves
to consideration of H.R. 7102. The clerk will report.
The CLERK. H.R. 7102, to establish the office----
Chairman WILLIAMS. Without objection, the first reading of
the bill is dispensed. And without objection, the bill is
considered as read and open for amendment.
Do any Members seek recognition for the purpose of offering
an amendment?
If no, seeing none, the question is now on adoption of H.R.
7102 in favor of reporting it to the House.
All those in favor, say aye.
Mr. ELLZEY. Mr. Chairman.
Chairman WILLIAMS. All opposed, say no.
Mr. ELLZEY. Mr. Chairman, I call for a recorded vote.
Chairman WILLIAMS. All right. A recorded vote has been
requested and a roll call vote is ordered. Pursuant to
Committee Rule 13 and House rule XI, further proceedings on the
bill are postponed.
H.R. 7103
The next bill we will mark up is H.R. 7103, the Agency
Accountability Act of 2024, introduced by Representatives
Stauber and McGarvey.
I now recognize the bill's sponsor, Mr. Stauber, for an
opening statement.
Mr. STAUBER. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I rise today to speak
in favor of my bill, H.R. 7103, the Agency Accountability Act
of 2024.
It is well known that endless bureaucracy and red tape
crushes small businesses. Yet since President Biden took
office, over 700 regulations have been added to the Federal
Register, costing nearly $440 billion and adding more than 236
million paperwork hours. It is clear that Main Street America
is not a priority of this administration. If the Biden
administration insists on burdening small businesses with such
an overregulated landscape, the very least they could do is
ensure that small businesses have every opportunity to contract
with the largest purchaser of goods and services in the world,
the federal government.
Right now, federal agencies set goals for awarding
contracts to small businesses. But meeting those goals is often
treated like a suggestion and not a requirement. The result?
Too many agencies fall short, leaving billions of dollars in
contracts off the reach of American dreamers.
My bill, the Agency Accountability Act, changes the game.
It shines a spotlight on agency performance by requiring public
testimony for failures. Agency heads will answer directly to
Congress for missing goals, explaining why they haven't
prioritized small businesses and what they will do to fix it.
This isn't just about finger pointing. It is about finding
solutions. Public scrutiny paired with mandated reporting on
scorecard performance will expose systemic roadblocks and
identify best practices.
Our small businesses are more than just economic engines.
They are the embodiment of the American spirit, equipped with
creativity, resilience, and a fierce determination to succeed.
This bill gives them a fighting chance, a seat at the table,
and the opportunity to prove themselves on the national stage.
I urge my colleagues to support this important legislation
as it will help ensure the federal government is doing
everything it can to support small businesses in America.
Mr. Chair, I yield back.
Chairman WILLIAMS. Yields back. And I now recognize the
bill's cosponsor, Mr. McGarvey, for an opening statement.
Mr. MCGARVEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you,
Representative Stauber.
Each week we sit on this Committee and we discuss how we
can help ensure the federal government actually supports our
small businesses, the small business growth and
entrepreneurship in this country. This bill will do exactly
that. It is going to bring the federal government one step
closer to meeting its small business contracting goals. We
can't just walk the walk. We have to talk the talk, too. And
that's why I am proud to join Representative Stauber as a proud
sponsor of H.R. 7103, the Agency Accountability Act. And I am
grateful it was included in today's markup.
The bill would require the head of the Office of Small and
Disadvantaged Business Utilization of any federal agency that
does not receive an A grade on the SBA scorecard or whose
agency does not meet two or more of the subcategory goals to
hit their quota of contracts awarded to small business
recipients to testify before the House and Senate Small
Business Committees. We can hold failing agencies accountable,
and we can ensure that small businesses everywhere have the
opportunity to compete for and win federal contracts that
should be going to small enterprises.
I urge my colleagues to support the bill and look forward
to its passage today. I yield back.
Chairman WILLIAMS. Yields back. Are there any other Members
who wish to be recognized for a statement on the bill?
Ms. VELAZQUEZ. Yes, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman WILLIAMS. Recognize the Ranking Member.
Ms. VELAZQUEZ. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and to
Representative Stauber and Mr. McGarvey for their bipartisan
work on H.R. 7103.
I believe that most agency officials are making good faith
efforts to ensure that small businesses are able to participate
and maximize opportunities in the federal marketplace. The
goals are only goals, though, and agencies are not penalized if
they do not meet them. The way we encourage agencies to meet
their goal is to name and shame them when they don't. Requiring
testimony is an additional way to do that and to use our
leverage and congressional oversight tools to hold their feet
to the fire.
I am particularly pleased to see that this bill includes
agencies that have not received an A on the scorecard, but also
agencies that have not met two or more of their subcategory
goals. Each of the categories, including and especially the
HUBZone and WOSB programs, continue to need additional focus,
and this is a helpful step in that direction.
I am pleased to support it, and I urge my colleagues to do
as well. I yield back.
Chairman WILLIAMS. Yields back. And I now recognize myself
to speak in support of this legislation.
H.R. 7103, the Agency Accountability Act, brings
accountability to agencies who fail to meet their goals by
bringing them in front of Congress to answer to the American
people. Government agencies are required to meet a goal of
spending a certain amount of their contracting dollars with
small businesses. Unfortunately, these goals are not always
met, and specifically, certain small businesses, like those
that are service-disabled veteran-owned, are commonly left out.
To evaluate how agencies are meeting these goals, the SBA
produces a scorecard which shows vital information on awards
made to small businesses by each agency. Each agency is given a
letter grade in the SBA scorecard. This legislation will
require those agencies that do not receive an A on their
scorecard to be brought before Congress.
I urge all my colleagues support H.R. 7103 so that we can
finally hold the government accountable for failing to meet its
commitment to small businesses.
If there is no further discussion, the Committee now moves
to consideration of H.R. 7103. The clerk will report.
The CLERK. H.R. 7103, to amend the Small----
Chairman WILLIAMS. Without objection, the first reading of
the bill is dispensed with. And without objection, the bill is
considered as read and open for amendment.
Do any Members seek recognition for the purpose of offering
an amendment?
Seeing none, the question is now in the adoption of H.R.
7103 and favorably reporting it to the House.
All those in favor, say aye.
All those opposed, say no.
In the opinion of the Chair, the ayes have it.
Mr. STAUBER. Mr. Chair.
Chairman WILLIAMS. Yes, sir?
Mr. STAUBER. Request a recorded vote.
Chairman WILLIAMS. The recorded vote has been requested and
a roll call vote is ordered. Pursuant to Committee rule 13 and
House rule XI, further proceedings on the bill are postponed.
H.R. 6156
The next bill we will mark up is H.R. 6156, the Childcare
Small Business Insight and Improvement Act of 2023, introduced
by Representatives Landsman, Molinaro, and Meuser. The clerk
will report.
The CLERK. H.R. 6156, to require the administrator----
Chairman WILLIAMS. Without objection, H.R. 6156 is
considered as read and open for amendment. The bill's sponsor,
Mr. Landsman, has an amendment in the nature of a substitute at
the desk. The amendment has been predistributed to all Members.
The clerk will report the amendment.
The CLERK. Amendment in the nature of a substitute to
H.R.----
Chairman WILLIAMS. Without objection, the amendment is
considered as read and the substitute will be considered base
text of the bill for the purpose of amendment.
I now recognize the bill sponsor, Mr. Landsman, for an
opening statement.
Mr. LANDSMAN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and to my Republican
colleagues who helped us put this bill together, Congresswoman
Letlow and, of course, here Congressmembers Molinaro and
Meuser.
The Childcare Small Business Insight and Improvement Act is
an important step in lifting up and supporting childcare
providers, which are uniquely special and uniquely important
small businesses. They help children as they are developing,
and they help families so that they can work. They are, as it
has been said, the workforce behind the workforce. They are
essential to our economy.
And many, if not most, of our childcare providers are, in
fact, small businesses. We think about them sometimes as
nonprofits, and there are many that are, in fact, nonprofits
and many that are part of larger companies or bigger
businesses. But the fact is, most are small businesses. But the
SBA was not really built for these small businesses.
This bill will change that. It assesses the needs of our
childcare small businesses. It looks at the resources that the
SBA currently provides, but, most importantly, it starts to
tackle the gaps of what the SBA could be doing to lift up and
support our childcare small businesses and the leadership
within the SBA that would be needed to implement the
recommendations.
So I am grateful for the bipartisan support for our
childcare small businesses, the workforce behind our workforce.
And with that, I yield back.
Chairman WILLIAMS. Yields back. I now recognize the bill's
cosponsor, Mr. Meuser, for an opening statement.
Mr. MEUSER. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. And I thank
my colleague, Mr. Landsman, for his leadership.
For parents in the workforce, access to reliable and
affordable childcare is not just a convenience, it is a
necessity. It enables parents to focus on their careers,
contribute to the economy, and pursue their entrepreneurial
aspirations with the confidence that their children are in safe
hands.
Entrepreneurs face unique challenges in balancing the
demands of building a successful business and caring for their
families. Access to reliable and affordable childcare can make
all the difference, allowing entrepreneurs to concentrate on
their businesses while providing a secure environment for their
children's development.
In talking with many small businesses, particularly as of
late, and local chambers in my district, such as Mr. Bob Carl,
he's president of the Schuylkill County Chamber, they have
emphasized the importance and prioritized the importance of
access to reliable childcare for our small business owners and
local economy. This legislation recognizes the significant role
for-profit childcare providers play in supporting working
parents. By directing the SBA to conduct a thorough study of
the needs and challenges faced by these businesses, this
legislation will help this Committee and the SBA understand how
to appropriately assist increasing the overall availability and
affordability of childcare, benefiting both small business
childcare providers as well as the businesses and
entrepreneurs.
So I do thank my colleague again, Mr. Landsman. I thank my
colleague, Mr. Molinaro, for his leadership on this
legislation. I urge my colleagues to support its passage and
look forward to its consideration on the floor.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Chairman WILLIAMS. The gentleman yields back.
I now recognize the bill's cosponsor, Mr. Molinaro, for an
opening statement.
Mr. MOLINARO. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I certainly
appreciate it. And I am grateful to my colleague, Mr. Landsman.
This bipartisan legislation seeks to address a significant
challenge for certainly many families across America. Quality
and affordable childcare is as much about providing assistance
to children as it is a part of developing young children. And
so H.R. 6156, the Childcare Small Business Insight and
Improvement Act, is meant to address the need for affordable
childcare. The bill seeks to enhance the SBA's role in
supporting for-profit childcare providers while seeking to
foster a greater understanding of the needs and challenges of
small businesses.
New York, as sadly in many cases, is either the top or the
bottom when it comes to most expensive or least opportunity.
New York is the third least affordable state for single
parents. And we know in particular in upstate New York, we
continue to face the challenge of accessibility to affordable
and quality childcare. We hear consistently not only from
constituents, but also constituent business owners about the
lack of access to quality, affordable childcare and how
difficult it is, especially for families in rural communities
like mine, to access childcare.
The Childcare Small Business Insight and Improvement Act
sets our childcare providers up for long-term success and works
to ensure that access to quality childcare is not a workforce
barrier for our growing communities. We have seen it
consistently, too many are locked out of the workforce simply
because of lack of access to childcare. And again, I reinforce
that access to quality childcare is as much about providing the
opportunity for individuals to get to work and kids to have
those social relationships. But quality childcare is quality
early child development, and all of that is critically
important to growing the American economy and closing the gaps
in places like upstate New York.
And with that, again, I thank my colleagues Mr. Landsman,
Mr. Chairman, thank you. And I encourage my colleagues to
support of the bill.
And I yield back.
Chairman WILLIAMS. Yields back. Are there any other Members
who wish to be recognized for a statement on this bill?
Ms. VELAZQUEZ. Yes, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman WILLIAMS. Ranking Member.
Ms. VELAZQUEZ. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Let me begin by thanking Mr. Landsman and Molinaro and Mr.
Meuser. But let me also praise Mr. Landsman for his leadership
on this important issue. Since being elected to Congress, he
has made it his mission to make life better for children and
families, and increasing access to quality childcare is one way
to accomplish that goal.
Affordable, high-quality childcare is essential to working
families, small businesses, and our economy. A recent study
found nearly two-thirds of parents of infants and toddlers face
childcare issues that affect their productivity at work,
resulting in $78 billion in foregone earnings and job search
expenses for families. It also means $23 billion in workforce
shortages for employers and $21 billion in lower federal, state
and local tax revenues.
Unfortunately, quality childcare services has been in short
supply, and the pandemic exacerbated the shortages within the
industry. To make matters worse, the emergency funding provided
in the American Rescue Plan for childcare centers has ended.
Put simply, we are in the midst of a crisis.
In December, we heard testimony that the loss of funds is
threatening the existence of more than a third of our nation's
centers, and many providers have had to increase their fees. We
must tackle this crisis head-on and provide families the
support they need to enter and stay in the workforce. That is
why I am pleased to support the Childcare Business Insight and
Improvement Act, which will make sure our nation's 600,000
childcare businesses have the resources they need to thrive.
Mr. Williams, I yield back.
Chairman WILLIAMS. The Ranking Member yields back and I now
recognize myself to speak in support of the amendment in nature
of a substitute to H.R. 6156, the Childcare Small Business
Insight and Improvement Act of 2023.
This legislation requires the SBA to examine the landscape
of access to childcare through a report that will assess the
needs and challenges of for-profit childcare providers as well
as potential gaps in federal support for childcare small
businesses. The report will include recommendations for the
administrator on how to address the challenges uncovered in the
study.
This amendment preserves the intent of the original bill
while removing the mandate to create a new position to carry
out the bill before the study is conducted. I commend my
colleagues for supporting this legislation today while also
maintaining fiscal responsibility.
I urge my colleagues to vote yes on the amendment to H.R.
6156.
Do any Members seek recognition for the purpose of offering
an amendment to the amendment in the nature of a substitute?
If there is no further discussion, this question is now on
the amendment in the nature of a substitute to H.R. 6156
offered by Mr. Landsman.
All those in favor, say aye.
All those opposed, say no. In the opinion of the Chair, the
ayes have it, and the amendment and nature of a substitute to
H.R. 6156 offered by Mr. Landsman is agreed to.
Mr. LANDSMAN. Mr. Chair?
Chairman WILLIAMS. Yes. Recognized.
Mr. LANDSMAN. May I ask for a recorded vote?
Chairman WILLIAMS. A recorded vote has been requested and a
roll call vote is ordered. Pursuant to Committee rule 13 and
House rule XI, further proceedings on the amendment are
postponed.
The question is now on favorably reporting H.R. 6156, as
amended, to the House.
All those in favor, say aye.
All those opposed, say no.
In the opinion of the Chair, the ayes have it and H.R.
6156----
Mr. MEUSER. Mr. Chairman?
Chairman WILLIAMS. Yes.
Mr. MEUSER. I request a recorded vote.
Chairman WILLIAMS. Okay. A recorded vote has been requested
and a roll call vote is ordered. Pursuant to Committee rule 13
and House rule XI, further proceedings on the bill are
postponed.
H.R. 7104
The next bill we will mark up is H.R. 7104, the National
SBDC Advisory Board Improvement Act, introduced by
Representatives Mann and Golden.
I now recognize the bill's sponsor, Mr. Mann, for an
opening statement.
Mr. MANN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I rise to speak in support of H.R. 7104. In Kansas' big 1st
Congressional District, more than 80 percent of employees in
the district are employed by small business. There are five
small business development centers, or SBDCs, in the district,
and they operate in partnership with colleges or universities
across the state. We have ones in Liberal, Dodge City, Hayes,
Manhattan, and Lawrence. These SBDCs and those around the
country offer beneficial resources to small businesses, support
entrepreneurship, and drive economic development.
Between rampant inflation, high interest rates, a
disruptive supply chain, and burdensome federal regulation, our
small businesses are struggling. SBDCs often offer the tools
and resources that America's small business owners need to get
their business off the ground and to keep it running.
This legislation, the National SBDC Advisory Board
Improvement Act, would require the National Small Business
Development Center Advisory Board to provide an annual report
to Congress recommending improvements to SBDC's outreach,
technical assistant, and training for small businesses. The
National SBDC Advisory Board should be a part of the solution
to offer recommendations on how to keep those services and
resources current and of the highest quality, especially in
rural America.
I appreciate Representative Golden joining me in this
bipartisan legislation, and I encourage my colleagues to join
me in voting yes to advance this legislation to the full House.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Chairman WILLIAMS. The gentleman yields back. I now
recognize the bill's cosponsor, Mr. Golden, for an opening
statement.
Mr. GOLDEN. Thank you, Mr. Chair, Madam Ranking Member. I
want to thank Congressman Mann for bringing this bill forward
and for asking me to go ahead and partner with him on this.
In the interest of time, I will simply say that I am
strongly supportive of the work of Small Business Development
Centers and take seriously the responsibility of this Committee
and Congress to have good oversight of taxpayer-funded
programs. So I think this bill makes good sense. It is a
commonsense bill, it is a good bill, and I encourage the
Committee to support it. Thank you.
Chairman WILLIAMS. Are there any other Members who wish to
be recognized for a statement on the bill?
Yes, ma'am?
Ms. DAVIDS. Thank you, Chairman. And I would just like to
speak in support of the National SBDC Advisory Board
Improvement Act.
As Mr. Mann from the Big 1st in Kansas already stated, we
have quite a bit of entrepreneurship going on in the state of
Kansas. I know certainly the SBDCs in our state, including the
one in the 3rd district at Johnson County Community College,
works closely with the folks in Lawrence and other places in
the state. And just wanted to thank my colleagues for bringing
this bill up in a bipartisan way. I think this is a great
example of the ways that we can work together to improve the
entrepreneurial pursuits of the folks in our communities.
So I speak in support of the bill and encourage my
colleagues to support it here and on the House floor. I yield.
Chairman WILLIAMS. Yields back. Are there any other Members
who wish to be recognized for a statement on the bill?
Ms. VELAZQUEZ. Mr. Chairman?
Chairman WILLIAMS. Ranking Member.
Ms. VELAZQUEZ. Thank you. I am pleased to support the
legislation offered by Mr. Mann and Mr. Golden, which will
require the Small Business Development Center Advisory Board to
submit an annual report to Congress and the SBA on their
activities and, also, and this is the part that is so
important, to make recommendations to improve the program.
I applaud Mr. Mann and Mr. Golden for their leadership on
this issue, but I will be remiss if I did not mention the
importance of reauthorizing the entrepreneurial development
programs. It is imperative that this Committee review these
programs and make improvements to better meet the needs of
today small business owners. As the former Chair of this
Committee, I made certain we reauthorized these bills in both
the 116 and 117 Congresses. We worked together in a bipartisan
manner and all of the bills passed the House overwhelmingly.
In closing, Mr. Chairman, I look forward to working
together to mark up those reauthorization bills and appreciate
your commitment to that effort. I support this bill and I yield
back my time.
Chairman WILLIAMS. The gentlelady yields back. I now
recognize myself to speak in support of the legislation.
H.R. 7104, the National Small Business Development Center
Advisory Board Improvement Act ensures our nation's SBDCs
function at the highest level possible. The National SBDC
Advisory Board consists of educators, small business leaders,
and industry experts to give advice on improvements to the SBDC
program, to the associate administrator. This bill elevates
this important advisory board by providing an annual report to
Congress on opportunities to improve services and the program
as a whole.
I want to thank my colleague from Kansas and my colleague
from Maine for introducing this bill. I urge my colleagues to
support H.R. 7104.
If there is no further discussion, the Committee now moves
to consideration of H.R. 7104. The clerk will report.
The CLERK. H.R. 7104, to require the----
Chairman WILLIAMS. Without objection, the first reading of
the bill is dispensed with. And without objection, the bill is
considered as read and open for floor amendment.
Do any Members seek recognition for the purpose of offering
an amendment?
Seeing none, the question is now an adoption of H.R. 7104
and favorably reporting it to the House.
All those in favor, say aye.
Opposed, say no.
In the opinion of the Chair, the ayes have it, and H.R.
7104 is agreed to.
Mr. MEUSER. Mr. Chairman, I ask for a recorded vote.
Chairman WILLIAMS. Request for a recorded vote has been
requested and a roll call vote is ordered. Pursuant to
Committee rule 13 and House rule XI, further proceedings on the
bill are postponed.
H.R. 7105
The next bill we will mark up is H.R. 7105, the WOSB
Certification and Opportunity Expansion Act, introduced by
Ranking Member of Velazquez and Representative LaLota.
I now recognize the bill's sponsor, Ranking Member
Velazquez, for an opening statement.
Ms. VELAZQUEZ. Thank you, Chairman Williams, and thank you,
Representative LaLota, for cosponsoring this bill.
Our Committee has regularly worked to strengthen the SBA
Small business contracting programs and to protect their
integrity. Continuing this tradition, the WOSB Certification
and Opportunity Expansion Act will move away from self-
certification for the women-owned small business program by
requiring federal agencies to only count contracts awarded to
certified WOSBs toward meeting their procurement goals. This
will bring the WOSB certification process in line with
certifications from the other three small business program. And
while it will strengthen the program, it is further intended to
bolster its use.
This administration has awarded a record amount of
contracting dollars to women-owned small businesses, yet the
top line goal of 5 percent of contracting dollars to WOSBs
remains unmet. Simply put, women-owned small businesses are not
seeing the contracting opportunities that should accompany
their level of participation in the federal market. This is not
surprising when looking at the utilization of the contracting
authorities for small business programs.
According to CRS last analysis, the percentage set-aside or
sole sources to the other programs ranges from a low of 17
percent for HUBZones to well over half, about 58 percent, for
8(a)'s. The veteran's programs seized 44 percent of its dollars
reserved exclusively for veterans. Of the spending now going to
women-owned small businesses, only about 5 percent is moved
through the contracting authority.
Stakeholders point to confusion around WOSB-specific
requirements and processes. By moving more WOSB through the SBA
certification contracting process, we are expecting that
contracting officers will more confidently and more frequently
set aside and sole source contracts to women-owned small
businesses.
I will close by highlighting two key points. First, we know
this will take time and resources for SBA to implement. I
appreciate the Chairman's willingness to work with us to
provide sufficient time, and in doing so, we expect that WOSBs
will not be penalized if SBA faces delays.
Second, the WOSB program is unique in its use of third-
party certifiers, and those third-party certifiers charge fees.
We believe that existing and new processes laid out in the bill
will ensure that no WOSB is required to pay for a
certification. I intend to monitor both of these issues closely
during implementation.
Again, thank you, Mr. Williams. I urge Members to support
the bill, and I yield back.
Chairman WILLIAMS. The lady yields back.
I now recognize the bill's cosponsor, Mr. LaLota, for an
opening statement.
Mr. LALOTA. Thank you, Chairman Williams. Thank you to
Ranking Member Velazquez, a proud fellow New Yorker, for
leading this effort with me. It is a good day when Members of
the same state delegation, but from opposite sides of the aisle
work together on an important issue that will not just benefit
our state's small businesses, but America's small businesses.
Our Women-Owned Small Business Certification Opportunity
Expansion Act will phase out self-certified women-owned small
businesses from the governmentwide procurement goals. In doing
so, we will achieve two main things: protect the integrity of
the women-owned small business program; and two, prevent the
abuse of federal small business contracting goals.
While our federal government has a goal to spend at least 5
percent of its procurement dollars with women-owned small
businesses, at present this includes self-certified firms. The
SBA Office of Inspector General has consistently pointed out
that with small disadvantaged businesses, the ability to self-
certify opens up the designation to risk. This holds true to
the ability for self-certified women-owned small businesses as
well.
Meanwhile, women-owned small business owners in the SBA's
Women-Owned Small Business Program go through a certification
program to ensure that only women-owned firms enter. This
aligns the Women-Owned Small Business Program with similar
programs that no longer count self-certified firms in these
goals. A similar provision phasing out self-certified service-
disabled veteran-owned small businesses from the procurement
goals passed in the fiscal year 2024 NDAA.
I ask that my colleagues support and vote yes on the Women-
Owned Small Business Certification and Opportunity Expansion
Act.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Chairman WILLIAMS. The gentleman yields back.
Are there any other Members who wish to be recognized for a
statement on the bill?
Seeing none, I now recognize myself to speak in support of
H.R. 7105, the Women-Owned Small Business Opportunity and
Expansion Act.
This bill will remove self-certification from the
governmentwide women-owned small business procurement goals,
allowing anyone to self-certify their business status could
lead to fraud and abuse. Women small business owners competing
for critical government contracts deserve to know that their
competition did not falsely self-certify their business status.
I am proud of the work already done to remove self-
certification from the service-disabled veteran-owned small
business program in the NDAA. And now it is time to do the same
with the WOSB program to help ensure integrity across SBA
programs.
I urge my colleagues to join me in supporting H.R. 7105.
If there is no further discussion, the Committee now moves
to consideration of H.R. 7105. The clerk will report.
The CLERK. H.R. 7105, to establish----
Chairman WILLIAMS. Without objection, the first reading of
the bill is dispensed with. And without objection, the bill is
considered as read and open for amendment.
Do any Members seek recognition for the purpose of offering
an amendment?
Seeing none, the question is now on the adoption of H.R.
7105 and favorably reporting it to the House.
All those in favor, say aye.
All those opposed, say no.
In the opinion of the Chair, the ayes haven it, and H.R.
7105 is agreed to and ordered favorably to the House.
Mr. MANN. Chairman, request a recorded vote, please.
Chairman WILLIAMS. A recorded vote has been requested. A
roll call vote is ordered. Pursuant to Committee rule 13 and
House rule XI, further proceedings on the bill are postponed.
H.R. 7128
The next bill we will mark up is H.R. 7128, the WOSB
Integrity Act of 2024, introduced by Representatives Maloy and
Scholten.
I now recognize the bill's sponsor, Ms. Maloy, for an
opening statement.
Mr. MALOY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman. I'll be brief.
We have already talked a fair amount about women-owned
small businesses, or WOSBs. This bill seeks to close a
loophole. The SBA inspector general found that while the SBA
certifies that firms are women-owned, the SBA does not have
procedures in place to verify size.
And this bill will close a loophole that allows women-owned
businesses that are not small businesses to use the resources
that have been set aside for women-owned small businesses. It
cleans up the process and makes sure that the resources that we
have set aside to support women who are trying to enter the
marketplace are, in fact, going to women in small businesses
who are entering the marketplace.
I represent Utah. Utah is the home to a lot of women who
are entrepreneurs, and I want to make sure that they can
compete and succeed. And in order to make that happen, we have
got to level the playing field and make sure these programs are
operating the way they were intended to.
With that, I yield back.
Chairman WILLIAMS. Yields back. I now recognize the bill
sponsor, Ms. Scholten, for an opening statement.
Ms. SCHOLTEN. Yes, sir. Thank you so much.
I am so proud to speak on behalf of this bill. The Women-
Owned Small Business--WOSB--Integrity Act, which is
cosponsored, of course, by Congresswoman Maloy. Women working
together, happy to see it.
Women, in particular, have been a driving force behind
America's economic rebound from the COVID-19 pandemic, creating
about half of new businesses for the third year in a row. To
that end, it is incumbent on us to continue to find ways to
support them. I strongly believe that one of the easiest ways
to do this is by streamlining the bureaucratic process required
when registering as a women-owned small business with the SBA.
That is why I am so proud to support this bill that would
require the SBA, or third-party certifiers, to certify that an
applicant meets the SBA's size standards as a Small business
for participation in the WOSB program.
By incorporating the certification at the beginning of the
registration process, WOSBs will be able to spend their time
running their business instead of defending their legitimacy
and being forced to engage in lengthy battles with the
competing companies that challenge the contracts they earn in
the federal marketplace.
As the Ranking Member on the Small Business Committee on
Contracting and Infrastructure, I look forward to continuing to
find solutions that lighten the bureaucratic burden of running
a women-owned small business in America.
I urge Members to vote yes on this important legislation.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. And I yield back the remainder of my
time.
Chairman WILLIAMS. Yields back. Are there any Members who
wish to be recognized for a statement on this bill?
Ms. VELAZQUEZ. Mr. Chairman?
Chairman WILLIAMS. Yes, Ranking Member.
Ms. VELAZQUEZ. Thank you. I really appreciate this bill's
sponsors, Representatives Maloy and Scholten, for their work to
bring it before us today.
The SBA's IG has routinely highlighted what it believes is
a discrepancy in SBA implementation of the WOSB program. Like
all small business contracting programs, WOSBs must meet a
number of criteria for participation, including that the firm
is owned and controlled by women, it is certified, and it is
small, among others. The IG has stated that implementation of
the size requirement is, and I quote, inconsistent with the
statutory requirement.
The purpose of this bill is to clarify that we expect SBA
to have a process similar to the other contracting programs
when reviewing WASP applicants. The OIG report states that they
acknowledge, and I quote, ``that size determination is a
specific process and is not recommending SBA perform size
determinations for each applicant.'' The legislation mirrors
that language to clarify the intent.
With that, I support this bill and I ask for a yes vote.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Chairman WILLIAMS. Yields back. I now recognize myself to
speak in support of H.R. 7128, the Women-Owned Small Business
Integrity Act.
This bill will ensure that women small businesses' owners
and the SBA's women-owned small business program do not have to
worry about a large firm and misrepresenting themselves as a
small business when they enter the program. Self-certification
in the SBA contracting programs presents a major concern, as
the Committee has heard directly from witnesses in our
hearings.
Unfortunately, the SBA does not have processes and
procedures in place to verify that WOSB applicants are in fact
women-owned small businesses. This is a missed opportunity by
the SBA to ensure that only small businesses are entering the
program and WOSB participants are not competing with fraudulent
actors.
I urge my colleagues to support H.R. 7128, the WOSB
Integrity Act, and take this step to prevent fraud and abuse.
If there is no further discussion, the Committee now moves
consideration of H.R. 7128. The clerk will report.
The CLERK. H.R. 7128, to establish requirements----
Chairman WILLIAMS. Without objection, The first reading of
the bill is dispensed. And without objection, the bill is
considered as read and open for amendment.
Do any Members seek recognition for the purpose of offering
an amendment?
Seeing none, the question is now on the adoption of H.R.
7128 in favor of reporting it to the House.
All those in favor, say aye.
All those opposed, say no.
In the opinion of the Chair, the ayes have it, and H.R.
7128 is agreed to and ordered favorably to the House.
Ms. SCHOLTEN. Mr. Chair?
Chairman WILLIAMS. Recognized.
Ms. SCHOLTEN. I request a recorded vote.
Chairman WILLIAMS. A recorded vote has been requested and a
roll call vote is ordered. Pursuant to Committee Rule 13 and
House rule XI, further proceedings on the bill are postponed.
H.R. 7129
The next bill we will mark up is H.R. 7129, the Put America
on Commission Act of 2024, which I introduced along with many
of my colleagues on this Committee.
I now recognize myself to speak in support of this
legislation
H.R. 7129, the Put America on Commission Act of 2024, will
maximize recovery efforts of fraudulent pandemic loan funds by
incentivizing everyday Americans to submit information on
fraudulent loans in exchange for a commission. This bill will
establish the Office of Whistleblower awards within the SBA to
pass along tips to the Office of Inspector General and credible
evidence of pandemic loan fraud submitted by the public. If
that information leads to a final conviction, the office will
then disperse award money to eligible whistleblowers.
The need for this bill was demonstrated during our
Committee hearing last year where we examined the SBA inspector
general's estimate that over $200 billion in taxpayer money was
given out to bad actors through PPP, EIDL, and other COVID-19
funding programs by the SBA. This accounts for nearly 20
percent of all pandemic lending and it is totally unacceptable.
One thing became particularly clear in that hearing was
that whistleblowers could serve as the key to uncovering this
unprecedented amount of fraud. The newly established Office of
Whistleblower Awards will be led by one staffer to coordinate
tips to the SBA inspector general for investigation.
Uniquely, the cost of the office's operations and the
whistleblower awards are fully funded by the recovered
fraudulent loan amounts which are deposited into the
whistleblower award fund. The office will sunset at the
conclusion of the final investigation under the expiration of
the statute of limitations for pandemic loan fraud.
Lastly, the bill provides authority to the SBA to seek a
separate civil monetary penalty against convicted fraudsters,
which must also be deposited the Whistleblower award fund. Any
unused monies in the whistleblower award fund are mandated to
be returned to the general fund.
In the private sector commission works, this bill will look
to bring this common practice to help bring accountability to
these individuals that chose to defraud the taxpayers during a
global pandemic. I greatly appreciate the work that the Office
of the Inspector General has done thus far to uncover the
extent of the fraud. But it is clear that more work must be
done to do the American people what they need to have done, and
also small businesses.
I am proud to put forward this piece of legislation that
will hold fraudsters accountable and recoup the billions of
dollars stolen from the taxpayers. I urge my colleagues to vote
yes on H.R. 7129.
Are there any other Members who wish to be recognized for a
statement on this bill?
Seeing none, I would--oh, Mr. Luetkemeyer, sorry. Yes, sir.
Mr. LUETKEMEYER. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate your
hard work on this bill. And you and I have been talking about
this for a long time, and I think you articulated some of the
problems and ways that we can deal with this.
You know, the Inspector general did his job. He did the job
of going through the files, seeing what the problem is and
showing us how large it was. Now it is our job, the SBA's job,
to fix it. SBA doesn't want to do it. They think they can't do
it, which is, in my judgment, I don't believe that. But if they
can't do it, then maybe we need to help them. And so if that is
the case, then this bill is a way to do that. It is a way to
take back our first target, the dollars that are taxpayer
dollars. They are not the government dollars. They are taxpayer
dollars, our dollars that we are supposed to be overseeing and
then have SBA go find them, DOJ go find them, whoever and
however this is going to work.
I think this is extremely important piece of legislation,
maybe the most important piece of legislation that comes out of
this Committee, because of the total amount of money that
you're talking about, number one. And number two, the principle
that if you owe money to the government, we are not going to
write it off. We are going to ask you to pay it back. Just like
every single business in this country, when they do--or
individual, when you take out a loan, when you take something
from somebody and you commit to pay it back, you pay it back.
That is a principle that has to be maintained, and this bill
will help do that.
Mr. Chairman, again, sincerely, thank you for your hard
work on this. I look forward to supporting it and urge my
colleagues to do as well.
With that, I yield back.
Chairman WILLIAMS. I now recognize Representative Meuser
from Pennsylvania for 5 minutes.
Mr. MEUSER. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
So we have discussed in detail, in multiple hearings this
year, the SBA's inspector general estimate $200 billion of
pandemic loan dollars were potentially obtained fraudulently.
So this number includes 8 percent of PPP, 44 percent of vital
loans.
So by establishing an Office of Whistleblower Rewards
within the SBA and putting America on commission, as you have
named the bill, and as the Chairman likes to say, this
legislation will incentivize Americans to come forward with
tips on potential pandemic loan fraud. This office will be
another tool at our disposal to fight to recover as much of the
potential COVID fraud as possible. This Committee must and will
take seriously our role in overseeing the SBA's loan programs,
especially the Pandemic Relief Programs, and assure bad actors
are pursued.
So I thank Chairman Williams for his leadership. I urge my
colleagues to support its passage and look forward to its swift
consideration on the House floor.
Mr. Chairman, thank you. And I yield back.
Chairman WILLIAMS. Yields back.
I would like to recognize the Ranking Member to speak on
the bill.
Ms. VELAZQUEZ. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Throughout the 118th Congress, this Committee has been
primarily focused on recovering fraudulent pandemic loans. I
share your commitment, and that is why I led efforts, along
with Congressman Luetkemeyer, to extend the statute of
limitations for fraud in the EIDL and PPP programs.
This bill, which became law, sent a strong message that
unscrupulous behavior will not be tolerated and that those who
commit fraud will be held accountable in the years to come. The
estimates of potential fraud in SBA programs vary
significantly, ranging from 26 billion to 200 billion. And
while we may never know the exact number, there is no doubt
that the vast majority of the fraud occurred in the first 9
months of the pandemic under the leadership of former President
Trump.
We also know with certainty that the Biden administration,
led by Administrator Guzman at SBA, took a number of steps to
curtail the fraud, including reinstituting longstanding
controls, establishing a fraud risk management board, and
creating a special council for enterprise risk. The IG has
attested to that in our Committee, and he reported that the
oversight work has provided an exponential return on
investment, 1,300 percent on the dollar.
Given the stellar return on the investment, the single most
important action we can take to recover fraud is to fully fund
the IG and our law enforcement community. I should note that
the IG has more than 90,000 actionable leads that have been
submitted to their hotline. The underlying issue is not
necessarily a failure to identify fraud, because the IG and DOJ
have enough leads to stay active for decades. The issue is
adequately funding the law enforcement community to investigate
and prosecute potential fraud.
With that said, I appreciate the efforts of the Chairman to
come up with a creative solution to help recover fraudulent
funds, and I plan to support this bill. New spending will be
needed to establish the office and hire staff because this type
of investigations and prosecutions can take time and the
recoveries, unfortunately, will not flow immediately into
account.
I am committed to making sure that SBA and the IG have the
resources they need to recover fraudulent funds. And I thank
the Chairman for working with me to bridge the differences on
this bill. Thank you and I yield back
Chairman WILLIAMS. Yields back. If there is no further
discussion, the Committee now moves to consideration of H.R.
7129. The clerk will report.
The CLERK. H.R. 7129, to amend the Small Business Act----
Chairman WILLIAMS. Without objection, the first reading of
the bill is dispensed with. And without objection, the bill is
considered as read and open for amendment.
Do any Members seek recognition for the purpose of offering
an amendment?
Seeing none, the question is now on the adoption of H.R.
7129 and favorably reporting to the house.
All those in favor, say aye.
Those opposed, say no.
In the opinion of the Chair, the ayes have it, and H.R.
7129 is agreed to and ordered favorably to the House.
Mr. ELLZEY. Mr. Chairman, I request a recorded vote.
Chairman WILLIAMS. A recorded vote has been requested. A
roll call vote is ordered. Pursuant to Committee rule 13 and
House rule XI, further proceedings on the bill are postponed.
The Committee now stands in recess subject to the call of
the Chair. We will resume at a later today at 11:45.
[Recess.]
Chairman WILLIAMS. Okay, if I can have everybody's
attention. The Committee will now come to order.
Without objection, the request for a recorded vote on the
agreeing to the amendment in the nature of a substitute for
H.R. 6156 is withdrawn and the amendment in the nature of a
substitute offered by Mr. Landsman is agreed to.
The Committee will now resume consideration of the bills on
which roll call votes are requested and postponed. We will
start with H.R. 6591.
The question now is on adopting H.R. 6591, as amended, and
ordering it favorably reported to the House. The clerk will
call the roll.
The CLERK. Mr. Luetkemeyer?
Mr. LUETKEMEYER. Yes.
The CLERK. Mr. Luetkemeyer votes aye.
Mr. Stauber?
Mr. STAUBER. Aye.
The CLERK. Mr. Stauber votes aye.
Mr. Meuser?
Mr. MEUSER. Aye.
The CLERK. Mr. Meuser votes aye.
Ms. Van Duyne?
Ms. VAN DUYNE. Aye.
The CLERK. Ms. Van Duyne votes aye.
Ms. Salazar?
Ms. SALAZAR. Aye.
The CLERK. Ms. Salazar votes aye.
Mr. Mann?
Mr. MANN. Aye.
The CLERK. Mr. Mann votes aye.
Mr. Ellzey?
Mr. ELLZEY. Aye.
The CLERK. Mr. Ellzey votes aye.
Mr. Molinaro?
[No response.]
The CLERK. Mr. Alford?
Mr. ALFORD. Aye.
The CLERK. Mr. Alford votes aye.
Mr. Crane?
Mr. CRANE. Aye.
The CLERK. Mr. Crane votes aye.
Mr. Bean?
Mr. BEAN. Aye.
The CLERK. Mr. Bean votes aye.
Mr. Hunt?
Mr. HUNT. Aye.
The CLERK. Mr. Hunt votes aye.
Mr. LaLota?
Mr. LALOTA. Aye.
The CLERK. Mr. LaLota votes aye.
Ms. Maloy?
[No response.]
Mr. Golden?
Mr. GOLDEN. Aye.
The CLERK. Mr. Golden votes aye.
Mr. Mfume?
Mr. MFUME. Aye.
The CLERK. Mr. Mfume votes aye.
Mr. Phillips?
[No response.]
Mr. Landsman?
Mr. LANDSMAN. Aye.
The CLERK. Mr. Landsman votes aye.
Mr. McGarvey?
[No response.]
Ms. Gluesenkamp Perez?
Ms. GLUESENKAMP PEREZ. Aye.
The CLERK. Ms. Gluesenkamp Perez votes aye.
Ms. Scholten?
[No response.]
Mr. Thanedar?
Mr. THANEDAR. Aye.
The CLERK. Mr. Thanedar votes aye.
Ms. Chu?
Ms. CHU. Aye.
The CLERK. Ms. Chu votes aye.
Ms. Davids?
Ms. DAVIDS. Ms. Davids votes aye.
Mr. Pappas?
[No response.]
The CLERK. Ranking Member Velazquez?
Ms. VELAZQUEZ. Aye.
The CLERK. Ranking Member Velazquez votes aye.
Chairman Williams?
Chairman WILLIAMS. Aye.
The CLERK. Chairman Williams votes aye.
Mr. MOLINARO. Mr. Chairman?
Chairman WILLIAMS. Yes.
Mr. MOLINARO. Mr. Chairman, how am I recorded?
Chairman WILLIAMS. Who said that?
Mr. MOLINARO. Mr. Molinaro. Okay. The other Italian from
New York.
The CLERK. Mr. Molinaro is recorded as not voted.
Mr. MOLINARO. I vote yes.
The CLERK. Mr. Molinaro votes aye.
Chairman WILLIAMS. Okay. Are there any other Members who
have not voted or wish to change their vote?
Seeing none, the clerk will report it.
The CLERK. Mr. Chairman, on that vote, 22 ayes, 0 nays, and
0 present.
Chairman WILLIAMS. The motion is agreed to, and H.R. 6591,
as amended, is adopted and will be reported favorably to the
House.
The question now is on adopting H.R. 7102 and ordering it
favorably reported to the Jouse. The clerk will call the roll.
The CLERK. Mr. Luetkemeyer?
Mr. LUETKEMEYER. Aye.
The CLERK. Mr. Luetkemeyer votes aye.
Mr. Stauber?
Mr. STAUBER. Aye.
The CLERK. Mr. Stauber votes aye.
Mr. Meuser?
Mr. MEUSER. Aye.
The CLERK. Mr. Meuser votes aye.
Ms. Van Duyne?
Ms. VAN DUYNE. Aye.
The CLERK. Ms. Van Duyne votes aye.
Ms. Salazar?
Ms. SALAZAR. Aye.
The CLERK. Ms. Salazar votes aye.
Mr. Mann?
Mr. MANN. Aye.
The CLERK. Mr. Mann votes aye.
Mr. Ellzey?
Mr. ELLZEY. Aye.
The CLERK. Mr. Ellzey votes aye.
Mr. Molinaro?
Mr. MOLINARO. Aye.
The CLERK. Mr. Alford?
Mr. ALFORD. Aye.
The CLERK. Mr. Alford votes aye.
Mr. Crane?
Mr. CRANE. Aye.
The CLERK. Mr. Crane votes aye.
Mr. Bean?
Mr. BEAN. Aye.
The CLERK. Mr. Bean votes aye.
Mr. Hunt?
Mr. HUNT. Aye.
The CLERK. Mr. Hunt votes aye.
Mr. LaLota?
Mr. LALOTA. Aye.
The CLERK. Mr. LaLota votes aye.
Ms. Maloy?
[No response.]
Mr. Golden?
Mr. GOLDEN. Aye.
The CLERK. Mr. Golden votes aye.
Mr. Mfume?
Mr. MFUME. Aye.
The CLERK. Mr. Mfume votes aye.
Mr. Phillips?
[No response.]
Mr. Landsman?
Mr. LANDSMAN. Aye.
The CLERK. Mr. Landsman votes aye.
Mr. McGarvey?
[No response.]
Ms. Gluesenkamp Perez?
Ms. GLUESENKAMP PEREZ. Aye.
The CLERK. Ms. Gluesenkamp Perez votes aye.
Ms. Scholten?
[No response.]
Mr. Thanedar?
Mr. THANEDAR. Aye.
The CLERK. Mr. Thanedar votes aye.
Ms. Chu?
Ms. CHU. Aye.
The CLERK. Ms. Chu votes aye.
Ms. Davids?
Ms. DAVIDS. Ms. Davids votes aye.
Mr. Pappas?
[No response.]
The CLERK. Ranking Member Velazquez?
Ms. VELAZQUEZ. Aye.
The CLERK. Ranking Member Velazquez votes aye.
Chairman Williams?
Chairman WILLIAMS. Aye.
The CLERK. Chairman Williams votes aye.
Chairman WILLIAMS. Are there any Members who have not
voted?
Mr. MCGARVEY. I wish to be recorded as an I vote, Mr.
Chairman.
The CLERK. Mr. McGarvey votes aye.
Ms. SCHOLTEN. Aye.
The CLERK. Ms. Scholten votes aye.
Mr. Chairman, on that vote, 24 ayes, 0 nays, and 0 present.
Chairman WILLIAMS. Okay. The motion is agreed to and H.R.
7102 is adopted and will be reported favorably to the House.
The question now is adopting H.R. 7103 and ordering it
favorably to the House. The clerk will call the roll.
The CLERK. Mr. Luetkemeyer?
Mr. LUETKEMEYER. Aye.
The CLERK. Mr. Luetkemeyer votes aye.
Mr. Stauber?
Mr. STAUBER. Aye.
The CLERK. Mr. Stauber votes aye.
Mr. Meuser?
Mr. MEUSER. Aye.
The CLERK. Mr. Meuser votes aye.
Ms. Van Duyne?
Ms. VAN DUYNE. Aye.
The CLERK. Ms. Van Duyne votes aye.
Ms. Salazar?
Ms. SALAZAR. Aye.
The CLERK. Ms. Salazar votes aye.
Mr. Mann?
Mr. MANN. Aye.
The CLERK. Mr. Mann votes aye.
Mr. Ellzey?
Mr. ELLZEY. Aye.
The CLERK. Mr. Ellzey votes aye.
Mr. Molinaro?
[No response.]
Mr. Alford?
Mr. ALFORD. Aye.
The CLERK. Mr. Alford votes aye.
Mr. Crane?
Mr. CRANE. Aye.
The CLERK. Mr. Crane votes aye.
Mr. Bean?
Mr. BEAN. Aye.
The CLERK. Mr. Bean votes aye.
Mr. Hunt?
Mr. HUNT. Aye.
The CLERK. Mr. Hunt votes aye.
Mr. LaLota?
Mr. LALOTA. Aye.
The CLERK. Mr. LaLota votes aye.
Ms. Maloy?
[No response.]
Mr. Golden?
Mr. GOLDEN. Aye.
The CLERK. Mr. Golden votes aye.
Mr. Mfume?
Mr. MFUME. Aye.
The CLERK. Mr. Mfume votes aye.
Mr. Phillips?
[No response.]
Mr. Landsman?
Mr. LANDSMAN. Aye.
The CLERK. Mr. Landsman votes aye.
Mr. McGarvey?
Mr. MCGARVEY. Aye.
The CLERK. Mr. McGarvey votes aye.
Ms. Gluesenkamp Perez?
Ms. GLUESENKAMP PEREZ. Aye.
The CLERK. Ms. Gluesenkamp Perez votes aye.
Ms. Scholten?
Ms. SCHOLTEN. Yes.
The CLERK. Ms. Scholten votes aye.
Mr. Thanedar?
Mr. THANEDAR. Aye.
The CLERK. Mr. Thanedar votes aye.
Ms. Chu?
Ms. CHU. Aye.
The CLERK. Ms. Chu votes aye.
Ms. Davids?
Ms. DAVIDS. Ms. Davids votes aye.
Mr. Pappas?
[No response.]
The CLERK. Ranking Member Velazquez?
Ms. VELAZQUEZ. Aye.
The CLERK. Ranking Member Velazquez votes aye.
Chairman Williams?
Chairman WILLIAMS. Aye.
The CLERK. Chairman Williams votes aye.
Chairman WILLIAMS. Okay. Are there any of the Members who
have not voted or wished to change their vote?
Seeing none, the clerk will report.
The CLERK. Mr. Chairman, on that vote, 23 ayes, 0 nays, and
0 present.
Chairman WILLIAMS. Okay. The motion is agreed to and H.R.
7103 is adopted and will be reported favorably to the House.
The question now is on adopting H.R. 6156, as amended, and
ordering it favorably reported to the House. The clerk will
call the roll.
The CLERK. Mr. Luetkemeyer?
Mr. LUETKEMEYER. Aye.
The CLERK. Mr. Luetkemeyer votes aye.
Mr. Stauber?
Mr. STAUBER. Aye.
The CLERK. Mr. Stauber votes aye.
Mr. Meuser?
Mr. MEUSER. Aye.
The CLERK. Mr. Meuser votes aye.
Ms. Van Duyne?
Ms. VAN DUYNE. Aye.
The CLERK. Ms. Van Duyne votes aye.
Ms. Salazar?
Ms. SALAZAR. Aye.
The CLERK. Ms. Salazar votes aye.
Mr. Mann?
Mr. MANN. Aye.
The CLERK. Mr. Mann votes aye.
Mr. Ellzey?
Mr. ELLZEY. Aye.
The CLERK. Mr. Ellzey votes aye.
Mr. Molinaro?
[No response.]
Mr. Alford?
Mr. ALFORD. Aye.
The CLERK. Mr. Alford votes aye.
Mr. Crane?
Mr. CRANE. Aye.
The CLERK. Mr. Crane votes aye.
Mr. Bean?
Mr. BEAN. Aye.
The CLERK. Mr. Bean votes aye.
Mr. Hunt?
Mr. HUNT. Aye.
The CLERK. Mr. Hunt votes aye.
Mr. LaLota?
Mr. LALOTA. Aye.
The CLERK. Mr. LaLota votes aye.
Ms. Maloy?
[No response.]
Mr. Golden?
Mr. GOLDEN. Aye.
The CLERK. Mr. Golden votes aye.
Mr. Mfume?
Mr. MFUME. Aye.
The CLERK. Mr. Mfume votes aye.
Mr. Phillips?
[No response.]
Mr. Landsman?
Mr. LANDSMAN. Aye.
The CLERK. Mr. Landsman votes aye.
Mr. McGarvey?
Mr. MCGARVEY. Aye.
The CLERK. Mr. McGarvey votes aye.
Ms. Gluesenkamp Perez?
Ms. GLUESENKAMP PEREZ. Aye.
The CLERK. Ms. Gluesenkamp Perez votes aye.
Ms. Scholten?
Ms. SCHOLTEN. Aye.
The CLERK. Ms. Scholten votes aye.
Mr. Thanedar?
Mr. THANEDAR. Aye.
The CLERK. Mr. Thanedar votes aye.
Ms. Chu?
Ms. CHU. Aye.
The CLERK. Ms. Chu votes aye.
Ms. Davids?
Ms. DAVIDS. Ms. Davids votes aye.
Mr. Pappas?
[No response.]
The CLERK. Ranking Member Velazquez?
Ms. VELAZQUEZ. Aye.
The CLERK. Ranking Member Velazquez votes aye.
Chairman Williams?
Chairman WILLIAMS. Aye.
The CLERK. Chairman Williams votes aye.
Chairman WILLIAMS. Okay. Are there any of the Members who
have not voted or wish to change their vote?
Seeing none, the clerk will report.
The CLERK. Mr. Chairman, on that vote, 23 ayes, 0 nays, and
0 present.
Chairman WILLIAMS. Okay. The motion is agreed to and H.R.
6156, as amended, is adopted and will be reported favorably to
the House.
The question now is on adopting H.R. 7104, and ordered
favorably reported to the House. The clerk will call the roll.
The CLERK. Mr. Luetkemeyer?
Mr. LUETKEMEYER. Aye.
The CLERK. Mr. Luetkemeyer votes aye.
Mr. Stauber?
Mr. STAUBER. Aye.
The CLERK. Mr. Stauber votes aye.
Mr. Meuser?
Mr. MEUSER. Aye.
The CLERK. Mr. Meuser votes aye.
Ms. Van Duyne?
Ms. VAN DUYNE. Aye.
The CLERK. Ms. Van Duyne votes aye.
Ms. Salazar?
Ms. SALAZAR. Aye.
The CLERK. Ms. Salazar votes aye.
Mr. Mann?
Mr. MANN. Aye.
The CLERK. Mr. Mann votes aye.
Mr. Ellzey?
Mr. ELLZEY. Aye.
The CLERK. Mr. Ellzey votes aye.
Mr. Molinaro?
[No response.]
Mr. Alford?
Mr. ALFORD. Aye.
The CLERK. Mr. Alford votes aye.
Mr. Crane?
Mr. CRANE. Aye.
The CLERK. Mr. Crane votes aye.
Mr. Bean?
Mr. BEAN. Aye.
The CLERK. Mr. Bean votes aye.
Mr. Hunt?
Mr. HUNT. Aye.
The CLERK. Mr. Hunt votes aye.
Mr. LaLota?
Mr. LALOTA. Aye.
The CLERK. Mr. LaLota votes aye.
Ms. Maloy?
[No response.]
Mr. Golden?
Mr. GOLDEN. Aye.
The CLERK. Mr. Golden votes aye.
Mr. Mfume?
Mr. MFUME. Aye.
The CLERK. Mr. Mfume votes aye.
Mr. Phillips?
[No response.]
Mr. Landsman?
Mr. LANDSMAN. Aye.
The CLERK. Mr. Landsman votes aye.
Mr. McGarvey?
Mr. MCGARVEY. Aye.
The CLERK. Mr. McGarvey votes aye.
Ms. Gluesenkamp Perez?
Ms. GLUESENKAMP PEREZ. Aye.
The CLERK. Ms. Gluesenkamp Perez votes aye.
Ms. Scholten?
Ms. SCHOLTEN. Aye.
The CLERK. Ms. Scholten votes aye.
Mr. Thanedar?
Mr. THANEDAR. Aye.
The CLERK. Mr. Thanedar votes aye.
Ms. Chu?
Ms. CHU. Aye.
The CLERK. Ms. Chu votes aye.
Ms. Davids?
Ms. DAVIDS. Ms. Davids votes aye.
Mr. Pappas?
[No response.]
The CLERK. Ranking Member Velazquez?
Ms. VELAZQUEZ. Aye.
The CLERK. Ranking Member Velazquez votes aye.
Chairman Williams?
Chairman WILLIAMS. Aye.
The CLERK. Chairman Williams votes aye.
Chairman WILLIAMS. Are there any other Members who have not
voted or wish to change their vote?
The clerk will report.
The CLERK. Mr. Chairman, on that vote, 23 ayes, 0 nays, and
0 present.
Chairman WILLIAMS. The motion is agreed to and H.R. 7104 is
adopted and will be reported favorably to the House.
The question now is on adopting H.R. 7105 and ordering it
favorably reported to the House. The clerk will call the roll.
The CLERK. Mr. Luetkemeyer?
Mr. LUETKEMEYER. Aye.
The CLERK. Mr. Luetkemeyer votes aye.
Mr. Stauber?
Mr. STAUBER. Aye.
The CLERK. Mr. Stauber votes aye.
Mr. Meuser?
Mr. MEUSER. Aye.
The CLERK. Mr. Meuser votes aye.
Ms. Van Duyne?
Ms. VAN DUYNE. Aye.
The CLERK. Ms. Van Duyne votes aye.
Ms. Salazar?
Ms. SALAZAR. Aye.
The CLERK. Ms. Salazar votes aye.
Mr. Mann?
Mr. MANN. Aye.
The CLERK. Mr. Mann votes aye.
Mr. Ellzey?
Mr. ELLZEY. Aye.
The CLERK. Mr. Ellzey votes aye.
Mr. Molinaro?
[No response.]
Mr. Alford?
Mr. ALFORD. Aye.
The CLERK. Mr. Alford votes aye.
Mr. Crane?
Mr. CRANE. Aye.
The CLERK. Mr. Crane votes aye.
Mr. Bean?
Mr. BEAN. Aye.
The CLERK. Mr. Bean votes aye.
Mr. Hunt?
Mr. HUNT. Aye.
The CLERK. Mr. Hunt votes aye.
Mr. LaLota?
Mr. LALOTA. Aye.
The CLERK. Mr. LaLota votes aye.
Ms. Maloy?
[No response.]
Mr. Golden?
Mr. GOLDEN. Aye.
The CLERK. Mr. Golden votes aye.
Mr. Mfume?
Mr. MFUME. Aye.
The CLERK. Mr. Mfume votes aye.
Mr. Phillips?
[No response.]
Mr. Landsman?
Mr. LANDSMAN. Aye.
The CLERK. Mr. Landsman votes aye.
Mr. McGarvey?
Mr. MCGARVEY. Aye.
The CLERK. Mr. McGarvey votes aye.
Ms. Gluesenkamp Perez?
Ms. GLUESENKAMP PEREZ. Aye.
The CLERK. Ms. Gluesenkamp Perez votes aye.
Ms. Scholten?
Ms. SCHOLTEN. Aye.
The CLERK. Ms. Scholten votes aye.
Mr. Thanedar?
Mr. THANEDAR. Aye.
The CLERK. Mr. Thanedar votes aye.
Ms. Chu?
Ms. CHU. Aye.
The CLERK. Ms. Chu votes aye.
Ms. Davids?
Ms. DAVIDS. Ms. Davids votes aye.
Mr. Pappas?
[No response.]
The CLERK. Ranking Member Velazquez?
Ms. VELAZQUEZ. Aye.
The CLERK. Ranking Member Velazquez votes aye.
Chairman Williams?
Chairman WILLIAMS. Aye.
The CLERK. Chairman Williams votes aye.
Chairman WILLIAMS. Are there any other Members who have not
voted or wish to change their vote?
Mr. MOLINARO. Mr. Chairman? Mr. Molinaro votes aye.
The CLERK. Mr. Molinaro votes aye.
Chairman WILLIAMS. The clerk will report.
The CLERK. Mr. Chairman, on that vote, 24 ayes, 0 nays, and
0 present.
Chairman WILLIAMS. The motion is agreed to and H.R. 7105 is
adopted and will be reported favorably to the House.
The question now is on adopting H.R. 7128 and ordering it
favorably reported to the House. The clerk will call the roll.
The CLERK. Mr. Luetkemeyer?
Mr. LUETKEMEYER. Aye.
The CLERK. Mr. Luetkemeyer votes aye.
Mr. Stauber?
Mr. STAUBER. Aye.
The CLERK. Mr. Stauber votes aye.
Mr. Meuser?
Mr. MEUSER. Aye.
The CLERK. Mr. Meuser votes aye.
Ms. Van Duyne?
Ms. VAN DUYNE. Aye.
The CLERK. Ms. Van Duyne votes aye.
Ms. Salazar?
Ms. SALAZAR. Aye.
The CLERK. Ms. Salazar votes aye.
Mr. Mann?
Mr. MANN. Aye.
The CLERK. Mr. Mann votes aye.
Mr. Ellzey?
Mr. ELLZEY. Aye.
The CLERK. Mr. Ellzey votes aye.
Mr. Molinaro?
Mr. MOLINARO. Aye.
The CLERK. Mr. Molinaro votes aye.
Mr. Alford?
Mr. ALFORD. Aye.
The CLERK. Mr. Alford votes aye.
Mr. Crane?
Mr. CRANE. Aye.
The CLERK. Mr. Crane votes aye.
Mr. Bean?
Mr. BEAN. Aye.
The CLERK. Mr. Bean votes aye.
Mr. Hunt?
Mr. HUNT. Aye.
The CLERK. Mr. Hunt votes aye.
Mr. LaLota?
Mr. LALOTA. Aye.
The CLERK. Mr. LaLota votes aye.
Ms. Maloy?
[No response.]
Mr. Golden?
Mr. GOLDEN. Aye.
The CLERK. Mr. Golden votes aye.
Mr. Mfume?
Mr. MFUME. Aye.
The CLERK. Mr. Mfume votes aye.
Mr. Phillips?
[No response.]
Mr. Landsman?
Mr. LANDSMAN. Aye.
The CLERK. Mr. Landsman votes aye.
Mr. McGarvey?
Mr. MCGARVEY. Aye.
The CLERK. Mr. McGarvey votes aye.
Ms. Gluesenkamp Perez?
Ms. GLUESENKAMP PEREZ. Aye.
The CLERK. Ms. Gluesenkamp Perez votes aye.
Ms. Scholten?
Ms. SCHOLTEN. Aye.
The CLERK. Ms. Scholten votes aye.
Mr. Thanedar?
Mr. THANEDAR. Aye.
The CLERK. Mr. Thanedar votes aye.
Ms. Chu?
Ms. CHU. Aye.
The CLERK. Ms. Chu votes aye.
Ms. Davids?
Ms. DAVIDS. Ms. Davids votes aye.
Mr. Pappas?
[No response.]
The CLERK. Ranking Member Velazquez? Can you repeat that?
Ms. VELAZQUEZ. Aye.
The CLERK. Ranking Member Velazquez votes aye.
Chairman Williams?
Chairman WILLIAMS. Aye.
The CLERK. Chairman Williams votes aye.
Chairman WILLIAMS. Are there any of the Members who have
not voted wish to change their votes?
The clerk will report.
The CLERK. Mr. Chairman on that vote 24 ayes, 0 nays, and 0
present.
Chairman WILLIAMS. The motion is agreed to and H.R. 7128 is
adopted and will be reported favorably to the House. I think
this is about as perfect as going to get right here for the
people of this great country that we are doing things to help
Main Street America.
So with that being said, the question now is on adopting
H.R. 7129 and ordering it favorably to the House. The clerk
will call the roll.
The CLERK. Mr. Luetkemeyer?
Mr. LUETKEMEYER. Aye.
The CLERK. Mr. Luetkemeyer votes aye.
Mr. Stauber?
Mr. STAUBER. Aye.
The CLERK. Mr. Stauber votes aye.
Mr. Meuser?
Mr. MEUSER. Aye.
The CLERK. Mr. Meuser votes aye.
Ms. Van Duyne?
Ms. VAN DUYNE. Aye.
The CLERK. Ms. Van Duyne votes aye.
Ms. Salazar?
Ms. SALAZAR. Aye.
The CLERK. Ms. Salazar votes aye.
Mr. Mann?
Mr. MANN. Aye.
The CLERK. Mr. Mann votes aye.
Mr. Ellzey?
Mr. ELLZEY. Aye.
The CLERK. Mr. Ellzey votes aye.
Mr. Molinaro?
Mr. MOLINARO. Aye.
The CLERK. Mr. Molinaro votes aye.
Mr. Alford?
Mr. ALFORD. Aye.
The CLERK. Mr. Alford votes aye.
Mr. Crane?
Mr. CRANE. Aye.
The CLERK. Mr. Crane votes aye.
Mr. Bean?
Mr. BEAN. Aye.
The CLERK. Mr. Bean votes aye.
Mr. Hunt?
Mr. HUNT. Aye.
The CLERK. Mr. Hunt votes aye.
Mr. LaLota?
Mr. LALOTA. Aye.
The CLERK. Mr. LaLota votes aye.
Ms. Maloy?
[No response.]
Mr. Golden?
Mr. GOLDEN. Aye.
The CLERK. Mr. Golden votes aye.
Mr. Mfume?
Mr. MFUME. Aye.
The CLERK. Mr. Mfume votes aye.
Mr. Phillips?
[No response.]
Mr. Landsman?
Mr. LANDSMAN. Aye.
The CLERK. Mr. Landsman votes aye.
Mr. McGarvey?
Mr. MCGARVEY. Aye.
The CLERK. Mr. McGarvey votes aye.
Ms. Gluesenkamp Perez?
Ms. GLUESENKAMP PEREZ. Aye.
The CLERK. Ms. Gluesenkamp Perez votes aye.
Ms. Scholten?
Ms. SCHOLTEN. Aye.
The CLERK. Ms. Scholten votes aye.
Mr. Thanedar?
Mr. THANEDAR. Aye.
The CLERK. Mr. Thanedar votes aye.
Ms. Chu?
Ms. CHU. Aye.
The CLERK. Ms. Chu votes aye.
Ms. Davids?
Ms. DAVIDS. Ms. Davids votes aye.
Mr. Pappas?
[No response.]
The CLERK. Ranking Member Velazquez?
Ms. VELAZQUEZ. Aye.
The CLERK. Ranking Member Velazquez votes aye.
Chairman Williams?
Chairman WILLIAMS. Aye.
The CLERK. Chairman Williams votes aye.
Mr. Chairman, on that vote, 24 ayes, 0 nays, and 0 present.
Chairman WILLIAMS. The motion is agreed to and H.R. 7129 is
adopted and will be reported favorably to the House.
Let me also say, without objection, Committee staff is
authorized to make technically conforming changes, and Members
have 2 business days to file additional supplemental descending
and minority views.
Thanks for being here today. We did a good job. I am proud
of all of you. Thank you.
[Whereupon, at 12:14 p.m., the committee was adjourned.]
A P P E N D I X

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
