- OVERSIGHT HEARING ON ENERGIZING THE TERRITORIES: PROMOTING AFFORDABLE AND RELIABLE ENERGY SOURCES FOR THE U.S. INSULAR AREAS

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

ENERGIZING THE TERRITORIES: PROMOTING AFFORDABLE AND
RELIABLE ENERGY SOURCES FOR THE U.S. INSULAR AREAS

=======================================================================

OVERSIGHT HEARING

before the

SUBCOMMITTEE ON INDIAN AND INSULAR AFFAIRS

of the

COMMITTEE ON NATURAL RESOURCES
U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

Thursday, April 11, 2024

__________

Serial No. 118-110

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Natural Resources

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.govinfo.gov

or

Committee address: http://naturalresources.house.gov

______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

55-382 PDF                WASHINGTON : 2024

COMMITTEE ON NATURAL RESOURCES

BRUCE WESTERMAN, AR, Chairman
DOUG LAMBORN, CO, Vice Chairman
RAUL M. GRIJALVA, AZ, Ranking Member

Doug Lamborn, CO      Grace F. Napolitano, CA
Robert J. Wittman, VA      Gregorio Kilili Camacho Sablan,
Tom McClintock, CA          CNMI
Paul Gosar, AZ      Jared Huffman, CA
Garret Graves, LA      Ruben Gallego, AZ
Aumua Amata C. Radewagen, AS      Joe Neguse, CO
Doug LaMalfa, CA      Mike Levin, CA
Daniel Webster, FL      Katie Porter, CA
Jenniffer Gonzalez-Colon, PR      Teresa Leger Fernandez, NM
Russ Fulcher, ID      Melanie A. Stansbury, NM
Pete Stauber, MN      Mary Sattler Peltola, AK
John R. Curtis, UT      Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez, NY
Tom Tiffany, WI      Kevin Mullin, CA
Jerry Carl, AL      Val T. Hoyle, OR
Matt Rosendale, MT      Sydney Kamlager-Dove, CA
Lauren Boebert, CO      Seth Magaziner, RI
Cliff Bentz, OR      Nydia M. Velazquez, NY
Jen Kiggans, VA      Ed Case, HI
Jim Moylan, GU      Debbie Dingell, MI
Wesley P. Hunt, TX      Susie Lee, NV
Mike Collins, GA
Anna Paulina Luna, FL
John Duarte, CA
Harriet M. Hageman, WY

Vivian Moeglein, Staff Director
Tom Connally, Chief Counsel
Lora Snyder, Democratic Staff Director
http://naturalresources.house.gov

------

SUBCOMMITTEE ON INDIAN AND INSULAR AFFAIRS

HARRIET M. HAGEMAN, WY, Chair
JENNIFFER GONZALEZ-COLON, PR, Vice Chair
TERESA LEGER FERNANDEZ, NM, Ranking Member

Aumua Amata C. Radewagen, AS         Gregorio Kilili Camacho Sablan,
Doug LaMalfa, CA                         CNMI
Jenniffer Gonzalez-Colon, PR         Ruben Gallego, AZ
Jerry Carl, AL                       Nydia M. Velazquez, NY
Jim Moylan, GU                       Ed Case, HI
Bruce Westerman, AR, ex officio      Raul M. Grijalva, AZ, ex officio

------

CONTENTS

----------
Page

Hearing held on Thursday, April 11, 2024.........................     1

Statement of Members:

Hageman, Hon. Harriet M., a Representative in Congress from
the State of Wyoming.......................................     1
Leger Fernandez, Hon. Teresa, a Representative in Congress
from the State of New Mexico...............................     2

Statement of Witnesses:

Brewer, John D., Jr., Director, Office of Insular Affairs,
U.S. Department of the Interior, Washington, DC............     4
Prepared statement of....................................     5
Questions submitted for the record.......................     7
Fleming, Kyle D., Chairman, U.S. Virgin Islands Water & Power
Authority, St. Croix, U.S. Virgin Islands..................     8
Prepared statement of....................................    10
Questions submitted for the record.......................    12
Stein, Kenneth, Vice President for Policy, Institute for
Energy Research, Washington, DC............................    13
Prepared statement of....................................    15
Questions submitted for the record.......................    16
Guannel, Gregory, Director, Caribbean Green Technology
Center, St. Thomas, U.S. Virgin Islands....................    18
Prepared statement of....................................    19
Questions submitted for the record.......................    22
Fisher, Travis, Director, Energy and Environmental Policy
Studies, Cato Institute, Washington, DC....................    22
Prepared statement of....................................    24
Questions submitted for the record.......................    29

Additional Materials Submitted for the Record:

Submissions for the Record by Representative Grijalva

Climate Strong Islands Network, Letter to the Committee..    41

Submissions for the Record by Representative Velazquez

Article titled, ``Cuatro de cada 10 personas en Puerto
Rico padeceran de cancer en algun momento de sus
vidas''................................................    34

OVERSIGHT HEARING ON ENERGIZING THE TERRITORIES: PROMOTING AFFORDABLE
AND RELIABLE ENERGY SOURCES FOR THE U.S. INSULAR AREAS

----------

Thursday, April 11, 2024

U.S. House of Representatives

Subcommittee on Indian and Insular Affairs

Committee on Natural Resources

Washington, DC

----------

The Subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 2 p.m., in
Room 1324 Longworth House Office Building, Hon. Harriet M.
Hageman [Chairwoman of the Subcommittee] presiding.
Present: Representatives Hageman, LaMalfa; Leger Fernandez,
Sablan, and Velazquez.

Ms. Hageman. The Subcommittee on Indian and Insular Affairs
will come to order. Without objection, the Chair is authorized
to declare a recess of the Subcommittee at any time.
The Subcommittee is meeting today to hear testimony on
Energizing the Territories: Promoting Affordable and Reliable
Energy Sources for the U.S. Insular Areas. Under Committee Rule
4(f), any oral opening statements at hearings are limited to
the Chairman and the Ranking Minority Member. I therefore ask
unanimous consent that all other Members' opening statements be
made part of the hearing record if they are submitted in
accordance with Committee Rule 3(o).
Without objection, so ordered.
I will now recognize myself for an opening statement.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. HARRIET M. HAGEMAN, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF WYOMING

Ms. Hageman. Today's hearing is entitled ``Energizing the
Territories: Promoting Affordable and Reliable Energy Sources
for the U.S. Insular Areas.'' We will hear from leaders and
stakeholders about how Congress can ensure that the territories
are able to utilize the energy resources that best suit their
specific needs and desires, not just the energy resources that
the Biden administration believes should be used. It is not
Washington, DC's job to pick winners and losers. Energy sources
should not be deemed less than due to the ebbs and flows of an
administration.
Furthermore, the territories have adopted aggressive goals
for transitioning to wind and solar energy, even though it is
unclear whether these goals can be met and despite limited
assurances that these energy sources can even meet baseload
power demands. This hearing will be an opportunity to get an
update on the status of these goals and the impact they have
had on the utility costs for residents in the territories and
their access to reliable energy.
The available data suggests that these goals have not been
met and are among the reasons why the territories have some of
the highest utility costs in the United States while having
frequent outages. American Samoa, the Northern Mariana Islands,
or CNMI, Guam, and the U.S. Virgin Islands need reliable and
cost-efficient energy resources. Yet, the Biden administration
has continued to prioritize so-called renewable energy only and
grid infrastructure, such as solar and wind, over the more
reliable and affordable liquified natural gas, coal, and
baseload power options.
Several Federal grants and loan programs showcase this
preference. OIA's Energizing Insular Communities, or EIC,
Program was created to ``provide grant funding for energy
strategies that reduce the cost of electricity and reduce
dependence on foreign fuels.'' Utilizing natural resources
while ensuring American energy is readily available for
economic and security needs is not limited to so-called
renewable energy, yet the Biden administration seems to believe
so.
IEC grants have been provided to American Samoa Power
Authority for electric vehicles, to Guam for a 100 percent
renewable energy study, to CNMI for solar photo voltaic
systems, and to the U.S. Virgin Islands for battery electric
vehicles. The snapshot shows the hyper fixation on so-called
renewables by the Biden administration, a hyper fixation that
comes at a higher price and also sacrifices reliability.
The U.S. territories are often subject to severe weather
incidents which pose a threat to infrastructure reliant on
solar and wind energy. In Guam, the 2023 Typhoon Mawar ripped
solar panels from rooftops leading to thousands of people being
without power for over a week. With U.S. military bases in Guam
and the planned reopening of the U.S. Air Force airfield in
Tinian, reliable energy sources are necessary for our military
capabilities.
Reliable energy sources are necessary for those that reside
in these territories and the well-being of those who reside in
the territories should not be decided on by bureaucrats in
Washington, DC. The insular areas deserve self-determination of
Federal policies that do not promote energy poverty.
Thank you to the witnesses for being with us today. I look
forward to today's discussion in seeing how we can promote
affordable and reliable energy sources for the territories.
The Chair now recognizes the Ranking Minority Member for
any statement.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. TERESA LEGER FERNANDEZ, A REPRESENTATIVE
IN CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF NEW MEXICO

Ms. Leger Fernandez. Thank you, Madam Chair, and as always,
thank you very much for the witnesses for being here. I am
delighted to be here once again to discuss some of the
challenges facing Americans residing in the territories, in
particular the exceedingly high cost of electricity generation
and what opportunities we can pursue to overcome these
challenges.
Guam, the Northern Mariana Islands, American Samoa, and the
U.S. Virgin Islands face a number of barriers to access to
reliable and affordable energy. The islands lack
interconnection to larger electrical grids and there are no
Indigenous sources of fossil fuels. To my knowledge, there is
no coal being mined on any of the islands, there is no oil and
gas being pumped, which means that all of this fuel has to be
imported, shipped in.
So-called renewable energy is actually there. The wind
blows every day. I come from New Mexico and the wind blows
every day in our plains and we have lots of windmills that are
popping up, and we know that that might be one of the sources.
Maybe not something that you will always rely on, but that you
will be able to rely on to diversify what you rely on. The sun
comes up every day and that may be a source that you will be
able to rely on, diversify, because it does already exist in
the territories.
Guam has some of the lowest residential electricity rates
in the Pacific Islands, yet those prices are still twice as
high as the average in the United States. Part of those prices
include surcharges to cover petroleum costs. The Guam Power 30
recently increased residential utility rates from 23 cents to
26.4 cents per kilowatt hour. In New Mexico, in contrast, where
we have a mix of energy sources, we pay less than half of that
and our wind and solar prices are way below that amount.
American Samoa residents face average prices of 45 cents
per kilowatt hour, U.S. Virgin Islands residents, 42 cents per
kilowatt hour, and Northern Mariana Islands residents, 43 cents
per kilowatt hour. These are prices three to four times as high
as those in the mainland. Unacceptable. So, we want to find the
solutions to bring those costs down. Why don't we always want
to be looking for the kinds of solutions that bring those costs
down?
Last Congress, the Offshore Wind for Territories Act was
signed into law opening the offshore waters around Guam,
American Samoa, Northern Mariana Islands, Puerto Rico, and the
U.S. Virgin Islands to wind power development. The U.S.
Department of the Interior will hold wind lease sales in the
territories by September 2025, depending on interest from
energy companies.
However, each island has their own unique opportunities and
challenges when it comes to implementing wind power. For
instance, Guam has substantial wind power potential but also
unique wind turbine siding issues. CNMI also has installed
several small-scale wind projects. But wind turbines must
withstand typhoons and not interfere with airstrip and material
facilities. We must recognize both the opportunities for energy
development, their unique situations, and their unique
obstacles.
Geothermal may be an option. Hawaii we can look to as an
example where they have made great efforts to diversify the
energy portfolio and create a more reliable grid. In 2022,
Hawaii generated 29 percent of their energy with renewable
sources including solar, wind, geothermal, biomass, and
hydropower. The state has a goal of generating 100 percent of
electricity from renewable sources by 2045. On the big island
of Hawaii, the Puno Geothermal Venture Plant provides about 30
percent of the island's electricity demand, 30 percent is
provided by a single renewable energy plant.
There are so many different opportunities to pursue to
overcome the serious challenges our sisters and brothers on the
other islands face, from energy development, to grid security
and strength, to weatherization of homes. If you care about
communities, you work to make them resilient, you work to lower
their costs. It is our solemn responsibility to care. Not to
care about one particular industry, not to care about what an
industry's talking points may be, but to care about improving
the lives of the people living on these beautiful islands.
I look forward to hearing from our witnesses about both the
challenges and the opportunities, how we can work together to
bring reliable energy, renewable energy, and lower costs to all
the U.S. territories.

Ms. Hageman. I will now introduce our witnesses. Mr. John
Brewer, Director of Office of Insular and International
Affairs, U.S. Department of the Interior, Washington, DC; Mr.
Kyle Fleming, Chairman, U.S. Virgin Islands Water and Power
Authority, St. Croix, U.S. Virgin Islands; Mr. Kenny Stein,
Vice President of Policy, Institute for Energy Research,
Washington, DC; Dr. Gregory Guannel, Director, Caribbean Green
Technology Center, St. Thomas, U.S. Virgin Islands; and Mr.
Travis Fisher, Director of Energy and Environmental Policy
Studies at the Cato Institute in Washington, DC.
Welcome to all of you. We thank you for being here today.
Let me remind the witnesses that under Committee Rules, they
must limit their oral statements to 5 minutes, but your entire
statement will appear in the hearing record. To begin your
testimony, please press the ``talk'' button on the microphone.
And we use timing lights. When you begin, the light will turn
green. When you have 1 minute left, the light will turn yellow.
And at the end of 5 minutes, the light will turn red, and I
will ask you to please complete your statement. I will also
allow all of the witnesses on the panel to testify before we
begin our Member questioning.
The Chair now recognizes Mr. Brewer for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF JOHN D. BREWER, JR., DIRECTOR, OFFICE OF INSULAR
AFFAIRS, U.S. DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR, WASHINGTON, DC

Mr. Brewer. Madam Chair, Ranking Member, and members of the
Subcommittee on Indian and Insular Affairs, thank you for the
opportunity to testify on affordable and reliable energy
sources in the insular areas. I am the Director of the Office
of Insular Affairs at the U.S. Department of the Interior, the
office responsible for administering the Federal Government's
relationship with the territories of American Samoa, the CNMI,
Guam, and USVI. You have my written testimony, so I would like
to reiterate a few key points.
The territories face unique energy challenges due to their
remote locations. Residents and businesses in the territories
pay an average of 2.4 times more per kilowatt hour than the
U.S. average. This is largely due to the cost of importing
fuels and the territories' inability to achieve economies of
scale by participating in larger interconnected grids.
The high cost of energy poses challenges for the private
sector to maintain operations in the territories. Utilities in
the territories are affected by fluctuations in fuel prices
resulting in significant impacts on the provisions of goods and
services to businesses and residents in the territories. Over
the last decade, the territories have made strides to improve
their energy security. With Federal partners, they have worked
to harden energy infrastructure, especially in the wake of
destructive hurricanes and typhoons.
Additionally, the territories have diversified their energy
generation by adopting renewable technologies to supplement
baseload energy infrastructure and thereby decrease reliance on
shipments of imported fossil fuels. A little over a decade ago,
virtually all energy production in the territories was
dependent on fossil fuels.
OIA has a long history of supporting the territories with
increasing access to reliable and affordable energy. The
Energizing Insular Communities, or EIC, Grant Program began in
2011 to assist territories as they implement energy strategies
to reduce the cost of electricity which was three times the
national average at the time. While the program funding
available is small relative to the energy needs of the
territories, its targeted investments do help move the
territories toward meeting their energy goals.
OIA requires EIC grant proposals to be tied to each
territory's energy plan which reflects their self-determined
energy goals. With $15.5 million available for the four
territories in Fiscal Year 2023, the EIC program received $33.7
million in applications. The EIC program is open to proposals
involving all forms of power generation, including improvements
related to conventional sources of power generation, such as
oil and natural gas as identified in local energy plans.
While replacement of old inefficient diesel fuel generators
from the 1970s and 1980s would improve territorial energy
efficiency and security, these replacements are often not
within the scope of the current EIC program funding level. For
example, one new 80-megawatt generator would cost approximately
$94 million, while the EIC's funding level is approximately $15
million. Additionally, more efficient conventional generators
may not always provide the cheapest electricity rates, as rates
for imported fuel would be subject to global fluctuations in
price and supply.
The Administration is committed to energy projects that
promote energy security in the territories as well as projects
that support a sustainable energy future through investments in
renewable energy development. Madam Chair, Ranking Member, it
is a pleasure to appear before your Subcommittee to discuss
affordable and reliable energy in the territories. Thank you.

[The prepared statement of Mr. Brewer follows:]
Prepared Statement of John D. Brewer, Jr., Director, Office of Insular
Affairs, U.S. Department of the Interior

Chair Hageman, Ranking Member Leger Fernandez, and members of the
Subcommittee on Indian and Insular Affairs, thank you for the
opportunity to testify on affordable and reliable energy sources in the
U.S. Insular Areas. I am the Director of the Office of Insular Affairs
(OIA) at the U.S. Department of the Interior, the office responsible
for administering the Federal government's relationship with the
territories of American Samoa, the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana
Islands (CNMI), Guam, and the United States Virgin Islands (USVI)
(collectively, the territories). Access to affordable and reliable
energy is of the utmost importance to the territories as it directly
impacts their economic development and quality of life.
Overview of Energy Needs in the U.S. Territories

The territories face unique energy challenges due to their remote
geographies. Residents and businesses in the territories pay an average
of 2.4 times more per kilowatt hour than the U.S. average. This
disparity is largely due to the cost of importing fuels to support
baseload generation capacity and the territories' inability to achieve
economies of scale by participating in larger interconnected grids. The
territories are heavily dependent on imported fossil fuels to support
baseload energy generation. For the three Pacific territories, refined
petroleum fuel is imported from Asia (primarily Singapore, South Korea,
Japan, Malaysia) and for the USVI, petroleum and liquid petroleum gas
(LPG) is provided from sources abroad.
When considering median household incomes, residents in the
territories spend a higher proportion of their income on energy costs,
resulting in more than double the energy burden compared to the average
U.S. household.
Access to reliable and affordable energy in the territories not
only impacts residents directly today but also has a significant impact
on future economic growth and development opportunities. The high cost
of energy poses challenges for the private sector to maintain
operations in the territories.
Utilities in the territories are affected by fluctuations in fuel
prices resulting in significant impacts on the provision of goods and
services to businesses and residents in the territories.
Energy reliability impacts every sector in the territories--from
healthcare to education and private industry to transportation.
Antiquated and vulnerable infrastructure is consistently tested by the
energy demands of local communities and adverse weather events, which
are becoming more severe and more frequent. Unfortunately, the result
is that power disruptions are now considered a regular part of life in
many communities in our territories.
While utility providers work to upgrade their infrastructure to
meet these challenges, they often lack the resources necessary to make
the large-scale investments required to modernize and harden their
infrastructure. To improve energy reliability, the territorial
utilities have used Power Purchase Agreements (PPAs) with private
companies to expand generation capacity. While PPAs can be a useful
tool, they do not solve underlying generation capacity and operational
issues.
Over the last decade, the territories have made some strides to
improve their energy security. With Federal partners, they have worked
to harden energy infrastructure, especially in the wake of destructive
hurricanes and typhoons. Additionally, the territories have diversified
their energy generation by adopting renewable technologies (mostly
solar and net metering) to supplement baseload energy infrastructure
and thereby decrease reliance on shipments of imported fossil fuels.
Renewable power generation now accounts for 3 percent of total power
generated in both American Samoa and the USVI, 11 percent in the CNMI,
and 17 percent in Guam. A little over a decade ago, virtually all
energy production in the territories was dependent on fossil fuels.
OIA Support for Energy Needs in the U.S. Territories

OIA has a long-standing history of supporting the territories with
increasing access to reliable and affordable energy. Public Law 109-58,
enacted in 2005, directed the Secretary of the Interior to draft long-
term energy plans for the insular areas, with the objectives of
reducing their reliance on energy imports, increasing energy
conservation and energy efficiency, and using native energy sources. In
2010, OIA entered into an interagency agreement with the Department of
Energy's National Renewable Energy Lab (NREL) to help the Pacific
territories increase energy independence and security. This agreement
led to an in-depth analysis of the energy situation in each territory
and culminated in the creation of energy plans that included both
short-term energy action plans and long-term strategic energy plans
published in 2013.
Public Law 113-235 directs the Department of the Interior to
establish a team of experts to develop energy action plans for the
territories and assist with their implementation. In 2022, OIA entered
into a new interagency agreement with NREL to provide technical support
to OIA and the territories to continue efforts to improve energy
security and resiliency, reduce energy costs, and diversify energy
sources.
OIA provides funding to the territories to support energy security
through the Energizing Insular Communities (EIC) grant program. The EIC
program began in 2011 to assist territories as they implement energy
strategies to reduce the cost of electricity, which was three times the
national average at the time. The EIC program funding averaged $3.7
million a year between fiscal years (FY) 2011 and 2020. Since then,
this Administration has requested, and Congress has appropriated,
increases to the funding level to its current level at around $15
million in FY 2024. While the program funding available is small
relative to the energy infrastructure needs of the territories, its
targeted investments do help move the territories towards meeting their
energy goals.
OIA requires EIC grant proposals to be tied to each territory's
energy plan, which reflects their self-determined energy goals. Local
government entities, independent public authorities, and educational
institutions in the territories are all eligible to apply for funds
under this competitive program. With $15.5 million available for the
four territories in FY 2023, the EIC program received $33.7 million in
applications. Of the applications received, $3.2 million proposed grid
studies and planning projects; $18.5 million proposed renewable power
generation, storage, and transmission projects; and $12 million
proposed demand side management projects. Of that, OIA awarded $3
million for grid studies and planning projects, $5.1 million for solar
power generation and storage projects, and $7.4 million for demand side
management projects.
The EIC program is open to proposals involving all forms of power
generation, including improvements related to conventional sources of
power generation such as oil or natural gas as identified in local
energy plans. While replacement of old, inefficient diesel fuel
generators from the 1970s and 1980s would improve territorial energy
efficiency and security, these replacements are often not within the
scope of the current EIC program funding level. For example, one new
80-megawatt generator would cost approximately $94 million, while the
program funding level is approximately $15 million. Additionally, more
efficient conventional generators may not always provide the cheapest
electricity rates, as rates for imported fuel would be subject to
global fluctuations in price and supply.
Beyond the EIC program, OIA also coordinates with our interagency
partners to help identify and provide support to the territories for
energy-related projects and plans. For example, the Inflation Reduction
Act revised the Outer Continental Shelf Lands Act to allow for offshore
wind energy leasing of the submerged lands within the U.S. exclusive
economic zone adjacent to American Samoa, CNMI, Guam, the USVI, and the
Commonwealth of Puerto Rico. Further, the Act directed the Secretary of
the Interior to investigate the feasibility of offshore wind leasing in
the territories. The Bureau of Ocean Energy Management has started to
engage with territorial governors regarding potential offshore wind
energy development for Puerto Rico, Guam, and the USVI.
The Administration is committed to energy projects that promote
energy security in the territories as well as projects that support a
sustainable energy future through investments in renewable energy
development. Chair Hageman, Ranking Member Leger Fernandez, it is a
pleasure to appear before your Subcommittee to discuss affordable and
reliable energy in the territories. Thank you.

______

Questions Submitted for the Record to Mr. John Brewer, Jr., Director,
Office of Insular Affairs, U.S. Department of the Interior

Mr. Brewer did not submit responses to the Committee by the appropriate
deadline for inclusion in the printed record.

Questions Submitted by Representative Westerman

Question 1. Several of the territories have set aggressive goals
for their transition to renewable energy. American Samoa adopted a goal
to obtain 50% of its energy from renewable sources by 2025 and 100% by
2040. Guam is also targeting 50% renewable energy by 2035 and 100% by
2040. The CNMI targeted 20% by 2016. The USVI has a goal for 25% by
2020, 30% by 2025, and 50% by 2044.

Are these goals being met or are on track to being met? If not,
why? Please provide us what the current percentage of each territory's
energy use is from solar and wind energy in your response.

Question 2. What is the selection process by which Energizing
Insular Communities (EIC) grant program awards are granted?
Questions Submitted by Representative Leger Fernandez

Question 1. Insular Areas need affordable and reliable energy
options, and it's clear that the status quo does not provide that.
Island reliance on foreign imports of diesel fuel is expensive and
unsustainable, and the climate impacts of continued reliance on fossil
fuels will be felt first in vulnerable island communities. A transition
to more sustainable renewable energy is critical. How is the Biden
administration, through the EIC grant program and others, helping
island communities address this energy transition in ways that work
best for each island community, ensuring island self-determination?

Question 2. The EIC program currently provides about $15 million
(as of FY 2024) to help the territories implement their energy plans,
however you note in your written testimony that at times DOI receives
more than double that amount in applications. How does OIA address that
gap and what additional support can the Federal Government provide to
help the territories meet their energy goals?

Question 3. The Inflation Reduction Act included $15 million for
the Office of Insular Affairs to provide technical assistance to the
U.S. Territories for climate change planning, mitigation, adaptation,
and resilience. Could you share how OIA has been utilizing this
funding, especially for energy projects in the territories?

______

Ms. Hageman. Thank you, Mr. Brewer, for your testimony.
The Chair now recognizes Mr. Fleming for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF KYLE D. FLEMING, CHAIRMAN, U.S. VIRGIN ISLANDS
WATER & POWER AUTHORITY, ST. CROIX, U.S. VIRGIN ISLANDS

Mr. Fleming. Thank you, and good afternoon, Madam Chair,
and other members of the Subcommittee. Thank you for the
opportunity to testify on behalf of the U.S. Virgin Islands
relative to the ongoing and future impacts the Biden-Harris
administration's energy policy is having on the territory.
My name is Kyle Fleming, Director of the Virgin Islands
Energy Office and Chairman of the Governing Board of the Virgin
Islands Water & Power Authority. Despite the territory's small
footprint, the reliable and affordable energy supply has proven
to be a complicated endeavor. In summary, the challenges the
territory's energy landscape faces are as follows:

1. The U.S. Virgin Islands' heavy reliance on imported
fossil fuels for electricity generation, which not only
contributes to high energy costs but also leaves the Virgin
Islands vulnerable to supply disruptions and price fluctuations
of global fuel markets.

2. Geographical constraints, such as complex and heavily
vegetated topography, sub-sea transmission cables, and limited
land availability, present logistical challenges to centralized
generation and distribution of energy at scale.

3. The need for holistic energy transition planning and
modeling rather than reactionary energy investments aimed to
mitigate immediate energy emergencies.

4. Finally, the high upfront costs of the energy transition
within an island network that requires a significant investment
in infrastructure and grid modernization to fully realize the
positive impacts of the transition.

Despite these challenges, the Virgin Islands have access to
extensive renewable energy resources that can be managed by
energy storage innovations to mitigate intermittency issues.
Pairing these renewable resources with efficient thermal
generation and affordable fuel supply could fast-track the
diversification of our energy mix away from exclusively
imported fossil fuels. Reducing fossil fuel dependence for
electricity generation and transportation needs will have the
most immediate effect on managing the territories' exposure to
the volatile commodity markets.
The Biden-Harris energy policy resonates with the Virgin
Islands and Governor Albert Bryan's strategy to alleviate the
energy burdens of the territory through innovative energy
solutions. The alignment of these visions underscores a shared
territorial and Federal commitment to a sustainable and
resilient future.
A couple examples include the State Energy Program which is
a formula-based funding opportunity that the Virgin Islands has
historically leveraged to support small-scale energy programs
historically limited by funding allotments which were budgeted
at approximately $300,000 annually. Under the Bipartisan
Infrastructure Law, the Virgin Islands received a bolstered
allocation of $2.59 million to support our energy programs.
This funding augmentation has enabled an expanded portfolio of
locally available energy incentives to include an equitable e-
mobility rebate program designed to lower the costs of electric
vehicle adoption as well as a battery energy storage rebate
program designed to bolster energy resilience through home-
based energy storage.
Additionally, the Department of the Interior's Office of
Insular Affairs has served as a steadfast advocate for the
insular territories. The Virgin Islands have leveraged
competitive grant awards under OIA's Energizing Insular
Communities Program to support the development of microgrids, a
critical infrastructure across the territory. Under the Biden-
Harris administration, the territory has seen funding
augmentations here as well.
For reference, the Virgin Islands received approximately
$625,000 in 2019 under the EIC. By comparison, in 2023, the
territory was awarded $3.93 million under that funding cycle.
These funds will support the development of additional
microgrids and critical infrastructure, the procurement of
electric vehicle within the government fleet, and deployment of
renewably-powered DC fast-charging stations to support the
growing penetrations of electric vehicles within the territory.
Of the many funding opportunities made available to the
territory under the Inflation Reduction Act, the impact
potential of EPA's Solar for All grant stands above them all.
And in October 2023, the Virgin Islands submitted a proposal
requesting $100 million in funding to support the deployment of
residential rooftop solar, community solar, and associated
battery storage. When aggregated, these technologies could be
leveraged to create virtual power plants and provide both
direct and distributed energy savings and overall grid
resilience.
Additionally, the Virgin Islands has been actively pursuing
the expanded program eligibility and loan authority of the U.S.
Department of Energy's Loan Program under the Biden-Harris
administration. This has provided an opportunity for the Virgin
Islands to approach holistic energy solutions with an
affordable and sustainable financing mechanism that did not
exist before. Coupling comprehensive energy transition strategy
with financing mechanisms such as the LPO would unlock the
territorial benefits that have historically been limited to the
pages within planning reports.
In closing, transcending the geographical challenges
inherent to sustaining energy within a remote insular territory
requires a custom-tailored approach to the energy transition
planning and implementation. While the territories' challenges
are uniquely nuanced, the Biden-Harris energy policy has
provided augmented funding, technical support, and insular
prioritization that enables the Virgin Islands to define and
implement our energy future through a modern-day lens. Thank
you.

[The prepared statement of Mr. Fleming follows:]
Prepared Statement of Kyle D. Fleming, Director, Virgin Islands
Energy Office and Chairman,
Governing Board, Virgin Islands Water & Power Authority

Introduction & Background

Good afternoon, Chairman Hageman and other members of the
Subcommittee on Indian and Insular Affairs. Thank you for the
opportunity to testify on behalf of the United States Virgin Islands
relative to the ongoing and future impacts the Biden-Harris
administration's energy policy is having on the territory. My name is
Kyle Fleming, Director of the Virgin Islands Energy Office (VIEO) and
Chairman of the Governing Board of the Virgin Islands Water & Power
Authority (VIWAPA).
The USVI comprises of three main islands in the Caribbean, with a
total area of 133 square miles, about twice the size of Washington D.C.
The islands of St. Croix, St. John, and St. Thomas house nearly all the
territory's 90,000 residents. And while the VI is truly an American
paradise, we are also positioned on the front-line of climate change
which has been highlighted by the deterioration of our fragile marine
ecosystems and the growing intensity of the annual hurricane season.
For reference, USVI was struck by two Category 5 hurricanes in 2017,
Hurricanes Irma and Maria, and these back-to-back storms caused
significant damage to most of USVI's electric distribution system,
power-generation, and transmission sub-stations. Although Hurricanes
Irma and Maria arrived more than six (6) years ago, high electricity
costs and power instability from these storms continue to hamper the
Virgin Islands economic recovery. Energy remains the single most
comprehensive and critical factor to be addressed for our territory's
future. Systemic energy instability has direct and indirect negative
impacts on sustainable economic development. Additionally, it has been
proven that disruptions to the electrical system may magnify existing
societal vulnerabilities and tensions for families and in the delivery
of government services.

Despite the USVI's small footprint, reliable and affordable energy
supply has proven to be a complicated endeavor. The Virgin Islands
Water and Power Authority (WAPA) has the sole responsibility of
producing electricity, primarily through imported petroleum products,
and distributing electricity to approximately 55,000 residential and
commercial customers. In summary, the challenges of the territory's
energy landscape faces are as followed:

1.  USVI's heavy reliance on imported fossil fuels for electricity
generation, which not only contributes to high energy costs
but also leaves the USVI vulnerable to supply disruptions
and price fluctuations in global fuel markets.

2.  Geographical constraints such as complex and heavily vegetated
topography, subsea transmission cables, and limited land
availability, present logistical challenges to centralized
generation and distribution of energy at scale.

3.  The need for holistic energy transition planning and modeling
rather than reactionary energy investments aimed to
mitigate immediate energy emergencies.

4.  The high upfront costs of the energy transition within an island
network that requires a significant investment in
infrastructure and grid modernization to fully realize the
positive impacts of the transition.

5.  Finally, regulatory and policy barriers that hinder the adoption
of alternative energy, including outdated regulations,
permitting processes, and limited access to traditional
financing.

Despite these challenges, there is an ever-growing recognition of
the urgent need to transition to a cleaner, more resilient distributed
energy system in the U.S. Virgin Islands, driven by both the potential
for long-term economic sustainability and territorial transformational
growth. The U.S. Virgin Islands are well-positioned to leverage the
high impact potential of a comprehensive energy transition. The Virgin
Islands have access to extensive renewable energy resources that when
paired with efficient thermal generation and managed by energy storage
innovations will fast-track the reduction of costly imported fossil
fuel. Limiting fossil fuel dependence, for both electricity generation
and transportation needs, will have the most immediate effect on
providing energy burden relief within our community.
Reducing the price of America's Paradise by creatively deploying
innovative and disruptive solution sets that address the unique
realities of attaining sustainability within a remote island nation is
at the core of the Virgin Islands energy strategy. The Biden-Harris
energy policy has played an integral role in providing the USVI with a
once in a generation opportunity to convert this strategy into
implementable near-term shovel ready projects that will redefine the
energy landscape of the Virgin Islands.
Territory Impact from Biden Administration Energy Policy:
The Inflation Reduction Act, signed by President Biden on August
16, 2022, marked a historic moment in U.S. clean energy and climate
policy. The IRA built on the foundational climate and clean energy
investments in President Biden's Bipartisan Infrastructure Law. The
passage of these landmark federal laws could not have come at a more
crucial time in the U.S. Virgin Islands history. As we find ourselves
six years removed from the 2017 hurricanes, which highlighted the
vulnerability of our island's energy system. The IRA has been heralded
as the most significant climate legislation in U.S. history, offering
funding, programs, and incentives to accelerate the transition to a
clean energy economy and will drive significant deployment of new clean
electricity resources. These federal initiatives resonate with the
Virgin Islands and Governor Albert Bryan's strategy to alleviate the
energy burdens of the territory through innovative energy solutions.
The alignment of these visions underscores a shared Territorial and
Federal commitment to a sustainable and resilient future.
The Virgin Islands are focused on the development and
implementation of sustainable energy policies, programs, and projects.
The windfall of clean energy funding, under the IRA & BIL, facilitates
the fulfilment of the territory's mission and more importantly, ensures
that meaningful and tangible impacts are realized across our territory.
The territory's impact potential because of the Biden-Harris Energy
Policy spans a range of policy areas and to date, many have already
come to fruition.
State Energy Program (DOE)

The State Energy Program (SEP) is a formula-based funding
opportunity that the Virgin Islands has historically leveraged to
support small-scale energy programs, limited by funding allotments
which were budgeted at approximately $300,000 annually. Under the
Bipartisan Infrastructure Law, the Virgin Islands received a bolstered
allocation of $2.59 Million to support our state energy programs. The
SEP funding augmentation has enabled an expanded portfolio of locally
available energy incentive programs. To include an Equitable E-Mobility
Rebate Program designed to lower the cost of electric vehicle adoption
as well as a Battery Energy Storage Rebate Program designed to bolster
energy resilience through home-based battery adoption.
Energizing Insular Communities (DOI)

The Department of Interior's Office of Insular Affairs (OIA) serves
as a steadfast advocate for all insular territories. The Virgin Islands
have leveraged competitive grant awards under the OIA's Energizing
Insular Communities (EIC) Program to support the development of micro-
grids at critical infrastructure across the territory. The true impact
of this funding source has been limited by funding allotments, but
fortunately under the Biden-Harris Administration, the territory has
seen funding augmentations here as well. For reference the Virgin
Islands received $625,000 in 2019 under the EIC; by comparison in 2023
the territory was awarded $3.93 Million. These funds will support the
development of additional micro-grids at critical infrastructure,
procurement of electric vehicles within the government fleet, and
deployment of renewably powered DC fast-charging stations to support
the growing penetration of electric vehicles within the territory.
Solar For All & Loan Program Office

Of the many funding opportunities made available to the territory
under the IRA, the impact potential of EPA's ``Solar for All'' (SFA)
grant stands above them all. On June 28th, 2023, EPA launched a $7
billion grant competition through President Biden's Investing in
America agenda to increase access to affordable, resilient, and clean
solar energy for low-income households. In October 2023, the VIEO
submitted a proposal requesting $100 Million in SFA funding to support
the deployment of Residential Rooftop Solar, Community Solar Programs,
and associated Battery Energy Storage. When aggregated, these
technologies will be leveraged to create Virtual Power Plants (VPP)
that provide both direct and distributed energy savings and grid
resilience to the territory's grid. These solutions have the power to
reshape the energy market of the US Virgin Islands and expeditiously
propel the territory towards a sustainably powered future.
The Virgin Islands has been actively pursuing the expanded program
eligibility and loan authority of the U.S. Department of Energy's Loan
Program Office under the Biden-Harris administration. This has provided
an opportunity for the Virgin Islands to approach holistic energy
solutions with an affordable and sustainable financing mechanism that
did not exist before. Coupling comprehensive energy transition strategy
with financing mechanisms such as the LPO would unlock territorial
benefits that have historically been limited to pages within planning
reports.
Conclusion

In closing, transcending the geographical challenges inherent in
sustaining energy access to the remote insular territories requires a
custom-tailored approach to energy transition planning and
implementation. While the challenges of territory are uniquely nuanced,
The Biden-Harris energy policy provides augmented funding, technical
support, and insular prioritization that enables the Virgin Islands to
define and implement our energy future through a modern-day lens.

______

Questions Submitted for the Record to Mr. Kyle Fleming, Chairman,
U.S. Virgin Islands Water and Power Authority

Mr. Fleming did not submit responses to the Committee by the
appropriate deadline for inclusion in the printed record.

Questions Submitted by Representative Westerman

Question 1. In your written testimony, you state that there are
high upfront costs to energy transition. You state that this is due to
the need for significant investment in infrastructure and grid
modernization in order to fully realize the positive impacts of the
transition.

In your estimate, how much is the cost for this transition?

Question 2. In your written testimony, you pointed to the
destruction that the hurricanes have had on the solar grids and the
fact that the power instability from these storms continue to hamper
USVI's economic recovery.

Can you elaborate for us what those economic impacts are?

Question 3. How does the policy of energy self-determination
benefit the U.S. Virgin Islands?

Question 4. In 2012, the Hovensa oil refinery on St. Croix was shut
down. In 2021, the refinery was sold to two new companies, who plan on
restarting the refinery. There have been multiple delays in this
process due to restrictive actions and policies from the federal
government.

What impacts did the closing of the oil refinery have on the
overall cost of energy in the USVI?
Questions Submitted by Representative Leger Fernandez

Question 1. The St. Croix refinery has a long history of polluting
the surrounding community and environment, which has been well
documented by the local community and the national news, yet there are
some who want to continue to pour resources into reopening and
continuing that status quo. How could the investments being made in
reopening the refinery be better used to support energy technology
innovation that will provide St. Croix communities with cleaner, more
sustainable energy in the future?

______

Ms. Hageman. Thank you, Mr. Fleming, for your testimony.
The Chair now recognizes Mr. Stein for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF KENNETH STEIN, VICE PRESIDENT FOR POLICY,
INSTITUTE FOR ENERGY RESEARCH, WASHINGTON, DC

Mr. Stein. Madam Chair, thank you for the opportunity to
testify at this hearing.
The goal of energy policy in a modern society should be
ensuring affordable, reliable, and abundant energy supplies.
These three eminently achievable goals should be the entire
focus of policymaking as they provide the firm foundation on
which modern life depends. Ideological preferences, such as
picking certain energy sources for support and subsidy, should
have no place in an energy policy focused on human flourishing.
When it comes to the U.S. insular areas, which are already
economically disadvantaged, it is even more crucial that energy
policy should be driven by what works best for the populations
of these islands, not the ideological preferences of
Administration officials. Insular areas should not be used for
experimental energy policy just because they are subject to
more Federal control and coercion than states. In these
communities, energy is already often expensive and unreliable
due both to remoteness as well as existing poor policy choices.
The Federal Government should not be exacerbating these
existing deficiencies with ideological meddling, such as
aggressively pushing expensive and unreliable electricity
sources. If a rich state like California votes to raise costs
and wreck its electricity grid with regulations and mandates,
that is at least their choice. Washington, DC imposing these
destructive policies on less than rich islands, knowing the
negative consequences, is frankly immoral.
The simple fact is, especially when it comes to island
territories, that wind and solar fail all three energy policy
tests. They are expensive, unreliable, and only intermittently
abundant.
First, neither wind nor solar are a particularly cheap way
to produce energy. Claims of the cheapness of these sources
usually rely on inappropriate use of levelized cost of
electricity measures or noting that once constructed there are
no input costs for fuel. But while wind and solar certainly are
cheap when the wind happens to be blowing or the sun is
shining, there are grid level costs to wind and solar that are
not included in most LCOE calculations.
Wind and solar require more transmission spending than
concentrated generation sources as well as needing expensive
backup capacity. Batteries alone are not sufficient for backup
as capacity because, beyond a few hours, batteries become
prohibitively expensive. Therefore gas, diesel, coal, or hydro
backup generation is also needed.
A wind and solar grid thus effectively requires building
the same capacity at least three times. That is before
considering that wind and solar alone typically have to
overbuild capacity because of their intermittency and that wind
and solar facilities don't last nearly as long as other
generation options. For islands specifically, there is an
additional non-monetary cost in land use demands. As islands,
land is by its nature limited, so grid scale wind and solar
simply require too much land to be practical for a small
island. Put simply, a wind and solar grid is a recipe for
spiraling costs.
Second, wind and solar by their nature are intermittent and
thus unreliable. The wind does not always blow and even in
sunny places the sun doesn't shine at night. As mentioned
above, some of this intermittency can be expensively accounted
for by battery backup, but to fully address intermittency, full
gas, coal, diesel, or hydro backup capacity must be maintained.
If you must build and maintain full conventional capacity
anyway, why are we spending the extra money and consuming the
extra land required to build wind and solar generation.
Here again, islands face unique challenges in dealing with
wind and solar intermittency. The way that California, who is
often touted as a leader in renewable electricity generation,
gets away with leaning heavily on wind and solar is that the
state imports electricity from its neighbors. Indeed, imports
through cross-continental grids are integral to every model
that attempts to show that wind and solar can be relied upon to
power a modern society. Obviously, that is not an option for a
remote island.
Hurricanes and typhoons are another unique issue that makes
wind and solar suboptimal for U.S. insular territories. Solar
arrays are fragile and exposed to storms, and wind turbines
can't operate in high winds and are subject to damage because
they are also out in the elements. At the time that electrical
reliability becomes most crucial for a remote island, during a
natural disaster, is when wind and solar are subject not just
to being knocked off-line by a downed power line, but being
rendered fully inoperable.
Third, wind and solar fail the standard of abundance, by
which I mean readily available at whatever amount is needed.
Wind and solar, as intermittent sources, are not always
available and, as previously mentioned, battery storage becomes
prohibitively expensive beyond a few hours of backup. Now, to
be fair on this count, other generation sources can be lacking
as well since physical resources must be imported from long
distances to power conventional plants. But physical resources
are easily stockpiled for emergencies, in a way that wind and
solar electrons cannot be.
When considering the best energy supplies for U.S.
territories, on the basis of affordability, reliability and
abundance, wind and solar are substantially deficient. Solar
generation has at least some role to play, given that
generation peaks during the hottest part of the day when
consumption of air conditioning is at its peak, but it is not
practical or desirable to have a grid that is primarily on
solar. A mix of energy sources, with the large majority
provided by stable supply, should be the near-term goal and
long-term, LNG is probably the best solution.
It is only in recent years that global LNG supplies have
reached the levels that spot markets have developed. This
increased supply, combined with U.S. territories' geographic
location near to large LNG suppliers such as Trinidad and
Australia, makes LNG a real option for U.S. territories in a
way it has not historically been.
Finally, there are also actions that Congress or the
Administration could take to ease the shipping costs that
contribute to high energy prices in the territories.
I look forward to responding to any of your questions.
Thank you very much.

[The prepared statement of Mr. Stein follows:]
Prepared Statement of Kenneth Stein, Vice President for Policy,
Institute for Energy Research

My name is Kenny Stein, I am the Vice President for Policy for the
Institute for Energy Research, a free-market organization that conducts
research and analysis on the function, operation, and regulation of
energy markets.
The goal of energy policy in a modern society should be ensuring
affordable, reliable and abundant energy supplies. Especially in a
wealthy society like the United States, these three eminently
achievable goals should be the entire focus of policy making as they
provide the firm foundation on which a comfortable modern life depends.
Ideological preferences, such as picking certain energy sources for
support and subsidy, should have no place in an energy policy focused
on human flourishing.
When it comes to U.S. insular areas, which are already economically
disadvantaged compared to the mainland, it is even more crucial that
energy policy should be driven by what works best for the populations
of these islands, not the ideological preferences of administration
officials. Insular areas should not be used for experimental energy
policy just because they are subject to more federal control and
coercion than states. In these communities energy is already often
expensive and unreliable, due both to remoteness as well as existing
poor policy choices. The federal government should not be exacerbating
these existing deficiencies with ideological meddling such as
aggressively pushing expensive and unreliable electricity sources. If a
rich state like California votes to raise costs and wreck its
electricity grid with regulations and mandates, that's at least their
choice. Washington, DC imposing these destructive policies on less than
rich island communities, knowing the negative consequences, is frankly
immoral.
The simple fact is that, especially when it comes to island
territories, wind and solar fail all three energy policy tests: they
are expensive, unreliable and only intermittently abundant.
Firstly, neither wind nor solar are a particularly cheap way to
produce energy. Claims of the cheapness of these sources usually rely
on the inappropriate use of Levelized Cost of Electricity (LCOE)
measures or noting that once constructed there are no input costs for
fuel. But while wind and solar certainly are cheap when the wind
happens to be blowing or the sun is shining, there are grid level costs
of wind and solar that are not included in most LCOE calculations. Wind
and solar require more transmission spending than concentrated
generation sources as well as needing expensive backup capacity.
Batteries alone are not sufficient for backup as capacity beyond a few
hours becomes prohibitively expensive. Therefore gas, diesel, coal, or
hydro backup generation is also needed. A wind and solar grid thus
effectively requires building the same capacity at least three times.
That is before considering that wind and solar alone typically have to
overbuild capacity because of their intermittency and that wind and
solar facilities don't last nearly as long as other generation options.
For islands specifically, there is an additional non-monetary cost in
land use demands. As islands, land is by its nature limited, grid scale
wind and solar simply require too much land to be practical for a small
island. Put simply, a wind and solar grid is a recipe for spiraling
costs.
Second, wind and solar are by their nature intermittent and thus
unreliable: the wind does not always blow and even in sunny places the
sun does not shine at night. As mentioned above, some of this
intermittency can be expensively accounted for by battery backup, but
to fully address intermittency, as a wealthy developed society must
provide as a bare baseline, full gas, coal, diesel, or hydro backup
capacity must be maintained. If you must build and maintain full
conventional capacity anyway, why spend the extra money and consume the
extra land required to build up wind and solar generation. Here again,
islands face unique challenges in dealing with wind and solar
intermittency. The way that California, often touted as a leader in
renewable electricity generation, gets away with leaning heavily on
wind and solar is that the state imports electricity from its neighbors
at night or when the wind is not blowing. Indeed, imports through
cross-continental grids are integral to every model that attempts to
show that wind and solar can be relied upon to power a modern society.
That's not an option for a remote island. Hurricanes and typhoons are
another unique issue that makes wind and solar suboptimal for U.S.
insular territories: solar arrays are fragile and exposed to these
storms, wind turbines cannot operate in high winds and are subject to
damage. At the time that electrical reliability is most crucial for a
remote island, during a natural disaster, is when wind and solar are
subject not just to being knock offline by a downed power line, but
being rendered fully inoperable.
Third, wind and solar fail the standard of abundance, by which I
mean readily available at whatever amount is needed. Wind and solar, as
intermittent sources, are not always available, and as previously
mentioned battery storage becomes prohibitively expensive beyond a few
hours of backup. Now to be fair on this count, other generation sources
can be lacking as well since physical resources must be imported from
long distances to power conventional plants. But physical resources are
easily stockpiled for emergencies, in a way that wind and solar
electrons cannot be.
When considering the best energy supply options for U.S.
territories, on the basis of affordability, reliability and abundance
wind and solar are substantially deficient. Solar generation has at
least some role to play, given that generation peaks during the hottest
part of the day when consumption for air conditioning is highest, but
it is not practical or desirable to have a grid that is reliant
primarily on solar. A mix of energy sources, with the large majority
provided by stable supply, should be the near term goal and long-term,
LNG is probably the best solution. It is only in recent years that
global LNG supplies have reached the levels that spot markets have
developed. This increased supply, combined with U.S. territories'
geographic location near to large LNG suppliers like Trinidad and
Australia, makes LNG a real option for U.S. territories in a way that
is has not historical been. Finally, there are also actions Congress or
the administration could take to ease the shipping costs that
contribute to high energy prices in the territories.
U.S. insular territories face unique challenges in supplying the
energy needed to support modern life. While wind and solar may
superficially look like a way around those challenges, beyond a
possible small percentage contribution, both are insufficient for
supporting an entire grid, especially for a remote island. Pushing
these suboptimal resources will be an expensive and unnecessary detour
on the way to actual long term solutions.

______

Questions Submitted for the Record to Mr. Kenny Stein, Vice-President
of Policy, Institute for Energy Research

Questions Submitted by Representative Westerman

Question 1. How much does it generally cost for a state or a
territory to transition to renewables?

Answer. It is hard to estimate a firm number for a variety of
reasons. One, no state or territory has come anywhere close to actually
transitioning to renewables if we mean wind and solar (if hydroelectric
generation is included, there are a few states that get close). Two,
every states' electricity situation is different: some states are
members of cross-state markets, some states rely heavily on imports,
some states allow natural gas to be used to backup wind and solar, and
so on.
What we can say generally is that the states with the most
aggressive pro-W+S mandates, regulations, and subsidies also tend to
have the highest electricity rates in the country. California
consistently has been at or near the top of highest electricity prices
in the continental U.S., followed by all the states in the northeast.
This pattern can be seen in other parts of the world like Europe,
Canada and Australia where higher W+S reliance correlates with higher
than average electricity rates.

Question 2. The territories pay on average two to three times what
states pay for their utilities. There are concerns that prioritizing
renewable energy would cause utility prices to go up even higher in the
territories.

Do you have an estimate on the impact of renewable energy
transition has on utility prices here in the U.S.?

Answer. As described in the previous response, estimating a firm
number is difficult for a variety of reasons, there are many factors
that impact utility rates, everything from the rate setting process,
consumer demand, state regulations, market design, and many more.
What we can say generally is that the states with the most
aggressive pro-W+S mandates, regulations, and subsidies also tend to
have the highest electricity rates in the country. California
consistently has been at or near the top of highest electricity prices
in the continental U.S., followed by all the states in the northeast.
This pattern can be seen in other parts of the world like Europe,
Canada and Australia where higher W+S reliance correlates with higher
that average electricity rates.
It is very clear that W+S at the grid level are very expensive. At
the individual turbine, electricity appears cheap when the wind is
blowing. However, the extra cost to the grid of building transmission,
backup capacity, and balancing intermittency makes solar and especially
wind extremely expensive at the grid level. This means higher electric
rates, and these costs only increase as the percentage of renewable
generation increases.

Question 3. Why are baseload options such as natural gas and coal
much more reliable and cheaper than renewables?

Answer. On reliability, both coal and natural gas are dispatchable,
they can be turned on and off, and generation can be increased or
decreased, in relatively short periods of time. This means that they
are ideal for responding to electric load that fluctuates throughout
the day. This responsiveness makes for a more reliable electricity
supply in contrast to W+S which operate on their own schedule subject
to the weather. It is notable that even in states and countries that
have high percentages of electricity coming from W+S, these countries
mostly maintain natural gas generation capacity to backup W+S
intermittency.
This intermittency is also why coal and natural gas are almost
always cheaper to run at a grid level. In order for W+S heavy grids to
provide reliable electricity, huge additional spending on transmission,
backup, and balancing are required, spending that is largely
unnecessary for a coal or natural gas based grid. In order to have a
heavily W+S grid, you essentially have to overbuild, replicating the
grid several times: extra W+S, extra transmission, battery or natural
gas backup supply. There has to be a lot of duplication to try to
account for weather unreliability, and that is expensive to build and
maintain.

Question 4. The solar panels needed for solar energy, the primary
source of renewable energy for the territories, are made from critical
minerals.

Where are the minerals being used to make the solar panels used in
the U.S. coming from? Are they from the U.S.? Allied or partner
countries? Our adversaries?

Answer. It of course depends on the specific minerals needed, but
the supply chains for most mineral inputs to solar panels are dominated
by China, as is the supply of finished panels. Even when the mining of
a mineral happens elsewhere (e.g. cobalt from Congo, or nickel from
Indonesia), the processing of those minerals happens in China or are
processed in other countries by Chinese companies. This dominance is
similar in the supply chains of batteries, which are the posited backup
for most solar projects. While some mineral input processing, for
example for copper and aluminum, are relatively well distributed around
the world (though China is usually the largest single processor), other
minerals are heavily Chinese controlled. For example, silicon is around
80% Chinese processed, and rare earths, several of which are used in
solar panels, are around 85% Chinese processed. Dominance in some
battery minerals is even more significant: China controls over 90% of
manganese processing and around 100% of graphite processing.
Even when the U.S. mines a mineral domestically, it is often still
processed through Chinese supply chains. For example, the rare earth
minerals produced at the Mountain Pass mine in California have to be
shipped to China for processing.

4a) Would it be fair to say that the Biden administration's
restrictions on deep-sea mining and natural gas, coupled with the
prioritization on renewables, are severely limiting our energy
generation potential and pushing us to rely more on the People's
Republic of China?

Answer. Certainly. The Biden administration's mining restrictions
eliminate any possibility of breaking Chinese supply dominance
mentioned in the previous response. And restricting supply of natural
gas, of which the U.S. has hundreds of years-worth of reserves, would
mean that our energy needs have to be served by imports. China has
heavily subsidized the development of batteries and renewables because
it does not have the domestic energy reserves (other than coal) that
the U.S. is blessed with. Hampering domestic mineral and energy
production means relying on foreign sources of those resources.

______

Ms. Hageman. Thank you, Mr. Stein, for your testimony.
The Chair now recognizes Mr. Guannel for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF DR. GREGORY GUANNEL, DIRECTOR, CARIBBEAN GREEN
TECHNOLOGY CENTER, ST. THOMAS, U.S. VIRGIN ISLANDS

Dr. Guannel. Good afternoon, Chair Hageman, Vice Chair
Gonzalez-Colon, and members of the Subcommittee. Thank you for
the opportunity to testify today regarding the need for
affordable and reliable energy sources in the insular areas. My
name is Gregory Guannel, and I am the Director for the
Caribbean Green Technology Center at the University of the
Virgin Islands.
The U.S. territories, which are important for national
security and identity, are small islands far from the mainland,
with limited natural resources. We are small markets who must
import fuel at high costs. Territories must operate their
electricity system without the ability to tap into larger
electricity markets when problems arise. As a result, we have
the highest energy costs in the nation and any generation or
distribution issue turns into an outage or a blackout that can
last hours, days, sometimes weeks.
This situation makes access to electricity a struggle for
many and a drag on the economy. Electricity and the technology
that it powers is critical to conduct business, to communicate,
to access water, to keep food and medicine cold. It is
critical, especially for older people, breathing machines,
wheelchairs, fridges for medicine, safety, lighting, all these
depend on a dependable and sustained supply of electricity. In
my written testimony, I provide a few examples of how residents
describe reliable access to electricity as a matter of
survival.
Be sure, we in the territories have adapted to living with
frequent disruption and high costs. Most people, including me,
own gas stoves instead of electric ones. Gas dryers and gas
water heaters are common and many, including me, have their own
generators. Nevertheless, our quality of life, economic
competitiveness, and security is compromised by our fragile
electrical infrastructure and unreliable and affordable access
to fuel.
Given the critical importance that electricity plays in our
lives, it is imperative that we change the way we think about
power production, power delivery, and power management. We must
adopt technologies that make adaptation to disruptions easier
and simpler. Decentralized power production facilitated by
solar power generation and batteries, and even electric cars,
actually allow us to do so.
Investment and grants from Federal agencies to assist
island, rural, and isolated communities to access technologies
like solar power and batteries are actually critical to our
survival. They allow us to modernize electricity and
transportation infrastructure, build microgrid, and make sure
that we have access to affordable and reliable power so that
businesses can finalize the transactions, schools can keep the
AC on, military facilities and families can lead normal lives,
and hospitals can continue to serve patients.
I would like to note that the case for rapid investment in
alternative decentralized sources of power applies beyond the
territories. Since the early 2000s, a number of severe
electrical outages has been steadily increasing around the
country. Last week, more than a half million people in the
Northeast lost power after a series of storms. I am sure that a
few of them are now considering investing in alternate sources
of power and decentralized sources of power.
Also, it is important to note that in the Pacific and in
the Caribbean these programs are a way to showcase American
engineering technology and innovation in regions where foreign
entities are aggressively offering their energy services and
building large solar power plants in other nations.
Americans in the U.S. territories provide critical
cultural, economic, and security services to our country. We
need to ensure that programs from Federal agencies that provide
assistance to diversify the energy portfolio by investing in
solar power and alternative decentralized solutions continue to
exist. Thank you.

[The prepared statement of Dr. Guannel follows:]
Prepared Statement of Gregory Guannel, Ph.D., Director, Caribbean Green
Technology Center, University of the Virgin Islands

Chair Hageman, Vice-Chair Gonzalez-Colon and Members of the
Subcommittee, thank you for the opportunity to testify today regarding
the need for affordable and reliable energy sources in the U.S. Insular
Areas. My name is Gregory Guannel, and I am the Director of the
Caribbean Green Technology Center at the University of the Virgin
Islands (cgtc.org).
The U.S. territories of the U.S. Virgin Islands (USVI), Guam,
American Samoa, and the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands
(CNMI) are small islands, far from the mainland, who experience a host
of natural disasters on a regular basis. These islands, which are
important for national security and identity, are also small markets,
who depend on dedicated and complex supply chains to bring most of the
resources they need to function. They must import their fuel sources at
a relatively high cost, and operate their electricity generation,
transmission and distribution systems without the ability to tap into
larger electricity markets or extra human capacity when issues arise.
As a result, any generation or distribution issue (mechanical failure,
computer failure, natural hazards, etc.) turns into an outage or
blackout for residents. Moreover, they have some of the highest
electricity costs in the nation, ranging between $0.35 to $0.47 per
kWh, compared to a U.S. average of around $0.15 per kWh. Calculations
from the Caribbean Green Technology Center at the University of the
Virgin Islands, nearly 50% of the population of the USVI has a high
energy burden, paying more than 6% of their annual income on
electricity costs.\1\ The other pacific territories also have a high
proportion of their population with similar high energy burden. Access
to affordable power is a struggle for many and a drag on the economy.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Statistics computed from USVI Water and Power Authority and
from 2020 Census data (https://www.census.gov/newsroom/press-releases/
2023/2020-dhc-summary-file-usvi.html)
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Living with and adapting to disruptions is a normal part of life in
the territories. Like in rural parts of the U.S. mainland, many
residents of the territory must manage and maintain services that are
taken for granted in many other places such as mail delivery, road
maintenance, or wastewater and water management. For example, in the
U.S. Virgin Islands, the public water system only serves 38% of the
population, which means that 62% of residents depend on rainwater
harvesting or wells, and must operate and maintain water pumps,
pressure tanks and filtration systems to meet their household water
needs. Residents have also adapted to electricity disruptions, which,
according to the calculations of the Caribbean Green Technology Center,
happen almost every other day in the USVI and that can last a few
hours, a few days, or weeks. Most people own gas stoves instead of
electric ones; gas dryers and water heaters are common; and many also
own electric generators.
However, living and adapting to frequent loss of power is becoming
a bigger challenge. Access to power is becoming essential for many to
function, and it is for some a matter of life and death. Electricity,
and the technology it powers, is critical to conduct business; to
communicate and receive information as we depend on cell phones and
internet; to pump water out of cisterns and wells and access water; to
keep food and medicine cold; etc. Last year, CNMI declared a state of
emergency as they struggled to provide power for days to their
residents after the failure of some of their generating capacity.
Earlier this year, commerce almost came to a standstill in American
Samoa after a long blackout. Cash machines, cash registers, supply
management, credit card transactions: all economic activity depends on
having electricity. After hurricanes Irma and Maria, hospitals and
clinics in Puerto Rico and the Virgin Islands struggled to provide care
to patients without access to power. Last year, many members of the
military and their families stayed in the dark without power for days
in Guam after typhoon Mawar hit them. And last summer, Puerto Rico
experienced blackouts for many days because demand for power was so
high during their heat wave. Access to electricity is critical
especially older populations whose number is rising in the territories:
breathing machines, wheelchairs, fridges for medicine, safety
lightning. All these depend on a dependable and sustained supply of
electricity.

Ensuring that all residents of the U.S. territories have access to
reliable power is critical and essential. Following hurricane Irma and
Maria that hit the U.S. Virgin Islands in 2017, Dr. Alison Bates, Mr.
Pagan Quinones and I conducted a series of surveys and interviews on
energy issues with residents. The results of this study, which are
currently under review in an academic publication, showed that reliable
access to electricity is discussed as a matter of survival. Below are
some excerpts from our interviews:

``We have finally learned the importance of having a secure
grid. Without a grid that can handle these enormous stormsthat
we know will come, without being able to survive a storm and
get back up immediately after a storm, there's no future for
this island.''

``The most important thing is--reliability [laughs]. We have an
issue with constant power on the islands. For instance,
yesterday St. Thomas--once St. Thomas loses power--St. John
loses power. Automatically. It's one system. Um, so you could
have times during the month, at least once or twice a month
guaranteed we're going to lose power. So you have people who
have health issues, medicine . . . food, and that's just during
a month to month basis where you are going to lose power. So I
feel we need to have something more sustainable and reliable.''

``What is important to me is actually to have power all the
time. Uh, I would gladly pay another 5, 10 cents a kilowatt if
I could be guaranteed that we had power all that time, 24/7, no
interruption. Because it--it is the interruptions that are
ruining the economy, it's not the price of power as far as I'm
concerned.''

And as the Caribbean territories are facing another summer of
extreme heat, it is imperative that we change the way we think about
power production, delivery and management. Given the critical
importance that electricity plays in our lives, we must adopt
technologies that make adaptation to disruptions easier and simpler.
Diesel or gasoline generators are useful, but can be dangerous if not
properly operated, and are prone to malfunction: in the USVI, the
waiting list for generator maintenance is many months. This is why
access to solar power generation and batteries and even electric cars
are so critical to residents and other stakeholders. From interviews
conducted by Dr. Bates, Mr. Pagan Quinones and I, people mentioned how
critical it was for them to have access to solar generated power after
the 2017 hurricanes.

``Those who were not prepared paid the price. They either had
to live and wait for [the USVI Water and Power Authority] to
come back . . . people who had spent the money, and prepared,
were so much better off than the people that, well first of all
didn't have the inclination, but also didn't have the funds, to
secure their houses and secure their power, and their backup in
case [the utility] fails. They had a terrible time, but the
ones that we know, that were ready, and they were--they're
precious few, like us, who can get back up the next day.''
But many cannot afford the upfront cost of investing in these new
technologies.

``I think for me the main issue would be what would be the
startup cost for a normal working class family to be able to
switch over to renewable energy [solar] . . . it might be
cheaper in the long run, but almost always starting up is a big
investment and the regular working-class people can't afford to
give that lump sum at first but then we also can't afford to
live, to pay three hundred dollar bills of electricity a
month.''

Programs from Federal Agencies (USDA, DOE, DOI, etc.) to assist
island communities, rural communities, and isolated communities to
access technologies like solar power and batteries, to modernize their
electricity and transportation infrastructure, to build microgrids, and
to ensure that all have access to affordable and reliable power
especially in times of crisis are critical to their survival. These
programs ensure, as one interviewee quoted above mentioned, that
territories have a future. Accessing affordable and reliable energy
sources means that businesses can finalize transactions, internet and
conference calls are not interrupted, schools do not lose AC or lights,
or hospitals can continue to serve patients.
The case of rapid investment in alternate, decentralized sources of
power in the United States goes beyond what we have observed or lived
in the U.S. Territories. In the United States, the number of severe
electrical outages has been steadily increasing since the early 2000s,
as shown in Figure 1 from data published by the Office of
Cybersecurity, Energy Security and Emergency Response of the Department
of Energy and compiled by the Caribbean Green Technology Center at the
University of the Virgin Islands. Last week, more than half a million
people in the Northeast lost power after a series of storms. Many of
these people probably share the same sentiments as those expressed in
the territories when power goes out. And I'm sure that a few of them
are now considering investing in alternate source of power to protect
themselves in the future and ensure they have a reliable source of
power.

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

.epsFigure 1: Total number of severe electrical outages and number
of outages due to natural hazards in the U.S. Causes of outages vary
from equipment malfunction, operation issues, vandalism, cyber attacks
or storms. Data Source: CERES (2024).\2\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ Office of Cybersecurity, Energy Security and Emergency Response
of the Department of Energy (CERES) https://www.oe.netl.doe.gov/
OE417_annual_summary.aspx; Accessed April 9, 2024.

Access to electricity is critical to life as we live it now. The
U.S. Territories, where Americans who provide critical cultural,
economic and security services to our country live, have and will
continue to thrive in an environment where disruptions and adaptation
are a way of life. Nevertheless, investments and grants from Federal
Agencies to increase the portfolio of energy sources and solar in
particular make a difference and increase our overall resilience: they
make access to electricity affordable and reliable. These programs are
also a way to showcase American engineering and technologies in regions
where foreign entities like China are aggressively making investments
and offering their energy services.
In order to ensure our most distant territories do not become our
weakest national security and economic links we need to:

ensure like programs like Energizing Insular Communities
continue to fund resilience activities in the U.S.
Territories, such as increasing the construction of
microgrids or purchasing large solar systems for critical
infrastructure systems,

provide opportunities for residents to invest in their own
electricity generation and storage technologies like solar
modules and batteries,

increase the presence, technical assistance of Federal
Agencies and the Department of Energy in particular to
insular areas in the wider Pacific and Caribbean regions.

______

Questions Submitted for the Record to Dr. Guannel, Director, Caribbean
Green Technology Center

Dr. Guannel did not submit responses to the Committee by the
appropriate deadline for inclusion in the printed record.

Questions Submitted by Representative Westerman

Question 1. Power outages and the lack of reliable energy is a
concerning reality felt by residents of the U.S. territories.
Hurricanes Irma and Maria tore apart solar panels and left residents
without power for weeks.

Would you agree that it is important for the Insular Areas to have
access to reliable and cost-effective energy?

Question 2. In your testimony, you said that solar energy would
make electricity affordable, however solar energy requires more
transmission spending than traditional energy sources such as oil and
gas. Solar often comes at the price of needing backup capacity such as
gas or hydro. How then, do you rationalize solar energy being
affordable?

______

Ms. Hageman. Thank you, Mr. Guannel, for your testimony.
The Chair now recognizes Mr. Fisher for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF TRAVIS FISHER, DIRECTOR, ENERGY AND ENVIRONMENTAL
POLICY STUDIES, CATO INSTITUTE, WASHINGTON, DC

Mr. Fisher. Thank you, Chairman Hageman, Ranking Member
Leger Fernandez, and distinguished members of the Subcommittee.
I am Travis Fisher. I am the Director of Energy and
Environmental Policy Studies at the Cato Institute, a non-
partisan public policy research organization in Washington, DC.
It is an honor to be invited to speak with you today about the
reliability and affordability of electricity in the United
States.
In every part of the country, the power grid should be an
asset to American prosperity, but policymakers have wounded our
grids with subsidies, regulations, and mandates. Across the
United States, the power grid is straining under two
significant pressures: decades of unwise policy on the one
hand, and the resurgence of electricity demand growth on the
other. We must keep all energy resources on the table,
including fossil fuels, if we want our grids to be affordable
and reliable.
The Biden administration has said it wants the United
States to use 100 percent CO
2
-free electricity by
2035 to tackle the climate crisis, which it views as an
existential threat. In my opinion, the bigger threat to
Americans comes not from climate change but from overzealous
central planners who will cause an energy crisis.
For example, forcing the U.S. insular areas to abandon
fossil fuels would put these areas at risk of price spikes and
blackouts. Getting rid of fuels like coal, oil, propane, and
natural gas means relying more heavily on intermittent
resources, like wind and solar, and building large battery
systems to back them up. Increasing costs should be a non-
starter in low-income areas. Using batteries to convert solar
energy into a reliable resource increases its cost by more than
three-fold.
All technologies have a role to play, but forcing a
transition to weather-dependent resources is especially unwise
in the face of climate change. Think about it, if we expect
extreme weather to be a growing problem going forward, then why
should we make our electricity systems weather dependent? Along
those lines, I want to highlight three major Federal policies
that hurt grid reliability and affordability. Although most of
my work covers the mainland, these concerns apply to the
insular areas, too.
First is a set of production tax credits in the Inflation
Reduction Act, or IRA. These could cost American taxpayers $3
trillion by 2050. These tax credits reward electricity
production from unreliable resources and speed up the
retirement of reliable power plants. The result is a weaker and
more expensive grid over time, not to mention a deepening
fiscal crisis for the country.
Second is the tailpipe emissions rule from the
Environmental Protection Agency, or EPA. This is a defective
mandate for electric vehicles. The final rule seeks to ensure
that by 2032 about two-thirds of new vehicles sold will be
electric. This rule not only limits American's choice of
vehicles but it also places immense stress on the power grid.
Third is the proposed power plant rule from the EPA. This
proposed rule mandates two technologies that are not adequately
demonstrated as the statute says, which are carbon capture and
green hydrogen. The EPA says carbon capture and green hydrogen
are adequately demonstrated because they are adequately
subsidized by the IRA.
If you take these together, these policies mean more demand
on the grid and less reliable supply. The predictable result is
higher power bills and increased risk of blackouts for
electricity customers everywhere.
Hawaii offers a stark reminder of the dangers of a forced
energy transition in an island setting. In Hawaii, anti-coal
public policies drove the closure of the state's last coal-
fired power plant. In practice, the replacement energy has come
from more expensive oil-fired power plants along with solar and
battery systems. Grid reliability suffered.
In January of this year, over 100,000 Hawaiians faced
rolling blackouts because the energy system was not resilient
to bad weather. The immediate cause was a severe rainstorm, but
the underlying lack of energy security came from policymakers.
It was policymakers who decided that Hawaii's energy resources
should be dependent on the weather.
The American people want reliable and affordable
electricity and policymakers should listen. The energy crisis
can be stopped because it is being driven by unwise policies
and we can reform them. If we keep all energy options on the
table, we can ensure reliable and affordable energy for the
U.S. insular areas.

[The prepared statement of Mr. Fisher follows:]
Prepared Statement of Travis Fisher, Director of Energy and
Environmental Policy Studies, Cato Institute

Chairman Hageman, Ranking Member Fernandez, and distinguished
members of the subcommittee:
Thank you for the opportunity to testify on the reliability and
affordability of America's electrical grid. The Cato Institute is a
nonpartisan public policy research organization dedicated to the
principles of individual liberty, limited government, free markets, and
peace. I am the Director of Energy and Environmental Policy Studies at
Cato, and my research focuses on the economics and reliability of
electricity, the role of free markets in improving the availability and
affordability of energy and natural resources, and environmental
regulations that impact the energy sector.
I commend you for examining the impacts of public policy on the
reliability and affordability of America's power grids, especially in
the U.S. Insular Areas.
Executive Summary

Americans depend on a strong energy infrastructure for our health
and well-being, and the electrical grid is the most important--and
fragile--piece of energy infrastructure we have. Unfortunately, power
grids across the country are damaged by public policies at nearly every
level of government.
The stakes for policymakers are high, and the impacts of flawed
energy policies are coming into starker focus every day. For example,
Hawaii's forced energy transition began to show signs of strain in
January of this year when the local utility was unable to meet demand
for several hours during a rainstorm.
During extreme weather, Americans need reliable electricity to
survive. Day to day, we need reliable and affordable electricity to
thrive and grow.
The power grid should be an asset to American prosperity, but
policymakers--through a multitude of subsidies, regulations, and
mandates--have wounded it to the point that it is now becoming a
dangerous liability.
I. Reliable and Low-Cost Electricity is Essential

At the turn of the millennium, the National Academies of
Engineering ranked the electric grid the greatest engineering
achievement of the twentieth century.\1\ The main criterion for
selection was how much an achievement improved people's quality of
life. Access to reliable electricity improves the quality of life of
every American.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Wm. A. Wulf, Great Achievements and Grand Challenges, National
Academy of Engineering, Sept. 1, 2000, https://www.nae.edu/7461/
GreatAchievementsandGrandChallenges

There is a clear nexus between the affordability of electricity and
energy security at the household level. A recent Congressional Research
Service (CRS) report on electric utility disconnections highlighted the
hardships and threats to energy security faced by many American
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
families:

``Researchers estimate that approximately 1% of households are
disconnected each year. Broader measures of energy insecurity
(e.g., foregoing other necessary expenses like food or
medicine) are higher, with approximately 30% of American
households experiencing some form of energy insecurity. Black
and Hispanic households appear more likely to be disconnected
than non-Hispanic White households. For many American families,
electric utility disconnections are the most significant threat
to energy security.'' \2\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ U.S. Congressional Research Service, Electric Utility
Disconnections, January 31, 2023, https://crsreports.congress.gov/
product/pdf/R/R47417

Data compiled by CRS highlight the affordability challenge: ``The
share of Black households experiencing energy insecurity is about twice
as high as that for White households (52% compared to 27% in 2020).
Similarly, the share of Hispanic or Latino households experiencing
energy insecurity is about twice as high as that for households that
are not Hispanic or Latino (47% compared to 25% in 2020).''
In the U.S. Insular Areas--which have electricity rates \3\ and
poverty levels \4\ that are well above the mainland U.S. average--
access to affordable energy is an even greater challenge. Grants
seeking to move Insular Areas away from fossil fuels will: 1) not
meaningfully impact the global climate given their small greenhouse gas
footprints and 2) exacerbate the energy insecurity of these areas by
limiting their primary energy sources to intermittent, weather-based
resources like solar and wind.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ U.S. Energy Information Administration, American Samoa
Territory Energy Profile, (stating that ``Electricity prices in
American Samoa vary with world petroleum prices. In 2022, the
territory's average electricity price was almost 45 cents per
kilowatthour, about 3.6 times higher than the U.S. average''), accessed
on April 9, 2024, https://www.eia.gov/state/print.php?sid=AQ
\4\ U.S. Census Bureau, 2020 Island Areas Censuses: American Samoa
(showing that over 50 percent of families in American Samoa live below
the poverty line), accessed on April 9, 2024, https://data.census.gov/
table/DECENNIALDPAS2020.DP3?g=040XX00US60&d=DECIA%20
American%20Samoa%20Demographic%20Profile&tid=DECENNIALDPAS2020.DP3
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
II. Energy Policies Are Undermining Reliability and Affordability

Under a reasonable set of regulations, electricity suppliers will
rise to meet challenges and deliver low-cost, reliable electricity to
consumers across the United States. However, energy and environmental
policies are creating predictable problems with grid reliability and
affordability.
Last year, for the first time ever, NERC identified energy policy
as a leading risk factor for electric reliability.\5\ In NERC's 2023
ERO Reliability Risk Priorities Report, the energy transition--
specifically the changing resource mix--tops the risk rankings.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\ Robert Walton, NERC Assessment Identifies New Risk to Grid
Reliability: Energy Policy, Utility Dive, Aug. 23, 2023, https://
www.utilitydive.com/news/nerc-assessment-new-risk-grid-reliability-
energy-policy/691590/

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

.epsThe reliability impacts on island systems could be more
profound than the impacts on mainland systems. That is because smaller,
islanded systems already face much lower levels of system inertia. In
other words, energy policies that force the shutdown of high-inertia
generators (such as large thermal plants fueled by hydrocarbons) place
an outsized risk on island systems. Observers have been aware of the
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
problems associated with inertia-less solar power for quite some time.

``Especially in island grids which already have a lower inertia
than large interconnected systems, the frequency response will
be highly deteriorated when conventional generation is replaced
by solar or wind power.'' \6\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\6\ Pieter Tielens and Dirk Van Hertem, Grid Inertia and Frequency
Control in Power Systems with High Penetration of Renewables, January
2012, https://lirias.kuleuven.be/bitstream/123456789/345286/1/
Grid_Inertia_and_Frequency_Control_in_Power_Systems_with_High_
Penetration_of_Renewables.pdf

In addition to minute-by-minute grid frequency challenges, forced
retirements of thermal generation can also cause problems with
aggregate electricity supply, commonly called resource adequacy. A lack
of resilient supply caused more than 100,000 Hawaiians to lose electric
service during a rainstorm in January of this year.\7\ Blackouts and
cost increases should not be the norm in America, yet policymakers
continue to set the stage for both.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\7\ Keli'i Akina, Ph.D., Are rolling blackouts the price Hawaii
must pay for clean energy?, Grassroot Institute of Hawaii, January 13,
2024, https://www.grassrootinstitute.org/2024/01/are-rolling-blackouts-
the-price-hawaii-must-pay-for-clean-energy/
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Regarding cost increases, utility officials warned that the closure
of Hawaii's last coal-fired power plant would increase electricity
rates because ``oil-generated power costs as much as five times more
than coal.'' \8\ Oil-generated electricity may not always be so much
more expensive than coal-generated electricity, but it is well known
that oil markets are significantly more volatile than coal markets.
Closing the door on coal and forcing island communities to get by on
other resources clearly cuts against the goal of ensuring a reliable
and affordable grid.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\8\ Gina Mangieri, Power cost hike, supply crunch ahead as last
Hawaii coal plant closes, KHON2, June 24, 2022, https://www.khon2.com/
always-investigating/power-cost-hike-supply-crunch-ahead-as-last-
hawaii-coal-plant-closes/
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Below is a snapshot of three public policies that pose a
significant risk to reliable, secure, and affordable electricity on the
mainland and in the U.S. Insular Areas.
A. The Inflation Reduction Act Weakens the Grid with Subsidies

The Inflation Reduction Act (IRA) threatens to undermine the well-
functioning of the power grid by flooding it with subsidized,
intermittent energy. One inescapable fact of the electricity industry
is that dispatchable resources are necessary to match supply with
demand and keep the grid energized at all times.\9\ By providing
unlimited amounts of subsidies to intermittent resources like wind and
solar energy, the IRA erodes the economics of dispatchable resources.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\9\ Jeff Turcotte, An Electrified Economy Needs Dispatchable
Generation: EPSA's Takeaways From the White House Electrification
Summit, Electric Power Supply Association, Dec. 21, 2022, https://
epsa.org/an-electrified-economy-needs-dispatchable-generation-epsas-
takeaways-from-the-white-house-electrification-summit/
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
If we look beyond the 10-year budget window, the cost of the IRA
credits could increase and remain high for years, perhaps indefinitely.
That is because the ``applicable year'' when the production tax credit
(PTC) in the IRA is supposed to phase down is triggered by an
impossible-to-meet greenhouse gas (GHG) reduction target. Specifically,
GHG emissions in the electricity sector must fall to 25 percent of
their 2022 level for the PTC to begin to phase down.
The total cost of energy credits in the IRA is an unstable number
with no reasonable cap. Note that the target in the IRA is a GHG
emissions level rather than a GHG intensity. The U.S. Energy
Information Administration (EIA) analyzed electricity sector GHG
emissions in the IRA reference case (and in the no-IRA case) and found
neither case to hit the ``applicable year'' target by 2050. Hence, the
IRA subsidies are set to pile up for decades, potentially reaching $3
trillion in just the PTC alone.\10\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\10\ Travis Fisher, The Inflation Reduction Act's Energy Subsidies
Are More Expensive Than You Think, Cato Institute, Sep. 5, 2023,
https://www.cato.org/blog/iras-energy-subsidies-are-more-expensive-you-
think
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The distinction between a level-based and intensity-based target
matters because electricity demand is growing, making the IRA targets
even harder to hit. The chart below assumes GHG emissions targets will
be hit around the year 2050.\11\ It is an illustrative example of how
large the IRA subsidies could be. To be clear, I do not believe the GHG
emissions targets in the IRA will be met by 2050.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\11\ Ryan Sweezey, The Indefinite Inflation Reduction Act: Will Tax
Credits for Renewables Be Around for Decades?, Wood Mackenzie, Mar. 8,
2023, https://www.woodmac.com/news/opinion/IRA-tax-credits-for-
renewables/

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

.epsAs discussed below, the IRA also enables the Environmental
Protection Agency (EPA) to claim certain unproven technologies are
adequately demonstrated when, in fact, they are merely adequately
subsidized. Thus, the IRA forms the basis of the EPA's Best System of
Emission Reduction (BSER). Basing permanent rulemakings on temporary
budget reconciliation measures like the IRA is inappropriate.
B. EPA Regulations Hurt Reliability and Affordability

The EPA's regulatory regime is laden with legal infirmities,
conflicts of interest, and technical and economic problems. The
proposed power plant GHG regulation--sometimes referred to as CPP 2.0
because it's the second attempt at a Clean Power Plan--relies on
technologies that have not been ``adequately demonstrated'' by any
stretch of the meaning of that term.\12\ The proposal is so legally
dubious that I am concerned the goal of the policy is to inject
uncertainty in the planning and financing of hydrocarbon-based
electricity generation rather than to enact a durable regulation.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\12\ Editorial Board, EPA and Its Biden Administration Critics,
Wall Street Journal, Feb. 21, 2024, https://www.wsj.com/articles/epa-
and-its-biden-administration-critics-fossil-fuel-carbon-tech-931eb26e
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
As mentioned above, the energy subsidies in the IRA enable the
EPA's overreach because they allow the EPA to set standards based on
hypothetical deployment of highly subsidized resources. In the CPP 2.0
proposal, EPA relied explicitly on the subsidies in the IRA to claim
that the BSER technologies--carbon capture and storage (CCS) and low-
GHG hydrogen--are ``adequately demonstrated.'' \13\ A corollary of
EPA's reliance on IRA subsidies is that, when fiscal realities demand a
claw-back of IRA subsidies, the CPP 2.0 will have to be clawed back as
well.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\13\ Travis Fisher, How the Inflation Reduction Act Bankrolls EPA
Overreach, Cato Institute, Oct. 9, 2023, https://www.cato.org/blog/how-
inflation-reduction-act-bankrolls-epa-overreach
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Assuming CPP 2.0 does not receive an immediate stay from the
courts, its practical impact will be to greatly reduce the supply of
electricity. Given that CCS is not commercially available at any useful
scale, the only compliance option for owners of coal-fired power plants
is to shut down. The same goes for natural gas-fired generators--low-
GHG hydrogen is at best very expensive and at worst unavailable. The
inevitable result of the rule is the shutdown of a significant amount
of reliable generation.
The proposed tailpipe emissions standard, if found to be legal,
will of course limit the choices Americans have in our vehicles, but it
will also greatly increase the demand for electricity. That is because
a significant amount of the energy needed for transportation will have
to shift from being supplied by petroleum (gasoline and diesel) to
being supplied by the power grid. In other words, the tailpipe rule
will further increase demand growth, which is already accelerating.
The result of reduced supply and increased demand is
straightforward to predict: increased prices and, unfortunately, energy
shortfalls. What that means for a typical electricity consumer is a
higher power bill and an increased risk of blackouts.\14\ According to
NERC, we are already in an elevated risk scenario. Hence any EPA
proposal to force an increase in demand or a decrease in supply--
including the tailpipe rule and CPP 2.0--will further weaken an already
fragile grid.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\14\ Travis Fisher, Public Comment Re: New Source Performance
Standards for GHG Emissions from New and Reconstructed EGUs, Docket ID
No. EPA-HQ-OAR-2023-0072; FRL-8536-04- OAR; RIN 2060-AV09, Cato
Institute, Dec. 20, 2023, https://www.cato.org/sites/cato.org/files/
2024-01/fisher-public-comment-12-20-23.pdf
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
III. EPA's Regulatory Impact Assessments Are Inadequate
In the case of both the tailpipe rule and CPP 2.0, the EPA used a
proprietary model developed by an outside consulting firm to estimate
the impacts of the rules on the retail price of electricity. Although
the price estimates are something of a black box, there are indications
that the process is deeply flawed.
The draft regulatory impact assessment for the tailpipe rule states
that ``[r]egional average retail electricity price differences showed
small increases or decreases (less than approximately 1 to 2
percent),'' meaning that EPA's price model violates the law of supply.
In no case should a rule that forces the rapid electrification of the
transportation fleet--which represents a large increase in the demand
for electricity--cause a reduction in prices.
Regarding the price impacts of CPP 2.0, EPA finds that vastly
reducing the supply of electricity generation would only increase
retail electricity prices by 0.2% in 2035 on average.\15\ This is an
implausible estimate made possible by a proprietary model. Why would
the EPA not rely on the Energy Information Administration, an
independent wing of the U.S. Department of Energy? The EIA is more than
capable of modeling the cost impacts of CPP 2.0, as it showed when it
modeled the cost impacts of the original Clean Power Plan using the
National Energy Modeling System.\16\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\15\ Ethan Howland, EPA proposes power plant greenhouse gas limits
with carbon capture, `green' hydrogen main compliance options, Utility
Dive, May 11, 2023, https://www.utilitydive.com/news/epa-ghg-carbon-
emission-limits-power-plants-carbon-capture-hydrogen/650039/
\16\ U.S. Energy Information Administration, Analysis of the
Impacts of the Clean Power Plan, May 2015, https://www.eia.gov/
analysis/requests/powerplants/cleanplan/pdf/powerplant.pdf
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The EPA could also inflate the estimated benefits of its own
regulations. In both the tailpipe rule and CPP 2.0, the EPA is poised
to use a greatly increased estimate of the Social Cost of Carbon
Dioxide (SC-CO
2
) to justify its proposals. One fundamental
problem (among others) is that the EPA is moving ahead of the
Interagency Working Group process to update the SC-CO
2
and
instead using its own estimate. In other words, the EPA can print its
own regulatory currency--the SC-CO
2
--to be used in
justifying its own rules under the required cost-benefit analyses.
As I wrote in formal comments to the EPA regarding CPP 2.0, the EPA
should improve its rulemaking by offering an objective, unbiased
assessment of the reliability and cost impacts.\17\ To that end, the
EPA should issue a new supplemental notice seeking comment on the
impact of the rule on the cost of electricity.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\17\ Travis Fisher, Public Comment Re: New Source Performance
Standards for GHG Emissions from New and Reconstructed EGUs, Docket ID
No. EPA-HQ-OAR-2023-0072; FRL-8536-04-OAR; RIN 2060-AV09, Cato
Institute, Dec. 20, 2023, https://www.cato.org/sites/cato.org/files/
2024-01/fisher-public-comment-12-20-23.pdf
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
IV. A Reliable and Affordable Grid Requires Less Government
Intervention

As I see it, there are two starkly different paths forward
regarding electricity policy. The first, which I endorse, is to embrace
American values and foster an electricity industry that is built on
fierce competition to serve consumers. The second, which I fear is
taking hold presently through the IRA and EPA rules discussed above, is
to force an unwise transition to politically favored, intermittent
resources.
Intermittent resources such as wind and solar energy should be
allowed to take their rightful place in electricity systems. Congress
should remove the IRA subsidies (along with all energy subsidies,
including subsidies for hydrocarbons and nuclear energy) to encourage
right-sized investments in energy resources that leave electricity
customers and federal taxpayers better off. The IRA will force
significant amounts of intermittent energy onto the grid--far more than
would be consistent with the goal of ensuring a reliable grid at least
cost to consumers and taxpayers. At the same time, the EPA is
recklessly shutting down reliable generation.
Rather than allowing an energy crisis of their own making to
unfold, policymakers should foster a reliable, low-cost grid that
provides a solid foundation upon which to build a strong and growing
American economy. The way to ensure a robust grid is simply to remove
the harm inflicted by unwise energy policy.
Finally, I urge policymakers to show restraint and humility when
interfering with the electric power sector. Policymakers have important
decisions to make about America's energy future, and it is vital that
members of Congress and other policymakers first do no harm. As NERC
has noted, ``[e]ducation for policymakers and regulators to increase
awareness of the reliability implications of policy decisions is a
critical need.'' \18\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\18\ North American Electric Reliability Corp., 2023 ERO
Reliability Risk Priorities Report, Aug. 2023, p. 21, https://
www.nerc.com/comm/RISC/Related%20Files%20DL/RISC_ERO_Priorities_
Report_2023_Board_Approved_Aug_17_2023.pdf
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Thank you for the opportunity to provide testimony on the critical
issue of the reliability and affordability of America's electric grids.

______

Questions Submitted for the Record to Mr. Travis Fisher, Director of
Energy and Environmental Policy Studies, Cato Institute

Mr. Fisher did not submit responses to the Committee by the appropriate
deadline for inclusion in the printed record.

Questions Submitted by Representative Westerman

Question 1. The territories pay on average two to three times what
states pay for their utilities. There are concerns that prioritizing
renewable energy would cause utility prices to go up even higher in the
territories.

Do you have an estimate on the impact of renewable energy
transition has on utility prices here in the U.S.?

Question 2. Why does the transition to renewables drive up the
utility costs for Americans?

2a) Would it be fair to say that the transition to renewables would
further increase utility costs for the territories?

2b) Would it also be fair to say that allowing for the territories
to have self-determination through an all-of-the-above energy approach
would help drive down energy costs?

Question 3. Do you believe there are economic drawbacks of
prioritizing renewable energy in the territories? And if so, what do
you think those are?

Questions Submitted by Representative Leger Fernandez

Question 1. California recently achieved an historic milestone of
producing enough energy from renewable sources to meet 100% of consumer
demand for 31 days (and counting, as of April 16, 2024). If such an
achievement is possible in California, which has significantly higher
energy demand than any of the U.S. Territories, why should we not
invest in helping the territories reach their renewable energy
generation targets?

______

Ms. Hageman. Thank you, Mr. Fisher, for your testimony.
I am now going to recognize the Members for 5 minutes of
questioning, and I am going to begin with Mr. LaMalfa.
Mr. LaMalfa. Thank you, Madam Chairman, for convening the
hearing, thanks for being recognized, and panelists for your
time with us here today.
I am going to start right at the top. Panelists, each one
of you please, what is your estimate of the percentage of
carbon dioxide in our atmosphere? What percent of our
atmosphere is made up of carbon dioxide? Please just run down
the line at your best estimate.
Mr. Fisher. I will start with 0.42 percent, 420 parts per
million.
Mr. LaMalfa. OK. Anybody else? Three others. I want
answers, please. What do you think it is?
Mr. Fisher. So, .042 percent. I got the decimal wrong.
Mr. Stein. Yes, .04 percent.
Mr. LaMalfa. Is that a consensus of all five of you, .042?
Mr. Fleming. I don't have a counter statement to that, so I
would align.
Mr. Brewer. No idea, Congressman.
Dr. Guannel. That is fine.
Mr. LaMalfa. OK. All right. Well, thank you. I always like
to start out these climate change and CO
2
greenhouse
gas conversations with where are we starting, so I got two
actually very correct answers. I appreciate that. A typical
response is somewhere between 20 and 50 percent by the person
on the street who is busy with their lives and such. So, that
is our baseline, .04 percent of our atmosphere is
CO
2
, yet we are hellbent in this country and other
western countries to somehow get rid of our energy grid and our
way of life to accomplish trying to bend that number just a
little bit lower when you can hardly even find it on a chart.
As this applies to our Committee work and our insular
affairs here, I did have a chance to visit Puerto Rico and look
at their generating plant there. It is antiquated, an old
diesel set up there. I am sure they gladly have it rather than
nothing. But upgrading and moving in a different direction
would be forward thinking for all these entities, all the
island areas that have unique challenges with keeping a grid
going and up to speed.
Interestingly, I saw a piece by Toyota today, and Mr.
Toyota with quotes in the past when he was talking about the
way forward is not electric vehicles. And they had an equation,
the 1:6:90 rule, maybe you have heard of that. But for every
one electric car, fully electric car that you can build, the
amount of minerals and special metals needed to do that, you
can make six plug-in hybrid electric cars or 90 regular hybrid
cars.
So, we are hellbent on forcing people into electric cars
with minerals and metals that aren't even available, and we
don't even permit mines in this country in order to get the
materials we need, they all have to be imported. Yet, you hear
you could build 90 hybrid vehicles for what it takes to build
one, and that is from Toyota. So, we are applying this same
kind of thinking towards forcing ourselves into the type of
power plants that would put us in a similar vein.
And I love the analogy on weather dependent because we just
saw that in Texas, where a weather dependent grid there got
knocked out by a hail storm. And the eclipse might be a fun
example, all of our solar technology was diminished for a few
minutes there amongst all the other crises that came out during
the hysteria over an eclipse.
Let me throw a couple questions here quick to Mr. Fisher
and Mr. Stein. Can you highlight some more of the advantages of
non-renewable sources like liquified natural gas from the
United States, which we produce abundantly, or when you are
talking the island regions way down there in the South Pacific
that maybe even are a regional ally and shipping advantage
would have in supplying gas to the islands there versus weather
dependent and unreliable sources like wind and solar? Let me
throw that first to Mr. Fisher and then Mr. Stein on deck.
Mr. Fisher. It is a great question. The short answer is you
have more portability in liquid fuels for sure and LNG as well,
you have more ability to store the fuel, and probably the main
advantage is it is controllable. In the sense of the eclipse,
we had no control over where the moon was in that moment. We do
have control over a unit that you can simply fire up or turn
off.
Mr. LaMalfa. A stationary fuel source that you can control
24/7. Mr. Fisher?
Mr. Fisher. Yes. And as I said in my testimony, I think
that LNG, it is only just today, within the last year or two,
where LNG has even theoretically become an option because of
the growth in LNG exports around the world. So, it is something
that in the past has never even been considered because it
wasn't really a realistic option, and I think that is why it is
very important to not reject that for ideological reasons. As I
said, Australia is one of the largest producers of LNG for
export in the world and the South Pacific territories are
actually located in an excellent location to take advantage of
that.
Mr. LaMalfa. So, low cost 24/7 available power sources that
you can control yourself. Yep. All right.
Madam Chair, let's not forget small modular nuclear
reactors could be ideal in the right setting, too. I will yield
back, Madam Chair. Thank you.
Ms. Hageman. Thank you. The Chair now recognizes Ms. Leger
Fernandez, the Ranking Member.
Ms. Leger Fernandez. Thank you so much. And I would point
out that it strikes me that we have two witnesses on the panel,
leaving aside the government, who actually live in the islands,
who actually have lived through the typhoons or hurricanes that
you have described in your testimonies as suffering at more
disastrous impacts because of climate change. I find that
testimony incredibly valuable.
I also find incredibly valuable the fact that two witnesses
who actually are on the ground running utilities, running the
energy companies that your communities rely on are advocating
for diversifying the energy sources. And I am hearing from you
that you want to see diversification. You are not saying we
want to eliminate anything altogether, but you want to see some
diversity.
And, Dr. Guannel and Mr. Fleming, you point out the
importance of microgrids, the importance of bringing solar and
perhaps wind in to bring down the cost. Am I understanding that
correctly that you see this as important to both the economic
prosperity of your islands but also very important with regards
to health and everything that you rely on? Can you just
describe real quickly why you think that that diversification,
those microgrids are important? I will go first to Dr. Guannel.
Dr. Guannel. Yes. We believe that it is actually very
important, and I can speak for myself and many of the residents
of the Virgin Islands. Diversification is critical because most
islands in the territories only have one power plant. If the
power plant goes down, nobody has power regardless of what is
going on. If the distribution system has a problem, sometimes
they turn off the entire system just to protect it.
So, the ability for people to have access to electricity is
critical. It is not a question of do I think this, do I think
that, it is a question of can I have the light on, can I live
my life, and access to electricity is the issue. The advantage
of solar is that it allows houses, communities to have access
to this electricity without really thinking too hard about the
intricacy of running a power plant.
Many people purchase solar and make the investment because
they know that, first of all, after 10 years or so, sometimes 5
years, they no longer have to pay anything at all, and they
continue to receive the benefit of the electricity being
produced. When there is a problem, they have access to
electricity.
Ms. Leger Fernandez. Thank you.
Dr. Guannel. Et cetera, et cetera. The issue is really
access.
Ms. Leger Fernandez. Thank you. So, the price actually then
stabilizes for them so they are not subject to the fluctuations
that we incur. I have a couple of more questions, but thank
you.
Mr. Fleming, if you could quickly answer the question with
regards to the benefits of having the diversification, the
solar and the wind.
Mr. Fleming. Yes, so diversification is really at the core
of everything that we look at from an energy standpoint in the
territory. I think the term was used earlier, abandoning, and
we are by no stretch abandoning our current need for thermal
generation that is driven by fossil fuels. We are currently in
the process of commissioning new, more efficient thermal
generation on the island of St. Thomas. We are paving a path
for establishing efficient generation on St. Croix as well,
because we are currently operating antiquated, legacy,
inefficient generation, so realizing our dependence on fossil
fuels in parallel with our growing penetration of renewables,
we still need to have an efficient baseload because that is how
we actually maximize the diversification with the additional
renewables.
And I will highlight one project specifically tied directly
to the OIA. We recently commissioned a microgrid at an
emergency shelter on St. Croix. This was the largest emergency
shelter on St. Croix which was funded through Energizing
Insular Communities Grant which incorporates solar, battery,
and a diesel gen set on site.
Ms. Leger Fernandez. Thank you very much.
I just want ask Mr. Brewer, do you pick winners and losers?
Mr. Brewer. Thank you, Congresswoman. No, ma'am, we don't.
The EIC program follows the priorities set by the territories.
They are in the lead. They set their priorities and then they
share those priorities with us, and then we are able to, based
on our criteria, see how they qualify for the EIC program, and
those that qualify for the program receive the grants.
Ms. Leger Fernandez. Right. My time is up, but I like the
fact that the answers have actually told us that the people in
the territories, at least what we are hearing today, they are
asking for this and you are responding to that.
With that, Madam Chair, I yield back.
Ms. Hageman. The Chair now recognizes Mr. Sablan for 5
minutes of questioning.
Mr. Sablan. Thank you, Madam Chair, and welcome to all the
witnesses. I am trying to figure out how differences with the
Biden administration energy plans, which I support, have become
a subject of the territories.
Mr. Brewer, welcome, and I want to thank your office and
the Department of the Interior for your support of the
Energizing Insular Communities Program that helps the insular
areas reduce our reliance on expenditures on imported fuels and
move towards developing and utilizing domestic energy sources.
As you note in your testimony, residents in the territories
face steep challenges to meet energy needs due to remote
geographies that need to import fuel and the constant threat of
natural disasters, particularly powerful storms that are
becoming more damaging and more frequent. This leads to energy
rates in the insular areas that are an average of two-and-a-
half times greater than rates in the mainland, and electricity
rates for residential customers in my district, the Northern
Mariana Islands, is regularly over 40 cents per kilowatt hour.
The Majority claims that the Biden administration through the
Department of the Interior is pushing the insular areas toward
solar, wind, and other sources of clean renewable energy.
Biden's One Energy they are calling it.
Mr. Brewer, please know that if you were going to issue
grants that don't support renewable energy, you are going to be
violating the law, won't you?
The law is intended to assist the insular areas in
developing and implementing plans to move the insular areas
away from their reliance on costly imported fuels to cheaper
domestic sources of energy. That is the law, Public Law 109-59
and 113-235. I don't know what we are arguing here. I don't
think you violated the law.
Mr. Brewer. Congressman, thank you. A couple of points. Let
me be clear, there is no language in the EIC that precludes a
territory from applying for funding from any source.
Mr. Sablan. Right. No, I understand that.
Mr. Brewer. There is no source that is----
Mr. Sablan. But it moves the insular, the territories, it
moves them, assists them to develop and implement plans to move
away from fossil fuels because I don't have fossil fuels in the
Northern Marianas, but we have the sun.
Mr. Brewer. If the CNMI energy plan has given priority for
solar energy, wind, whatever form of energy that it has seen as
a priority for its energy plan, and it provides that to our
office as what it wants to possibly fund through the EIC, that
is what we would use our criteria to evaluate.
Mr. Sablan. OK. Maybe you are not an expert, but we have
today's readily available technology. What is the most
efficient way to produce electricity? The most efficient way to
produce electricity is solar.
Mr. Brewer. I am afraid, sir, that that is outside of my
area of expertise.
Mr. Sablan. Oh, all right. Well, it is solar, if not for
the nation, then I know for the Northern Marianas. I live
there, I pay my utility bills every month. No one else does it
for me. And it is expensive for me. I can just imagine those
other people, those who fall at or below the $17,000 GDP.
Please, you have an issue with the Biden administration
energy plans, take it to the Biden administration energy plans.
This program is helping the people in the insular areas move to
something that they can afford. $15 million a year, you guys
want to bitch about that?
I yield back.
Ms. Hageman. The Chair now recognizes Ms. Velazquez for 5
minutes of questioning.
Ms. Velazquez. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Mr. Brewer, when it comes to asserting its military
presence, the United States does not hesitate to invest in the
territories. For decades, Guam has been almost entirely
dominated by the Department of Defense. Further, only two
decades ago, Puerto Ricans, including myself, were fighting to
stop the military from using Vieques as a bomb testing ground.
I have seen how our communities have been occupied,
contaminated, and become sicker. In fact, Madam Chairman, I
request that today's front page article of El Nuevo Dia, Puerto
Rico's largest newspaper, which states that 4 out of 10 Puerto
Ricans will get diagnosed with cancer at least once during
their lifetime. I ask unanimous consent for that to be
submitted for the record.

Ms. Hageman. Without objection.

[The information follows:]

Cuatro de cada 10 personas en Puerto Rico padeceran de cancer en algun
momento de sus vidas

La mediana de edad de los diagnosticos es a los 67 anos, pero cada vez
hay mas casos en jovenes

elnuevodia.com, 10 de abril de 2024, Por Marga Pares Arroyo

https://www.elnuevodia.com/noticias/locales/notas/cuatro-de-cada-10-
personas-en-puerto-rico-padecera-de-cancer-en-algun-momento/

*****

Pese a que los adultos mayores son los mas vulnerables a un diagnostico
de cancer, toda la poblacion en Puerto Rico esta en riesgo, ya que se
estima que el 41.5% de las personas en la isla sufrira de esta
enfermedad en algun momento de sus vidas.

Sin embargo, personas que estudian la enfermedad consultadas por El
Nuevo Dia coinciden en que, a pesar de que aun es la segunda causa de
fallecimientos en el pais, la deteccion y la atencion en una etapa
temprana aumentan el nivel de supervivencia.

``Asusta un diagnostico de cancer, pero hay esperanza tambien porque
cada vez mas personas lo sobreviven'', enfatizo la demografa Vivianna
de Jesus Monge, investigadora cientifica de la Division de Control de
Cancer y Ciencias de la Poblacion del Centro Comprensivo de Cancer
(CCC) de la Universidad de Puerto Rico (UPR).

``Muchos conocemos a alguien que ha sobrevivido al cancer (tiempo
despues del diagnostico), y eso hace que haya esperanza en la gente,
que esa noticia de cancer no sea tan devastadora como antes'', anadio.

Datos del Registro Central de Cancer de Puerto Rico indican que la
sobrevida de hombres con cancer de prostata, de 2012 a 2016, fue de
99.7% a los cinco anos del diagnostico, mientras que, en cancer de
tiroides, la supervivencia fue de 100% y, en mujeres con cancer de
mama, de 86.8%.

``La sobrevivencia varia por el tipo de cancer y su estadio al momento
del diagnostico. Si se coge en un estadio I y II, es mucho mayor (la
sobrevida) que cogerlo, por ejemplo, en estadio IV, que, muchas veces,
ya esta en metastasis (propagacion de las celulas cancerosas mas alla
del tumor original)'', explico, por su parte, Maria Cristy,
vicepresidenta de Servicios al Paciente de la Sociedad Americana Contra
el Cancer de Puerto Rico.

Segun el Instituto Nacional del Cancer (NCI, en ingles), en Estados
Unidos, el indice de supervivencia a cinco anos de todos los canceres
combinados es de 68%.

La sobrevida o supervivencia en cancer es definida por el NCI como el
tiempo que pasa desde la fecha del diagnostico o el comienzo del
tratamiento en el cual los pacientes siguen vivos hasta que ha
transcurrido un periodo que, habitualmente, se establece en cinco anos.

14,168 casos nuevos de cancer en agnosticados el de prostata emas, es
prevenible en muchos reduccion de tabaquismo como factores
determinantes.

Otros elementos clave para un paciente son si tiene o no un seguro
medico, que incluye la cubierta de su poliza, el tiempo de espera para
acceder a los servicios, la distancia hasta la instalacion medica donde
recibe atencion y si tiene transportacion o no, puntualizo De Jesus
Monge.

Riesgo en edades vulnerables

Durante los ultimos 66 anos, el cancer ha sido la segunda causa de
muerte en Puerto Rico (1957-2023), siendo los adultos mayores los mas
afectados, con una mediana de edad de 67 anos en los diagnosticos de
esta enfermedad, segun la informacion mas reciente disponible en el
Registro Central (2016-2020).

``La poblacion ha envejecido mas, y esta es una enfermedad mayormente
de edad avanzada, aunque tambien se ven casos en mas jovenes, donde ha
habido un aumento'', declaro el doctor Fernando Cabanillas, director
medico del Centro de Cancer del Hospital Auxilio Mutuo.

Al hacer referencia a los datos en el Registro Central, que incluyen
una proyeccion de los diagnosticos realizados entre 2017 y 2019, Cristy
dijo que ``aproximadamente cuatro de cada 10 personas (41.5%, segun el
reporte) seran diagnosticadas con algun tipo de cancer ``, y considero
que este panorama es comun en paises desarrollados como Puerto Rico.
``Estilos de vida donde abunda el sedentarismo (falta de ejercicio o
actividad fisica) y una mala nutricion contribuyen a eso'', puntualizo.

Hace dos anos, los Centros para el Control y Prevencion de Enfermedades
clasificaron a Puerto Rico con la mayor prevalencia de sedentarismo
(49.4%) a nivel de Estados Unidos. Segun datos del Departamento de
Salud, al 2021, el 72.4% de la poblacion estaba en sobrepeso o padecia
de obesidad.

``El diagnostico de cancer ya no es una sentencia de muerte. Ademas, es
prevenible en muchos casos''--Maria Cristy

De acuerdo con Cristy, especialista en politica publica de cancer, las
cerca de 5,000 muertes por cancer reportadas al ano en Puerto Rico
obligan mirar la enfermedad como un problema de salud publica
multidimensional, mientras que Cabanillas advirtio que hay otros tipos
de cancer que surgen por ciertos virus o exposiciones a herbicidas,
entre otros factores.

``En la mayoria (de los casos), no se conoce bien (su causa). Podria
ser por el factor genetico o ciertos sindromes'', senalo Cabanillas.

Mas enfermedades cronicas y degenerativas

De Jesus Monge abundo que ``el desarrollo economico ha llevado a
cambios en los estilos de vida.'' ``Antes, las enfermedades eran mas
infecciosas y transmisibles, ahora predominan las cronicas y
degenerativas'', apunto.

La edad y el sexo tambien son factores de vida a considerar en el
desarrollo de cancer, sostuvo De Jesus Monge. ``Las mujeres hacen mas
prevencion, visitan mas al medico para la atencion temprana de una
posible enfermedad. El hombre tiene un estilo de vida mas arriesgado.

Por eso, aunque a nivel mundial nacen mas ninos que ninas, a los 29
anos hay mas mujeres que hombres'', expuso.

Mejores medidas de higiene, disponibilidad de agua potable, un mayor
entendimiento y educacion sobre las enfermedades, esfuerzos de
prevencion y tratamientos mas efectivos han ayudado a que las personas
vivan mas, destaco la demografa. La expectativa de vida en Puerto Rico
es de 81 anos, en ambos sexos, al 2021, segun datos del Programa de
Demografia del Recinto de Ciencias Medicas de la UPR.

``Aunque la vejez no es una enfermedad, ese deterioro progresivo lo
expone a otras condiciones de salud''--Vivianna de Jesus Monge

Pero, con una mediana de edad de 67 anos en los diagnosticos de cancer,
De Jesus Monge expreso gran preocupacion ante la vulnerabilidad que ya
reviste esa poblacion. ``Preocupa mucho, porque esas edades tienen ya
de por si una salud fragil, posiblemente con otras comorbilidades y
limitaciones. Aunque la vejez no es una enfermedad, ese deterioro
progresivo lo expone a otras condiciones de salud'', alerto.

Agrego que con familias mas pequenas debido a la baja en natalidad y el
aumento de la migracion, entre otros factores, muchos adultos mayores
viven solos y enfrentan ese diagnostico de cancer con poco o ningun
apoyo para ayudarlos a tomar decisiones sobre su tratamiento y como
cuidar de su salud.

``El cancer se atiende de forma agresiva, con operaciones,
quimioterapias y citas periodicas. Preocupa las condiciones con que
enfrentan esto (el cancer) y las posibilidades de que sobrevivan'',
sostuvo.

Aunque la mayor parte de los casos de cancer ocurren a partir de los 60
o 65 anos, Cristy advirtio que se ha notado una estabilizacion de
pacientes de esas edades, pero un aumento en personas de 55 anos o
menos.

Crisis en la salud afecta a pacientes

Todo lo que afecte a la industria de la salud incidira directamente en
el servicio a pacientes, establecio De Jesus Monge, quien este jueves
presentara una ponencia en el Centro Comprensivo de Cancer, en Centro
Medico de Rio Piedras, sobre como la demografia puede contribuir y
ayudar al estudio e investigacion de esta enfermedad.

Explico, por ejemplo, que con el cierre de hospitales o areas
hospitalarias se reducen las camas disponibles, lo que limita o demora
la atencion a los enfermos. Y los que estan en mas riesgo son aquellos
que padecen condiciones complicadas--como el cancer--y requieren
multiples servicios.

De igual forma, dijo, es importante conocer la proporcion de medicos
por paciente, en este caso, los oncologos, ya que esto podria provocar
demoras en las citas medicas.

Cristy, al citar datos de la Asociacion de Hematologia y Oncologia
Medica de Puerto Rico, informo que hay 114 hematologos oncologos
activos en la isla. El mayor reto, planteo, es que solo hay cuatro o
cinco ginecologos oncologos.

``No creo que haga falta muchos mas medicos a nivel de oncologia. No
hay escasez, como la hay de cirujanos cardiovasculares. Y ya hay
oncologos en practicamente toda la isla, no solo concentrados en el
area metro'', puntualizo, por su parte, Cabanillas.

______

Ms. Velazquez. Yet, Congress moves quickly to eliminate
funding for the Energizing Insular Communities Grant Program in
Fiscal Year 2024, one of the few resources available to advance
energy resilience and protect those that suffer from terrible
diagnoses like this. Can you please explain how much funding
the Federal Government allocates on average annually to advance
its military presence in the territories and how it compares to
its investment in energy-related grants?
Mr. Brewer. Congresswoman, thank you for your question.
Having visited Guam myself, you are certainly correct, there is
a significant military presence on the island of Guam.
Unfortunately, I have no area of expertise in that, I will have
to defer that part of your question to the Department of
Defense.
Regarding the EIC funding, let me just say a couple of
things. One, since 2011, the EIC program actually has had an
increase in funding starting in 2011 from about under $2
million to now going to about $15.5 million, so we have seen a
steady increase in EIC funding. That is the program that my
office oversees, so that is really the one that I can speak
mainly about. We have had that increase in funding and are very
appreciative of that.
Ms. Velazquez. And do you support for Congress to continue
to allocate money, resources for the territories?
Mr. Brewer. We certainly hope that the support Congress has
shown will be there.
Ms. Velazquez. Dr. Guannel, island territories are often
accused of not having the capacity to identify, apply, and
administer Federal grants, yet we know this does not have
anything to do with being a territory, but rather it is closely
related to the level of support the islands receive. How could
the Federal Government better support capacity building and its
investment to expand renewable energy?
Dr. Guannel. I think that the programs that you mentioned
and some of the examples that Mr. Fleming gave earlier of the
type of grants that are received are examples of how the
Federal Government can help the territories increase capacity.
Mr. Fleming can speak more about this, but he has received a
fair amount of funding for increasing workforce capacity to
deal with the new technologies. We are also receiving funding
to increase offerings at the university level to diversify the
workforce and meet the demands because there is a very strong
demand from a workforce point of view in terms of jobs for
people to not only install, because energy companies which are
privately owned are extremely busy and there is a surge in
demand for jobs in that field, but there is also a large demand
for energy conservation-type jobs.
So, I think that the programs like EIC and others from the
USDA and EPA go a very, very long way to increase the capacity
of the territories.
Ms. Velazquez. Thank you.
Madam Chair, I yield back.
Ms. Hageman. Thank you. I know recognize myself for 5
minutes of questioning.
Mr. Brewer, several of the territories have set aggressive
goals for their transition to renewable energy. For example,
American Samoa adopted a goal to obtain 50 percent of its
energy from renewable sources by 2025 and 100 percent by 2040.
Guam is also targeting 50 percent so-called renewable energy by
2035 and 100 percent by 2040. CNMI 20 percent by 2016, and the
U.S. Virgin Islands has a goal for 25 percent by 2020, 30
percent by 2025, and 50 percent by 2044.
Mr. Brewer, are these goals being met for transitioning to
these so-called renewable energy resources? Have the
territories been meeting their goals in terms of using 25
percent, 50 percent, or 100 percent of so-called renewables by
a particular date?
Mr. Brewer. Thank you for your question, ma'am. I believe
at this point, I don't have the numbers exactly in front of me,
but I do know that, as you noted in your question, a percentage
of their energy needs are being met through----
Ms. Hageman. A percentage, but you don't know what
percentage?
Mr. Brewer. I would have to get back to you about the exact
percentage at this time, what exactly they do----
Ms. Hageman. OK. And you don't know if they are on track to
meet their goals?
Mr. Brewer. I would need to get back to you on that.
Ms. Hageman. OK. Mr. Stein, as we see from both Mr.
Fleming's and Dr. Guannel's written testimonies, the cost of
this transitioning to wind and solar is extremely high, and at
the same time the territories have set these extremely
aggressive goals to transition in some cases to 100 percent
wind and solar within the next 20 years. My first question for
you is, why aren't they just doing it now, why do they have to
wait 20 years if this is such a great thing and they are going
to be able to meet all of their needs and demands, why wait
until 2040, why not just do it right now?
Mr. Stein. Well, there are a lot of factors that go into
it. And first of all, the actual construction phase of both
wind and solar is quite expensive and it takes a certain amount
of time. There are environmental restrictions on things, for
the islands in particular, the shipping costs are huge for
getting some of these, like if you want to build a wind
turbine, that is a very large piece of machinery.
So, the timelines for this, even with unlimited money, you
have a very long timeline. And, obviously, I don't really think
that even on a 2030-year time scale it is actually physically
possible to achieve this, but to even try, it takes a very long
time.
Ms. Hageman. Have you ever seen any state or territory that
has managed to transition to mostly or completely renewable
energy?
Mr. Stein. Well, the key is defining what we mean by
renewable energy. If we are including hydro in that definition,
there are quite a few states and quite a few countries that
have achieved not truly 100 percent but near 80 to 90 percent.
Ms. Hageman. But that includes hydro.
Mr. Stein. Right, that is including hydro because that is
doing the baseload work. If you are talking about just wind and
solar, there are very few options. I know that Iowa and South
Dakota have very high penetrations of wind. In Europe, Denmark
I believe is the only country that has surpassed 50 percent
with wind and solar. But in all three of those cases, they are
connected into large continental grids. They have neighbors
that have a lot of water or nuclear power generation, so they
have the ability to import on days when the wind is not
blowing.
Ms. Hageman. So, one of the things that has always just
puzzled me about this discussion that we have been having with
renewables and the amount of money that is being spent on what
I would consider an astonishing boondoggle, what I would really
like to see is, I would like to see a community be a pilot
project for us. Let's just pick Boulder, Colorado, for example.
It is about 100,000 people. I know that a lot of people who are
strong advocates and believe very strongly in this climate
crisis and how we need to transition away from the use of coal,
oil, and gas.
What I would love to do is have Boulder be our pilot
project. Take out all of their gas stations, take out all of
their gas-fired powered appliances, take away all of their
internal combustion engines, require everybody to drive an
electric vehicle, and then ring that community, which has a lot
of wind and a lot of sun, by the way, and just ring that
community with wind turbines and solar facilities, solar
plants, and have no backup, no backup whatsoever, no gas-fired
power plants, no coal-fired power plants, no generators. I
would love to see a community like Boulder with 100,000 people
be our pilot project.
Mr. Fisher, do you think that that is something that is
feasible in the next 10, 20, 30, 50, 75, or maybe 100 years
where we would have a community like Boulder give up all access
and use of fossil fuels and go solely to wind and solar as
their energy supply?
Mr. Fisher. That is an excellent question. I would like to
see that experiment play out myself. But I have to admit, the
amount that you would have to overbuild solar and wind
resources to have anywhere near 100 percent reliability would
be astronomically expensive and, in fact, I am not sure what
the geographic scope of your circle is there, but I don't think
there is even geographically enough space to do that.
Ms. Hageman. OK. Well, don't you think we ought to try
something like that before we try to impose it upon 330 million
people in this country?
Mr. Fisher. Yes, I think part of the problem is we don't
have a very good experiment. We are sort of mandating our wish
list instead of working through problems as they come up. I
think one great example is it is true that the marginal cost of
solar is very low, but when you consider integration costs, and
balancing costs, and things like that, it is actually three or
four times more expensive than you would expect if you just
looked at the LCOE figures.
And the cost impact, too, is something that we have to
consider, and there is also a trade-off with reliability. So,
even if you have a very low cost system, is it reliable? It is
incredibly hard to do both and then to add the extra layer of
sustainability or environmental consciousness, all of that, it
is incredibly difficult, so it does take some careful
experimentation, as you have said.
Ms. Hageman. Well, I want to----
Ms. Leger Fernandez. Madam Chair, would you yield?
Ms. Hageman. Yes. I am actually out of time.
Ms. Leger Fernandez. OK. We were talking earlier about
Hawaii's goals, and Kauai's utility is at 100 percent renewable
most days, island, and in 2022 they were at 60.2 percent. And I
think the important point that was being made earlier is the
idea of diversification because in many of these plans it is to
not eliminate completely but it is actually creating a mix.
Anyway, in answer to your question, we were able to pull
that up since you had that.
Ms. Hageman. But nobody at 100 percent. 60 percent. So, 40
percent of the time, what you have pointed out is 40 percent of
the time--yes, 40 percent of the time they don't have, so I
guess I don't want to be in the hospital one of those days that
is a 40 percent day.
I want to thank the witnesses for your valuable testimony
and the Members for their questions. The members of the
Committee may have some additional questions for the witnesses
and we will ask you to respond to those in writing.
Mr. LaMalfa. I was wondering if there would be more rounds.
Ms. Hageman. I have to go to another----
Mr. LaMalfa. I know. I always do that, too.
Ms. Hageman. Under Committee Rule 3, members of the
Committee must submit questions to the Committee Clerk by 5
p.m. on Tuesday, April 16, 2024, and the hearing record will be
held open for 10 business days for these responses.
If there is no further business, without objection, the
Committee stands adjourned.

[Whereupon, at 3:06 p.m., the Subcommittee was adjourned.]

[ADDITIONAL MATERIALS SUBMITTED FOR THE RECORD]

Submission for the Record by Rep. Grijalva

Climate Strong Islands Network (CSIN)

Washington, DC

April 25, 2024

Hon. Harriet Hageman, Chair
Hon. Teresa Leger Fernandez, Ranking Member
House Natural Resources Committee
Subcommittee on Indian and Insular Affairs
Washington, DC 20515

Chair Hageman, Ranking Member Leger Fernandez, and Members of the
Subcommittee:

Thank you for the opportunity to provide written testimony as part
of the record for the Indian and Insular Affairs Subcommittee hearing
entitled ``Energizing the Territories: Promoting Affordable and
Reliable Energy Sources for the U.S. Insular Areas.'' U.S. islands and
territories need sound energy policy to ensure a future that allows
their communities to continue to thrive. Clean, affordable, renewable
energy will be a key part of building the resiliency of island
communities as they face increased impacts of climate change, including
natural disasters, sea level rise, and extreme weather events. Key to
ensuring that energy (and all other) federal policies work for island
communities is to include island voices in policy discussions, and to
truly listen as they voice their needs and present solutions that work
for their unique communities.

The Climate Strong Islands Network (CSIN) was formed to help
amplify the collective voice of island communities to drive more
resources, supportive policies, and attention to U.S. islands. The CSIN
Steering Committee includes community leaders from Guam, Northern
Mariana Islands, Alaska, Hawai'i, Puerto Rico, American Samoa, and St.
Croix. CSIN's mission is to build an effective coalition of island
entities that work across sectors and geographies in the continental
U.S. and the nation's states and territories located in the Caribbean
and Pacific with the goal of helping their communities become more
climate resilient.

U.S. islands face a host of singular challenges exacerbated by
climate change and natural hazards, geographic limitations, and varying
degrees of political affiliation and representation within the U.S.
Government. Island communities exist at the forefront of climate
change, whether it be reoccurring disasters such as hurricanes and
tsunamis or slow-onset issues such as extreme heat, ecosystem shifts,
ocean warming, and sea level rise. These events have far-ranging
impacts on human life and livelihoods, as well as on societal systems
and supports. CSIN was established to bring island communities together
to address these challenges and to establish their voice on national
policy priorities and to build community resilience in the face of
climate change. CSIN advocates for island-driven policy changes that
address the unique challenges faced by island communities.

CSIN is particularly interested in the subject of this hearing
because it presents the opportunity to highlight the ways in which
island communities, including the U.S. territories, are taking active
steps to diversify their energy grids and prepare for future climate-
related energy disruptions and challenges.

After watching the ``Energizing the Territories: Promoting
Affordable and Reliable Energy Sources for the U.S. Insular Areas''
hearing, CSIN wants to emphasize several important points:

Island Communities Want Clean Energy

In 2021, CSIN, led by its Steering Committee of island community
leaders, released its National Islands Policy Framework, which outlines
7 Key Issue Areas along with policy priorities and recommendations CSIN
supports that will help islands become more resilient to climate
change. Clean Energy is one of these key priority issues for CSIN. The
National Islands Policy Framework states:

``In order to become climate resilient, U.S. islands need
local, independent, reliable, and affordable energy generation
and community based distribution systems that are locally
informed and accountable to local needs. Islands are naturally
more vulnerable to the effects of natural disasters so they
need self-sufficient and reliable energy systems to ensure they
can continue to serve their community even after a natural
disaster. Because of their unique geography and populations,
islands are the ideal place for renewable energy technologies
and innovations. Islands will need continued investment,
support, and technical training to transition to a clean energy
future. Technical training allows for islands to develop their
existing workforce with renewable energy expertise while
meeting the unique needs of their community. Developing
individual island capacity decreases islands' reliance on
fossil fuels and enables them to become energy independent.
Energy systems that work on an island could be applied to other
rural communities across the continental United States to help
those rural communities become more climate resilient.'' \1\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ CSIN National Islands Policy Framework

The broad policy recommendations from CSIN related to Clean Energy
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
are:

1.  Federal government support for island communities in establishing
and achieving clean energy or net zero goals.

2.  Federal clean energy policies and recommendations that are
locally and culturally relevant and consider local
expertise.

3.  Develop effective federal funding mechanisms to incentivize and
support clean energy deployment and energy storage
solutions on islands.

4.  Expand DOE's authority to finance clean energy projects in
frontline communities, including island communities.

5.  Establish programs to operate clean energy related pilot programs
on U.S. islands to advance projects like microgrids and
small scale power generation.

Island communities across the U.S. and the territories are
demonstrating their interest in clean energy innovation. Programs like
the Energizing Insular Communities (EIC) give islands the resources
they need to launch their island-created and island-driven clean energy
initiatives. The projects funded by the EIC program in FY2023, such as
CNMI's Energy Task Force and Guam's ``Guam100'' project, demonstrate
that island communities are leading the way to diversify and
decarbonize their electric grids.\2\ Islands are looking ahead and
working hard to innovate and find sustainable energy solutions that
will help their communities become more resilient to climate change.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ https://www.doi.gov/media/document/eic-grants-territories-2023
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Island Communities Need Diverse Energy Sources

When natural disasters and extreme weather hits island communities,
resilient power generation for electricity is imperative to ensure the
safety of island residents and the operation of emergency response
activities. That is why island communities need diverse energy sources
that can ensure reliability when they need it the most. Renewable
energy sources like solar and wind can continue to power homes and
community services if a fossil fuel generated power plant is impacted
by an earthquake, or if bad weather forces delays in the shipment of
diesel fuel.

On April 12, 2024, the day after the Subcommittee hearing, the
Virgin Islands Water and Power Authority (WAPA) announced scheduled
power outages ``. . . due to `inclement marine weather' in St. Thomas
and St. John and offline generating units on St. Croix.'' \3\
Throughout the scheduled outages, residents and businesses were
impacted, and the stability of the electrical grid was dependent on
island residents reducing their energy consumption. This is a
significant burden and disruption on island communities, one which
could be avoided if diverse energy sources could come online when
needed to respond to disaster and weather related energy disruptions.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ https://www.sottvi.news/p/wapa-shares-schedule-for-rolling-
blackouts

Island communities support the EIC program because it invests in
island-driven initiatives that diversify island energy sources, expand
clean energy generation, and reduce energy costs for island residents,
which ultimately will help islands become more climate resilient.
Island Communities Need Affordable and Reliable Energy

Most islands do not produce their own petroleum or its derivatives
like diesel, requiring islands to import fuel to operate their
electricity generating power plants. This imported fossil fuel is not
cheap, causing island communities to pay more than the average mainland
U.S. community for their basic power needs. Further, fossil fuel energy
is not immune to climate change disruptions. As demonstrated by the
news of rolling blackouts in St. Croix, fossil fuel imports can be
impacted by severe weather, and fossil fuel power plants can be damaged
in natural disasters like floods and tsunamis. By diversifying their
power sources and utilizing renewable energy sources that are available
on islands, using technology to harness that energy that largely
already exists, islands can reduce their energy costs and create a more
reliable grid.
Island Communities Need Representation

U.S. islands are politically under-represented by policymakers and
elected officials in Washington, DC, which has resulted in under-
investment and a lack of knowledge and understanding by policy makers
of the challenges they face and the unique ways in which federal
policies will impact their communities. CSIN advocates for stronger
representation for U.S. islands, so their unique needs are taken into
consideration during the federal decision making processes. Congress
and federal agencies have a responsibility to engage more directly with
island communities as they establish and implement policies that impact
islands.

To address this issue, the federal government must make adjustments
to ensure that a) island voices are heard during policy making
processes, b) adequate consideration is given to the unique challenges
of island communities, and c) island communities are directly engaged
in the implementation of policies. Taking these steps will empower
island communities to engage in the policy process and will ensure that
future policies can be realistically deployed in island communities,
which will go a long way to ensuring islands achieve long-term climate
resiliency.

Thank you for the opportunity to contribute testimony for the
hearing record. The Climate Strong Islands Network stands ready to
assist the Subcommittee in the future by providing an island
perspective on policies that impact island communities.

Sincerely,

Lirio Marquez-D'Acunti,       Dr. Austin Shelton, III,
Co-Chair, CSIN Steering
Committee                     Co-Chair, CSIN Steering Committee

[all]
