- LEGISLATIVE HEARING ON H.R. 5482, TO PREVENT ENERGY POVERTY AND ENSURE THAT AT-RISK COMMUNITIES HAVE ACCESS TO AFFORDABLE ENERGY, "ENERGY POVERTY PREVENTION AND ACCOUNTABILITY ACT OF 2023"; H.R. 6474, TO AMEND THE ENERGY POLICY ACT OF 2005 TO EXPEDITE GEOTHERMAL EXPLORATION AND DEVELOPMENT IN PREVIOUSLY STUDIED OR DEVELOPED AREAS; AND H.R. 6481, TO AMEND THE MINERAL LEASING ACT TO REQUIRE THE SECRETARY OF THE INTERIOR TO REIMBURSE THE FEE FOR AN EXPRESSION OF INTEREST IF THE EXPRESSION OF INTEREST BECOMES INACTIVE, AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

H.R. 5482, H.R. 6474, AND
H.R. 6481

=======================================================================

LEGISLATIVE HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND
MINERAL RESOURCES

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON NATURAL RESOURCES
U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

Tuesday, December 12, 2023

__________

Serial No. 118-84

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Natural Resources

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.govinfo.gov
or
Committee address: http://naturalresources.house.gov

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
54-447 PDF                  WASHINGTON : 2024

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

COMMITTEE ON NATURAL RESOURCES

BRUCE WESTERMAN, AR, Chairman
DOUG LAMBORN, CO, Vice Chairman
RAUL M. GRIJALVA, AZ, Ranking Member

Doug Lamborn, CO Grace F. Napolitano, CA
Robert J. Wittman, VA Gregorio Kilili Camacho Sablan,
Tom McClintock, CA     CNMI
Paul Gosar, AZ Jared Huffman, CA
Garret Graves, LA Ruben Gallego, AZ
Aumua Amata C. Radewagen, AS Joe Neguse, CO
Doug LaMalfa, CA Mike Levin, CA
Daniel Webster, FL Katie Porter, CA
Jenniffer Gonzalez-Colon, PR Teresa Leger Fernandez, NM
Russ Fulcher, ID Melanie A. Stansbury, NM
Pete Stauber, MN Mary Sattler Peltola, AK
John R. Curtis, UT Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez, NY
Tom Tiffany, WI Kevin Mullin, CA
Jerry Carl, AL Val T. Hoyle, OR
Matt Rosendale, MT Sydney Kamlager-Dove, CA
Lauren Boebert, CO Seth Magaziner, RI
Cliff Bentz, OR Nydia M. Velazquez, NY
Jen Kiggans, VA Ed Case, HI
Jim Moylan, GU Debbie Dingell, MI
Wesley P. Hunt, TX Susie Lee, NV
Mike Collins, GA
Anna Paulina Luna, FL
John Duarte, CA
Harriet M. Hageman, WY

Vivian Moeglein, Staff Director
Tom Connally, Chief Counsel
Lora Snyder, Democratic Staff Director
http://naturalresources.house.gov
------

SUBCOMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND MINERAL RESOURCES

PETE STAUBER, MN, Chairman
WESLEY P. HUNT, TX, Vice Chair
ALEXANDRIA OCASIO-CORTEZ, NY, Ranking Member

Doug Lamborn, CO                     Jared Huffman, CA
Robert J. Wittman, VA                Kevin Mullin, CA
Paul Gosar, AZ                       Sydney Kamlager-Dove, CA
Garret Graves, LA                    Seth Magaziner, RI
Daniel Webster, FL                   Nydia M. Velazquez, NY
Russ Fulcher, ID                     Debbie Dingell, MI
John R. Curtis, UT                   Raul M. Grijalva, AZ
Tom Tiffany, WI                      Grace F. Napolitano, CA
Matt Rosendale, MT                   Susie Lee, NV
Lauren Boebert, CO                   Vacancy
Wesley P. Hunt, TX                   Vacancy
Mike Collins, GA
John Duarte, CA
Bruce Westerman, AR, ex officio

CONTENTS

Page

Hearing held on Tuesday, December 12, 2023.......................     1

Statement of Members:

Stauber, Hon. Pete, a Representative in Congress from the
State of Minnesota.........................................     2
Ocasio-Cortez, Hon. Alexandria, a Representative in Congress
from the State of New York.................................     3

Panel I:

Hageman, Hon. Harriet M., a Representative in Congress from
the State of Wyoming.......................................     5
Steel, Hon. Michelle, a Representative in Congress from the
State of California........................................     6

Statement of Witnesses:

Panel II:

Jones, Bryant, Executive Director, Geothermal Rising, Boise,
Idaho......................................................     8
Prepared statement of....................................     9
Questions submitted for the record.......................    11
Sgamma, Kathleen, President, Western Energy Alliance, Denver,
Colorado...................................................    13
Prepared statement of....................................    14
Cha, J. Mijin, Assistant Professor, University of California,
Santa Cruz, California.....................................    16
Prepared statement of....................................    18
Questions submitted for the record.......................    22
Hollie, Derek, Founder, Energy Poverty Prevention Project,
Stafford, Virginia.........................................    23
Prepared statement of....................................    25

Additional Materials Submitted for the Record:

Bureau of Land Management, Statement for the Record..........    54
Questions submitted for the record.......................    55

Submissions for the Record by Representative Stauber

Emma Wohlrab, Letter to Chairman Westerman...............    56

Submissions for the Record by Representative Hageman

Navajo Transitional Energy Company (NTEC), Letter dated
December 13, 2023......................................    57

Submissions for the Record by Representative Grijalva

National Parks Conservation Association, Statement for
the Record.............................................    61
Southern Environmental Law Center, Letter to the
Committee..............................................    62
The Wilderness Society, Letter to the Committee..........    70

Submissions for the Record by Representative Ocasio-Cortez

Department of Energy, Secretary Granholm, Letter to DOE
Stakeholders...........................................    31
Section 5 of H.R. 5482...................................    50

Submissions for the Record by Representative Kamlager-Dove

The Guardian, July 2023 article titled, `` `We can't
escape': climate crisis is driving up cost of living in
the US west''..........................................    40

LEGISLATIVE HEARING ON H.R. 5482, TO PREVENT ENERGY POVERTY AND ENSURE
THAT AT-RISK COMMUNITIES HAVE ACCESS TO AFFORDABLE ENERGY, ``ENERGY
POVERTY PREVENTION AND ACCOUNTABILITY ACT OF 2023''; H.R. 6474, TO
AMEND THE ENERGY POLICY ACT OF 2005 TO EXPEDITE GEOTHERMAL EXPLORATION
AND DEVELOPMENT IN PREVIOUSLY STUDIED OR DEVELOPED AREAS; AND H.R.
6481, TO AMEND THE MINERAL LEASING ACT TO REQUIRE THE SECRETARY OF THE
INTERIOR TO REIMBURSE THE FEE FOR AN EXPRESSION OF INTEREST IF THE
EXPRESSION OF INTEREST BECOMES INACTIVE, AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES

----------

Tuesday, December 12, 2023

U.S. House of Representatives

Subcommittee on Energy and Mineral Resources

Committee on Natural Resources

Washington, DC

----------

The Subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:30 a.m. in
Room 1334, Longworth House Office Building, Hon. Pete Stauber
[Chairman of the Subcommittee] presiding.
Present: Representatives Stauber, Graves, Fulcher, Tiffany,
Duarte; Ocasio-Cortez, Huffman, Kamlager-Dove, and Lee.
Also present: Representatives Hageman and Steel.

Mr. Stauber. The Subcommittee on Energy and Mineral
Resources will come to order.

Under Committee Rule 4(f), any oral opening statements at
hearings are limited to the Chairman and the Ranking Minority
Member.

And I ask unanimous consent that the gentlewoman from
California, Mrs. Steel, and the gentlewoman from Wyoming, Ms.
Hageman, be allowed to participate in today's hearing.

Without objection, so ordered.

I now recognize myself for an opening statement.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. PETE STAUBER, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF MINNESOTA

Mr. Stauber. Thank you all for being here today to discuss
these important pieces of legislation.
Republicans on this Committee have continuously fought for
increased domestic energy production this Congress. This
started with H.R. 1, the Lower Energy Cost Act, which will
accelerate all kinds of energy projects and enable an all-of-
the-above energy strategy. We have pushed this agenda because
it is beneficial to the American people and the American
economy. It provides good-paying jobs for Americans, including,
in many cases, union jobs. It lowers energy costs for American
families. It is better for our environment, and it improves our
national security, making the world safer.
While Republicans have been fighting for our all-of-the-
above American energy agenda in Congress, this Administration
has continued to carry out a radical, anti-traditional energy
agenda that has caused energy prices to skyrocket. In the first
year of the Biden administration, U.S. consumers spent over
$1.3 trillion on energy when adjusted for inflation, a 25
percent increase from 2020.
This trend worsened in 2022, as the average monthly
electric bill for residential customers in the United States
increased 13 percent from 2021 to 2022, rising from $121 a
month to over $137 a month, the largest annual increase in
average residential electricity spending since the data first
was calculated beginning in 1984. Last winter, the number of
households relying on government assistance to cover their
energy costs rose by an estimated 1.3 million to more than 6
million, the largest year-over-year increase since 2009.
Additionally, when President Biden was elected in November
2020, the average gasoline price in the United States was
roughly $2.20 per gallon. Under President Biden's watch,
gasoline prices reached a record high, breaking in 2022 with
prices soaring to a nationwide average of over $5 a gallon.
Increasing energy costs are especially devastating for American
families who are living paycheck to paycheck.
All three of the bills we have before us today will help
increase domestic energy production and reduce energy costs for
American families.
H.R. 5482, the Energy Poverty Prevention and Accountability
Act, introduced by my friend and colleague from Wyoming, Ms.
Hageman, would commission a government-wide study to review
laws and regulations that impact energy access and
affordability that make recommendations on how to reduce energy
poverty in at-risk communities.
The bill would also require CBO to include estimates for
future legislation that would impact energy prices for at-risk
communities, and would force agencies to demonstrate actions to
lock up lands or slow energy permitting will not increase
energy poverty. I personally appreciate this provision, as this
Administration withdrew 225,504 acres in my home state of
Minnesota, putting off limits the largest copper nickel find in
the world, a move that would certainly affect at-risk
communities across the United States.
Lastly, the bill would require that all government
regulations include an energy poverty statement on the first
page of each rulemaking statement of policy or guidance
document detailing how the action will not result in energy
poverty in at-risk communities. I am proud to join my colleague
from Wyoming in co-sponsoring this legislation, which will
ultimately hold this Administration accountable for their
policies that are raising energy costs and burdening at-risk
communities across our country.
H.R. 6474, introduced by my colleague and friend, Mrs.
Steel from California, would expedite geothermal energy
development by expediting the permitting process in areas with
existing development and areas that have been recently studied
under NEPA.
Lastly, H.R. 6481, introduced again by Ms. Hageman from
Wyoming, is a common-sense bill that would simply ensure that
submitters of Expressions of Interest, EOI, for onshore oil and
gas lease sales are refunded if the BLM refuses to lease the
acreage in their submitted EOI.
And I appreciate my colleagues' good work on these bills,
and look forward to hearing testimony from our witnesses today.
With that, I will now yield to the Ranking Member Ocasio-
Cortez.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. ALEXANDRIA OCASIO-CORTEZ, A
REPRESENTATIVE IN CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF NEW YORK

Ms. Ocasio-Cortez. I thank you, Chairman Stauber.
Today, we will discuss H.R. 5482, the ``Energy Poverty
Prevention and Accountability Act.''
Energy insecurity is a problem in the United States. In a
2023 Census Bureau survey, more than one in four households in
the United States said they had difficulty paying their energy
bills. They have cut back on other essentials to pay for
energy, or they have lived with unsafe temperatures to lower
their bills. We see this in the Bronx all the time.
We, in Congress, should be taking energy poverty seriously.
But H.R. 5482 is far from the answer to this. While sponsors
say this bill will help low-income and over-burdened minority
communities, which is one that I represent, everything in this
bill is structured to help one constituency, and that is fossil
fuel companies and executives.
H.R. 5482 would require very one-sided, so-called energy
poverty studies to show the benefits of oil and gas production
and slow down any Federal actions to transition away from
fossil fuels. This bill takes a completely upside-down view of
energy and security, tying fossil fuel production at one end of
the supply chain to the energy prices we pay at the other end.
It is a trickle-down assumption and approach. It basically says
the more we produce fossil fuels, the more gas and oil that we
extract, the lower energy prices Americans will have to pay.
But needless to say, this is not nearly the full picture,
and it drastically over-simplifies the problem. It is not hard
to disprove, either. If more fossil fuel production meant lower
costs, why is it that today, while American oil and gas
production is at a record high, home energy costs continue to
go up?
For one, the oil and gas we produce does not stay in the
United States. Our country is exporting more oil and gas than
ever. Regulators, analysts, and utilities have repeatedly found
that natural gas exports are driving up the cost for consumers,
and that is because exports tie American gas prices to the
volatile global market. Under the Trump administration, the
Department of Energy commissioned a study on natural gas
exports that concluded that exports are in the ``public
interest'' because they would benefit Big Oil's American
shareholders. Gas exports are still being approved based on
this widely discredited study.
And that leads me to my second point, which is that the
money made from oil and gas production isn't even going to
everyday Americans' pockets. It is lining the pockets of oil
and gas executives. In the past year, Big Oil profits reached a
record of $200 billion. Our public resources are not being
developed for the public good; they are being developed for
private profit.
And when we also look at energy bills, we also need to
consider the types of homes and appliances that people use. If
you live in a mobile home with no insulation and decades-old
appliances, that is also going to drive your energy bills up
even higher, which already compounds on people who continue to
be financially strained. You will have to pay more to heat or
cool or cook than in a better-insulated apartment with energy
efficient appliances.
So, as we are here discussing the very real problem of
energy insecurity and costs, I want to make sure that we are
here to discuss real solutions. Because if one was looking to
actually lower one's energy bills, one might look to cut
private industry profits or to halt fossil fuel exports so that
Americans can see the benefits of our energy production. One
might set up a public trust so that profits from our energy
production could be reinvested into our communities. But this
bill does nothing to limit our fossil fuel exports, and it does
nothing to redirect profits towards public good. Instead, it
explicitly calls for studies that ``encourage private energy
sector investment on Federal public land and tribal land.''
If one was looking to actually address energy poverty, one
might create programs that incentivize energy efficiency. But
my colleagues across the aisle have repeatedly tried to cut the
Inflation Reduction Act programs that help everyday Americans
afford energy efficient appliances and other improvements.
Lastly, if one were also looking to address the issue of
energy insecurity, one would also not ignore the climate
crisis. From rising temperatures to intensifying disasters, the
rapidly changing climate is directly driving up home energy
bills, making our energy system less reliable and communities
more vulnerable to disaster.
The fact is this bill does not address energy bills.
Instead, my colleagues across the aisle are exploiting the
language of poverty in order to enrich private oil and gas
interests. If we actually want to reduce the energy burden on
American families, we need to end our reliance on fossil fuels
and our dedication to maximizing oil and gas profits, not
double down on them. For that reason, I am encouraged to see
H.R. 6474, a bill promoting geothermal energy development, on
the docket today.
With that, I yield back.
Mr. Stauber. Thank you very much. We will now begin with
our first panel of Members, who will speak respectively on
their legislation.
I now recognize Ms. Hageman from Wyoming's at-large
Congressional District for her testimony.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. HARRIET M. HAGEMAN, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF WYOMING

Ms. Hageman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I am very grateful
for the opportunity to testify on two of my bills, the Energy
Poverty Prevention and Accountability Act and my bill to amend
the Mineral Leasing Act to make Expression of Interest fees, or
EOIs, reimbursable.
In April of this year, I had the opportunity to question
Secretary Haaland in a Full Committee hearing on the
President's budget. I specifically asked her if she was
familiar with the term ``energy poverty,'' to which she replied
that she was not. This was concerning to me, to say the least.
But she finally did admit that it was self-explanatory, and I
explained to her what it does mean, which is a situation where
people have to choose between paying their heating bill, buying
medicine, or buying food because of the high cost of energy.
What was even more concerning to me was that Ms. Haaland
refused to say that this Administration views energy poverty as
a bad thing. And considering the fact that every decision they
have made has either caused or exacerbated energy poverty, I
must say that I believe that this Administration is furthering
energy poverty as an affirmative policy for the purpose of
controlling human behavior and pursuing a radical climate
agenda.
On Day 1 of his presidency, President Biden declared a war
on fossil fuels, and has been responsible for promulgating
rules that raise energy prices for Americans, starting with the
cancellation of the Keystone Pipeline and expanding the use of
the government-created social cost of carbon metric to
artificially increase the regulatory costs of energy production
of fossil fuels when performing their analyses.
My bill does not focus on an artificial manufactured
narrative, but rather looks at the cold, hard facts and the
impacts on the pocketbooks of the people in America's most
vulnerable communities. Energy poverty, as defined in my bill,
is the condition in which individuals do not have access to
affordable and reliable energy to maintain economic security.
Countless Americans are dealing with energy poverty today as a
direct result of bad public policy originating from the
executive branch and from Congress.
My bill requires a report on at-risk communities
experiencing energy poverty and the barriers preventing at-risk
communities from accessing affordable energy. It also instructs
the CBO to identify if a proposed bill directs an agency to
take actions that could affect access to affordable energy in
any at-risk community.
It also directs the Department of the Interior to conduct a
study on how its proposed rules and regulations impact energy
poverty strictly as it relates to price in at-risk communities,
and it allows entities sponsoring energy, mineral, or
transmission projects on Federal land to request a study from a
lead agency on how a new lease or project on Federal land would
impact job creation and energy prices.
The left has perpetuated a false narrative that energy
producers are somehow causing poverty. They cite price gouging,
but then they attempt to centralize the energy market by
raising royalty rates and bonding fees in an effort to cripple
competition. Actions like this demonstrate that they are not
serious, and they do not practice what they preach.
Mr. Chairman, we should be encouraging development and
self-reliance, not discouraging it, and the second bill I have
today does just that.
I think we all agree that it is wrong to pay an entity for
services not provided, but that is what is happening right now
with the oil and gas Expression of Interest fees. Companies pay
$5 per acre every 3 years to express interest in an oil and gas
lease. And as we all know, it has been the policy of this
Administration to neglect or refuse to issue them. My bill
would allow entities with inactive leases to get reimbursed,
and to allow the term for which the EOI applies to be extended
from 3 years to 5 years. This simply allows producers to get
what they pay for, and to be reimbursed when leases are not
issued.
In summary, both of these bills are important for every
American that has watched their heating bills rise and who are
paying more at the pump because of DC's bad policies. I urge my
colleagues to support my efforts to allow for greater
transparency when it comes to issuing policies that impact the
paychecks and prosperity of all Americans, and to support
future development.
I also request that the debate that we have today is based
upon the facts and the language of the bill itself, rather than
simply attempting to impugn our character because we are
conservatives and believe that fossil fuels and energy
production are a good thing for America, and have provided for
the prosperity that we all enjoy, every single one of us
sitting in this room.
With that, I yield back.

Mr. Stauber. Thank you very much. I will now recognize Mrs.
Steel from California's 45th Congressional District for her
testimony.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. MICHELLE STEEL, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA

Mrs. Steel. Thank you, Chairman Stauber, for inviting me
today. You know what? I can talk about the gas price just a
little bit before I start talking about my bill here.
In California, the average gas price is over $6 per gallon.
When gas prices go up, it really hurts middle- and lower-income
families. In California itself, we have a lot of oil in the
land. And in California, because of the toughest regulations,
they have never given out even one permit approved since 1994.
We have all these energies inside of the government, but we are
not really working on what we have.
Having said that, I just want to say thank you, Chairman
Stauber, for hosting this legislative hearing on H.R. 6474, my
legislation to expedite geothermal exploration and development.
Geothermal power is the great renewable energy source.
My bill is very simple and straightforward. It would
expedite geothermal development by amending the Energy Policy
Act of 2005 to allow for a new categorical exclusion for
geothermal under the National Environmental Policy Act of 1969.
Especially, it would allow for the categorical exclusion for
geothermal drilling in situations where drilling has occurred
within the last 5 years, or drilling will occur within an area
for which an approved environmental document that considered
drilling was completed pursuant to NEPA within the last 5
years. This will allow for an expedited approval process for
certain geothermal projects, and mirrors existing categorical
exclusion under the NEPA.
This important legislation will help my home state of
California and the United States to have more sustainable,
clean, and reliable energy. Geothermal power can be an
important tool to make the United States energy independent and
achieve a cleaner energy future. It is extensively available,
and can contribute significantly to meeting U.S. energy needs.
California has a sizable geothermal reservoir. Too much
regulation prevents producing the energy that we already have
in this country. Congressional action can make the United
States a strong producer and my home state a domestic leader in
the production of geothermal electricity.
Geothermal energy will support local communities and will
boost cities economically as production grows. It will create
and maintain sustainable local jobs to strengthen congressional
districts. It has a small footprint and near-zero carbon
emissions. As I already mentioned, it is reliable and
consistent, unlike other energy sources, and will support the
already-existing energy grid. Most importantly, geothermal
energy will insulate future market vulnerability and provide
energy relief for decades.
I look forward to my colleagues and the witnesses making
the case for categorical exclusion for geothermal energy, and
expediting the permitting process without reducing
environmental standards.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

Mr. Stauber. Thank you very much. We will now move to
introduce our second panel.
Let me remind the witnesses that under Committee Rules,
they must limit their oral statements to 5 minutes, but their
entire statement will appear in the hearing record.
To begin your testimony, please press the ``talk'' button
on the microphone.
We use timing lights. When you begin, the light will turn
green. When you have 1 minute remaining, the light will turn
yellow. And at the end of the 5 minutes, the light will turn
red, and I will ask you to please complete your statement.
I will also allow all witnesses to testify before Member
questioning.
Our first witness is Dr. Bryant Jones. He is the Executive
Director for Geothermal Rising, and is stationed in Boise,
Idaho.
Dr. Jones, you are now recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF BRYANT JONES, EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR, GEOTHERMAL
RISING, BOISE, IDAHO

Dr. Jones. Hello and good morning, Representative Stauber,
Representative Ocasio-Cortez, and members of the House Natural
Resources Committee and Subcommittee on Energy and Mineral
Resources. Thank you for the opportunity to testify at today's
hearing and discuss the potential and opportunity for
geothermal energy in our nation's energy mix.
My name is Bryant Jones, and I am the Executive Director of
Geothermal Rising, the world's oldest geothermal association,
serving as the main professional organization for the
geothermal community in the United States. Our members harness
the heat beneath the Earth's surface for direct-use geothermal
heat pumps, and to generate 24/7 carbon-free electricity
critical to achieving reliable, affordable, fully-decarbonized
buildings, industries, and stable power grids. Geothermal
Rising's membership includes project developers, service and
equipment providers, research groups, environmental and climate
NGOs, government agencies, and other stakeholders.
Inexhaustible geothermal energy offers a solution to some
of the most pressing challenges such as energy reliability and
emissions reductions. Frankly, it is an energy source we can't
afford not to invest in.
Our work at Geothermal Rising centers on decreasing energy
costs, increasing efficiencies, promoting a strong geothermal
workforce, and contributing to a sustainable planet and an
energy-independent nation. As we continue to advocate for the
responsible development of geothermal resources and compatible
reductions of regulatory red tape, Geothermal Rising
acknowledges the importance of environmental assessments and
compliance with the National Environmental Policy Act, or NEPA.
While new legislation creating categorical exclusions for
geothermal activities would accelerate clean energy
development, it must be approached with caution and
responsibility. To ensure that efforts to streamlining
permitting are responsible and effective, Geothermal Rising
recommends that the Congress urge Federal agencies to issue
categorical exclusions for activities with minimal
environmental impact, based on long-standing data from past
environmental assessments and environmental impact statements.
Geothermal energy is often referred to as the invisible
energy resource. It has the lowest carbon footprint of all
renewable energy technologies, and it has the smallest
environmental footprint of all energy technologies. There is a
clear need for a more streamlined and balanced review process
that can efficiently address environmental and community
concerns while advancing the development of geothermal energy.
Geothermal Rising supports the streamlining of NEPA reviews
while maintaining scientific rigor and public participation. We
support regulations that shorten review times for
environmentally beneficial projects without significant adverse
effects. We recognize that NEPA reviews, despite their
necessity, can add significant costs, time, and litigation risk
to projects. It is crucial that the process is refined to
better accommodate the urgent development of clean geothermal
energy projects which currently often fall into categories
requiring detailed and multiple NEPA reviews.
We advocate for a balanced approach that upholds
environmental standards while enabling streamlined development
of geothermal energy. This balance can be achieved through
carefully-crafted categorical exclusions, pragmatic and tiered
reviews, and other appropriate administrative efficiencies,
while ensuring that any proposed action's environmental impact
is thoroughly considered and transparently communicated.
Geothermal Rising supports H.R. 6474, sponsored by
Representative Steel, as it accomplishes what I have just
presented.
Furthermore, Geothermal Rising supports the release of
guidance on permitting by the Department of the Interior, and
suggests that the Congress encourage BLM to address industry
concerns over geothermal leasing delays, requirements that
geothermal permitting review workforce live in remote field
offices, and the lack of geothermal technical knowledge in
those BLM field offices.
We are excited to see policy momentum supporting geothermal
development on Capitol Hill, and we look forward to working
with all of those in the executive branch and Congress to
provide a framework to responsibly increase pathways to
establish streamlined permitting processes for this unique and
vast energy resource, while also ensuring environmental
responsibility.
The world is watching the United States for how it designs
its portfolio in the energy transformation. Geothermal energy
must be leveraged if we are to rapidly develop nationwide,
robust power systems and a clean, sustainable fuel mix, all
while creating jobs and bolstering innovative economic and
industrial outputs.
Thank you again for this opportunity, and I am happy to
answer any questions you may have to the best of my knowledge.

[The prepared statement of Dr. Jones follows:]
Prepared Statement of Dr. Bryant Jones, Executive Director,
Geothermal Rising
on H.R. 6474

Good morning Representative Stauber, Representative Ocasio-Cortez,
and Members of the House Natural Resources Committee Subcommittee on
Energy and Mineral Resources, thank you for the opportunity to testify
at today's hearing and discuss the potential and opportunity of
geothermal energy in our nation's energy mix.
My name is Bryant Jones, and I am the Executive Director of
Geothermal Rising, the world's oldest geothermal association, serving
as the main professional and educational organization for the
geothermal community in the United States. Our members harness the heat
beneath the Earth's surface for direct use, geothermal heat pumps, and
to generate 24/7 carbon-free electricity, critical to achieving
reliable, affordable, fully decarbonized buildings, industries, and
power grids. Geothermal Rising membership includes project developers,
service and equipment providers, universities and research groups,
government agencies, public utilities, and other stakeholders.
Geothermal Rising's (GR) mission is to ``use the earth to save the
earth'' by tapping into the extraordinary potential of our geothermal
resources. GR's policy work supports this mission by advancing a
comprehensive agenda of technology agnostic federal and state-level
policies, regulatory work, and general initiatives to accelerate the
deployment of all forms of geothermal energy.
Inexhaustible geothermal energy offers a solution to some of our
most pressing challenges such as energy reliability and emissions
reductions. It is a resource that can generate 24/7 clean electricity,
provide heating and cooling for homes and industries, and much more.
Frankly, it is an energy source we can't afford not to invest in. Our
work at Geothermal Rising centers on decreasing energy costs,
increasing efficiency, promoting a strong geothermal workforce, and
contributing to a sustainable planet and energy independent nation.
Currently, in the United States, geothermal power plants have an
installed capacity of 3,692 MW, however, this represents only 0.4% of
total U.S. utility-scale electricity generation and accounted for 1.9%
of electricity generation from renewable sources,\1\ underscoring the
substantial opportunity we have to scale up geothermal energy as we
enter this new generation of geothermal technologies and innovation.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ https://www.eia.gov/energyexplained/electricity/electricity-in-
the-us.php
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The first geothermal power plant in the United States started up
more than 60 years ago based on a now mature suite of technologies.
Today's newer geothermal technologies leverage the expertise and
experience of the North American oil and gas sector and are poised to
unleash even more of the United States' geothermal potential. Other
advantages of geothermal include the domestic co-production of critical
minerals, existing supply chains, and high paying jobs that directly
transfer from the conventional energy sector. Lastly, the United States
is well poised to be the hub of technological development and
deployment of geothermal energy that can be implemented at home and
exported around the world. However, a critical hurdle stands in the way
of realizing this potential--permitting.
As we continue to advocate for the responsible development of
geothermal resources and compatible reductions of regulatory red tape,
GR acknowledges the importance of environmental assessments and
compliance with the National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA). While new
legislation creating categorical exclusions for geothermal activities
would accelerate clean energy development, it must be approached with
caution and responsibility, ensuring adequate safeguards and
transparency. To ensure that efforts to streamline permitting are
responsible and effective, GR recommends that the Congress urge federal
agencies to issue categorical exclusions for activities with minimal
environmental impact based on long-standing data from past
environmental assessments (EAs) and environmental impact statements
(EISs).
GR supports the streamlining of NEPA reviews while maintaining
scientific rigor and public participation. We support regulations that
shorten review times for environmentally beneficial projects without
significant adverse effects, emphasizing high-quality scientific
analysis and considerations of climate change impacts and environmental
justice. We recognize that NEPA reviews, despite their necessity, can
add significant cost, time, and litigation risk to projects. It's
crucial that the process is refined to better accommodate the urgent
development of clean energy industries like geothermal, which often
fall into categories requiring detailed NEPA review.
A recent example is that of the Dixie Meadows Geothermal
Utilization Project in Nevada, in which Ormat faced undue lawsuits and
delays over concerns about toad habitat. Ormat was seeking to complete
the project by a specific deadline to avoid losing $30 million due to
the terms of a power purchase agreement for this 60-megawatt project.
Another example is the Gerlach geothermal project, again in Nevada,
which faced significant delays due to concerns over viewscapes. Given
that geothermal is often referred to as the invisible energy resource,
has the lowest carbon footprint of all renewable energy technologies,
and has the smallest environmental footprint of all energy
technologies, there is a clear need for a more streamlined and balanced
review process that can efficiently address environmental and community
concerns while advancing the development of renewable energy.
GR sees an opportunity for improvement in our 6-8 year permitting
timeline for geothermal projects.\2\ As noted in Young et al., 2015
published by the National Renewable Energy Lab, a NEPA review can be
triggered up to 6 times in the project development process which is
less than ideal for capital management. We advocate for a balanced
approach that upholds environmental standards while enabling
streamlined development of geothermal energy. This balance can be
achieved through carefully crafted categorical exclusions, programmatic
and tiered reviews, and other appropriate administrative efficiencies,
while ensuring that any proposed action's environmental impact is
thoroughly considered and transparently communicated.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ Young et al., 2015
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Furthermore, GR supports the release of guidance on permitting by
the Department of the Interior (DOI) and suggests that the Congress
encourage BLM to address industry concerns over geothermal leasing
delays, requirements that geothermal permitting review workforce live
in remote field offices, and the lack of geothermal technical knowledge
in BLM field offices.
In representing the geothermal community, GR strives to be a
consensus organization, recognizing that our members may have diverse
viewpoints on certain issues. Therefore, while we support the general
direction of proposed regulations and legislative efforts to streamline
permitting and the development of the geothermal industry, it's
important to note that our members may have slightly deviating
priorities and interests.
Again, while we advocate for permitting reform in a broad sense, we
also emphasize the need for a balanced approach, namely, environmental
responsibility and public participation. With the values of responsible
resource development at the forefront, the United States can lead the
way in clean, renewable geothermal energy while safeguarding our
ecosystems and communities.
We are excited to see policy movement supporting geothermal
development on Capitol Hill and look forward to working with all of
those in our national agencies and Congress to provide a framework to
responsibly increase pathways to establish streamlined permitting
practices for this unique and vast energy resource, while also
providing adequate safeguards and transparency.
The world is watching the United States for how it designs its
portfolio in the energy transformation. Geothermal energy must be
leveraged if we are to rapidly develop a nation-wide robust power
system and a clean sustainable fuel mix, all while creating jobs and
bolstering innovative economic and industrial outputs.
Thank you again for this opportunity, and I am happy to answer any
questions you may have to the best of my knowledge.

______

Questions Submitted for the Record to Dr. Bryant Jones, Executive
Director, Geothermal Rising

Questions Submitted by Representative Dingell

Question 1. Dr. Jones, Department of the Interior has a goal of
licensing 25,000 MW of renewables on public lands by 2025. How could
next-generation geothermal energy help DOI achieve these goals?

Answer. Geothermal energy has several unique characteristics that
set it apart as a clear ``winner'' to achieve DOI renewable energy
goals.

Unlike intermittent renewables, geothermal provides 24/7
baseload power, contributing to grid stability and
reliability.

Geothermal plants have a small footprint, allowing for
significant power generation with minimal land disruption,
making them ideal for public lands.

Geothermal energy has the smallest environmental footprint
of all energy technologies, including wind and solar,
according to the National Renewable Energy Laboratory.

Next-generation geothermal technologies can access deeper,
hotter resources more efficiently, increasing the potential
power output per project and the geological range of
geothermal projects. I.e., next generation projects can be
deployed virtually ``anywhere'' and not be constrained to
where conventional hydrothermal geothermal resources are
easily accessible.

Geothermal energy's low carbon footprint aligns with DOI's
sustainability goals, providing a clean energy source while
preserving natural landscapes. Geothermal energy has the
lowest life cycle greenhouse gas emissions of all renewable
energy technologies, according to the National Renewable
Energy Laboratory.

Question 2. Dr. Jones, deploying a significant amount of new
geothermal projects on federal land will take collaboration and
innovation. Just this fall, leaders from several industries and
agencies, including federal, state, and local governments, came
together to celebrate the groundbreaking of the Fervo Energy Cape
Modern Geothermal Exploration Project in Beaver County, Utah. Mr.
Jones, could you please tell us more about how your members are working
with public lands managers to ensure there is community engagement and
smart siting for geothermal projects.

Answer. The Fervo Energy Cape Modern Geothermal Exploration Project
in Beaver County, Utah, is indeed an excellent example of the
collaborative efforts needed to deploy new geothermal projects on
federal lands successfully--however, the permitting and tenure process
was more arduous than necessary. It is a partnership between Google,
Fervo, and Cyrq Energy, another geothermal developer with geothermal
power plants and geothermal direct use systems in New Mexico, Utah,
Nevada, and Oregon.
Other examples of geothermal developers working to enhance grid
reliability within a geothermal facility footprint include Calpine's
development projects at The Geysers. The projects include a 25 MW North
Geysers geothermal incremental development, two energy storage
installations on repurposed geothermal sites totaling 38 MWs, and
Calpine's partnership with Greenfire Energy to test a closed-loop
geothermal system in conjunction with a California Energy Commission
grant. Calpine continues to explore new geothermal technologies that
will enhance its geothermal output and efficiency at the Geysers. Yet
another example is Eavor Technologies testing closed-loop geothermal
drilling technologies at Cyrq Energy's Lightning Dock power plant in
New Mexico. Eavor successfully drilled and completed the deepest
closed-loop geothermal well.
In general, our members have had to be extremely patient in their
efforts to get boots on the ground and projects started, contributing
to undue stress, cost, uncertainties, and added risks. Our members are
passionate about geothermal and willing to take such risks because they
care about the environment and are seeking to do their part to draw
down the climate crisis. The geothermal community is not seeking to
skirt environmental law, but advocating that environmental adherence
processes can be streamlined significantly. To aid our national
environmental goals and interests, it is critical that emission-
reducing and environmentally low-impact clean energy projects are not
unnecessarily (and ironically) stalled in the name of environmentalism.
Our members prioritize community engagement, ensuring local
stakeholders are involved and informed throughout the project life
cycle. This involves public meetings, transparent communication, and
addressing local concerns and interests. Geothermal Rising members also
focus on smart siting practices. This includes identifying locations
with minimal environmental impact, high geothermal potential, and
community support. Collaborations extend beyond local communities,
involving state and federal agencies, to streamline permitting
processes and align projects with broader energy and environmental
goals. These approaches exemplify how geothermal projects can be
developed responsibly and sustainably, benefiting both the energy grid
and local communities.

Question 3. Dr. Jones, what else can the Bureau of Land Management
do to advance geothermal energy and create jobs in rural communities?

Answer.

Simplify and expedite the permitting process for
geothermal development, especially for projects on
previously disturbed or studied lands. This includes
adopting categorical exclusions for geothermal exploration.

Establish a geology and science fellows program between
BLM and a non-profit, perhaps Geothermal Rising, to augment
BLM's geothermal permitting review staff with independent
geologists and researchers from academia, retired
professionals, or national lab staff.

Allow hybrid energy leasing on BLM lands so that other
renewables can development on BLM geothermal leases so long
as geothermal is also being developed as a means of sharing
transmission costs and potentially bring investment from
other renewables to geothermal.

Allow BLM staff to work remotely rather than physically
relocating to spots such as Winnemucca, Nevada or Battle
Mountain, Nevada. This would attract more candidates to
help alleviate staffing issues that the geothermal industry
experiences at all BLM field and district offices. With the
new language in the debt ceiling bill around Environmental
Assessment/Environmental Impact Statement timelines, BLM is
going to need to hire new staff to meet the condensed
schedules.

Equalize BLM decision making across offices/states with a
set of standard geothermal-specific operating procedures
for geothermal permitting would greatly speed up
development of geothermal resources on federal lands.

Increase frequency on of BLM geothermal lease sales on
federal lands. Nevada is currently the only state holding
regular lease sales. All other western states are years
behind congressionally mandated geothermal lease sale
timelines.

Provide technical support and resources to local BLM
offices, enhancing their capacity to manage and review
geothermal projects effectively. Hire more staff, train
them adequately in standard geothermal technical
vernacular, and allow them to work remotely so that rural
areas can be served effectively.

Encourage partnerships between the private sector, local
communities, and BLM to develop projects that align with
local economic and environmental objectives. The BLM can
aid in this by supporting flexible financing structures and
mitigating exploration risks.

Increase awareness and understanding of geothermal
energy's benefits, potential, and dispel misconceptions
through educational programs and community outreach.

______

Mr. Stauber. Thank you, Dr. Jones. Our next witness is
Kathleen Sgamma, and she is the President of Western Energy
Alliance, and is stationed in Denver, Colorado.
Ms. Sgamma, you are now recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF KATHLEEN SGAMMA, PRESIDENT, WESTERN ENERGY
ALLIANCE, DENVER, COLORADO

Ms. Sgamma. Good morning, Chairman Stauber, Ranking Member
Ocasio-Cortez, and members of the Committee.
Thanks for the opportunity to testify today. I really
appreciate the bill, Ms. Hageman, on the Expressions of
Interest, one of my favorite topics.
Western Energy Alliance represents oil and natural gas
producers in Wyoming and across the Rocky Mountain West. The
bill fixes a structural flaw in the EOI provisions, Expressions
of Interest, or EOI provisions of the Inflation Reduction Act.
There are many structural flaws in the IRA regarding energy,
since the language was hastily rushed in in the summer of 2022,
and this legislation fixes one of them. So, I really appreciate
that.
Representative Hageman's bill would correct one of those
flaws. The EOI language in IRA, if unchanged, requires
companies to pay a $5-per-acre fee for acreage they nominate,
regardless of whether that acreage is ever offered for sale.
Based on the large proportion of acreage that BLM nominates
and then historically sits on and never brings to sale, the
government is in the inappropriate position of charging for
nothing. The government takes the money, regardless of whether
the service is rendered or not, something that certainly would
not work in the private sector.
I have a very simple fix. BLM should simply collect the EOI
fee at the time the acreage is offered for sale. IRA language
does not specify when the fee must be paid, so BLM has the
flexibility, with its leasing rule, which it is now working on
finalizing, to simply make this fix a reality. We, at Western
Energy Alliance, offered that suggestion in our comments, and
we hope BLM will accept that change.
Further, collecting the fee at time of sale fixes another
problem, and that is the situation of one company paying for
something that another company receives. Nominating a parcel
and paying that fee does not guarantee you will win the lease
at auction. It merely starts the leasing process. By making the
EOI fee payable at the time of sale, the winning bidder pays
for the lease right received, not the losing bidder, who goes
home empty-handed. It is inherently inequitable to compel one
party to pay for something another party receives.
My solution also addresses parcels offered at auction that
receive no bids. In that case, the nominating company pays the
EOI fee. Whether sold or not, the EOI fee is paid, and BLM
pockets the fee to cover its lease processing costs. BLM could
implement my solution as part of its leasing rule, but
legislation such as H.R. 6481 is necessary in the likelihood
that BLM does not choose to implement my practical solution.
The push for the EOI fee came in response to the problem of
too much acreage being nominated in Nevada. As far as I could
tell, given publicly available information and conversations
with people in Nevada, one or two persons inexperienced in the
business of oil and natural gas were nominating millions of
acres without having conducted any analysis of the geology,
resource potential, or industry interest. The nominations would
be submitted indiscriminately on bulk spreadsheets, listing
hundreds of parcels of hundreds of thousands of acres at a
time. This is something that real practitioners in the oil and
natural gas industry in Wyoming, New Mexico, Colorado, and
North Dakota simply do not do.
The person or persons did this several times, and, of
course, none of the acreage sold at auction. I argued publicly
and to BLM at the time that they should simply ignore these
bulk nominations. And indeed, BLM came to that same conclusion.
So, that kind of was the problem solved. But you know, the
problem basically went away, but, of course, the idea of an EOI
fee went far beyond the problem.
Therefore, I call on Congress simply to eliminate the fee.
Even before the new IRA fee went into effect, the oil and gas
industry returns $55 for every dollar BLM spends processing the
oil and natural gas program in its entirety. In fact, the $8.6
billion we return in royalties, rents, and bonuses more than
covers BLM's entire budget.
Given the likelihood of my first legislative suggestion
being adopted, I think Representative Hageman's bill is very
reasonable, and we do appreciate that and call on Congress to
move forward with that bill.
Thank you so much for the opportunity to testify.

[The prepared statement of Ms. Sgamma follows:]
Prepared Statement of Kathleen Sgamma, President,
Western Energy Alliance
on H.R. 6481

Chairman Stauber, Ranking Member Ocasio-Cortez, and Committee
Members, thank you for the opportunity to testify today on H.R. 6481.
The subject of the bill involves nominations for oil and natural gas
leases, which are initiated by an Expression of Interest (EOI). EOIs
are a specific detail of the leasing process governed by the Mineral
Leasing Act (MLA), as amended by the inaptly named Inflation Reduction
Act (IRA). Inaptly, as the EOI fee, along with other fees and tax
increases as well as hundreds of billions in government spending, will
ensure that fundamental energy inflation continues far into the future.
Western Energy Alliance thanks Representative Hageman for
introducing the bill. The bill does not rescind the fee, but rather
fixes a structural flaw in the EOI provisions of IRA. There are many
structural flaws in IRA regarding energy, since the language that
Senator Manchin hastily developed as he rushed IRA into law over just a
few weeks in the summer of 2022 was not vetted with industry experts
nor with the Bureau of Land Management (BLM). Officials at BLM have
commiserated with me over the lack of technical consultation on the
language, which has resulted in impracticalities and confusion on how
to implement several provisions such as those regarding EOIs, other fee
increases, and the intertwining of renewable energy permits with oil
and natural gas leasing. The proposed leasing rule, about which I
testified before this Subcommittee in September, demonstrates the
difficulties BLM faces in finalizing a legally defensible final rule.
Likewise, the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) is struggling in
multiple rulemakings to figure out technically how to implement the
methane emissions fee mandated by IRA.
We applaud Senator Manchin for recognizing--in a bill that included
hundreds of billions of dollars in spending and subsidies for so-called
green energy projects--that oil, natural gas, and coal provide 80% of
the energy that Americans rely on and are not going away anytime soon.
While research and development for alternative energy sources is a
worthy government investment, excessive IRA spending that distorts
energy markets confuses American energy policy and threatens grid
reliability. But since IRA proceeds apace, at least Senator Manchin had
the foresight to attempt to keep the Department of the Interior from
completely crowding out reliable energy sources by focusing solely on
wind and solar energy. He included provisions that require a minimum
level of oil and natural gas lease offerings before wind and solar
permits can be issued, an all-of-the-above energy approach we can get
behind. However, again, since the language was not developed
cooperatively, the wording is confusing and BLM is playing games with
how it counts EOIs and acreage offered to meet neither the letter nor
the spirit of these IRA provisions.

Regulatory Fix

Getting back more directly to the subject at hand, Rep. Hageman's
bill would correct one of the various flaws of the EOI provisions in
IRA. First to identify the flaws. The EOI language in IRA, if
unchanged, requires companies to pay a $5 per-acre fee for the acreage
they nominate, regardless of whether the acreage is ever offered for
sale. Based on the large proportion of nominated acreage that BLM
historically sits on for years and never brings to sale, the government
is in the inappropriate position of charging for nothing. The
government takes the money whether or not the service is rendered,
something that certainly would not work in the private sector.
I have a simple fix: BLM should simply collect the EOI fee at the
time the acreage is offered for sale. The IRA language does not specify
when the fee must be paid, so BLM has the flexibility with its leasing
rule to make this simple fix a reality. Western Energy Alliance offered
that suggestion in comments on the rule, and we hope BLM will accept
this common-sense fix.
Further, collecting the fee at time of sale also corrects another
problem: the situation of one company paying for something another
company receives. Nominating a parcel does not guarantee you will win
that lease at auction; it merely starts the leasing process. By making
the EOI fee payable at time of sale, the winning bidder pays for the
lease right received, not the losing bidder who goes home empty-handed.
It is inherently inequitable to compel one party to pay for property
that another party receives.
My solution also addresses parcels offered at auction that receive
no bids: the nominating company pays the EOI fee. Whether sold or not,
the EOI fee is paid and BLM pockets the fee to cover its lease
processing costs. BLM could implement my suggestions as part of its
leasing rule, but legislation such as H.R. 6481 is necessary in the
likelihood BLM chooses not to implement my practical solution.

Some History

The push for the EOI fee came in response to the problem of too
much acreage being nominated in Nevada. As far as I could tell, given
publicly available data and conversations with people in Nevada, one or
two individuals inexperienced in the business of oil and natural gas
were nominating millions of acres without having conducted any analysis
of the geology, resource potential, or industry interest. The
nominations would be submitted indiscriminately on bulk spreadsheets
listing hundreds of parcels of hundreds of thousands of acres at a
time. In digging into the issue, I could not determine a true motive
other than possibly naivete and a desire to convince gullible clients
that one is a ``player'' in the business. But a nomination is nothing
but a piece of paper if you never acquire the lease and determine its
potential.
This person(s) did this several times, and of course, none of the
acreage sold at auction. I argued publicly and to BLM that it should
simply ignore these bulk nominations. BLM indeed came to that same
conclusion after a few null sales and did not move forward wholesale
with these nominations. Problem solved.
Meanwhile, in the Mountain West states where the vast majority of
federal leasing and production occur, this simply does not happen.
Companies spend too much time and money when assessing potential leases
to nominate willy nilly. The majority of parcels offered generally
receives bids. The percentage is not 100% because of inefficiencies in
the leasing process and the long time periods between nomination and
sale, which can discourage companies and cause them to give up. But
bulk nominations of hundreds of thousands of acres simply do not occur.
Legislative Solutions

Once BLM stopped processing the bulk nominations from Nevada, the
problem went away. But of course, reality and evidence don't always
drive the policy process, and the ``solution'' of an EOI fee lasted far
beyond the problem. Therefore, I call on Congress to simply eliminate
the EOI fee. Even before the new IRA EOI fee and all the others were
put in place, the oil and natural gas industry returned $54.94 for
every dollar BLM spent administering the federal oil and gas
program.\1\ In fact, the $8.6 billion in onshore royalties, rents, and
bonuses that oil and natural gas companies paid in 2022 cover BLM's
entire budget appropriation of $1.6 billion. BLM does not lack
resources to process EOIs.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Office of Natural Resources Revenue (ONRR) 2022 revenue data
for oil and natural gas divided by BLM's $156,537,000 total FY2022
actual appropriation, from Budget Justifications and Performance
Information, Fiscal Year 2024, Bureau of Land Management, DOI.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Given the likelihood of my first legislative suggestion passing,
H.R. 6481 is a very reasonable solution. By removing the word
``nonrefundable'' from the EOI fee definition in the Mineral Leasing
Act, the bill fixes the important problem of BLM taking fees for
acreage that it never offers for sale. After five years, if BLM has not
offered the parcel, the EOI fee is refunded. That is reasonable.
A third suggestion would be for H.R. 6481 to be amended along the
lines of my easy regulatory fix above. The bill could specify that the
EOI fee is to be paid at the time of sale by the winning bidder, or if
the parcel does not sell, the nominating company is on the hook. My
suggestion solves the potential problem of excess nominations, as
profligate nominators are liable for unwanted lease fees. At $5 an
acre, our naive friends in Nevada would be immediately priced out of
the nominations process, were they still up to their tricks today.

Thank you for the opportunity to testify.

______

Ms. Hageman [presiding]. Thank you, Ms. Sgamma. Our next
witness is Dr. J. Mijin Cha, and she is Assistant Professor at
the University of California, Santa Cruz Environmental Studies
Department, and is stationed in Santa Cruz.
Dr. Cha, you are now recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF J. MIJIN CHA, ASSISTANT PROFESSOR, UNIVERSITY OF
CALIFORNIA, SANTA CRUZ, CALIFORNIA

Dr. Cha. Thank you, Chairman Stauber, Ranking Member
Ocasio-Cortez, and members of the Subcommittee on Energy and
Mineral Resources. Thank you for inviting me to testify today.
My name is Mijin Cha, and I am an Assistant Professor of
Environmental Studies at the University of California, Santa
Cruz. My testimony today is based on my research, and my views
are my own. I join you today to discuss Representative
Hageman's proposed legislation, H.R. 5482.
First, I commend Representative Hageman for recognizing how
energy poverty affects so many households across the country.
The U.S. Energy Information Administration found that in 2020,
34 million households, nearly one out of every three households
nationwide, struggled to pay their energy bills or kept their
homes at unsafe temperatures because of cost concerns.
However, the bill's specific focus on protecting oil and
gas extraction and exploration is counter to combating energy
poverty. Pricing is one of the main drivers of energy poverty,
but it is not the only one. Poor housing stock, lack of access
to capital, and homeowner status all contribute to energy
insecurity and high energy burdens. Focusing only on energy
production misses these other drivers of energy insecurity.
Moreover, the bill as introduced does nothing to reduce
energy prices. To address the root causes of energy poverty, we
must first reintroduce the ban on oil exports and expand it to
include a ban on fracked gas exports to keep oil and gas
extracted in the United States in the United States.
Second, we must expand current Federal assistance programs
that provide assistance to struggling households, such as the
Low-Income Home Energy Assistance Program, LIHEAP, and the
Weatherization Assistance Program, WAP.
And third, we must plan for and advance a managed decline
of fossil fuel extraction and use.
Exports of U.S. fossil fuels rose dramatically after the
ban on oil exports was lifted in 2015. Since that time, crude
oil exports have grown nearly 900 percent; fracked gas exports
increased by 507 percent. The United States is now a net
petroleum exporter. Instead of providing for people in this
country, the majority of oil and gas extracted in the United
States is shipped around the world. Reinstating the ban on oil
exports would keep American oil here and reduce fuel costs at
home.
Additionally, expanding the original ban on exports to
include fracked gas would increase the domestic supply of gas
available to be used for heating and for gas-fired power
plants.
A main reason bills remain high is the global demand for
gas led to a substantial increase in exports of liquefied
natural gas, LNG, from the United States. To prevent future
price spikes driven by global considerations, banning the
exports of LNG, in addition to oil, would keep gas in-country
and ensure American resources benefit Americans.
Second, we must expand current Federal assistance programs.
Programs such as LIHEAP and WAP are crucial lifelines for
struggling households. Expanding these programs would provide
vital support at a time when many more families are struggling
to pay their energy bills. LIHEAP provides assistance to over 6
million low-income families, but need far outweighs current
programmatic funding. LIHEAP, as currently funded, can only
serve less than a third of eligible households. If fully
resourced, LIHEAP could be a lifeline for all families in need.
WAP is another energy assistance program that should be
scaled up significantly. Weatherization can reduce heating
bills by up to 30 percent, and WAP recipients save nearly $300
per year, on average. Expanding WAP access and weatherizing all
low-income housing would also make tremendous structural
progress towards eliminating energy insecurity and poverty by
reducing overall energy demand.
If cost is a concern, expansion of LIHEAP and WAP could be
funded by repealing the tax credits and subsidies the oil and
gas industry receive. Conservative estimates calculate that oil
and gas companies currently receive $20 billion a year in
financial subsidies. These subsidies dwarf the amount allocated
to LIHEAP, currently just $3.6 billion for Fiscal Year 2024.
Ultimately, however, the biggest threat facing vulnerable
communities is unabated climate change and the continued use of
fossil fuels. To protect these populations, we must phase out
the extraction and use of fossil fuels.
More than 12 million people face health burdens from living
within half a mile of an oil or gas well or a fossil fuel
facility. Proximity to oil and gas sites has been shown to
increase health conditions such as asthma, cancer, and pre-term
birth rates. Continued fossil fuel use places enormous health
burdens upon workers and communities across the country and
across the world.
In addition to the continuing health impacts, fossil fuels
are the primary driver of the climate crisis. Without a fossil
fuel drawdown, unabated climate change will lead to an
uninhabitable planet. There is already evidence that low-income
households and households of color do not cool their homes to
comfortable temperatures because of the high cost of air
conditioning, assuming they can afford air conditioning in the
first place.
Extreme heat also wreaks havoc on electricity grids.
Increased blackouts and grid instability affects everyone, and
continuing the use of fossil fuels will only exacerbate these
dangerous conditions.
To stave off the worst impacts of the climate crisis, we
must have a managed and orderly decline of fossil fuel
extraction and use. A timeline with set production reduction
targets and resources for transition will provide stability and
certainty for markets to adapt and provide stability and
certainty for workers and communities.
Thank you for your time, and I look forward to your
questions.

[The prepared statement of Dr. Cha follows:]
Prepared Statement of Dr. J. Mijin Cha, Assistant Professor, University
of California, Santa Cruz; Fellow, Climate Jobs Institute, Cornell
University
on H.R. 5482

Chairman Stauber, Ranking Member Ocasio-Cortez, and members of the
Subcommittee on Energy and Mineral Resources, thank you for inviting me
to testify today.
My name is Mijin Cha and I am an assistant professor of
Environmental Studies at the University of California, Santa Cruz, a
Fellow at the Climate Jobs Institute at Cornell University, and a
Fellow at the Climate and Community Project. I hold a JD and a PhD and
am a member of the California Bar. My research focuses on the
intersection of labor, climate, and inequality and how to advance a
just energy transition. My testimony today is based on my research and
my views are my own.
I join you today to discuss Representative Hageman's proposed
legislation--H.R. 5482, ``Energy Poverty Prevention and Accountability
Act of 2023.'' Coincidentally, while I am based in California now, I
spent many of my formative years in Rep. Hageman's beautiful home state
of Wyoming.
First, I commend Rep. Hageman for recognizing how energy poverty
affects so many households across the country. The U.S. Energy
Information Administration found that in 2020, 34 million households--
nearly one out of every three households nationwide--struggled to pay
their energy bills or kept their homes at unsafe temperatures because
of cost concerns.\1\ Black and Hispanic households experience higher
levels of energy insecurity and poverty.\2\ Energy security is a
racial, economic, and social justice consideration.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ ``In 2020, 27% of U.S. Households Had Difficulty Meeting Their
Energy Needs,'' accessed December 7, 2023, https://www.eia.gov/
todayinenergy/detail.php?id=51979.
\2\ Shalanda H. Baker, Sanya Carley, and David M. Konisky, ``Energy
Insecurity and the Urgent Need for Utility Disconnection Protections,''
Energy Policy 159 (December 1, 2021): 112663, https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.enpol.2021.112663; Michelle Graff et al., ``Which Households Are
Energy Insecure? An Empirical Analysis of Race, Housing Conditions, and
Energy Burdens in the United States,'' Energy Research & Social Science
79 (September 1, 2021): 102144, https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.erss.2021.102144.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
I also commend this bill for proposing to study the impact that
policies have on low-income communities, rural communities, and
communities of color. It is imperative that we structure policy in a
way that protects the most vulnerable.
However, the bill's specific focus on protecting oil and gas
extraction and exploration is counter to combatting energy poverty.
Recent research shows that electricity shutoffs are driven largely by
two issues: an overinvestment in fossil fuel infrastructure, which
drives price volatility, and excessive profits and executive pay.\3\
While struggling families face ever increasing power bills and threats
of cutoffs, utility executives received, on average, $5.9 million in
pay in 2022. High oil and gas prices mean higher profits and therefore
the incentive is to keep gas prices high.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ ``In 2020, 27% of U.S. Households Had Difficulty Meeting Their
Energy Needs,'' accessed December 7, 2023, https://www.eia.gov/
todayinenergy/detail.php?id=51979.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Moreover, while pricing is one of the main drivers of energy
poverty, it is not the only one. Poor housing stock, lack of access to
capital, and homeowner status all contribute to energy insecurity and
high energy burdens.\4\ Low-income households and households of color
are more likely to live in housing in need of weatherization and
energy-efficiency upgrades, but lack the capital to undertake these
improvements. Inefficient and poorly weatherized housing creates poor
health conditions and also requires more electricity and heating than
necessary. These conditions result in excessively high utility bills
even when rate pricing is lower. Moreover, low-income households and
households of color are more likely to be renters, which means they
cannot take advantage of most rebate and energy efficiency incentive
programs. Rather, they must rely on landlords to do upgrades even
though the impact is on their utility bills. Focusing only on energy
production misses these other drivers of energy insecurity and high
energy burden.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\ Diana Hernandez, ``Understanding `Energy Insecurity' and Why It
Matters to Health,'' Social Science & Medicine (1982) 167 (October
2016): 1-10, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.socscimed. 2016.08.029.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
To address the root causes of energy poverty, we must 1)
reintroduce the ban on oil exports and expand it to include a ban on
fracked gas exports to keep oil and gas extracted in the U.S. in the
U.S., 2) expand current federal assistance programs that provide
assistance to struggling households, such as the Low Income Home Energy
Assistance Program (LIEHAP) and the Weatherization Assistance Program
(WAP), and 3) plan for and advance a managed decline of fossil fuel
extraction and use.
Reintroduce Ban on Oil Exports and Expand to Include a Ban on Exports
of Fracked Gas

While households across the country struggle to pay their heating
and electric bills, the oil and gas industry is breaking production and
profit records. This year, there was a record level of oil and gas
production. And, 2023 is not an anomaly--this record-setting level of
production is expected to continue until 2050.\5\ Not only is this
incompatible with any and all measures to address the climate crisis,
record-setting levels of oil and gas production have not reduced energy
bills for Americans. While more and more oil and gas is being
extracted, those profits are going to oil and gas companies and
households across the country are not benefiting, not even one cent.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\ Oliver Milman, ``US Oil and Gas Production Set to Break Record
in 2023 despite UN Climate Goals,'' The Guardian, November 27, 2023,
sec. Environment, https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2023/nov/27/
us-oil-gas-record-fossil-fuels-cop28-united-nations.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Exports of U.S. fossil fuels rose dramatically after the ban on oil
exports was lifted in 2015.\6\ Since the repeal of the ban, crude oil
exports grew nearly 900 percent.\7\ Fracked gas exports increased by
507 percent.\8\ In addition to being the world's top producer of oil
and gas, the United States is now a net petroleum exporter. In 2022, we
exported 9.52 million barrels of petroleum per day while importing 8.33
million barrels per day.\9\ Instead of providing for people in this
country, oil and gas extracted in the U.S. is shipped around the world.
Increasing production levels has done nothing for household energy
bills because the oil and gas extracted is being sent to other
countries. Re-instating the ban on oil exports would keep American oil
here and reduce fuel costs at home.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\6\ Taproot Earth and Climate and Community Project, ``We Choose
Now: Energy Policy Playbook,'' https://taproot.earth/wp-content/
uploads/23_05_04_WCN-ENERGY.pdf, May 2023, accessed December 6, 2023.
\7\ ``U.S. Exports of Crude Oil (Thousand Barrels per Day),''
accessed December 9, 2023, https://www.eia.gov/dnav/pet/hist/
LeafHandler.ashx?n=PET&s=MCREXUS2&f=M.
\8\ ``Natural Gas Imports and Exports--U.S. Energy Information
Administration (EIA),'' accessed December 9, 2023, https://www.eia.gov/
energyexplained/natural-gas/imports-and-exports.php.
\9\ ``Frequently Asked Questions (FAQs)--U.S. Energy Information
Administration (EIA),'' accessed December 6, 2023, https://www.eia.gov/
tools/faqs/faq.php.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Additionally, expanding the original ban on exports to include
fracked gas would increase the domestic supply of gas available for
heating and for gas-fired power plants. This increased supply will
decrease costs for households. One reason bills remain high, as made
clear by utilities and regulators, is the global demand for gas led to
a substantial increase in exports of liquified natural gas (LNG) from
the U.S. Another reason is that when gas prices spike, the effect lasts
for years. While there was a spike in gas prices in 2021 and 2022 due
to Russia's invasion of Ukraine, wholesale gas prices fell in 2023 to
roughly the level they were before the invasion.\10\ Yet, this decrease
in wholesale gas prices was not reflected on utility bills. Residential
gas prices, in fact, were at their highest levels in 10 states in
August 2023. The reason is because utilities distribute the cost of
fuel spikes in rate increases over years. Customers will continue to
pay for the temporary high cost of gas from the Ukrainian war for
several years to come. As a result of these factors, there is no relief
for American utility customers even though retail gas prices declined.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\10\ ``LNG Exports Have Raised Natural Gas Prices for U.S.
Households,'' accessed December 7, 2023, https://ieefa.org/resources/
lng-exports-have-raised-natural-gas-prices-us-households.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
To prevent future prices spikes driven by global considerations,
banning the export of LNG, in addition to oil, would keep domestic gas
domestic and ensure American resources benefit Americans.
Expand Current Federal Assistance Programs

Federal programs, such as the Low Income Home Energy Assistance
Program (LIHEAP) and the Weatherization Assistance Program (WAP), are
crucial lifelines for struggling households. LIHEAP and WAP are
critical to providing energy security to families across the country.
Expanding these programs would provide vital support at a time when
many more families are struggling to pay their energy bills.
LIHEAP provides assistance to over 6 million low-income families.
But need far outweighs current programmatic funding. LIHEAP as
currently funded can serve only less than a third of eligible
households. If expanded, the program could be a true lifeline and
provide more support. Fully resourcing the program would allow it to
reach all the households that need assistance.
WAP is another energy assistance program that should be scaled up
significantly. WAP provides crucial energy efficiency upgrades that can
help households permanently lower their energy bills. According to the
National Association for State Community Services Programs,
weatherization can reduce heating bills by up to 30 percent and WAP
recipients save nearly $300 per year on average.\11\ Expanding WAP
access and weatherizing all low-income housing would also make
tremendous structural progress towards eliminating energy insecurity
and poverty by reducing overall energy demand. Efficient homes have
lower energy bills. And, weatherization not only lowers utility bills,
it makes housing healthier and safer.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\11\ ``LIHEAP and WAP: A Dynamic Duo for Reducing the Low-Income
Energy Burden--NASCSP,'' accessed December 7, 2023, https://nascsp.org/
liheap-and-wap-a-dynamic-duo-for-reducing-the-low-income-energy-
burden/.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
If cost is a concern, expansion of LIHEAP and WAP could be funded
by repealing the tax credits and subsidies the oil and gas industry
receive. Conservative estimates calculate that oil and gas companies
currently receive $20 billion a year in financial subsidies.\12\ These
subsidies dwarf the amount allocated to LIHEAP--currently just $3.6
billion for FY 2024.\13\ In 2022, the major oil companies made a record
$219 billion in profits.\14\ Instead of using those profits to lower
costs for consumers, Big Oil paid shareholders a record $110 billion in
dividends and stock buybacks.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\12\ ``Fact Sheet--Proposals to Reduce Fossil Fuel Subsidies
(2021)--White Papers--EESI,'' accessed December 7, 2023, https://
www.eesi.org/papers/view/fact-sheet-proposals-to-reduce-fossil-fuel-
subsidies-2021.
\13\ ``LIHEAP and WAP Funding--The LIHEAP Clearinghouse,'' accessed
December 7, 2023, https://liheapch.acf.hhs.gov/Funding/funding.htm.
\14\ Ron Bousso, ``Big Oil Doubles Profits in Blockbuster 2022--
Reuters,'' February 8, 2023, https://www.reuters.com/business/energy/
big-oil-doubles-profits-blockbuster-2022-2023-02-08/.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Big Oil does not need tax payer dollars to further subsidize its
record profits. Reallocating the tax dollars lost to Big Oil would more
than fund LIHEAP at the levels it needs to provide support to all
struggling households.
Plan for and Advance a Managed Decline of Fossil Fuel Extraction and
Use

Ultimately, the biggest threat facing vulnerable communities is
unabated climate change and the continued use of fossil fuels. To
protect these populations, we must phase out the use of fossil
fuels.\15\ Fossil fuels create heavily polluted hotspots, also called
``sacrifice zones,'' where inhabitants are subjected to heavy air,
water, and land pollution. The vulnerable populations that live in
sacrifice zones also face health risks associated with such high levels
of pollution exposure. Sacrifice zones are disproportionately located
in communities of color and poor communities.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\15\ Timothy Q. Donaghy et al., ``Fossil Fuel Racism in the United
States: How Phasing out Coal, Oil, and Gas Can Protect Communities,''
Energy Research & Social Science 100 (June 1, 2023): 103104, https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.erss.2023.103104.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Even outside of sacrifice zones, fossil fuels pollute and cause
harm. More than 12 million people face health burdens from living
within half a mile of an oil or gas well or a fossil fuel facility.\16\
Proximity to oil and gas sites has been shown to increase health
conditions, such as asthma, cancer, and preterm birth rates.\17\
Continued fossil fuel use places enormous health burdens upon workers
and communities across the country and across the world.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\16\ Zahara Hirji, `` `Threat Map' Aims to Highlight the Worst of
Oil and Gas Air Pollution,'' Inside Climate News, June 16, 2016,
https://insideclimatenews.org/news/16062016/threat-map-aims-highlight-
worst-oil-and-gas-air-pollution-cancer-epa-earthworks/.
\17\ Jonathan J. Buonocore et al., ``Air Pollution and Health
Impacts of Oil & Gas Production in the United States,'' Environmental
Research: Health 1, no. 2 (May 2023): 021006, https://doi.org/10.1088/
2752-5309/acc886.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
In addition to the continuing health impacts, fossil fuels are the
primary driver of the climate crisis. Without a fossil fuel drawdown,
unabated climate change will lead to an uninhabitable planet. And,
climate change is not a future concern--we are already living in a
changing climate. Moreover, energy insecurity and the climate crisis
are inextricably linked. Climate change will exacerbate energy
insecurity, particularly as occurrences of extreme heat and extreme
cold continue to increase.\18\ Among their many dangers, extreme heat
and extreme cold cause spikes in energy demand that lead to higher
utility bills. Extreme temperatures create dangerous conditions and
households that cannot afford to adequate heat or cool their homes will
face increased health risks, including heatstroke and exacerbation of
pre-existing conditions.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\18\ Michelle Graff et al., ``Climate Change and Energy Insecurity:
A Growing Need for Policy Intervention,'' Environmental Justice, April
19, 2022, https://doi.org/10.1089/env.2021.0032.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
There is already evidence that low-income households and households
of color do not cool their homes to comfortable temperatures because of
the high cost of air conditioning, assuming they can afford air
conditioning in the first place.\19\ The dangers of extreme heat are
not limited to energy insecure households, though. Extreme heat also
wreaks havoc on electricity grids.\20\ Increased blackouts and grid
instability affects everyone and continuing the use of fossil fuels
will only further exacerbate these dangerous conditions.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\19\ Shuchen Cong et al., ``Unveiling Hidden Energy Poverty Using
the Energy Equity Gap,'' Nature Communications 13, no. 1 (May 4, 2022):
2456, https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-022-30146-5.
\20\ ``Extreme Heat Makes Electricity More Expensive, More
Polluting, and Less Reliable,'' The Equation, August 22, 2023, https://
blog.ucsusa.org/john-rogers/extreme-heat-makes-electricity-more-
expensive-more-polluting-and-less-reliable/.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
To stave off the worst impacts of the climate crisis, we must have
an energy transition away from fossil fuels to a renewable energy
future. There is an abundance of research that shows how renewable
energy will lower and stabilize energy prices \21\ but I want to point
to the testimony of Erin O'Neill, Chief Economist of Colorado's Public
Utilities Commission.\22\ In discussing the causes of the increase in
utility bills during the Winter of 2022-2023, gas bills were identified
as the main driver of high utility costs. O'Neill identified several
other factors, including the cost of gas and the increased demand for
gas due to a relatively colder Winter. Notably, however, investments
and use of renewable energy were identified as not responsible for
higher utility bills. In fact, ``[T]o the extent Colorado has invested
in renewable generation for electricity production, that has helped
insulate electric bills from the impact of high and volatile gas
commodity prices.''
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\21\ See e.g. Amol Phadke et al., ``2035 The Report: Plummeting
Solar, Wind, And Battery Costs Can Accelerate Our Clean Electricity
Future,'' 2020, https://www.2035report.com/wp-content/uploads/2020/06/
2035-Report.pdf; ``North American Renewable Integration Study,''
accessed December 9, 2023, https://www.nrel.gov/analysis/naris.html.
\22\  https://leg.colorado.gov/sites/default/?les/images/
puc_presentation_3.7.23.pdf
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Phasing out fossil fuels will require substantial management and
coordination.\23\ Without a managed decline, we risk a chaotic
transition that could lead to further economic and social instability.
The volatility of energy prices is empirical evidence of how an
unmanaged use of resources creates instability and insecurity. An
orderly and managed decline of fossil fuel extraction and use can
provide workers and communities a just transition to a carbon-free
future. A timeline with set production reduction targets and resources
for transition will provide stability and certainty for markets to
adapt to decarbonization and provide stability and certainty for
workers and communities to diversify economies and tax bases.\24\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\23\ Johanna Bozuwa et al., ``Chapter 8--Democratic Governance of
Fossil Fuel Decline,'' in Energy Democracies for Sustainable Futures,
ed. Majia Nadesan, Martin J. Pasqualetti, and Jennifer Keahey (Academic
Press, 2023), 73-82, https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-822796-1.00008-
5; Emily Grubert and Sara Hastings-Simon, ``Designing the Mid-
Transition: A Review of Medium-Term Challenges for Coordinated
Decarbonization in the United States,'' WIREs Climate Change 13, no. 3
(2022): e768, https://doi.org/10.1002/wcc.768.
\24\ For more research on what a just transition would entail, see:
J. Mijin Cha, ``A Just Transition for Whom? Politics, Contestation, and
Social Identity in the Disruption of Coal in the Powder River Basin,''
Energy Research & Social Science 69 (November 1, 2020): 101657, https:/
/doi.org/10.1016/j.erss.2020.101657; J. Mijin Cha and Manuel Pastor,
``Just Transition: Framing, Organizing, and Power-Building for
Decarbonization,'' Energy Research & Social Science 90 (August 1,
2022): 102588, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.erss.2022.102588; J. Mijin
Cha, Madeline Wander, and Manuel Pastor, ``Environmental Justice, Just
Transition, and a Low-Carbon Future for California,'' Environmental Law
Reporter 50 ELR 10216 (March 2020), https://elr.info/news-analysis/50/
10216/environmental-justice-just-transition-and-low-carbon-future-
california.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The federal government could go even further and build publicly
owned renewable projects that would help provide more stable energy to
the grid and reduce costs to consumers. As we see in the Building
Public Renewables Act recently passed in New York state, it is easier
to have more oversight and management of a public power authority than
the private utility system. A blueprint for how the federal government
could provide a public option for electricity can be found in the
Climate and Community Project's Building Public Renewables in the
United States, report.\25\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\25\ Johanna Bozuwa et al., ``Building Public Renewables in the
United States'' (Climate and Community Project, March 2023), https://
www.climateandcommunity.org/public-renewables-in-the-us.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Conclusion

To conclude, I applaud the Representative's recognition of energy
poverty and how it hurts communities across the country. In order to
address the root causes of energy poverty and protect vulnerable
households, the legislation should call for a ban on oil and gas
exports, expand existing assistance programs, and plan for and advance
a managed decline of fossil fuel resources.

Thank you for your time and consideration.

______

Questions Submitted for the Record to Dr. J. Mijin Cha, Assistant
Professor, University of California, Santa Cruz

Questions Submitted by Representative Dingell

Question 1. Dr. Cha, does increasing fossil fuel production lead to
lower energy costs?

Answer. Not necessarily. Without re-instating the ban on oil
exports and expanding it to include banning gas exports, the fossil
fuels produced domestically are being exported and sold in other
countries. So while oil and gas production in the U.S. is at record
levels, this increase in production is not leading to more domestic
supply. As a result, energy costs are not lowered even though
production levels are at record levels. Without the export ban,
increasing fossil fuel production will not materially decrease energy
costs.

Question 2. Dr. Cha, can you expand on some of the root causes of
energy insecurity?

Answer. The root causes of energy insecurity are general economic
insecurity, poor housing stock, lack of access to capital, and
homeowner status. General economic insecurity causes families to not
have enough income or wealth to pay basic utility bills. Low-income
households and households of color are more likely to live in housing
in need of weatherization and energy-efficiency upgrades, but lack the
capital to undertake these improvements. Inefficient and poorly
weatherized housing creates poor health conditions and also requires
more electricity and heating than necessary. These conditions result in
excessively high utility bills even when rate pricing is lower.
Moreover, weatherization and energy efficiency incentives are generally
targeted at homeowners so renters, which low-income families are more
likely to be, cannot take advantage of those programs.
The climate crisis is also a driver of energy insecurity as more
extreme weather events disrupt power supplies and systems. These
disruptions are often worse in low-income communities and communities
of color leading to more energy insecurity among these populations.

Question 3. Dr. Cha, do you believe H.R. 5482 ``Energy Poverty
Prevention and Accountability Act of 2023'' addresses those issues?

Answer. No, H.R. 5482 does not address any of these issues. To the
extent that H.R. 5482 protects the fossil fuel industry by providing
skewed analysis of the benefits of expansions of fossil fuel activity,
while ignoring the many costs and dangers, it will exacerbate the
climate crisis further increasing energy insecurity.

Question 4. Dr. Cha, can you elaborate about the importance of
LIHEAP and whether current funding levels are enough to meet American
families' needs?

Answer. LIHEAP provides vital support at a time when many more
families are struggling to pay their energy bills. LIHEAP provides
assistance to over 6 million low-income families. Currently funding
levels are far below what is needed to support American families.
LIHEAP as currently funded can serve only less than a third of eligible
households. LIHEAP funding would need to be tripled, at the minimum, to
provide assistance to all the families in need. The Weatherization
Assistance Program (WAP), which helps low-income households weatherize
their homes, is also a crucial lifeline that would structurally reduce
energy costs by reducing energy usage. WAP is also severely
underfunded.

______

Ms. Hageman. Thank you. Our final witness is Mr. Derek
Hollie, the Founder of the Energy Poverty Prevention Project,
who is stationed in Stafford, Virginia.
Mr. Hollie, you are now recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF DEREK HOLLIE, FOUNDER, ENERGY POVERTY PREVENTION
PROJECT, STAFFORD, VIRGINIA

Mr. Hollie. Thank you. Greetings, Chairman Stauber, Ranking
Member Ocasio-Cortez, and members of the Committee. Thank you
for the opportunity of allowing me to speak today.
I am not going to mince my words. By destroying America's
energy independence, the Biden administration directly is
making Black Americans more poor and less independent than
ever.
Since Biden's first day in office, with the shutdown of the
Keystone Pipeline projects and his ongoing war on a key pillar
of our economy, we have all experienced skyrocketing energy
costs that punish the very people he claims to care about.
I am Derek Hollie, Founder of the Energy Poverty Prevention
Project. I founded the organization to enable us to continue
leading the charge to expand awareness of energy poverty in the
United States and its implications on at-risk communities like
minorities, senior citizens, rural, and Native Americans.
The mission of the Energy Poverty Prevention Project is to
create equal access to affordable and reliable energy for all
Americans. We are committed to changing energy regulations that
fail to provide American citizens with access to affordable and
reliable energy needed to maintain personal health and economic
security.
Since 2019, I have had the opportunity to appear before
Congress six times to give witness testimony on energy poverty
and other related issues impacting at-risk communities. My
experience addressing energy poverty includes authoring over 50
op-eds and editorials, and developing education and outreach
campaigns.
My passion for American energy is deeply rooted in my own
story, stemming from my grandfather, who was a Black coal miner
in southwest Virginia and my time serving as a brakeman for
Norfolk Southern Railways, where we transported coal and other
natural resources here and abroad.
Energy poverty occurs when individuals and families are
unable to afford basic heating, electricity, and gas needs.
High energy costs and the lack of energy services negatively
impact a household's well-being and limit opportunities.
Vulnerable populations like minorities, senior citizens, and
Native Americans are most often disproportionately affected by
energy poverty, as other people have said today. These
inflationary pressures and terrible consequences are not the
result of a free market at work, but overzealous policy pushed
by paternalistic lawmakers who think they know what is best for
everyone with a one-size-fits-all approach.
Energy is a fixed cost for families and large entities
alike, and we know when the price of energy increases, so does
everything else: it costs more to drive, it impacts the cost of
groceries, and, most critically, come winter, it costs more to
heat your home. Rising energy costs make it harder or next to
impossible for Black families to make ends meet.
Tragically, the pause on new oil and gas leases on Federal
land and over-regulation accompanied with an aggressive green
agenda by the Biden administration has many Americans
experiencing energy poverty for the first time. There is no
reason anyone in our country should be without affordable
energy. The United States is abundantly rich in natural
resources including gas, petroleum, and coal, and America is
more capable than ever of providing affordable energy to its
citizens.
The United States was energy independent in 2019 for the
first time in decades, producing more energy domestically than
we consumed. This, along with a booming shale industry, helped
America overtake Saudi Arabia and Russia to become the No. 1
exporter of petroleum and natural gas globally.
Now, according to the U.S. Energy Information
Administration, fossil fuels accounted for 81 percent of our
U.S. energy production in 2022. Renewables reached their
highest production in 2022, and only accounted for 13 percent
of our energy production. More figures from the EIA show that
renewables received $15.6 billion of subsidies in Fiscal Year
2022, compared to $3.6 billion for fossil fuels. Per the EIA
report, renewable energies received nearly five times as much
in Federal subsidies than fossil fuels, despite having such a
small impact.
Renewable projects are also very costly. In an article by
Energy Wire in September, the Alliance for Clean Energy New
York told regulators in June that, due to cost, canceled or
delayed projects would drastically derail the schedule for
renewable development and cause the state to miss its mandates
under the law.
Eliminating energy poverty should be a goal that we are all
interested in achieving. And working towards that goal, we need
to be mindful of how environmental policies will impact the
vulnerable communities that need our support. Radical
environmentalists and the Biden administration like to frame
this as a fight against big energy. But all they are really
doing is pushing back Black Americans and other at-risk
communities further into poverty.
When the government creates policy, its priority should be
the welfare of the people, especially those who are impacted
the hardest. We need market-oriented energy policy that will
allow America to safely keep exploring and developing our own
natural resources for a more secure and prosperous future for
all Americans. Thank you.

[The prepared statement of Mr. Hollie follows:]
Prepared Statement of Derrick Hollie, Founder of Energy Poverty
Prevention Project
on H.R. 5482

Greetings Chairman, Pete Stauber, Ranking Member Ocasio-Cortez and
Members of the Committee. Thank you for the opportunity and for
allowing me to speak today.
I'm not going to mince words here. By destroying America's energy
independence, the Biden Administration is directly making Black
Americans more poor and less independent than ever. Since Biden's first
day in office with the shutdown of the Keystone pipeline project and
his ongoing war on a key pillar of our economy, we've all experienced
skyrocketing energy costs that punish the very people he claims to care
about.
I'm Derrick Hollie, founder of the Energy Poverty Prevention
Project. I founded the organization to enable us to continue leading
the charge to expand awareness of energy poverty in the United States
and its implications on at-risk communities like minorities, senior
citizens, rural and Native Americans. The mission of the Energy Poverty
Prevention Project is to create equal access to affordable and reliable
energy for all Americans. We are committed to changing energy
regulations that fail to provide American citizens with access to
affordable and reliable energy needed to maintain personal health and
economic security.
Since 2019, I have had the opportunity to appear before Congress
six times to give testimony on energy poverty and other related issues
impacting at-risk communities. My experience addressing energy poverty
includes authoring over fifty op-eds and editorials and developing
education and outreach campaigns. My passion for American energy is
deeply rooted in my own story, stemming from my grandfather, who was a
black coal miner in Southwest Virginia, and my time serving as a
brakeman for Norfolk Southern Railways, where we transported coal and
other natural resources here and abroad.
Energy poverty occurs when individuals and families are unable to
afford basic heating, electricity, and gas needs. High energy costs and
the lack of energy services negatively impact a household's well-being
and limit opportunity. Vulnerable populations like minorities, senior
citizens, and Native Americans are most often disproportionately
affected by energy poverty. These inflationary pressures and the
terrible consequences aren't the result of a free market at work, but
overzealous policy pushed by paternalistic lawmakers who think they
know what's best for everyone with a ``one size fits all approach.''
Energy is a fixed cost for small families and large enterprises
alike, and we know when the price of energy increases, so does
everything else. It costs more to drive, it impacts the cost of
groceries, and most critically, come winter, it costs more to heat your
home. Rising energy costs are making it harder or next to impossible
for Black families to make ends meet. Tragically, the pause on new oil
and gas leases on Federal land, and overregulation accompanied with an
aggressive green agenda by the Biden Administration has many Americans
experiencing energy poverty for the first time.
There is no reason anyone in our country should be without
affordable energy. The United States is abundantly rich in natural
resources, including natural gas, petroleum, and coal. America is more
capable than ever of providing affordable energy to its citizens. The
United States was energy independent in 2019 for the first time in
decades, producing more energy domestically than what we consumed.
This, along with a booming shale industry, helped America overtake
Saudi Arabia and Russia to become the top exporter of petroleum and
natural gas globally.
According to the U.S. Energy Information Administration, fossil
fuels accounted for about 81% of U.S. energy production in 2022.
Renewables reached their highest production in 2022 and only accounted
for 13% of all energy production. More figures from EIA show that
renewables received $15.6 billion of subsidies in fiscal year 2022,
compared to $3.6 billion for fossil fuels. Per the EIA report,
renewable energy industries received nearly five times as much in
federal subsidies than fossil fuels despite having such a small impact.
Renewable projects are also very costly. An article by ENERGYWIRE in
September, the Alliance for Clean Energy New York (ACENY) told
regulators in June, due to cost, ``canceled or delayed projects would
drastically derail the schedule for renewable development'' and cause
the state to miss its mandates under the law.
Eliminating energy poverty should be a goal we all are interested
in achieving. In working towards that goal, we need to be mindful of
how environmental policies will impact the vulnerable communities that
need our support. Radical environmentalists and the Biden
Administration like to frame this as a fight against big energy, but
all they are really doing is pushing Black Americans and other at-risk
communities further into poverty. When the government creates policy,
its priority should be the welfare of the people, especially those
impacted the hardest. We need a market-oriented energy policy that will
allow America to safely keep exploring and developing our own natural
resources for a more secure and prosperous future for all Americans.

Thank you.

______

Ms. Hageman. Thank you, Mr. Hollie, you are spot on.
The Chair will now recognize Members for 5 minutes of
questions. I now recognize Mr. Fulcher for his questioning.
Mr. Fulcher. Thank you, Madam Chair.
And to the panelists, thank you for taking the time and
coming to speak to us today, and for your input. And I do learn
from the information that our expert witnesses bring, and a
number of you I have met before.
Ms. Cha, I don't think we would agree on very much, but one
thing we may agree on is geothermal energy.
And to Mr. Jones, I have a question for you. First of all,
welcome from my hometown of Boise. And you may be aware, but I
am running complementary legislation on expanding geothermal
exploration on Federal lands. And I have long believed, in part
because of our history in Boise and what has happened there
with geothermal energy and working in the capital, which is, as
you know, influenced very heavily by that, but it is clean, it
is efficient, it is reliable, plentiful, cheap, and a very
minor disturbance to the land. So, this is something that I
think that we need to continue to espouse.
But in your testimony, Mr. Jones, you referenced that
geothermal projects currently take 6 to 8 years in terms of
permitting. Not days, not weeks, not months, years. Did I get
that right, first of all?
And secondly, why years?
Dr. Jones. Yes. Well, thank you for the question,
Representative Fulcher, and it is great to be here and
representing Idaho, or being from Idaho.
But yes, you are correct that it can take 6 to 8 years or
more for a geothermal project to go from exploration to being
in development. Part of that reason is that a geothermal
developer has to go through multiple NEPA reviews to get to the
development stage. A traditional hydrothermal system will have
to go through NEPA to get their first approval for exploration.
And then, if they find a promising heat anomaly, they will have
to go through a second NEPA process for permitting the drill
testing and gradient wells. Then they will have to go through a
third NEPA process to drill a slim hole or a confirmation well
of that resource. And then a fourth NEPA process to develop the
exploration to develop the well field itself. And then a fifth
NEPA process to build the power plant. And that doesn't include
that if there is a BLM lease auction involved, there is another
NEPA review.
So, those several different NEPA reviews cause the length
of time that geothermal development has to go through. And NEPA
reviews can sometimes last 300 days or 800 days. It depends.
So, that is what is preventing geothermal development in the
United States.
Mr. Fulcher. Thank you for that. And we do get confronted
with that frequently.
But this is a fabulous source, a fabulous source of energy.
And for anybody who likes electricity, you have to find
something to produce it. And I have yet to find anyone, I will
bet even Dr. Cha and my friend from California, Mr. Huffman,
that these are things that we can probably circle the wagons on
at a time when a lot of other things there is controversy with.
I think I understand some of these things, but I would like
you to help me convince maybe some of the others listening
here. What are some of the other economic benefits that come
along with this, in terms of development, jobs, other
ramifications that come as positive geothermal development?
Dr. Jones. Yes, thanks for that question, Representative
Fulcher.
Geothermal has an incredible amount of synergies with the
oil and gas industry. It requires drilling, it requires
subsurface reservoir managers, it requires engineers,
geologists. These synergies between the oil and gas workforce
and the geothermal workforce are tremendous and deep. We do not
have to re-educate a population to bring that workforce into
the geothermal industry.
And as I have already mentioned, geothermal has an
incredible amount of potential to not just decarbonize the
power grid, but also the built environment. We can decarbonize
industries that rely on natural gas right now to process dairy
or cheese. We can dehydrate vegetables and other produce using
geothermal instead of fossil fuels. We can use geothermal to
create clean, carbon-free electricity. So, the applications of
geothermal are quite vast.
Mr. Fulcher. I thank you for that. Thank you for your
expertise.
Madam Chair, I am going to just close by saying that we
have a winner here. And I, for one, am promoting spending some
time on the things that we agree on for a change, and this is
one of them. I yield back.
Ms. Hageman. Thank you, Mr. Fulcher. The Chair will now
recognize the Ranking Member, Ms. Ocasio-Cortez, for 5 minutes
of questioning.
Ms. Ocasio-Cortez. Thank you, Chair. I agree with my
colleagues across the aisle that it is essential for
policymakers to take seriously how energy policies are going to
affect the energy prices that are faced by everyday Americans.
But, unfortunately, the Energy Poverty Prevention
Accountability Act takes a very narrow view of which energy
policies and which impacts we should consider. Among other
things, this bill requires the Department of the Interior to
review energy ``activities'' to see if these activities would
impose disproportionate costs on at-risk communities, or
increase the likelihood that at-risk communities will
experience energy poverty and job losses. On its face, that
seems like something we might agree with. But we should be
taking a closer look. In this bill, the following activities
would require review.
One, a declaration of a moratorium on the leasing of
Federal land for the drilling, mining, or collection of oil,
gas, or coal, or related activities. That would require review.
The other thing that requires review is any action that
prohibits or delays the issuance of new oil and gas lease
sales, or the withdrawal of Federal lands from forms of entry,
appropriation, or disposal under the public land or mining
laws.
What we are seeing here is that the drafters of this bill
make it very clear which industries they are concerned about.
They are requiring that these studies are exclusively for
activities that would limit oil and gas production or mining,
but they don't really pertain to those that wouldn't.
Dr. Cha, do you believe that these narrowly-focused studies
would provide an accurate assessment of a community's risk of
energy insecurity or poverty?
Dr. Cha. I do not.
Ms. Ocasio-Cortez. I also find it interesting that
individual fossil fuel or mining project sponsors can request
an energy study to show, and I quote, ``how the project is
likely to alleviate energy poverty in at-risk communities,
including by creating jobs, reducing energy prices, or other
relevant measures.'' So, an individual fossil fuel or mining
project can request a study to validate or boost their own
project.
Dr. Cha, how could these criteria and this project-by-
project approach create a misleading picture of the costs and
benefits of extractive projects?
Dr. Cha. Well, I think, first, it does do exactly as you
said, Representative, which is project by project, and doesn't
take into account the cumulative impact of all of these
projects on a community.
It also only looks at the benefits. It doesn't look at any
externalities that are caused, the air pollution that is
caused, the poisoning to land, air, and water for those
communities, and it really just paints the most positive view
of the fossil fuel project and not taking into consideration
also the contribution that it could have to the climate crisis,
which is one of the greatest threats to vulnerable households.
Ms. Ocasio-Cortez. So, this isn't even about a cost benefit
analysis at all, correct?
Dr. Cha. It is like a benefit analysis.
Ms. Ocasio-Cortez. It is just a benefit analysis. So, a
fossil fuel company or project can come in and say, tell me all
the good things that can happen by me drilling in someone's
backyard, but don't talk about any of the polluting that can
happen, any of the dumping that can happen, any of the cancer
that can be caused in this area, any of the poisoning that can
happen on local constituents. Just tell me about the good
things. Correct?
Dr. Cha. Exactly.
Ms. Ocasio-Cortez. Now, in your opinion, would a project
sponsor request this kind of study for their project if they
thought there was any chance that the study would reflect
poorly on what they are proposing?
Dr. Cha. I can't imagine.
Ms. Ocasio-Cortez. So, we have seen over and over again how
these unbalanced studies, and I think at this point it is hard
to even call it a study because it is not objective, it is not
comprehensive, it is really not too far from propaganda at that
point, how they over-promise on the benefits of extractive
projects, and then they under-estimate or completely neglect
harm to local communities, places like Cancer Alley, Asthma
Alley, and so on.
Dr. Cha, if you were to design a study to measure how
likely a Federal action was to affect energy poverty or
insecurity in an at-risk community, what do you think are the
most important factors to include?
Dr. Cha. I think one factor that is really missing is time.
Something that has a much bigger burden over years than just in
a few months. It doesn't look at, as you mentioned, cumulative
impacts. It doesn't look at other alternatives that could be
proposed, for instance, like energy efficiency or
weatherization or other factors that really lead to energy
poverty. It really only looks, basically, at what can be the
best-case scenario for fossil fuel use.
Ms. Ocasio-Cortez. Great, thank you very much.
I yield back.
Ms. Hageman. Thank you. The Chair now recognizes Mr. Graves
for 5 minutes of questioning.
Mr. Graves. Thank you, Madam Chair. I find the line of
questioning and even some of the testimony especially
concerning. We have a witness who is advocating that we
actually shut down or stop oil and gas production, yet if we
look at comments of the International Energy Agency, the
Director has stated that the largest reduction in energy
history is a result of the United States' transition to natural
gas.
So, if the greatest threat to the planet is climate change,
and the greatest success in world history is the United States'
transition to natural gas, how can those two things co-exist?
Dr. Cha. Are you asking me?
Mr. Graves. Yes.
Dr. Cha. Well, I think history is not yet written, so it
may have been the greatest----
Mr. Graves. Wait a minute, hang on, hold on. History is not
written? We have already banked the savings.
Look, you are an Associate Professor. It is just incredibly
concerning to me that you are out here teaching the next
generation things like this that simply are not true, they are
not based upon facts and statistics.
The greatest reduction in emissions have already been
banked. The strategies that you are talking about are dream
world, they are dream world. What ends up happening--you are
sitting there talking about distorted economic considerations,
distorted economic considerations.
So, what are we doing? We are taking things like social
cost of carbon and factoring it into our cost analysis. Social
cost of carbon? What happens when you don't produce energy in
the United States?
We have had witnesses--I say this every time--my friends
across the aisle continue to repeat this incorrect information.
And I want to note, Ranking Member, I submitted for the record
a statement from the parishes representing the so-called Cancer
Alley refuting the science proving that that statement is
wholly incorrect.
But social cost of carbon considerations completely ignores
the fact that when we are not producing the energy in the
United States, we are getting it from sources that have higher
carbon intensity. Do we not care about the planet?
Look, this is math and science. This isn't people's
opinions. This is absolutely math and science. And do you know
what math and science shows out of this Administration, this
Administration? Their EIA energy outlook shows you are going to
have an increase in demand for both oil and natural gas
globally. So, why would you not produce it in the countries, in
the areas that have the lowest carbon intensity, if you are
going to have an increase in global demand, if we care about
the environment?
It is critically important that as we are moving forward,
if we truly care about climate change, and we care about this
environment and we care about this planet, that we are moving
forward based on decisions that actually make sense.
Mr. Hollie, I appreciate you being here, and I appreciate
you citing the fact that when you look at the taxpayer
subsidies that are going to companies, noting the total
distortion, you have technologies that have been around for 40
and 50 years that we are subsidizing to the tune of $0.50 on
the dollar in some cases, and we are watching, even with those
incredible amounts of subsidies, watching prices go up and, as
you noted, energy poverty having a profound impact on American
families.
Can you talk about basically what you believe a strategy
moving forward would make sense in light of, I hope, your
sensitivity to climate and the environment, while also being
sensitive to energy poverty and the impact this is having on
families?
I have read study after study, inability to afford
groceries, health care, rental and mortgage payments, and
things along those lines.
Mr. Hollie. You pretty much said everything right there.
But it has been proven.
And like I said in my testimony, we don't have to look any
further than back to 2019, when we were energy independent for
the first time, and look at the cost of gas prices and where
they were, and people were paying less.
And there was a study done by Shell Crescent USA back in
2019, 2020, I believe it was, where it showed, here it is,
right here. ``Shell Crescent USA natural gas end users, which
include American households, businesses, and manufacturers, and
electric power generators, have realized $1.1 trillion in
savings since 2008 as a result of increased natural gas
production in the Shell Crescent USA region of Ohio,
Pennsylvania, and West Virginia.''
So, that study already shows what you are just saying. It
has proven what natural gas will do for Americans. It will
lower the cost of energy for them.
Mr. Graves. Thank you very much.
I want to make note of the October 2023 EIA International
Energy Outlook by the Biden administration: 57 percent increase
in global oil demand projected, 58 percent increase in global
demand for natural gas. Biden administration figures.
We want to talk about social cost of carbon? For every one
ton of emissions we have reduced in the United States, China
has increased by four.
I yield back, Madam Chair.
Ms. Hageman. Thank you, Mr. Graves.
Ms. Ocasio-Cortez. Madam Chair, I have a unanimous consent
request.
Ms. Hageman. Yes.
Ms. Ocasio-Cortez. I would like to seek unanimous consent
to enter this open letter from Secretary Granholm into the
record. It details how the Department of Energy is focused on
underserved, over-burdened, and front line communities, and
making sure that they are receiving economic benefits from the
Administration's energy investments.
Ms. Hageman. So ordered.

[The information follows:]

The Secretary of Energy
Washington, DC 20585
July 25, 2022

Dear Department of Energy Stakeholders:

On November 15, 2021, President Joseph R. Biden signed the historic
Bipartisan Infrastructure Law (the BIL), kickstarting a once in a
generation effort to overhaul our Nation's energy infrastructure and
strengthen America's competitive edge in clean energy for years to
come. The BIL includes more than $62 billion for the Department of
Energy (DOE) to deliver a more equitable clean energy future for the
American people.

DOE has adopted the following priorities for DOE's work, including
BIL implementation:

Modernizing and upgrading American energy infrastructure;

Driving quality job creation, including the opportunity
for good-paying union jobs;

Delivering reliable, clean, and affordable energy to more
Americans as we tackle the climate crisis, pursuing a zero-
carbon electricity system by 2035 and a net-zero emission
economy by 2050;

Advancing justice and equity and ensuring stronger
economic and environmental benefits for disadvantaged
communities;

Increasing domestic manufacturing and protecting energy
supply chains;

Growing private sector uptake of clean energy technologies
through DOE-led demonstration and deployment programs.

As we launch this historic investment in American communities, I
want to reiterate a major priority set forth by the Biden
Administration that will be integral to our successful implementation
of the BIL--Justice40 in line with existing statute.

On January 27, 2021, the White House issued Executive Order 14008
(E.O.), establishing a goal that 40 percent of the overall benefits of
certain Federal Government investments, including in climate and clean
energy, flow to disadvantaged communities (the Justice40 Initiative).
DOE intends to implement the Justice40 Initiative throughout all its
BIL efforts, wherever authorized by law, and within well-established
DOE programs that fall within the climate and clean energy investment
categories covered by Justice40. Together these efforts comprise part
of the agency's effort to ensure that communities historically left
behind in Federal programs and spending are able to access the benefits
of this energy transition. This is how we view energy justice. Our deep
commitment to its principles will help to ensure that underserved,
overburdened, and frontline communities (disadvantaged communities or
DACs) receive transformative benefits as we make investments that will
transform our Nation's energy infrastructure.

In April of this year, DOE's Office of Economic Impact and
Diversity released the Department's Justice40 framework (https://
www.energy.gov/diversity/justice40-initiative). The framework
identifies Justice40 communities and outlines the agency's approach to
the President's transformative initiative, as summarized below.

Justice40 Implementation. Applicants for new funding
opportunity announcements (FOA) will be asked to consider
how project benefits can flow to DACs. Moreover, FOA
applicants will also be asked to articulate how DACs can be
meaningfully considered, identified, and benefited in plans
submitted to DOE. Funding recipients will also be asked to
track and report how these identified benefits flow to
DACs. Specific requirements will vary by program, including
which Justice40 benefits (see below) are applicable and how
DACs are to be identified for purposes of a given program.
DOE will provide general guidance on Justice40
implementation, but program-specific funding and guidance
documents will be the source for definitive requirements.

Identifying Justice40 covered programs. Today, the
Department is releasing a comprehensive list of current
programs covered by the Justice40 Initiative. This list was
developed by applying the criteria in OMB's Interim Justice
40 Implementation Guidance M-21-28. These programs include
new and expanded BIL programs critical to building the
energy infrastructure of the future, as well as well-
established DOE programs that fall into the categories of
climate change, clean energy and energy efficiency, clean
transportation, affordable and sustainable housing,
training and workforce development (related to climate,
natural disasters, environment, clean energy, clean
transportation, housing, water and wastewater
infrastructure, and legacy pollution reduction, including
in energy communities), remediation and reduction of legacy
pollution, and critical clean water and waste
infrastructure. The list of DOE Justice40 Covered Programs
is available at https://www.energy.gov/diversity/justice40-
initiative.

Identifying DACs. Pursuant to E.O. 14008 and the Office of
Management and Budget's Interim Justice40 Implementation
Guidance M-21-28, DOE has developed a definition and tools
to locate and identify DACs. These resources can be located
at https://energyjustice.egs.anl.gov/. DOE will also
recognize DACs as defined and identified by the White House
Council of Environmental Quality's Climate and Economic
Justice Screening Tool (CEJST), which can be located at
https://screeningtool.geoplatform.gov/.

Identifying benefits that flow to DACs. Benefits can be
thought of as direct or indirect investments or positive
project outcomes--such as job creation or enterprise
creation--that flow to DACs. DOE's ``General Guidance for
Justice40 Implementation'' identifies policy priorities the
agency sees as critical to advancing an equitable clean
energy future, which are: (1) decreasing energy burden; (2)
decreasing exposure to environmental hazards and burdens;
(3) increasing clean energy jobs, job pipeline, and job
training; (4) increasing clean energy enterprise creating
and contracting (e.g., minority-owned or disadvantaged
business enterprises); (5) increasing energy democracy; (6)
increasing access to low-cost capital; (7) increasing
parity in clean energy technology access and adoption; and
(8) increasing energy resiliency. Depending on the DOE
program or funding, recipients will be asked to consider
how certain activities, such as direct dollars invested,
stakeholder engagement, jobs and workforce development,
energy burden reduction, and the amelioration of
environmental harms, can benefit DACs.

Benefits can be highly specific to each project or program, with
some categories not relevant depending on the technology or
economic sector involved, and we encourage funding
applicants to collaborate with Department staff and
resources to explore all the ways Federal funding can lift
up the communities in our Nation in most need of
assistance.

That said, in keeping with principles of energy and environmental
justice, DACs should not be identified solely to meet
Federal goals, and Federal funding should not create or
exacerbate harm to communities.

I am honored to lead this Department through a historic re-
investment in our country's energy infrastructure. Justice will serve
as our North Star as we fight climate change and bring economic
prosperity to our great Nation. I hope you will join us in our efforts
to ensure that the benefits of BIL, DOE climate and clean energy
programs, and other Federal efforts build a better future for all
Americans.

Sincerely,

Jennifer M. Granholm

______

Ms. Hageman. The Chair now recognizes Mr. Huffman for 5
minutes of questioning.
Mr. Huffman. Thank you, Madam Chair. Just a little
housekeeping before we go further.
Mr. Hollie, it is good to see you again. You have been a
frequent flyer at some of our hearings that I have been a part
of. And I am naturally wondering, since you have been such a
prolific advocate in support of the fossil fuel industry, if
maybe we have one of those moments where a witness and perhaps
the funder of the witness are on the same panel. Yet, when I
looked at your disclosure form for this Committee, the
questions about disclosure of funding for your advocacy were
unanswered. In each case, it says N/A. So, I wonder if you
could just tell me. Do you receive, either wearing the hat of
the Energy Poverty Prevention Project or the other advocacy
hats that you wear, do you receive fossil fuel industry
funding?
Mr. Hollie. No, I do not.
Mr. Huffman. Why don't you tell us that? Why don't you
complete the form?
Mr. Hollie. Because I thought non-applicable meant that no,
I do not. But I could say for the record I do not receive any
funding from the oil and gas industry. My thoughts and my
opinions are what I believe, and what I live every day.
Mr. Huffman. Thank you, sir.
I want to talk about my colleague from Wyoming's bill,
because this narrative that our Republican colleagues are
suddenly champions for the poor, and trying to address the
burdensome costs that they deal with every day, does require
one to suspend a bit of disbelief.
But we have seen this pattern, where our colleagues across
the aisle were miraculously transformed into champions for NEPA
when it was proposed that asylum seekers might seek emergency
shelter on National Park Service land. We saw something similar
when it comes to the Endangered Species Act and the Marine
Mammal Protection Act. When folks are proposing offshore wind
projects, they are suddenly great champions to save the whales.
Yet, for the oil and gas industry in the Gulf, they are very
happy to watch the Rice's whale proceed further down the path
towards extinction.
The common thread in all of these kind of whiplash
experiences with our colleagues across the aisle is that
whatever serves the interests of Big Oil and Gas is where they
go.
Look, energy insecurity is a real problem. The question is,
what do we do about it? And we know that there is a suggestion
in our colleague from Wyoming's bill that we can drill our way
through this problem. The problem is we have done that. We are
the No. 1 producer of oil and gas in the world. We are a net
exporter. We have achieved fossil fuel energy dominance in a
big, big way. Yet, you would think we would have really cheap
energy prices if that was the ticket to cheap energy.
Obviously, it is not, because the market for fossil fuels is
always rigged.
Yet, when Democrats propose things that will get American
consumers off of this fossil fuel roller coaster, things like
home and building efficiency, weatherization, things like
renewable energy, which is not subject to all of the crazy
vicissitudes of the fossil fuel market, we have opposition from
Republicans every single time.
And, of course, one of the factors driving increased energy
costs are high temperatures and climate disasters that are
driven by this deadly fossil fuel addiction. And our Republican
friends oppose us every single time we try to address that.
So, there are two things that our colleagues across the
aisle could do, very specific and effective things that they
could do to drive down energy costs. And it would, I guess, be
a test of whether they are serious about tackling energy
poverty. And Dr. Cha, you mentioned them. It would be a ban on
crude oil exports and all of these fracked gas LNG exports that
our colleagues across the aisle are so enthusiastic to support.
We do it all the time in this Committee.
Am I right? My understanding is all the data suggests that
these two specific things would bring down energy costs.
Dr. Cha. Absolutely.
Mr. Huffman. Yet, we won't see our colleagues across the
aisle take that obvious step to confront energy poverty because
they never go against the fossil fuel industry.
Now, Dr. Cha, what primarily causes big swings in peak
demand? Because I understand the state of Wyoming, for example,
a place where fossil fuels are king, recently announced that
they were raising energy prices, electricity prices, because of
problems, not with renewables or climate action or anything
like that. They have told us, these utilities themselves, that
they are having peak demand problems. What is the cause of
that?
Dr. Cha. It is usually extreme weather events like extreme
heat or extreme cold.
Mr. Huffman. And what is causing spikes in energy costs for
those utilities?
Dr. Cha. The gas market is very volatile. And as global
demand for gas rises, most of our gas gets exported.
Mr. Huffman. Thank you, Dr. Cha.
I yield back.
Mr. Stauber [presiding]. Thank you very much. Next up is
Representative Hageman.
Ms. Hageman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Hollie, you mentioned your work organizing education
and outreach campaigns to help accomplish your stated mission,
which is to create equal access to affordable and reliable
energy for all Americans. Bureaucrats in Washington, DC,
however, are trying to tell vulnerable communities, such as the
communities you have worked with in the past, what their
problems are. They often highlight public health and
environmental justice as the main areas of concern when it
comes to American energy policy.
Mr. Hollie, in your experience, what are the main concerns
of communities facing energy poverty?
Mr. Hollie. Thank you, Representative Hageman. I would say
the biggest thing in these communities is people just trying to
make ends meet. I mean, people are struggling right now. And
just speaking to them, when you see the price of gas go down,
immediately it has a psychological impact. You know, I have a
few more dollars in my wallet to spend. So, like I said, just
trying to make ends meet, and just seeing some impact and
relief at the pumps.
Ms. Hageman. Well, in your opinion, does the Biden
administration share the same priorities as the communities you
have worked with in the past?
Mr. Hollie. At this point, I would say no.
Ms. Hageman. Dr. Cha, in your testimony you said the bill's
specific focus on protecting oil and gas extraction and
exploration is counter to combating energy poverty. My bill,
however, simply requires that actions taken by the Federal
Government to regulate energy, including oil and gas and
transmission lines, take energy poverty into account.
Understanding the economic impact these regulations have on
vulnerable communities is important to them, and it should be
important to all of us.
Mr. Hollie, in your opinion, do the communities you have
worked with care more about keeping the lights on and furnaces
working, or do they care more about eliminating fossil fuels as
an energy source?
Mr. Hollie. I would say they would be more wanting to keep
the lights on in their home, for sure.
Ms. Hageman. And Dr. Cha, you said in your testimony that
the two main causes of rising energy prices are over-investment
in fossil fuel infrastructure and excessive profits and pay to
executives. With all due respect, this claim is extremely out
of touch with reality.
The cold, hard fact is that we are experiencing rising
energy costs due to a forced energy transition in Wyoming right
now, as mentioned by Mr. Huffman. The Federal Government is
pumping millions of dollars into green energy projects in our
state, and the result has been the highest rate increase
proposal we have ever seen, as much as 30 percent.
Fortunately, the Public Service Commission has pushed back
against some of the proposed rate increases, but it is no
thanks to this Administration. If it were completely up to
them, we would be forced to wholly rely on weak, intermittent
sources instead of depending on reliable sources such as coal
and oil and gas.
Your testimony reminds me of the old adage that government
is always trying to fix its last solution. This Administration
has adopted energy policy that is intended to increase the cost
of energy, and then they want to turn around and provide
additional welfare payments to the people who suffer for those
policies. That isn't the way that we can keep the lights on or
provide the energy that we need.
Ms. Sgamma, in your testimony you mentioned that the market
can be destabilized when we eliminate reliable sources and
instead dedicate our funding into just a few sources like we
did in the so-called Inflation Reduction Act. You said
excessive IRA spending that distorts energy markets, confuses
American energy policy, and threatens grid reliability. Could
you please elaborate on how Federal spending and subsidies
distort energy markets and threaten grid reliability?
Ms. Sgamma. I think we only need to look to California to
see how high energy prices are in California.
One of the leaders on green energy policies, Germany, is a
great example. Over the last 20 years, they have poured
billions, hundreds of billions of dollars, into wind and solar,
and they have had to rely more on coal because the energy
policy just hasn't worked. They have destabilized their grid.
We are facing the same situation. The FERC commissioners
just testified to the destabilization of the grid recently this
summer.
So, as we see places like California and Germany put in
place more unreliable energy, their prices have gone up.
Whereas, I mean, let's talk basic economics, which I haven't
heard a lot of on this panel. We, by producing more oil and
natural gas and exporting it around the world, we have helped
keep prices down, and we have helped keep the lights on in
Europe with our LNG exports. Prices are down exactly 64 percent
to the day from 20 years ago in natural gas. And we are
exporting it abroad, we are producing more of it here, and we
have decreased prices considerably.
So, we are not only reducing greenhouse gas emissions, as
Mr. Graves pointed out, but we are helping our allies keep the
lights on.
Ms. Hageman. And I think another important point to make is
that Germany has destroyed their industrial base. And I don't
think we want that visited on the American soil.
With that, I yield back. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Stauber. Thank you very much. Next, Representative Lee,
you are up for 5 minutes.
Ms. Lee. Thank you, Mr. Chair and Ranking Member Ocasio-
Cortez. I also want to thank our witnesses for being here, and
I want to thank Representative Steel for bringing her bill
before us this morning, championing an energy resource in
geothermal that, despite its immense promise both economically
and environmentally, remains largely and shockingly untapped.
Seventeen years ago, a DOE-backed MIT-led panel concluded
that most of the key technical requirements to make enhanced
geothermal systems work economically over a wide area of the
country are already in effect. When a Vox reporter followed up
this year with the expert who chaired that panel to ask why
surprisingly little progress has been made on this front, the
panel's chair pointed specifically to the continued need for
accelerated permitting and licensing of enhanced geothermal
projects.
Dr. Jones, does your own experience back up the recent
findings of the Congressional Research Service in September
2022 that the permitting process for enhanced geothermal result
in development timelines that are longer than any other power
production projects?
Dr. Jones. Yes, it does, and geothermal does not have a
technology problem, it has a policy problem.
Ms. Lee. And is it your opinion, Dr. Jones, that
Representative Steel's bill would help accelerate geothermal
development in a way that maximizes the positive impacts for
energy and the environment, while minimizing any negative
impacts on the ground at development sites?
Dr. Jones. Yes, absolutely.
Ms. Lee. Thank you. Nevada is the nation's second-largest
producer of geothermal electricity in the United States, and
second only to California. And this Nevadan looks forward to
joining my friend from California to make this a bipartisan
bill.
Turning quickly to H.R. 6481, Ms. Sgamma, prior to the
passage of the Inflation Reduction Act in 2022 how much did it
cost speculators to file EOIs nominating Federal lands for oil
and gas leasing?
Ms. Sgamma. Nothing.
Ms. Lee. That is right. The answer is zero, which
perversely tracks with the 0.3 percent of Federal lands ever
actually leased in Nevada over the last 70 years that have
produced oil or gas. The incredibly modest $5-per-acre
nominating fee instituted by the IRA now provides a bare
minimum of protection from this kind of unrestrained and
unproductive speculation that has long plagued both Nevada's
public lands and the American taxpayers who have had to
subsidize this wasteful practice.
H.R. 6481 would roll back the progress made in the IRA and
reincentivize such speculation, which is why I encourage
taxpayer advocates on both sides of the aisle to join me in
opposing this bill.
And with that, I yield.
Mr. Stauber. Thank you very much. Next up, Representative
Tiffany from Wisconsin.
Mr. Tiffany. Yes, thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, and I
do want to associate myself with the remarks by Mr. Huffman
that all of a sudden Republicans are concerned about energy
shortages, the whole energy poverty thing, people being poor as
a result of not having abundance of energy, which we should
certainly have, and saving the whales. And I associate myself
with that because we conservatives that believe in producing
energy however we can, we have always wanted to do that.
In particular, I would point out to my friends across the
aisle that after oil was found in Pennsylvania, we were able to
reduce the amount of whale hunting that went on because the
blubber from whales was used in street lamps in the 1800s to
light streets, to light homes, and things like that. It was one
of the greatest conservation measures for wildlife that we will
ever find in the history of the United States of America. By
finding oil, we were literally saving the whales. And it
continues to this day.
And I really enjoy the term that Mr. Huffman used,
``vicissitudes.'' It is a wonderful word, and he used it in
context of the vicissitudes of the marketplace. And should we
be subject to that? I would much rather be subject to that than
the vicissitudes of a government that is trying to decrease the
amount of energy that we produce in America.
Dr. Cha, is it better for Western Europe to get their gas
from us or Russia?
Dr. Cha. I think it is better for Americans to have their
energy bills lowered using American gas.
Mr. Tiffany. Do you think it is better for Western Europe
to get their gas from us or from Russia?
Dr. Cha. I don't have the expertise to answer that
question, but I do have the expertise to know that it is better
for American energy prices to decrease for utility customers.
Mr. Tiffany. I appreciate you saying that you don't have
the expertise. I hope the young people that you are teaching
out there in California--that you do become knowledgeable on
that because it is an important component when we talk about
how we produce energy and how important it is to have
affordable energy for people, in particular for the poorest out
there.
Mr. Hollie, Representative Hageman brought up the subject
of welfare payments. In your testimony, you talked about
subsidies for unreliable and intermittent renewable energy. If
those subsidies were eliminated, do you think those renewable
energy projects would be profitable? Would they even be built?
Mr. Hollie. They wouldn't be built, would not exist. It
could not happen without the subsidies.
Mr. Tiffany. Why is that?
Mr. Hollie. Because they need the subsidies to work. And in
a free market, if the renewables were that good, they should be
able to stand on their own without the subsidies.
Mr. Tiffany. So, for example, not only are we paying more
for the electricity that is produced by wind and solar, but the
taxpayers are on the hook for that also. Is this correct?
Mr. Hollie. Yes, sir. Yes, they are.
Mr. Tiffany. And would that be contributing to our national
debt, which exceeds over $33 trillion now?
Mr. Hollie. Yes, sir. It would.
Mr. Tiffany. So, we are getting it both ways as Americans.
Is that right?
Mr. Hollie. That is correct.
Mr. Tiffany. Ms. Sgamma, it is good to see you back here.
You mentioned in regards to the IRA that both industry experts
as well as the Bureau of Land Management were not consulted in
regards to the IRA. What impact is that having? What impact did
that have in the writing of that bill by not doing proper
consultation with people who knew what was going on?
I believe you stated in here the Bureau of Land Management
said there were a lot of technical parts of how this will be
implemented that were not thought through thoroughly. Is that
somewhat accurate, that characterization?
Ms. Sgamma. Yes. BLM has mentioned to me several times, and
I think even in testimony, that they are struggling to
implement some of those provisions.
Mr. Tiffany. Ms. Sgamma, if we reduce fossil fuels--I
believe it was back in the Obama administration, they cited by
the reduction of fossil fuels, how much temperatures would
decline. Do you recall what that number was?
Ms. Sgamma. No, but I know that our climate envoy, John
Kerry, has said many times that we could eliminate all
greenhouse gas emissions from the United States and it would
make no difference to climate change.
Mr. Tiffany. Or certainly de minimis. Is that correct?
Ms. Sgamma. It is 0.00 whatever percent or degree of
Celsius.
Mr. Tiffany. So, we could shut down affordable energy here
in America, and it will do nothing on the issue that is before
us.
Are we going to destroy the climate? We will not destroy
the climate as a result of the reduction of fossil fuels. So,
let's produce and have prosperity, because this has always been
at the heart of American success, hasn't it, is having
affordable energy.
I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Stauber. Thanks for your testimony and comments.
Representative Kamlager-Dove, you are up for 5 minutes.
Ms. Kamlager-Dove. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Mr. Hollie, I share your concerns about energy poverty,
because no one should have to choose between paying their
energy bills and essentials like paying for food, child care,
health care, job training, affordable housing, WIC, SNAP,
climate-resilient construction, all programs that Republicans
have been trying to cut. No one should have to choose between
those things or have to keep their homes at unsafe temperatures
because their bills are too high or their energy is unreliable.
But I do disagree that the legislation we are discussing
today will help our most vulnerable communities. Contrary to
the assumptions in H.R. 5482, fossil fuels are not the most
cost-effective option for a lot of American bill-payers. Mr.
Hollie, are you aware that the Chief Financial Officer of
Southern Company, one of the largest utilities in the United
States, recently called solar the most viable technology for
the Southeast?
Mr. Hollie. No, I was not aware that he said that.
Ms. Kamlager-Dove. Are you aware that Georgia Power, a
subsidiary of Southern Company, has reported that solar is the
most cost-effective energy resource addition available in
Georgia?
Mr. Hollie. I don't see how, but I am not aware of that,
either.
Ms. Kamlager-Dove. OK. Are you aware that efforts to
support a household in reducing its dependence on the
electricity grid are often the most cost-effective energy
resource when compared to energy supply-side investments?
Mr. Hollie. When you utilize natural gas, I can see how it
could be more effective.
Ms. Kamlager-Dove. OK. Are you aware that there are dozens
of existing Federal programs to offer relief from energy
burdens?
Mr. Hollie. Yes.
Ms. Kamlager-Dove. OK.
Mr. Hollie. But I don't think they make a difference.
Ms. Kamlager-Dove. Do you support these Federal programs?
Mr. Hollie. Sure, if they are going to make a difference,
but they haven't proven to make a difference.
Ms. Kamlager-Dove. Or do you only support policies to
protect the fossil fuel industry?
Mr. Hollie. I support any policy that is going to reduce
energy for Americans.
Ms. Kamlager-Dove. OK, including Federal programs that
offer relief from energy burdens?
Mr. Hollie. Absolutely.
Ms. Kamlager-Dove. OK, great. Because, unfortunately, my
colleagues across the aisle have been aiming to defund some of
these very programs. And we also know that there are many costs
associated with fossil fuel energy that aren't reflected in the
utility bills that we pay. These costs fall disproportionately
on low-income communities and communities of color.
So, Mr. Hollie, a question for you. It is a yes or no
answer. Does the proposed legislation take into account climate
impacts from fossil fuel development?
Mr. Hollie. I don't think it does.
Ms. Kamlager-Dove. OK. Another yes or no question, does the
proposed legislation take into account the disproportionate
health impacts and health costs associated with increased
fossil fuel production?
Mr. Hollie. I think it would, yes.
Ms. Kamlager-Dove. You think it does?
Mr. Hollie. I think it would.
Ms. Kamlager-Dove. I look through the legislation. I
couldn't find that. And coming from my district, which has one
of the largest urban oil fields in the country, I can tell you
that my communities that are in close proximation to the oil
field suffered disproportionately around issues of asthma,
cancers, respiratory illnesses. And I have never seen any of
those things discussed in this Committee in legislation around
increased fossil fuel production. Those issues cannot be
separated for my constituents at all when it comes to energy
production and also energy poverty.
Mr. Chair, I ask unanimous consent to enter into the record
this report from the Guardian from July 2023, entitled, ``We
can't escape: climate crisis is driving up the cost of living
in the US west.''
Mr. Stauber. Without objection.

[The information follows:]

`We can't escape': climate crisis is driving up cost of living in the
US west

The Guardian, July 21, 2023 by Maanvi Singh

https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2023/jul/21/climate-crisis-cost-of-
living-energy-water-california#::text=11%20months%20old-
,'We%20can't%20escape'%3A%20
climate%20crisis%20is%20driving,living%20in%20the%20US%20west&text=Miner
va %20Contreras%20can't%20keep,costs%20rose%20to%20about%20%24500.

*****

Extreme weather, fueled by global heating, is affecting energy, water,
insurance premiums and food and housing costs. Minerva Contreras can't
keep up with the bills.

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4447.009

.epsPedestrian uses an umbrella to shield themself from the sun
while walking past power lines in California. Photograph: Frederic J
Brown/AFP/Getty Images

Recently, after a series of extreme heatwaves in California forced her
family to run the AC, her monthly electricity costs rose to about $500.
Her water bill averages around $100, but because the water is
contaminated with pesticides from nearby agricultural fields, her
family spends an additional $140 each month to purchase jugs of
drinking water. Her grocery bills have gone up as well, after a spate
of winter storms disrupted harvests across the state.

``Practically, about one week's paycheck goes toward rent, the next
week's toward the electrical bill, and the third week's toward the gas
and water bills and the remaining for everything else,'' said
Contreras, a farm worker who lives with her husband and two children in
the small, agricultural town of Lamont. ``We just can't keep up.''

Here, in what is already one of the most expensive states in the US,
the climate emergency is driving up the cost of living. Extreme
weather, drought and drastic swings in temperature, all fueled by
global heating, are affecting utility costs and insurance premiums,
exacerbating housing shortages and causing food prices to go up.

These issues are echoed throughout the US and the globe, as relentless
heat and smoke pollution from wildfires push communities across the
southern US, Europe and Asia to their limits. The health and economic
impacts of the spate of extreme weather will become clearer in the
months to come.

But in California, the cost imposed by the disquieting recurrence of
climate-related disasters that more and more countries are faced with
have already become untenable for many. Nearly half of the state's
residents say they struggle to save money or pay for unexpected
expenses, according to a recent poll by a consortium of local non-
profits. Many families are just one fire or flood away from financial
ruin.

``We don't see a future here, and it's a shame we can't escape
either,'' Contreras said. ``Where would we go?''

`We put up with a lot of heat'

As temperatures in Lamont this week topped 113F (45C), Contreras
worried about how much her family might have to run the AC. ``We are
usually very careful and try not to,'' she said. ``We put up with a lot
of heat before we turn it on.''

Each summer for the past few years, Contreras's family has fallen
behind on their electricity bills. Each year, they sign up for
repayment plans and manage to pay down their arrears by February or
March, only to fall behind again as the warmer season begins.

Her family is not alone. California residents are increasingly facing
higher electricity prices, at a time when extreme weather is making
energy demands go up. Utility rates in the state are already among the
highest in the US, with California's Public Utilities Commission (CPUC)
finding that since 2013, rate increases have outpaced inflation.

One major reason is that electricity companies have faced increasing
wildfire mitigation expenses like clearing vegetation around power
lines and higher wildfire insurance costs and they have passed the
charge on to consumers. Meanwhile, utility companies such as PG&E have
also been allowed to pass on the liability costs of sparking some of
the state's most destructive wildfires.

For many households, the price increases mean dire choices, said
Michael Mendez, assistant professor of environmental planning and
policy at the University of California, Irvine. A survey by researchers
at Columbia University found that nearly 30% of households in
California kept their homes at a temperature that was unhealthy or
unsafe to save on energy costs. ``When you overlay existing social,
economic and health disparities with climate change and extreme
weather, that exacerbates inequalities,'' Mendez said.

``People are not only facing a rise in costs, but also increased
variability in costs,'' said Alan Barreca, a professor at the Institute
of the Environment & Sustainability at UCLA.

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4447.010

.epsSan Bernardino county firefighter wipes his head as the Oak
Fire burns near Fontana, California. Photograph: David Swanson/AFP/
Getty Images

Barreca and his colleagues have found that for each August day when the
temperature was 95F or higher, the chance that a low-income family
would fall behind on bills and have their power disconnected increased
by 1.2%.
A new proposal to adjust electricity fees based on their income could
help, Barreca said. Researchers and advocacy groups have also proposed
offering adjusted rates and discounted electricity during extreme
weather events and establishing a rental right to cooling.
High water costs `deepening the inequities'

Climate change is taxing the water supply as well as the electrical
grid. One in eight households across California are behind on their
water bills, owing about $1bn altogether, as cycles of lengthy drought
dwindle water supplies. A survey by the state's water board found that
households in predominantly Black and Latino neighborhoods were more
likely to be in arrears.

``With water, the existing system was already not working,'' said
Rachel Cleetus, a climate and energy program director at the Union of
Concerned Scientists, a science advocacy organization. ``And now it's
really falling apart in the face of the pressures from climate
change.''

Due to a complex and outdated water rights system that in many areas
favors big agriculture over communities and ageing, ailing
infrastructure, many of the state's poor and rural communities have
struggled to access adequate drinking water, she said. Then, in recent
years, long stretches of drought have caused shortages and spiked
prices. Wildfires and a series of catastrophic floods this winter have
caused further complications, tainting water supplies and damaging
critical infrastructure.

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4447.011

.epsFloodwaters after a very wet winter destroyed crops and fields
in California. Photograph: Caroline Brehman/EPA

Contreras and her family, who have lived in Lamont for about 12 years,
have been informed year after year that the stuff coming out of their
taps isn't safe for consumption due to a legacy of pesticide pollution
seeped in the groundwater system. In other parts of the Central valley,
chronic overpumping has depleted water, and left homeowners with dry
wells. Hundreds of families in the San Joaquin valley continue to
receive water deliveries by truck, despite a winter of record-setting
precipitation.

``California already has a huge challenge with inequity,'' said
Cleetus. ``It has a high poverty rate. There's already an affordable
housing crisis in the state. And these kinds of climate risks are just
adding an additional layer of risk, and deepening the inequities.''

`Felt really vulnerable about losing my home'

In the small, rural town of Midpines, at the south-western edge of
Yosemite national park, Beth Pratt says she has seen the climate crisis
reshape her community. Last year, the explosive Oak Fire burned nearly
100 homes here.

``In my work as a conservationist, I advocate for wildlife who are
threatened because of climate change. Now we're starting to feel that
same vulnerability,'' said Pratt, who is the regional executive
director of the National Wildlife Federation. ``This is the first time
I felt really vulnerable about losing my home.''

Last month, the state's largest property insurance companies--Allstate
and State Farm--announced that they will no longer sell new policies in
California, citing the growing risk of catastrophes. The news came as
renters and homeowners across the state were quietly dropped by
insurance companies, or were facing unaffordable premiums.

This month, not long after Allstate announced it would halt new
policies in the state, Pratt got notice that the company would not be
renewing her existing policy.

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4447.012

.epsA collapsed house in Rolling Hills Estates in Los Angeles,
California. Photograph: Etienne Laurent/EPA

That was despite the fact that Pratt had spent about $100,000 to harden
her home against fire. She invested in fire-rated metal siding for the
house, redid her redwood decks in ember-resistant laminate and metal
railings. She purchased a 2,500-gallon tank with a fire hose hookup,
and this year, she spent $10,000 to hire a crew to clear trees and
overgrowth.

When the letter from Allstate came, telling her that even all that was
not enough to keep her home insured, Pratt was flabbergasted. ``I mean,
$100,000 is not something the average person has,'' she said. ``I don't
really have it--on a non-profit salary. I had to refinance my mortgage
to afford this.''

Most of her neighbors are facing the same issue, she said--they've
either lost their insurance already, or expect to lose it soon. After
the record-breaking 2020 fire season, the number of Californians who
were told by their insurer that their policy wouldn't be renewed
increased by about 30%.

The only remaining option for Pratt and her neighbors is the state's
Fair plan, a limited insurance plan for those who cannot find coverage
through a private company. It will cost Pratt double what she was
paying Allstate.

Moving and buying elsewhere isn't financially feasible--and besides,
Pratt said, she's lived in this small community for 25 years. ``We
can't just move away from the climate crisis.''

`Everywhere in California is the same'

In fact, many poor and middle-class families are being forced to move
to areas that are feeling the impact of climate crisis more intensely.
``The housing affordability crisis in California is pushing people out
of cities and increasingly out, into locales with a higher risk for
extreme heat, higher risk for drought and wildfires,'' said Mendez.

In the towns of Planada and Pajaro, farm workers without flood
insurance or access to unemployment aid saw their homes and life
savings wiped out by floods this winter. Aid from the Federal Emergency
Management Agency (FEMA) wasn't enough to cover the cost of materials,
let alone labour, to rebuild.

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4447.013

.epsVehicles and homes engulfed by floodwaters in Pajaro,
California, in March 2023. Photograph: Josh Edelson/AFP/Getty Images

Agricultural workers in the central coast and Central valley, who
harvest the bulk of produce grown in the state and in the country, were
out of work for weeks. Planted fields of summer fruit were wiped out
and shortages drove up already inflated grocery prices this year.

In Lamont, where daily highs are predicted to remain above 100F (37.7C)
through the end of the month, the Contreras family has resigned to
another year of debt. Because it is unsafe to work in the fields after
11am on most days, Contreras's husband has had his work hours cut.
Normally he would pick up extra work in the tangerine or grape fields,
but the weather has disrupted those harvests as well.

Recently, the family had to sign up for a second repayment plan for
their electrical bills. ``It's depressing,'' Contreras said. ``The
bills just keep accumulating.''

The family thinks about moving, but can't think of where they could
live affordably. ``Everywhere in California, we see that it's the
same,'' she said.

______

Ms. Kamlager-Dove. Thank you. And I quote, ``Extreme
weather, fueled by global heating, is affecting energy, water,
insurance premiums, and food, and housing costs.''
So, we must and are entirely capable of addressing these
issues together, all at once. And the false advertising that is
H.R. 5482 falls far short.
With that, Mr. Chair, I yield back.
Mr. Stauber. Thank you very much. I will now recognize
myself for 5 minutes of questioning. But before I do, I do want
to make a statement.
My friend and colleague, Ranking Member Ocasio-Cortez,
states this, the energy poverty bill, only supports one
industry. I want the Ranking Member to know it supports all
energy projects, including transmissions. And that is on page
13 of the bill itself. So, all energy projects are included in
this.
Ms. Sgamma, in May and June of this year, BLM held lease
sales in New Mexico and North Dakota, respectively. In the New
Mexico lease sale, the BLM offered 45 parcels, 37 of which were
nominated. When the lease sale occurred, the only parcels
receiving bids were those that were nominated. In North Dakota,
the BLM offered 32 parcels, 14 of which were nominated, and it
was the same story. All of the nominated parcels were bid on,
and the parcels that weren't nominated were completely ignored.
Are you seeing this as a trend by the BLM, in that they are
offering a lot of non-nominated acreage?
Ms. Sgamma. BLM is playing games with how the numbers of
leases are counted, and that is because of another, I think,
worthy provision of IRA, which was Senator Manchin's intention
of all-of-the-above energy. And he tied wind and solar
permitting to oil and natural gas leasing. A minimum number of
nominations, minimum acreage requirements brought to sale were
required before wind or solar permit could be issued. And as a
result, BLM is trying to pad its numbers with acreage that
nobody wants so that they can say it was offered.
Mr. Stauber. Well, where are these parcels coming from, if
they aren't nominated by the operators?
Ms. Sgamma. BLM just moves forward with them.
Mr. Stauber. What kind of impact is that having on lease
sales with respect to revenues generated?
Ms. Sgamma. Well, it doesn't return anything. There is no
nomination fee, there are no royalties that result, there is no
leasing revenue that results. So, it is just playing games with
the numbers.
Mr. Stauber. And how will these lackluster lease sales
impact energy prices long term, and how will that impact energy
poverty?
Ms. Sgamma. Well, it does nothing for reducing energy
poverty.
Mr. Stauber. Thank you.
Dr. Jones, you mentioned in your testimony a geothermal
project can be subject to six rounds of NEPA reviews. Why is
that the case for a single project?
Dr. Jones. It is because there are several different stages
of a geothermal development project: exploration, then you have
to confirm the resource, then you have to drill the production
well, and the monitoring wells. And each of those steps
requires a full NEPA review.
Mr. Stauber. So, the bill before us today would expedite
the NEPA process for drilling geothermal wells, but wouldn't
impact the NEPA process for leasing. Is that correct?
Dr. Jones. That is correct.
Mr. Stauber. So, the agencies will still do a full NEPA
review, even before using a categorical exclusion, correct?
Dr. Jones. That is correct.
Mr. Stauber. Thank you. In my view, this is a common-sense
approach we should be using for all forms of energy. It doesn't
make sense to be completing the same work time and time again.
Mr. Hollie, earlier in your career you served as the Office
of Small and Disadvantaged Business Utilization at the U.S.
Department of Transportation, working closely with small and
minority-owned businesses across our country. Can you share how
small and minority-owned businesses benefit from a robust,
thriving U.S. energy industry?
Mr. Hollie. Yes, sir. I met with small businesses just last
week, and a number of them complain about rising cost of
energy. So, if we can reduce the price of energy for all
Americans, business owners alike, they will see an increase in
their wallets.
Mr. Stauber. And what you are saying is those businesses
that aren't directly involved in the energy sector also gain
from a robust----
Mr. Hollie. Yes, sir. I am talking about automotive, people
who work on cars, who run restaurants. Everyone benefits from
lower-cost energy.
Mr. Stauber. Thank you.
Dr. Cha, real quick, my colleague asked you about not
exporting oil to keep in the United States. Is that
nationalizing the oil and gas industry?
Dr. Cha. It is repealing the export ban, repealing the----
Mr. Stauber. What is that?
Dr. Cha. Repealing the repeal of reinstating the export
ban.
Mr. Stauber. OK. So, what I heard you say is that keeping
the oil and gas within the United States is going to help the
United States in the energy sector reduce the cost of energy.
Is that correct?
Dr. Cha. That is correct.
Mr. Stauber. OK. Would you have that same mindset when it
comes to critical minerals?
Dr. Cha. [No response.]
Mr. Stauber. Would you rather mine the critical minerals,
process the critical minerals that we have in this country
versus going overseas and using child slave labor for the
minerals? Does that logic follow in critical mineral mining?
Dr. Cha. I think there are different issues that----
Mr. Stauber. How so?
Dr. Cha. Well, I think with critical mineral mining, the
question is how much mining do we need to meet our energy
transition needs.
Mr. Stauber. And how much do you think we need?
Dr. Cha. It depends on how our policies are developed. But
if we switch to public transportation versus individual car
use, for instance, we would need less.
Mr. Stauber. I do agree with you, it depends on the policy.
And this Administration's policy on mining, critical mineral
mining, is anywhere but America, any worker but the American
worker.
My time is up, and I yield to Representative Duarte for 5
minutes.
Mr. Duarte. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, I appreciate it.
Mr. Hollie, help me out here, please. I represent a very
low-income, Voting Rights Act district, Hispanic mainly, in the
Central Valley of California. A great part of my district is
served by PG&E, although we don't, God forbid, explore much oil
in California anymore, or natural gas to our potentials.
We still have, my constituents, paying $0.57 a kilowatt
hour for electricity during the peak summer rates. Is this
high? Is that a lot?
Mr. Hollie. Yes.
Mr. Duarte. I think it is the highest in the nation. If you
look at California, and even still, PG&E isn't keeping up with
capital needs. You can't get a new panel hooked up. In one town
of my district, Madera, you can't hook up any new panel to
create jobs, to create manufacturing, housing. The system is
tapped out.
But nonetheless, these low-income renters, these low-income
families in the Central Valley, they must not be dialed in to
the Federal benefits. Because when I was campaigning and
knocking on doors in the neighborhoods, their screen doors were
closed and their main door to the home was wide open in 105
degree afternoons. These families are ventilating their homes
with natural ventilation from the outside. They can't afford to
run the air conditioner. They can't afford to run even a swamp
cooler because of electric rates in this area.
Now, this is my perception, you can tell me if I have this
right or not--over on the coast we have fairly moderate
temperatures. We have relatively higher-income folks. And at
the highest of those income folks we have solar panels and lots
of green energy taking these households off the grid, not
sharing in the overhead cost of PG&E, not sharing in the legacy
costs of infrastructure, the general repair. That is all baked
into the $0.50 per kilowatt hour. And they are fine, they are
fine. Do I have that right?
Mr. Hollie. Yes, you absolutely have it right.
Mr. Duarte. OK, because it sounds unbelievable that we
would put these costs of green energy on the lowest-income
families in the warmest environment in the state, and then
underserve those environments with lack of infrastructure, lack
of capacity to expand job opportunities. If they all did want
to run their air conditioner, I doubt we could even support
that.
Mr. Hollie. Right, exactly. I agree.
Mr. Duarte. So, Dr. Cha next to you talks about we must
reintroduce the ban on oil exports and expand to increase a ban
on fracked gas exports to keep oil and gas extracted in the
United States in the United States.
And Ms. Sgamma, you can answer this also. Are Dr. Cha and
her friends, are they reaching out to you and saying, great,
let's build more pipelines, let's get more logistics solutions,
let's move this energy around the United States more
efficiently, more effectively, so that we can keep it here on
the continental United States and not export it to our friends
abroad? Let them buy Russian, or Iranian, or Venezuelan. We can
keep this right here. Let's build the infrastructure to do
that. Are you getting partnerships from the left and overtures
to increase that infrastructure?
Ms. Sgamma. No, but I don't think we are talking basic
economics here when we say ban exports. Besides the
nationalization and the socialization of energy that that
involves, I mean, we don't ban other exports of other products.
It is simply bad economics.
By reducing the price of oil globally, we help keep costs
lower here in the United States. Not in California, because
they distort their energy markets there, and you are paying
over $6 a gallon in California.
Mr. Duarte. So, as a farmer, I don't have to worry about
keeping all of our Ag product here locally to fight food
inflation, or keeping all of our manufactured product here.
Ms. Sgamma. Right, we don't nationalize industries in the
United States.
Mr. Duarte. We are not going to just keep it all here, even
though here, if you talk about agricultural products, we do in
a general way, most of the time, have the ports, and the roads,
and the railroads. But here in America, we don't even have
close to the infrastructure we need to keep our domestic energy
production here.
I mean, we exported 9.5 billion barrels of oil, or 9.5
million barrels of oil a day, and we are importing 8.33 million
barrels of oil a day. Some of that is just a logistics
solution, is it not?
Dr. Cha, we are talking about your work here, please chime
in. Let me know where I have this wrong, please.
Dr. Cha. Well, oil exports were banned up until 2015, so we
do have the infrastructure to keep the oil in the country.
Mr. Duarte. Then why are we building pipelines, or at least
fighting over building pipelines?
Dr. Cha. Yes, I would agree that we shouldn't build any
more pipelines.
Mr. Duarte. So, we should not build pipelines, but we
should keep our oil and energy resources here domestically?
Dr. Cha. It worked until 2015, yes.
Mr. Duarte. Thank you. I yield back.
Mr. Stauber. Thank you very much.
Ms. Ocasio-Cortez. Mr. Chair, I have a unanimous consent
request.
Mr. Stauber. Yes, go ahead.
Ms. Ocasio-Cortez. Thank you. Since my comments were
invoked earlier, I would like to just resubmit section 5 on
page 10. While all projects can request the optional study, the
only ones that are subject to the mandatory studies are
activities that could potentially slow or prevent fossil fuel
development.

So, to clarify and provide evidence for my assertions to
the record, I would like to resubmit that section. Thank you.

Mr. Stauber. Without objection.

[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4447.005

.eps[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4447.006

.eps[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4447.007

.eps[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4447.008

.eps__

Mr. Stauber. I thank the witnesses for their valuable
testimony and the Members for their good questions.
The members of the Subcommittee may have some additional
questions for the witnesses, and we will ask you to respond to
these in writing. Under Committee Rule 3, members of the
Committee must submit questions to the Committee Clerk by 5
p.m. on Friday, December 15. The hearing record will be held
open for 10 business days for these purposes.
If there is no further business, without objection, the
Committee stands adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 12:05 p.m., the Subcommittee was adjourned.]

[ADDITIONAL MATERIALS SUBMITTED FOR THE RECORD]

Statement for the Record
Bureau of Land Management
U.S. Department of the Interior
on H.R. 5482, H.R. 6474, and H.R. 6481

Thank you for the opportunity to provide this Statement for the
Record on H.R. 5482, the Energy Poverty Prevention and Accountability
Act; H.R. 6474, regarding Sec. 390 categorical exclusions for
geothermal development; and H.R. 6481, regarding refundable expression
of interest fees.
Background

The Bureau of Land Management (BLM) manages approximately 245
million surface acres, located primarily in 12 western states, as well
as 30 percent of the nation's onshore mineral resources across 700
million subsurface acres, overlain by properties managed by other
Federal agencies such as the Department of Defense and the U.S. Forest
Service (USFS), as well state and private lands.
The Federal Land Policy and Management Act of 1976 (FLPMA) provided
the BLM with the multiple use and sustained yield mandate that guides
all of the BLM's land management decisions. Driven by that mandate
established by FLPMA, the BLM sustains the health, diversity, and
productivity of the nation's public lands for multiple uses, such as
conventional and renewable energy development; livestock grazing;
conservation; mining; watershed protection; hunting, fishing, and other
forms of recreation, and more. This enables the BLM to contribute
tremendously to economic growth, job creation, and domestic energy
production, while generating revenues for Federal and State treasuries
and local economies and allowing for a thoughtful and balanced approach
to management of our public lands.
H.R. 5482, Energy Poverty Prevention and Accountability Act

H.R. 5482 directs various Federal agencies to conduct reviews of
Federal energy laws and regulations, as well as proposed energy
projects and state renewable energy portfolio standards, to evaluate
their impacts on energy access for at-risk communities. In addition,
the bill requires the Comptroller General of the United States, in
consultation with each relevant agency, to develop criteria to
determine whether an at-risk community is experiencing ``energy
poverty'', which is defined in the bill as ``a condition in which
individuals do not have access to affordable and reliable energy to
maintain economic security.'' The bill also requires a study by the
Secretary of the Interior before undertaking or not undertaking certain
energy related actions (including conducting leasing and permitting or
making withdrawals of Federal land, among other activities) to
determine if the activity would impose disproportionate costs on at-
risk communities or increase the likelihood that they will experience
energy poverty and job losses. Additionally, H.R. 5482 would allow
entities sponsoring certain energy related projects on Federal land to
request the lead agency conduct a study on how the applicant's proposal
would create jobs and reduce energy prices.
Analysis
The BLM recognizes the importance of affordable and reliable energy
to our national and economic security. The BLM supports the Sponsor's
goal of mitigating the disparate impact of energy costs to at-risk
communities. However, the studies required by the bill, including those
that could be requested by an applicant or entity sponsoring a project,
would add another layer of complexity to the existing processes, create
duplicate analysis requirements, make it difficult to predict timelines
for project reviews and permitting, and potentially delay completion of
authorizations for energy-related projects. The BLM also notes that the
National Environmental Policy Act already requires the analysis of a
variety of impacts, both beneficial and adverse. For these reasons, the
BLM cannot support the bill.
H.R. 6474, Regarding Sec. 390 Categorical Exclusions for Geothermal
Development

H.R. 6474 proposes to amend Section 390 of the Energy Policy Act of
2005 (EPAct 2005), which established five categorical exclusions (CXs)
for oil and gas, known as Section 390 CXs, to include exploration or
development of geothermal resources.
Analysis
CXs are categories of actions that Federal agencies have determined
do not have a significant effect on the quality of the human
environment (individually or cumulatively) and for which neither an EA
nor an EIS is required to comply with NEPA (40 CFR 1508.4). Although
eligible actions may not require an EA or EIS, a CX is not an exemption
from NEPA requirements. Section 390 CXs apply only to oil and gas
exploration and development pursuant to the Mineral Leasing Act. Other
procedural requirements still apply to Section 390 CXs, such as
consultation under the Endangered Species Act and National Historic
Preservation Act.
The BLM does not anticipate that the Section 390 CXs would offer
significant benefits in improving processing times for geothermal
projects, as there are considerable inherent differences between
geothermal and oil and gas production processes. Currently, the BLM is
working on administratively establishing CXs specifically for
geothermal development, and these CXs will be more applicable to the
geothermal process than the oil and gas-focused Section 390 CXs, which
the bill would amend. Additionally, the BLM generally believes that new
CXs are better developed through the traditional administrative process
than through legislation. As such, the BLM does not support H.R. 6474.
H.R. 6481, Regarding Refundable Expressions of Interest Fees

H.R. 6481 requires the Secretary of the Interior to reimburse the
fee for an expression of interest (EOI) if the EOI becomes inactive.
The non-refundable $5 per acre EOI fee was established by the Inflation
Reduction Act (IRA, Public Law 117-169).
Analysis
An EOI is an informal nomination to request certain Federal lands
to be included in a competitive oil and gas lease sale. The
nonrefundable EOI filing fee is intended to minimize spurious EOIs,
including those submitted for lands that are ineligible for oil and gas
leasing. Historically, many EOIs submitted to the BLM were for lands
that were ineligible for a lease sale for reasons such as being located
within an existing authorized lease, lacking federally owned minerals,
or being legislatively unavailable for mineral leasing.
By creating a nonrefundable fee through the IRA, Congress placed
the burden on the party submitting an EOI to ensure the lands submitted
are available and eligible for leasing. Consistent with Congressional
intent, this has decreased the number of spurious EOIs and the workload
imposed on the BLM mineral leasing program, making it possible to
process EOIs for eligible lands more efficiently. The BLM supports
maintaining the nonrefundable EOI fee as directed by Congress, and
therefore does not support H.R. 6481.
Conclusion

Thank you again for the opportunity to provide a statement for the
record on these bills.

______

Questions Submitted for the Record to Bureau of Land Management

The Bureau of Land Management did not submit responses to the Committee
by the appropriate deadline for inclusion in the printed record.

Questions Submitted by Representative Stauber

Question 1. How many EOIs has each BLM field office invalidated
since the Inflation Reduction Act (IRA) was passed and what criteria is
each office using to do so?

1a) How do these numbers compare percentage-wise to the remaining
EOIs?

Question 2. Please submit the number EOIs that you have received,
along with the associated acreage, over the last 24 months by month and
by State.

2a) Please submit the amount of EOI acreage offered in lease sales
by the Department over the last 24 months by lease sale.

2b) Please submit the amount of non-EOI acreage offered in lease
sales by the Department over the last 24 months by lease sale along
with the agency's rationale for offering non requested acreage.

______

Submissions for the Record by Rep. Stauber

Dear Bruce Westerman:

My name is Emma Wohlrab and I am a student at Danbury High School.
In my American Government and pre law class we have spent a lot of time
researching and learning about the government and how it works. Over
the past few weeks we have been researching different committees and
choosing one we like. I chose the Natural Resources committee because
ever since I was I've been interested in nature and I knew it could
possibly dictate my job in the future. After we chose a committee we
had to pick out a bill that stood out to us, whether we're against it
or not. I chose the bill, H.R. 5482--Energy Poverty Prevention and
Accountability Act of 2023. This bill states that it will prevent
energy poverty and ensure that at-risk communities have access to
affordable energy. I am in full support of this bill. I'm in support of
this bill because I think that all people should have the right to
accessible and affordable energy.
Fox News made an article on September 15, 2023 stating that,
``According to the bill's text. Under the legislation, federal agencies
would be required to assess impacts energy-related policies have on a
wide of Americans'' (Catenacci). I support this because if the bill is
passed it's going to help those in need all across American not just in
one or a few states. In this article it also explains that the bill has
many endorsements from multiple energy industry groups, such as, ``The
U.S. Oil and Gas Association, Energy Workforce & Technology Council,
Energy Poverty Prevention Project and Domestic Energy Producers
Alliance.'' (Catenacci). With all this support it seems obviously that
many are in favor of the bill.
Another article in favor of the bill is on Dan Sullivan's website
called, Sullivan, Hageman Introduce Bill to hold Administration
Accountable for Regressive Energy Policies Targeting Rural and Low-
Income Americans, made on September 15, 2023. In this article it talks
mainly about the same stuff but most importantly it gives more
endorsements. For example it states, ``Skyrocketing energy costs are
crushing the livelihoods of vulnerable populations such as low-income,
minority, rural, elderly, and Indigenous communities . . . The Energy
Poverty Prevention and Accountability Act is the right step toward
curbing the out-of-control costs of regulation and government overreach
driving the epidemic of energy poverty in this country.''--Derrick
Hollie, The Energy Poverty Prevention Project (Sullivan) Being able to
help out the needy is always a top priority so this bill is really
important. But why would someone not be in support of this bill?
A person might not be in support of this bill because in order to
get more energy you would have to mine more and pollute the environment
more. A publisher called Harriet Hageman, also Wyoming's Congresswoman
as you probably know, created an article called Rep. Hageman and Sen.
Sullivan Introduce Bicameral Bill to Fight Energy Poverty. Created also
on September 25. In this article it states that, ``Whether it was
President Biden or Obama, Speaker Pelosi or Leader Schumer, these so-
called leaders have waged war against American coal and oil and gas,
all the while knowing they cannot replace the very energy resources
they are undermining'' (Rep. Hageman). So would this issue cause the
bill to be harder to pass? It takes so much to get the energy and
that's a lot of money so would the president want to make it cheaper
and lose money?
Another source that has evidence against the bill is Kevin Hern's
website. Created in 2020, however it talks about the same topic. This
bill is heavily supported so it's difficult to find evidence against
it. The article is called Hern Introduces energy bill protecting low-
income and minority communities. In this article it states that, These
same officials roll out strategies promoting ``environmental justice''
and ``economic equity'' (while never defining either). Yet, it is
ultimately our fellow Americans who struggle to make ends meet when the
price at the pump goes up, energy bills reach record highs, and the
grocery bill doubles'' (Hern) This makes me think that if the bill is
passed and low-income families energy cost is lowered, would the higher
income families have to pay more than they are already paying? If so,
that is a definite disadvantage of the bill.
Overall, the Energy Poverty Prevention and Accountability Act of
2023 bill is a great bill that would help millions of Americans out, as
long as no one else or the environment is negatively affected. But one
more question, how much would this bill cost? Anyways, I would love to
see this bill get passed and I hope you didn't get too bored while
reading this. I wish you the best of luck and support for this bill.

Best regards,

Emma Wohlrab

______

Submissions for the Record by Rep. Hageman

Navajo Transitional Energy Company

Broomfield, Colorado

December 13, 2023

To Whom It May Concern:

Navajo Transitional Energy Company (NTEC) writes in support of
House Resolution 5482. We believe the Energy Poverty Prevention and
Accountability Act of 2023 is an essential piece of legislation to
ensure that the current extraordinary focus on climate change does not
irrevocably harm the most vulnerable among us by essentially, or in-
fact, eliminating basic needs, such as affordable and reliable
electricity.

While the scientific community has been discussing climate change
since as early as 1938, global politics and policies regarding climate
change have become truly extraordinary over the past decade. In the
United States, the Biden Administration is rapidly moving forward with
massive, systemic changes to the United States electrical grid. All
corners of the Administration have been pushing for the elimination of
fossil fuel generated electricity since signing Executive Order 13990
on President Biden's inauguration day. For illustration, just in 2023,
the following federal regulatory actions have been advanced which
threaten the US electrical grid (not an exhaustive list):

Proposed particulate matter national ambient air quality
standards review,

Final mercury and air toxics standards issuance of
``Appropriate & Necessary'' decision,

Proposed greenhouse gas new source performance standards
for existing electric generating units (rule 111d),

Proposed greenhouse gas new source performance standards
for new electric generating units (rule 111b),

Final greenhouse gas Subpart Ba implementing regulations,

Proposed mercury and air toxics standards risk and
technology review,

Effluent limitation guidelines proposed rule to
potentially strengthen effluent limitation guidelines,

Proposed coal combustion residuals legacy impoundments,

Final particulate matter national ambient air quality
standards review,

Proposed new source review emissions accounting review
rule,

Coal combustion residuals Part B final rule (Phase 2
closure),

Final ozone national ambient air quality standards
reconsideration,

Coal combustion residuals closure complete (f)(2), less
than 40 acres, and

Final prevention of significant deterioration fugitive
emissions rule.

Each of the individual regulations, rulemakings and reviews listed
above has a significant impact on an aspect of the United States
electrical grid. Taken together, the culmination of these items (along
with the regulations, rulemakings and reviews from 2020, 2021 and 2022)
puts the United States electrical grid in extreme peril. However, it is
not apparent that there is any balancing test being applied by the
Biden Administration to evaluate the impacts of its collective energy
policy decisions (or individual rulemakings) with the short-term harm
to our national security, national economy or the significant hardships
being exacerbated upon our most At-Risk communities (At-Risk as defined
in H.R. 5482).
NTEC has consistently stated that we believe an `all of the above'
energy strategy is the only prudent and reasonable path forward given
what is collectively understood about climate change, current and
future energy needs and the state of technological advancement with
other potential energy sources. We believe the Energy Poverty
Prevention and Accountability Act of 2023 is necessary because United
States energy policy to combat climate change seems to follow a
``Ready, Shoot, Aim'' methodology rather than reasonably analyzing the
economic, national security and social justice implications of
decisions. Policy makers seem significantly more concerned about what
may happen to people in the year 2100 rather than the absolute direct
policy impacts happening today on our most vulnerable. We need to
balance the needs of addressing potential climate change impacts that
may occur 30+ years from now with meeting the immediate basic
necessities of ALL human beings.

Affordability

The Energy Poverty Prevention and Accountability Act of 2023
clearly will provide some reassurance to the Navajo Nation that the
welfare of its citizens will not be expendable at the alter of climate
change. But the concern felt by members of the Navajo Nation are also
felt by many other communities. Over the past year, we have started to
see numerous examples of utilities that are announcing significant
increases for electricity rates. In Wyoming, both businesses and
individuals were recently informed that their local electric utility
was requesting a 20-35% rate increase. While the Wyoming PSC announced
the full requested increase would not be granted, the utility has
already stated they will be coming back for another rate increase in 2
or 3 years in the range of 30%. This is but one example of many from
across the country--and electric utilities have publicly stated that
rates in the future will be higher due to the costs of green energy. A
simple Google search provides dozens of headlines proclaiming electric
utility costs rising 5, 12, 20% and more in 2022 and 2023. These
increases are guaranteed to continue so long as the utilities are being
forced away from affordable energy. Obviously, utility increases are
essentially a regressive tax against the At-Risk populations and
communities this bill is intended to protect.

Reliability

For decades, we have seen the plight of non-US businesses operating
in countries throughout the world who were forced to deal with
significant energy reliability issues. Rolling brownouts, blackouts,
regulated power or inconsistent power have been deemed as a necessity
of doing business in Third World countries. Suddenly, as a direct
result of eliminating electrical generation from coal, gas and hydro
without replacement electricity being online, the United States finds
itself with similar significant electricity reliability concerns.

South Africa jumped on the `green energy' revolution early and
wholeheartedly. They are now dealing with systemic blackouts due to the
lack of reliable energy. The push to solar and wind has created a
massive energy poverty gap between the wealthy and the At-Risk, who
cannot afford to purchase solar units for their homes. While South
Africa is the continent's most developed economy, they have placed
themselves in a situation where they are forced to endure daily power
cuts which are wreaking havoc on the economy and population.

Over the past 6 months alone, many utilities, regional transmission
organizations, and federal agencies have released very concerning
studies and statements regarding reliability. For example:

FERC Commissioner Mark Christie told the Senate Energy and
Natural Resources Committee in a hearing on May 4, 2023
``The United States is heading for a reliability crisis. I
do not use the term ``crisis'' for melodrama, but because
it is an accurate description of what we are facing. I
think anyone would regard an increasing threat of system-
wide, extensive power outages as a crisis.''

At a hearing before the Senate Energy and Natural
Resources Committee on June 1, 2023, Manu Asthana,
President and CEO of PJM stated ``We will need to slow down
the retirement or restriction of existing generation until
replacement capacity is deployed . . . frankly, we see this
as the single largest risk in the energy transition.''

MISO has closed 45 power plants (1 nuclear, 29 coal and 15
gas) in the past 6 years. Those plants provided over 17
megawatts of electricity (approximate coverage for 11.2
million homes). The vast majority of that 17 megawatts has
been replaced with wind and solar, which is intermittent
power . . . not reliable as baseload power. According to
data from MISO's website, there will be an ever-widening
gap between `installed' and `accredited' capacity going
forward. Essentially, MISO is virtually guaranteed to not
be able to reliably meet its forecasted energy needs with
reliable generation. In other words, there WILL be
blackouts throughout the MISO region, it is simply a matter
of whether that occurs when the temperature is 30 degrees
or 20 below. The differences in those temperatures when the
electricity goes out will literally be a life/death
determination for many At-Risk individuals and communities
throughout the MISO region.

Similar analysis in ERGOT, SPP and other regions show that
PJM and MISO are not along. Each and every regional
transmission organization has been publicly clamoring about
the crisis that is not coming--but rather here.

It is for these reasons and more that we believe the Energy Poverty
Prevention and Accountability Act of 2023 is necessary legislation. The
United States can, and should, continue to address proven climate
change ramifications. However, we do not believe that climate change
and energy policy decisions should be made in a vacuum with a focus
only on POTENTIAL future impacts. There should be a balance between
protecting and lifting up citizens of today, especially those At-Risk,
while addressing potential harms in the future.

About NTEC

Navajo Transitional Energy Company was formed in 2013 as part of a
ground-breaking initiative by the Navajo Nation to assert and assume
full sovereignty over its vast mineral and energy assets. NTEC was
established under Navajo law as an autonomous limited liability company
whose sole shareholder is the Navajo Nation. NTEC's initial objective
was to acquire ownership and control of the Navajo Mine located
entirely on the Navajo Nation just outside of Farmington, New Mexico.
In 2019, NTEC went on to acquire substantially all the assets of Cloud
Peak Energy after they filed bankruptcy. Through this acquisition, NTEC
became the 3rd largest coal producer in the United States. Our coal
portfolio includes the Navajo Mine--which is a mine mouth operation
feeding the Four Corners Power Plant located on the Navajo Nation; the
Antelope and Cordero Mines in Wyoming and the Spring Creek Complex in
Montana.

In addition to owning and operating coal mines, NTEC owns and
operates producing helium wells on the Navajo Nation, we have an
ownership percentage in the Four Corners Power Plant, we have an
ownership interest in the Round Top rare earths deposit in Texas, and a
partnership with Arizona Lithium for development of the Big Sandy
lithium project in Arizona. Further, we are working closely with the
respective owners of the FCPP to develop large-scale, merchant power
solar facilities on reclaimed mine land. We truly represent and strive
for ``all of the above'' solutions to the energy needs of the Navajo
Nation, the United States and beyond. As new technologies are developed
which we believe can help provide energy and support the Navajo
Nation--we will be analyzing it.

We are an essential contributor to the Navajo Nation. Through
royalties, taxes and other payments NTEC accounts for 30% of the Navajo
Nation General Fund on an annual basis. Further, the Four Corners Power
Plant provides another 9%. That power plant is currently scheduled to
be shut-down in 2031.

In addition to significant royalties and taxes, NTEC provides
critical support for the Navajo Nation in numerous other ways. We
provided over 12,000 tons of free coal to Navajo and Hopi families in
2022-23 through our Community Heating Resource Program CHRP program to
ensure houses stay warm in the winter months. Due to high energy costs
and local energy shortages, we expect to exceed that amount this year.
In all, NTEC has provided over $350 million directly to the Navajo
Nation and to Navajo charities since 2013. Of our almost 1,400
employees, 354 voluntarily identified as Native American--including 318
Navajo employees. The average salary of our employees identifying as
Native American is $82,600. These high paying jobs are essential to the
Navajo community. The Navajo Nation is one of the most impoverished
communities in the United States, so to put this in perspective,
On the Navajo Nation:

Median household income is $26,862 (compared to $57,652
for the US),

36% of households have income below the poverty line
(compared to 12.7% in the US),

19% of households are in Extreme Poverty,

40% of homes lack running water,

32% of homes lack electricity,

86% of homes lack natural gas,

Unemployment rate is just above 40%,

More than 50% of Navajo on the Nation live more than 20
miles from the nearest grocery store (there are 13 grocery
stores on the 27,000 square mile Nation),

2020 census numbers provide 32.9% of homes have broadband
access.

Thank you for your consideration.

Regards,

Matthew Adams,
Director, Senior Tax Counsel
______

Submissions for the Record by Rep. Grijalva

Statement for the Record
National Parks Conservation Association (NPCA)
on H.R. 5482

Since 1919, National Parks Conservation Association (NPCA) has been
the leading voice of the American people in protecting and enhancing
our National Park System. On behalf of our 1.6 million members and
supporters nationwide, we write to share our thoughts on select
legislation ahead of a hearing in the Committee on Natural Resources
Subcommittee on Energy and Mineral Resources scheduled for December 12,
2023.

H.R. 5482, the Energy Poverty Prevention and Accountability Act of
2023--NPCA opposes this legislation, specifically Section 5, which is
intended to slow down new regulations in order to continue unfettered
extractive energy development on nearby public lands. While the stated
goal of this bill is to protect frontline communities and those in need
from higher energy costs, nothing in the bill would guarantee that
outcome. In fact, the bill does not take into account the costs and
benefits of renewable energy including wind and solar for these
communities. Renewable energy could have other long term, non-polluting
benefits as well. Instead, this bill is a backdoor attempt to slow down
the ability of the administration to update regulations including
ensuring the taxpayers do not get saddled with the cost of cleaning up
extractive development as they do now. Occasionally, the Interior
Department uses authority granted in law to conserve land instead of
allowing energy development. This bill could allow many places
including important wildlife habitat--that many communities depend on
for food and subsistence--to be threatened with extractive energy
development. We urge you to oppose this bill.

Thank you for considering our views.

Sincerely,

Daniel Hart,
Director, Clean Energy and Climate Resiliency Policy

______

Southern Environmental Law Center

Atlanta, Georgia

December 20, 2023

Hon. Bruce Westerman, Chairman
Hon. Raul Grijalva, Ranking Member
House Natural Resources Committee
1324 Longworth House Office Building
Washington, DC 20515

Re: Southern Environmental Law Center's Opposition to H.R. 5482's
Protections of the Fossil Fuel Industry

Dear Chairman Westerman and Ranking Member Grijalva:

We write in opposition to H.R. 5482 because it would protect fossil
fuel interests at the expense of America's most vulnerable communities.
Energy poverty is a real, urgent issue that merits the attention of
policymakers at every level of government. But protecting the fossil
fuel status quo will not offer everyday Americans the access to
affordable energy and healthy communities that they need and deserve.
1.  The Southern Environmental Law Center is a nonprofit, nonpartisan
defender of the environment and the people who live here.

The Southern Environmental Law Center's mission is to protect the
basic right to clean air, clean water, and a livable climate; to
preserve our region's natural treasures and rich biodiversity; and to
provide a healthy environment for all. SELC is a nonprofit and
nonpartisan defender of the environment which draws upon the expertise
of our lawyers, policy, and issue experts. Our work is rooted in the
South, so we have a keen awareness of the South's history of racism and
the resulting environmental harms faced by communities of color here.
We have stood alongside our Southern neighbors who have faced the
hazardous impacts of fossil fuel pipelines and polluting industries. We
also have a committed, persistent presence in Public Utilities
Commissions across the Southeast to advocate for ratemaking, policies,
and programs that address the disproportionate energy burden borne by
households with low incomes and communities of color.
2.  The Southern Environmental Law Center opposes H.R. 5482.

It is with this deep policy knowledge of the causes of and
solutions to energy burden in the South that we write in opposition to
H.R. 5482. We enthusiastically support Congress' acknowledgement of its
important role in recognizing and mitigating energy burden and working
towards access to affordable energy for all Americans. But addressing
environmental injustice--and specifically, disproportionate energy
burden--cannot happen by further entrenching the fossil fuel status quo
that fostered these inequities, which is what this legislation would
do. This bill creates administrative red tape that would limit the
United States' ability to creatively, competitively, and nimbly meet
the needs of residents with the highest energy burden. And this bill
does not offer any assurances that the studies of energy poverty it
commissions will holistically consider the causes of and alternative
solutions to addressing energy poverty.
First, this bill relies on the false assumption that additional
investment in fossil fuels is an effective energy poverty solution. In
the South, alternatives to fossil fuels--like solar energy--are more
cost-effective energy sources, according to our energy utilities.\1\
Equally important, though, is that H.R. 5482 fails to account for
fossil fuels' outsized contributions to energy inequity due their
price-instability, energy unreliability, climate impacts, and public
health burdens.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ See, e.g., Zach Bright, Southern Co. eyes renewables surge
after Vogtle milestone, ENERGYWIRE (Aug. 4, 2023, 6:44 AM), https://
subscriber.politicopro.com/article/eenews/2023/08/04/southern-co-eyes-
renewables-surge-after-vogtle-milestone-00109701.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Second, this legislation relies on an oversimplistic view of the
causes of and solutions to energy poverty. The residential American's
energy bill is many layers of policies, policy-makers, and regulations
removed from the individual executive actions that may affect the
fossil fuel industry. The crisis of energy poverty is real, and it must
be addressed. But it is a far more complex problem than H.R. 5482
appears to suggest. Energy poverty arises from low incomes, drafty
housing with inefficient appliances, a lack of access to energy
efficiency programs, inequitable billing practices, extremely hot and
cold days, and so on.\2\ Fuel prices are an important factor, like the
rest of the contributing factors, but it is only one of many.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ Sonal Jessel et al., Energy, Poverty, and Health in Climate
Change: A Comprehensive Review of an Emerging Literature, 7 FRONTIERS
IN PUBLIC HEALTH 357, Dec. 12, 2019, https://www.frontiersin.org/
articles/10.3389/fpubh.2019.00357/full.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
a.  H.R. 5482 fails to account for cheaper energy alternatives, and it
offers no assurances that its asymmetrically mandated reports
will consider the price-instability, energy-unreliability,
climate impacts, and public health burdens of fossil fuels, all
which exacerbate energy inequity.

For the reasons explained below, the Southern Environmental Law
Center cannot support federal policies that discourage or delay
investments in our most cost-effective carbon-neutral resources, and
H.R. 5482 does just that by creating new, stringent reporting
requirements for actions that roll back fossil fuel reliance. To truly
evaluate the impact of fossil fuels on energy equity, H.R. 5482 would
have to require studies to explicitly consider the numerous
externalities of fossil fuels that exacerbate energy inequity as well
as potential alternative investments. Commissioning reports of the
impact of a fossil fuel policy without considering the full extent of
the harm those fuels have caused to our most vulnerable communities
does not serve everyday Americans' financial interests.
H.R. 5482 incorporates the erroneous assumption that maintaining
the fossil fuel status quo promotes energy equity. It does not. Not
only are fossil fuels not the most affordable option for energy
production, but their extraction and combustion for energy has resulted
in innumerable harmful impacts on the country's most vulnerable
communities.
i.  Fossil fuels are not the cheapest energy option for households.

Fossil fuels have been eclipsed as the most cost-effective energy
investments due to American ingenuity and market-driven investments in
clean energy technology. In the South, at least, investments in modern,
carbon-neutral energy infrastructure are the more cost-effective path
forward. Southern Company's chief financial officer recently called
solar the ``most viable technology'' for the Southeast.\3\ And Georgia
Power has described solar as ``the most cost-effective energy resource
addition available in Georgia.'' \4\ Similarly, energy efficiency
programs, which reduce the amount of energy demanded from the grid, are
typically the lowest cost energy resource compared to supply-side
investments.\5\ The cheapest electron is that which you do not use. In
fact, ACEEE has compiled data showing that saving energy through
``energy efficiency programs generally can be achieved at one-third to
one-fourth the cost of fossil-fuel based supply-side alternatives.''
\6\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ Bright, supra note 1.
\4\ Georgia Power 2022 Integrated Resource Plan at 13-90, No. 44160
(Ga. P.S.C. 2022), https://www.southernenvironment.org/wp-content/
uploads/2023/10/2022-IRP-Main-Document.pdf.
\5\ Energy Efficiency as a Resource, AMERICAN COUNCIL FOR AN
ENERGY-EFFICIENT ECONOMY, https://www.aceee.org/topic/ee-as-a-utility-
resource.
\6\ Id.

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4447.001

.epsIn stark contrast, Georgia Power, for example, acknowledges
that nearly all of its long-term coal investments are ``no longer in
the best interest of customers.'' \7\ And as described further below,
methane gas prices are unpredictable, and the risk of those price
spikes fall almost entirely on customers.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\7\ Georgia Power 2022 Integrated Resource Plan, supra note 4 at L-
187, https://www.southernenvironment.org/wp-content/uploads/2023/10/
2022-IRP-Main-Document.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
ii.  The volatility of methane gas prices creates a tremendous burden
for price-sensitive homes.

Fossil fuel prices are unpredictable, and because of common rate-
making practices in the United States, customers are the ones who are
on the hook when fossil fuel prices spike.\8\ A cardinal principle of
rate design for Public Utilities Commissions is to avoid rate shocks
``that can especially burden low-income households who would find it
difficult to afford utility services and other necessities.'' \9\ But
unpredictable fuel prices lead to unpredictable bills, and that burden
is felt most severely by households with the tightest budgets.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\8\ Joe Daniel et al., Strategies for Encouraging Good Fuel-Cost
Management: A Handbook for Utility Regulators, RMI (2023) (``Utilities
typically handle fuel costs through fuel adjustment clauses. Under
these policies, 100 percent of the cost of fuel is passed onto
customers. When fuel costs spike, only utility customers take the
hit.'' The report notes that this creates a major problem: ``It creates
no financial incentive for utilities for manage their fuel costs
carefully.'' Although this is the current status quo, there are several
ways regulators can act to relieve fuel-cost burdens across America,
outlined in the report.) (emphasis added).
\9\ Ken Costello, Multiyear Rate Plans and the Public Interest,
NATIONAL REGULATORY RESEARCH INSTITUTE, Report No. 16-08 at 42 (Oct.
2016) https://pubs.naruc.org/pub/FA86999D-D03F-2858-7228-A6353560E5B9.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Methane, or ``natural,'' gas, especially, is notorious for price
shocks, as international events can lead to a sudden and severe spike
in wholesale commodity prices.\10\ In states where those prices are
passed directly to the billpayer, that can cause massive bill shock for
each household. For example, this spring, Georgia Power billed its
customers $2.6 billion in overspending on fuel costs due to spikes in
gas prices.\11\ As a result, the average residential bill increased by
$15.94 a month.\12\ Georgia Power testified to the Georgia Public
Service Commission that the costs would have been even higher if not
for the downward pressure from renewables.\13\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\10\ Ana Maria Jaller-Makarewicz, Seesawing gas market dominated by
fear and volatility, INSTITUTE FOR ENERGY ECONOMICS AND FINANCIAL
ANALYSIS (Sept. 6, 2023), https://ieefa.org/resources/seesawing-gas-
market-dominated-fear-and-volatility (``Gas markets are becoming
riskier--gas and LNG prices are increasingly volatile and greatly
affected by global factors. The uncertainty of future events that could
affect gas supply makes it extremely difficult to predict how the
supply and demand could be balanced and how much prices could escalate
by. As seen in last year's events in Europe, the only way that
importing countries can mitigate that risk is by reducing their
internal consumption.'').
\11\ Georgia Power's Fuel Cost Recovery Application, Direct
Testimony of Sarah P. Adams and Adam D. Houston on behalf of Georgia
Power Company at 4, No. 44902 (Ga. P.S.C., February 28, 2023) (``As of
December 31, 2022, this under-recovered fuel balance was $2.1 billion,
and is projected to be $2.6 billion by May 31, 2023.'').
\12\ Georgia Power Company's Rebuttal Testimony of the Panel of
Sarah P. Adams and Adam D. Houston at 3, No. 44902 (Ga. P.S.C., April
24, 2023).
\13\ Georgia Power's Fuel Cost Recovery Application, Direct
Testimony of Sarah P. Adams and Adam D. Houston on behalf of Georgia
Power Company, supra note 11 at 15 (``Generation from renewable
resources . . . lowers the cost of fuel. . . .'').
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
iii.  Fossil fuel resources were our least reliable resources when the
Southern grid needed them most.

Fossil fuel resources were our least reliable resources when the
Southern grid needed them most. During the January 2014 ``Polar
Vortex,'' fossil fuel failures accounted for the vast majority of the
energy that was unavailable to power lights and heat homes.\14\ Seven
years later, fossil fuels again were not reliable. During Winter Storm
Elliott--the extreme cold weather event occurring between December 21
and 26, 2022--over 127,000 megawatts of generation was unavailable,
representing 18% of the total generation in the Eastern
Interconnection. Southeastern grid operators were forced to undertake
``the largest controlled firm load shed recorded in the history of the
Eastern Interconnection.'' \15\ Eighty-six percent (86%) of the
unplanned lost energy production was due to the failure of fossil fuels
in the cold.\16\ On Christmas Eve alone, 1.6 million homes in that
region lost power.\17\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\14\ NORTH AMERICAN ELECTRIC RELIABILITY CORPORATION, POLAR VORTEX
REVIEW at 13 (Sept. 2014), https://www.nerc.com/pa/rrm/
January%202014%20Polar%20Vortex %20Review/
Polar_Vortex_Review_29_Sept_2014_Final.pdf (``Coal plants accounted for
26 percent of the outages. Natural gas represented over 55 percent of
the total outages during the polar vortex.'').
\15\ FEDERAL ENERGY REGULATORY COMMISSION AND NORTH AMERICAN
ELECTRIC RELIABILITY CORPORATION, INQUIRY INTO BULK-POWER SYSTEM
OPERATIONS DURING DECEMBER 2022 WINTER STORM ELLIOTT: FERC, NERC AND
REGIONAL ENTITY STAFF REPORT at 6 (Oct. 2023).
\16\ Id. at 17 (see Figure 6b, which shows that natural gas units
accounted for 63% of the loss, and coal accounted for 23% of the loss).
\17\ Peter Behr, Bomb cyclone sparks fierce debate over grid
readiness, ENERGYWIRE (Jan. 3, 2023, 6:47 AM), https://www.eenews.net/
articles/bomb-cyclone-sparks-fierce-debate-over-grid-readiness/; Erwin
Seba and Scott Disavino, Storm cuts U.S. oil, gas, power output,
sending prices higher, REUTERS (Dec. 23, 2022, 8:13 PM), https://
www.reuters.com/business/energy/storm-cuts-us-oil-gas-power-output-
sending-prices-higher-2022-12-23/.

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4447.002

.epsiv.  The production and extraction of fossil fuels
disproportionately harm the communities H.R. 5482 is drafted to
protect.
The health burdens of fossil fuels are disproportionately borne by
communities of color and communities with lower incomes.\18\ Fossil
fuel infrastructure, from extraction to combustion, creates dangerous
air pollution that harms both the environment and human health.\19\
Nearly 18 million Americans live within 1 mile of an active oil or gas
well, ``including disproportionately large numbers of communities of
color, people living below the poverty line, older individuals and
young children in many counties with active drilling across the US.''
\20\ Adhtza Dawn Chavez of the Naeva Education Project explains that
methane gas' ``[s]pills, leaks, venting and flaring are taking a toll
on our air, water and health,'' and ``rural communities, tribal
communities, children and the elderly are especially at risk.'' \21\
And recent research has demonstrated that we have been underestimating
the danger of coal: ``Coal-fired power plants killed at least 460,000
Americans during the past two decades, causing twice as many premature
deaths as previously thought. . . .'' \22\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\18\ Lara J. Cushing et al., Historical red-lining is associated
with fossil fuel power plant siting and present-day inequalities in air
pollutant emissions, 8 NATURE ENERGY 52-61 (Jan. 2023).
\19\ Timothy Q. Donaghy et al., Fossil fuel racism in the United
States: How phasing out coal, oil, and gas can protect communities, 100
ENERGY RESEARCH AND SOCIAL SCIENCE at 4 (May 2023) (Figure 3 depicts an
overview of the fossil fuel life cycle, which shows that extraction,
processing, transport, and combustion of fossil fuels all lead to
hazardous air pollutants, criteria air pollutants, and greenhouse
gases).
\20\ U.S. Tightens Limits on Oil and Gas Methane to Address One of
Nation's Largest Pollution Sources, ENVIRONMENTAL DEFENSE FUND (Dec. 2,
2023), https://www.edf.org/media/us-tightens-limits-oil-and-gas-
methane-address-one-nations-largest-pollution-sources#::text=
Environmental%20Defense%20Fund%20research%20on,line%2C%20older%20individ
uals%20 and%20young. Jeremy Proville et al., The demographic
characteristics of populations living near oil and gas wells in the
USA, 44 SPRINGER NATURE POPULATION AND ENVIRONMENT 1-14 (2022).
\21\ Study Explores Demographics of Communities Living Near Oil and
Gas Wells, ENVIRONMENTAL DEFENSE FUND (June 21, 2022), https://
www.edf.org/media/study-explores-demographics-communities-living-near-
oil-and-gas-wells.
\22\ Nina Lakhani, US coal power plants killed at least 460,000
people in past 20 years--report, THE GUARDIAN (Nov. 23, 2023), https://
www.theguardian.com/environment/2023/nov/23/coal-power-plants-deaths-
pollution. Lucas Henneman et al., Mortality risk from United States
coal electricity generation, 382 SCIENCE 941-946 (2023).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
v.  H.R. 5482 entrenches fossil fuels at a time when we should be
accelerating away from them.

As the impacts of climate change become more severe and our
timeline to tackle it more urgent, it is irresponsible to double down
on fossil fuels when utilities should be aggressively pursuing
renewable energy options. Americans are experiencing more frequent and
severe natural disasters, temperature extremes, rising seas, ecosystem
loss, species extinction, food and water insecurity, and economic
disruption, in large part due to the climate change contributions of
fossil fuel extraction and use for energy production.
As noted above, these consequences are disproportionately borne by
communities of color and low-wealth communities. Further, according to
the Fifth National Climate Assessment, the energy system itself, from
supply to delivery to demand, is vulnerable to extreme events.\23\
``Extreme temperatures increase energy demands and stress electricity
operations, leading to outages that disrupt societal services.'' \24\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\23\ U.S. GLOBAL CHANGE RESEARCH PROGRAM, THE FIFTH NATIONAL
CLIMATE ASSESSMENT, Section 5.2: Compounding Factors (2023).
\24\ Id.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Rather than entrench fossil fuel reliance, the U.S. must accelerate
the transition to carbon-free energy. The current rate of declining
greenhouse gas emissions in the United States is not sufficient to meet
our critical commitments and goals.\25\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\25\ Id. at Section 1: Overview (``US net greenhouse gas emissions
remain substantial and would have to decline by more than 6% per year
on average, reaching net-zero emissions around midcentury, to meet
current national mitigation targets and international temperature
goals; by comparison, US greenhouse gas emissions decreased by less
than 1% per year on average between 2005 and 2019.'').
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
b.  H.R. 5482 does not address the complex roots of energy inequity and
energy poverty.

Energy poverty is the product of two factors: depressed incomes and
inflated energy bills. Clearly, the sources of depressed incomes and
poverty, generally, are the result of complex, intertwined
governmental, societal, and individual factors. Less commonly
understood, however, is the tremendous complexity of electricity bills.
The number at the bottom of a residential electric bill is the
product of energy usage, energy costs, and many layers of decision-
making about how to allocate the costs of energy, generally, among
ratepayers. Fossil fuel prices are important, but they cannot be viewed
in isolation.
Georgia Power, for example, proudly repeats that it offers
customers some of the lowest energy rates (meaning, cost per unit of
energy used) in the country. And yet, individuals do not pay energy
rates--they pay bills. And residential Georgia Power customers pay some
of the highest bills in the country.
Georgia's high bills (despite lower-than-average energy rates) can
be explained in part by high energy usage in the increasingly hot
South, and they are also a product of ratemaking policies. Energy usage
is often driven by factors like climate, home-efficiency, and
lifestyle. Ratemaking policies can further drive-up energy bills in
ways that are beyond a household's control, like by requiring customers
to pay for outsized monopoly utility profits or by incorporating large
fixed costs. For example, approximately 20% of the average bill paid by
Georgia Power's residential electricity customers goes toward Georgia
Power's profit margin (return on equity) and debt financing that has
been approved by the Georgia Public Service Commission.\26\ And there
are significant segments of the bill (nearly $18/month) that cannot be
avoided by reducing energy usage, but instead are effectively ``fixed
charges'' for items like coal ash clean up, large nuclear construction
costs, and shared electricity infrastructure like transformers and
overhead lines.\27\ There are also policies embedded in rate making
that allow Georgia Power to make risky investments in volatile fuel
sources (like methane gas) and not pay a penny more if gas prices
spike; instead, the Georgia Public Service Commission allows Georgia
Power to charge its customers for those unpredictable prices.\28\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\26\ Direct Testimony of Mark E. Ellis on behalf of Georgia
Interfaith Power & Light at 81, No. 44280 (Ga. P.S.C. Oct. 20, 2022)
(``Based on analysis of Georgia Power's general rate case filings, its
proposed combined rate of return for both debt and equity, the latter
grossed up for taxes, accounts for more than 25% of its revenue
requirement.''). A Southern Environmental Law Center energy consultant
determined that 25% of revenue requirement equates to approximately 20%
of the total bill paid by customers.
\27\ See, e.g., Direct Testimony of Justin Barnes on behalf of
Georgia Interfaith Power & Light at 14, No. 44280 (Ga. P.S.C. Oct. 20,
2022).
\28\ See Joe Daniel et al., supra note 8.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The complexity of energy poverty and energy bills is well
illustrated by a 2020 literature review for the Oak Ridge National
Laboratory, which found that there are five primary categories of
``causes and correlates'' of high energy burden: location and
geography, housing characteristics, socio-economic situations, energy
prices and policies, and behavioral factors.\29\ The price of energy is
only one factor in a complex web of policies and practices that result
in energy burden, as illustrated in Table 2.1, copied below. And the
focus of H.R. 5482, how any single federal policy or practice may
impact the price of residential fuel, is even far more removed.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\29\ Low-Income Energy Affordability: Conclusions from a Literature
Review, ORNL-TM-2019-1150 (Mar. 2020), available at https://
info.ornl.gov/sites/publications/Files/Pub124723.pdf

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4447.003

.epsFurthermore, this same study provides a menu of illustrative
programs and policies that directly target the problem of high energy
bills, as seen in Table 3.1, copied below. And ultimately, this study
acknowledges that ``[a] coordinated approach to home energy, health,
safety, and housing that integrates programs across geographies could
reduce low-income energy burden while delivering numerous other
benefits to both current and future generations.'' \30\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\30\ Id. at 59.

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4447.004

.epsSo, while SELC applauds the Committee's recognition of the real
impacts of energy poverty and energy burden on everyday Americans, we
urge Congress to consider the entire scope of causes of this issue,
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
which can then inform meaningful options for relief.

c.  Conclusion.

H.R. 5482 does not require consideration of the complexity of
factors impacting energy burden, and instead seeks to promote an
industry--fossil fuels--that has contributed significantly to energy
inequity across the South. For these reasons, the Southern
Environmental Law Center writes in opposition to H.R. 5482.

Jennifer Whitfield,           Bob Sherrier,
Senior Attorney               Staff Attorney

______

The Wilderness Society (TWS)

December 11, 2023

Hon. Peter Stauber, Chairman
Hon. Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez, Ranking Member
House Natural Resources Committee
Energy and Mineral Resources Subcommittee
1324 Longworth House Office Building
Washington, DC 20515

Chairman Stauber, Ranking Member Ocasio-Cortez, and members of the
House Natural Resources Committee's Subcommittee on Energy and Mineral
Resources:

On behalf of our more than one million members and supporters, The
Wilderness Society (TWS) writes to express our views on the bills
listed below, which are scheduled to be heard by the House Natural
Resources Committee's Energy and Mineral Resources Subcommittee on
December 12, 2023.
H.R. 5482, the Energy Poverty Prevention and Accountability Act

H.R. 5482 would subject all federal and state laws, bills, and
regulatory actions to additional reviews, audits, and reporting
requirements focusing exclusively on one aspect of the clean energy
transition: energy prices. The legislation fails to account for the
public health improvements, ecosystem health, fair returns for
taxpayers for the fossil fuel industry's use of shared public
resources, economic diversification, emissions reduction, or any other
positive externality that may arise from a legislative or regulatory
action.
Specifically, Section 2 of the bill includes senses of Congress
that Americans should have access to affordable, reliable energy, that
energy costs should be mitigated, and that federal policies should not
increase energy costs for ``at-risk communities.'' While these are
laudable goals, the legislation--again--places a primacy on
affordability and fails to account for other critical considerations
that may necessitate regulatory or legislative action.
Section 3 includes a series of definitions for ``at-risk
communities,'' ``energy poverty,'' what constitutes an ``energy rule''
under the purview of the Act, ``Federal land,'' and several other terms
that are found throughout United States Code.
Section 4 requires the Government Accountability Office and the
Office of Management and Budget (OMB) to jointly author a report on
energy actions taken by states and the federal government over the
prior year that also analyzes prospective regulatory actions. It would
also examine which ``at-risk communities'' are experiencing ``energy
poverty'', why, and how to mitigate those concerns, and recommendations
for action that follow a very narrow and overly prescriptive set of
parameters, including ``increasing energy production on Federal
lands.'' The prescriptiveness of these reports predetermines a set
outcome--an outcome that favors unscrupulous oil, gas, and coal leasing
and extraction.
Section 5 directs the Congressional Budget Office to include a cost
estimate on consumer energy price increases for each bill that could
result in an energy-related regulatory action. It also requires the
Secretary of the Interior to author a publicly available report to
Congress on the impacts on jobs and energy prices of any mineral
withdrawal or moratorium, pause, or delay on mineral leasing or
drilling on federal public lands. OMB would be required to publish a
statement on the webpage of every federal regulatory action certifying
that ``the rule or guidance will not result in energy poverty in at-
risk communities.'' Again, the bill ensures via overly prescriptive
parameters that these estimates and reports favor leasing, drilling,
and mining above all else.
Section 6 directs OMB to issue a rule within 90 days to implement
the Act.
Overall, the bill intends to essentially prohibit agencies from
taking any action beyond wholesale, unencumbered approval of oil, gas,
and coal lease sales, fossil fuel permit issuances, and other fossil
fuel development; tip the scales heavily in favor of oil, gas, and coal
production; burden an administration if it favors anything other than
fossil fuels; and erects several bureaucratic reporting hurdles
agencies must clear in order to promulgate any energy regulation beyond
a broken status quo that simply allows more and more oil, gas, and coal
production. By taking aim at state renewable portfolio standards, it
also attempts to abort any transition from fossil fuels to renewable
energy.
For these reasons, The Wilderness Society strongly opposes H.R.
5482, and urges the subcommittee not to advance it.
H.R. 6474, To amend the Energy Policy Act of 2005 to expedite
geothermal exploration and development in previously studied or
developed areas

This legislation would amend the Energy Policy Act of 2005 to add
certain geothermal exploration and development activities to an
existing categorical exclusion for oil and gas activities, putting
geothermal on par with oil and gas in certain narrow circumstances.
This would mean that the following geothermal activities would not be
subject to National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA) analysis:

Individual surface disturbances less than 5 acres where
the total surface disturbance under the lease is 150 acres
or less;

Drilling a geothermal well at a site where drilling for
oil, gas, or geothermal occurred within the last 5 years;

Drilling a geothermal well within a developed field where
either a resource management plan or NEPA document that was
approved within the last 5 years previously analyzed such
drilling as a reasonably foreseeable activity;

Placing a pipeline within a right-of-way that was approved
within the last 5 years; or

Maintaining a minor activity, but not the construction or
major renovation of a building or facility.

Public input and NEPA analyses are critical components of effective
decision-making. That said, The Wilderness Society supports the
renewable energy build-out, including expanding geothermal energy--and
we do not believe that renewable energy activities should be held to a
higher standard than oil and gas activities with a similar level of
surface disturbance. Enlarging the scope of an existing categorical
exclusion that currently only applies to a limited set of oil and gas
activities to also apply to the same activities related to geothermal
is laudable and is in service of the goal of permitting additional
clean, renewable energy on federal public lands.
While we oppose the underlying categorical exclusion, we believe
that as long as it exists in law for oil and gas it should also apply
to geothermal activities.
The Wilderness Society supports H.R. 6474 and urges members of the
subcommittee to advance it.
H.R. 6481, To amend the Mineral Leasing Act to require the Secretary of
the Interior to reimburse the fee for an expression of interest
if the expression of interest becomes inactive, and for other
purposes.

This legislation concerns the $5 per-acre fee, enacted by the
Inflation Reduction Act, that oil and gas operators must now pay when
nominating acres of federal public land for oil and gas leasing--also
referred to as the ``expression of interest fee'' (or ``EOI fee''). The
bill strikes ``nonrefundable'' from the existing statue, inserts
language clarifying that nominations are ``active'' for five years, and
stipulates that fees shall be refunded should a nomination become
inactive--ostensibly once five years has elapsed and the Bureau of Land
Management has not offered the acreage in question for lease.
The expression of interest fee was included in the IRA to reduce
speculation and to halt frivolous nominations. Between 2009 and 2019,
for instance, oil and gas speculators nominated over 60 million acres
in Nevada--with just over 5% of that total auctioned for lease, with
only a miniscule percentage of that subset yielding any paying
quantities.
Rampant abuses of the system like this unfortunate example strain
limited Bureau of Land Management resources. The EOI fee, as enacted by
the IRA, should remain fully nonrefundable to prevent these abuses.
Additionally, receipts from the EOI fee are split between the state
and federal government. Making this fee refundable pending future
agency action may impact both state and federal revenues.
The Wilderness Society opposes this legislation and urges members
of the subcommittee not to advance it.

Thank you for considering our views.

Sincerely,

Lydia Weiss,
Senior Director, Government Relations

[all]
