- OVERSIGHT HEARING ON EXAMINING GAO'S FINDINGS TO ADDRESS DATA GAPS AND IMPROVE DATA COLLECTION IN THE TERRITORIES

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

EXAMINING GAO'S FINDINGS TO
ADDRESS DATA GAPS AND IMPROVE
DATA COLLECTION IN THE
TERRITORIES

=======================================================================

OVERSIGHT HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON INDIAN AND INSULAR AFFAIRS

of the

COMMITTEE ON NATURAL RESOURCES
U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

Thursday, June 13, 2024

__________

Serial No. 118-129

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Natural Resources

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.govinfo.gov
or
Committee address: http://naturalresources.house.gov

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
55-973 PDF                  WASHINGTON : 2024

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------
COMMITTEE ON NATURAL RESOURCES

BRUCE WESTERMAN, AR, Chairman
DOUG LAMBORN, CO, Vice Chairman
RAUL M. GRIJALVA, AZ, Ranking Member

Doug Lamborn, CO Grace F. Napolitano, CA
Robert J. Wittman, VA Gregorio Kilili Camacho Sablan,
Tom McClintock, CA     CNMI
Paul Gosar, AZ Jared Huffman, CA
Garret Graves, LA Ruben Gallego, AZ
Aumua Amata C. Radewagen, AS Joe Neguse, CO
Doug LaMalfa, CA Mike Levin, CA
Daniel Webster, FL Katie Porter, CA
Jenniffer Gonzalez-Colon, PR Teresa Leger Fernandez, NM
Russ Fulcher, ID Melanie A. Stansbury, NM
Pete Stauber, MN Mary Sattler Peltola, AK
John R. Curtis, UT Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez, NY
Tom Tiffany, WI Kevin Mullin, CA
Jerry Carl, AL Val T. Hoyle, OR
Matt Rosendale, MT Sydney Kamlager-Dove, CA
Lauren Boebert, CO Seth Magaziner, RI
Cliff Bentz, OR Nydia M. Velazquez, NY
Jen Kiggans, VA Ed Case, HI
Jim Moylan, GU Debbie Dingell, MI
Wesley P. Hunt, TX Susie Lee, NV
Mike Collins, GA
Anna Paulina Luna, FL
John Duarte, CA
Harriet M. Hageman, WY

Vivian Moeglein, Staff Director
Tom Connally, Chief Counsel
Lora Snyder, Democratic Staff Director
http://naturalresources.house.gov
------

SUBCOMMITTEE ON INDIAN AND INSULAR AFFAIRS

HARRIET M. HAGEMAN, WY, Chair

JENNIFFER GONZALEZ-COLON, PR, Vice Chair

TERESA LEGER FERNANDEZ, NM, Ranking Member

Aumua Amata C. Radewagen, AS         Gregorio Kilili Camacho Sablan,
Doug LaMalfa, CA                         CNMI
Jenniffer Gonzalez-Colon, PR         Ruben Gallego, AZ
Jerry Carl, AL                       Nydia M. Velazquez, NY
Jim Moylan, GU                       Ed Case, HI
Bruce Westerman, AR, ex officio      Raul M. Grijalva, AZ, ex officio

-----------

CONTENTS

----------
Page

Hearing held on Thursday, June 13, 2024..........................     1

Statement of Members:

Hageman, Hon. Harriet M., a Representative in Congress from
the State of Wyoming.......................................     1

Leger Fernandez, Hon. Teresa, a Representative in Congress
from the State of New Mexico...............................     3

Statement of Witnesses:

Braybrooks, Melissa, Economist, Office of Insular Affairs,
U.S. Department of the Interior, Washington, DC............     5
Prepared statement of....................................     6
Questions submitted for the record.......................     9

Love-Grayer, Latesha, Director, International Affairs and
Trade, U.S. Government Accountability Office, Washington,
DC.........................................................    10
Prepared statement of....................................    11
Questions submitted for the record.......................    18

Leon Guerrero, Lola, Director, Bureau of Statistics and
Plans, Government of Guam, Hagatna, Guam...................    20
Prepared statement of....................................    22
Questions submitted for the record.......................    28

Orenstein-Cardona, Jacobo, Executive Assistant, Puerto Rico
Institute of Statistics, Government of Puerto Rico, San
Juan, Puerto Rico..........................................    28
Prepared statement of....................................    30
Questions submitted for the record.......................    33

Levin, Michael, Managing Partner, PacificWeb LLC, Honolulu,
Hawaii.....................................................    34
Prepared statement of....................................    36
Questions submitted for the record.......................    40

OVERSIGHT HEARING ON EXAMINING GAO'S FINDINGS TO ADDRESS DATA GAPS AND
IMPROVE DATA COLLECTION IN THE TERRITORIES

----------

Thursday, June 13, 2024

U.S. House of Representatives

Subcommittee on Indian and Insular Affairs

Committee on Natural Resources

Washington, DC

----------

The Subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 11:05 a.m., in
Room 1324, Longworth House Office Building, Hon. Harriet M.
Hageman [Chairwoman of the Subcommittee] presiding.
Present: Representatives Hageman, LaMalfa, Moylan,
Westerman; Leger Fernandez, Sablan, and Velazquez.

Ms. Hageman. The Subcommittee on Indian and Insular Affairs
will come to order.
Without objection, the Chair is authorized to declare a
recess of the Subcommittee at any time.
The Subcommittee is meeting today to hear testimony on
examining GAO's findings to address data gaps and improve data
collection in the territories.
Under Committee Rule 4(f), any oral opening statements at
hearings are limited to the Chairman and the Ranking Minority
Member. I, therefore, ask unanimous consent that all other
Members' opening statements be made part of the hearing record
if they are submitted in accordance with Committee Rule 3(o).
Without objection, so ordered.
I will now recognize myself for an opening statement.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. HARRIET M. HAGEMAN, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF WYOMING

Ms. Hageman. Today's hearing is entitled, ``Examining GAO's
Findings to Address Data Gaps and Improve Data Collection in
the Territories.''
On May 9, 2024, the Government Accountability Office
published a report on gaps in Federal data for the five U.S.
territories: American Samoa, Guam, Northern Mariana Islands,
Puerto Rico, and the U.S. Virgin Islands. The GAO found that
the U.S. Federal statistical products often contain data gaps
for the territories.
The U.S. territories are often excluded from or not fully
included in Federal statistical data products. Even in
instances where the U.S. territories are included in these
products, there may be disparities in the timeliness and in the
measurement of data quality when compared to the 50 U.S. states
and the District of Columbia.
Data impacts every facet of our life, from economic
development to national security. Statistics provide analytics
for planning, implementing, and assessing policy.
The U.S. Federal Statistical System is a decentralized
system with over 100 agencies, organizational units, and
programs. The Federal Statistical System is led by the Chief
Statistician of the United States within the Office of
Management and Budget and the Interagency Council on
Statistical Policy. The chief statistician also chairs the
Interagency Council on Statistical Policy.
Data gaps make it challenging to efficiently plan and
implement policy. Inaccurate or unavailable data increases the
risk of government waste. It also creates barriers for local
communities from accessing critical Federal programs and
opportunities. Quality and robust data, on the other hand,
enables policymakers in the government to carry out targeted
programs and ensure that laws are carried out in the manner
that they were intended.
Furthermore, it ensures that the local communities are
represented when assessing the distribution of Federal
resources. This is especially true for the U.S. territories, as
they have unique needs due to their geographic location. Many
of the territories rely heavily on U.S. Federal assistance,
including access to Federal programs and grants.
The U.S. territories are also highly prone to severe
weather disasters that often require population and employment
statistics to support recovery efforts. As many of the
territorial governments do not have the capacity and
infrastructure to collect data themselves, they have no choice
but to rely upon Federal data, even if it may be severely
outdated. The data gaps have restricted territory government
operations and continue to present unnecessary barriers to
economic growth.
As the U.S. territories face greater economic challenges
compared to the continental United States, it becomes ever more
important to have access to quality data. Today, we will hear
from agency officials, experts, and from the territories
themselves to examine this issue closely and to fully
understand what must be done to close this data gap.
The U.S. territories deserve and need quality data to
ensure that Federal and territorial policymakers have accurate
information to best implement strategies for the benefit of
their local communities. Finding ways to address the data gaps
for the territories will not only positively benefit our fellow
Americans in the U.S. territories, but also helps save U.S.
taxpayer dollars.
It would have been helpful to have the Chief Statistician
of the United States here today to discuss what steps it is
taking to ensure the principal statistical agencies taking to
improve data collection in the U.S. territories since the
publication of the GAO report. In its report, the GAO had
specific recommendations for the Chief Statistician to develop
better coordinated approaches to address data gaps in the U.S.
territories. I am deeply troubled that the Office of Management
and Budget lacked the capacity to prepare for this hearing. I
am especially troubled, when considering the fact that they
play a primary role in leading and coordinating the U.S.
Federal Statistical System.
This topic is of bipartisan interest to this Committee, and
of great importance to the U.S. territories. It is my sincere
hope that their absence from this hearing does not reflect a
lack of interest in this critical issue.
I would like to thank our witnesses who are with us today
to discuss the findings of the GAO report, and I look forward
to continuing this conversation about addressing the data gaps
in the territories.

The Chair now recognizes the Ranking Minority Member for a
statement.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. TERESA LEGER FERNANDEZ, A REPRESENTATIVE
IN CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF NEW MEXICO

Ms. Leger Fernandez. Thank you, Madam Chair, for working
with us and holding this important hearing to address the need
for timely data collection in the insular areas, a long-
standing concern, I know, of the islands.
And thank you so very much for traveling to be with us to
discuss these issues.
As we have heard, the lack of available data has presented
many obstacles to the islands and making decisions about their
communities and economies. If we don't have the information, we
cannot make informed decisions. It is a very simple
proposition. Incomplete and inaccurate population, economic,
labor force, and agricultural data leads to underfunding and
under-representation of the territories in certain Federal
programs.
For example, the Georgetown Law Center on Poverty and
Inequality published an issue brief in December 2022
highlighting how insufficient data about the territories
prevents policymakers from making informed decisions for
residents on issues from education, health care, and emergency
preparedness, issues that are key for your future prosperity
and survivability in a changing climate.
I want to commend GAO and, in particular, the authors of
the report we are discussing today for their work to find
inconsistent data collection methods for U.S. territories
across Federal agencies, and how that impacts the territories.
For example, in American Samoa, farmers may not be eligible
for certain farm support programs due to issues with the
address list utilized by the Census of Agriculture.
A lack of vital statistics prevents American Samoa from
participating in the Center for Disease Control and
Prevention's Vital Statistics Cooperatives program, which
provides funds in exchange for records of births and deaths.
For the Northern Mariana Islands, territorial officials
lack recurring economic indicators like employment statistics
from BLS. As a result, local officials don't have access to
updated data, and must collect it themselves.
In Guam, the area census lacks reportable data for some of
your smaller communities within the territory. As a result,
those communities are excluded from data tools like the Social
Vulnerability Index, which is used to identify groups that need
the extra support such as emergency preparedness funding for
natural disasters.
In the U.S. Virgin Islands, local officials struggle to
assess the effectiveness of COVID-19 resilience and recovery
efforts due to the Virgin Islands' exclusion in the Census
Bureau's Population Survey and Household Pulse Survey.
In Puerto Rico, it is not included in the current
population survey, and therefore lacks access to important
labor force information, including data related to veterans and
people with disabilities. Puerto Rico is also excluded from the
Census Bureau's Census of Governments, limiting available
information on government expenditures.
To address this problem, Ranking Member Raul Grijalva and
the five territorial delegates introduced H.R. 1400, the
bipartisan Territorial Statistics Collection Equity Act. I am
always pleased that this Committee is as bipartisan as it is in
terms of finding solutions and working together for the issues
that are presented here.
This bill requires the Office of Management and Budget to
develop and implement a plan for Federal agencies to collect
and publish statistics regarding the U.S. territories in the
same manner as statistics are collected and reported for the
states, also a simple proposition. I look forward to working
with you, Madam Chair, and the other members of the
Subcommittee to move this bipartisan bill in a similar
bipartisan manner to the way today's hearing was developed,
which, once again, thank you very much for that.
Thank you for yielding to me, and I look forward to hearing
from our witnesses. I do apologize we have conflicting hearings
today, so I am going to be popping in and out.
With that, I yield back.

Ms. Hageman. Thank you. I will now introduce our witnesses.
Ms. Melissa Braybrooks, Economist, Office of Insular and
International Affairs, U.S. Department of the Interior,
Washington, DC; Ms. Latesha Love-Grayer, Director,
International Affairs and Trade, U.S. Government Accountability
Office, Washington, DC; Ms. Lola Leon Guerrero, Director,
Bureau of Statistics and Plans, Government of Guam, Hagatna,
Guam; Mr. Jacobo--did I get that right?
Mr. Orenstein-Cardona. Yes, that is perfect.
[Laughter.]
Ms. Hageman. Not perfect. Close enough, right? Thank you.
Jacobo Orenstein-Cardona, Executive Assistant, Puerto Rico
Institute of Statistics, Government of Puerto Rico, San Juan,
Puerto Rico; and Dr. Michael Levin, Managing Partner,
PacificWeb LLC, Honolulu, Hawaii.
Let me remind the witnesses that under Committee Rules,
they must limit their oral statements to 5 minutes, but their
entire statement will appear in the hearing record.
To begin your testimony, please press the ``talk'' button
on the microphone.
And we use timing lights. When you begin, the light will
turn green. When you have 1 minute left, the light will turn
yellow. And at the end of your 5 minutes, the light will turn
red, and I will ask you to please complete your statement.
I will also allow all witnesses on the panel to testify
before Member questioning.
The Chair now recognizes Ms. Braybrooks for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF MELISSA BRAYBROOKS, ECONOMIST, OFFICE OF INSULAR
AFFAIRS, U.S. DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR, WASHINGTON, DC

Ms. Braybrooks. Thank you, Chair Hageman, Ranking Member
Leger Fernandez, and other distinguished members of the
Subcommittee. I am the Economist of the Office of Insular
Affairs. It is an honor to be before you today as a
representative of Assistant Secretary Cantor in the U.S.
Department of the Interior.
The Committee has my full testimony, but I would like to
highlight some of the most important issues related to the data
needs in the U.S. territories.
The existing gaps in territorial data create and perpetuate
inequities in how fellow Americans are served by our
policymakers and programs, and places undue burden on
territorial resources to solve. Accounting for all American
communities in the collection and publication of Federal
statistics is the foundation for being able to meet the
public's needs and priorities, inform solutions, and measure
performance of Federal programs and funding efficiently and
effectively.
Addressing Federal data gaps for U.S. territories is long
overdue. Having recently spent several weeks in the U.S.
territories discussing statistics, I would be remiss not to
convey some of the impacts from these gaps that were shared
with me.
Insufficient data affects the private sector's ability to
leverage outside investment and understand labor needs, the
government's ability to make informed policy decisions such as
forecasting revenue for budget purposes and the daily lives of
Americans, be it minimum wage determinants or the ability to
participate in mitigation of natural disaster risks. In a world
increasingly driven by data, the U.S. territories and the
Americans that live there are at risk of being left behind.
GAO's recent report recognizes the Federal Government's
historically fragmented approach to territorial data and
statistics. As we evaluate GAO's recommendation and look to
work with our Federal partners to address the root issues in a
meaningful way, in order to ensure that the barriers don't
serve as justifications for the gaps, OIA, or the Office of
Insular Affairs, suggests that the Federal community consider
the following.
First, the goal should be to identify the priority data
needs for the U.S. territories, and determine best options for
achieving, not approach this issue assuming that what works for
states is the best fit model for the U.S. territories.
Second, understanding of exclusion as a symptom of
statutory, administrative, or agency-level decisions is
paramount. Without the context of why the gap exists, the how
to solve is very challenging.
Third, statistics are only as good as the source data that
goes into it. The statistical discussion must be coupled with a
focus on investment in territorial capacity and statistical
infrastructure.
Fourth, the Office of Insular Affairs' limited pool of
technical assistance funds is not sustainable or sufficient for
providing the data necessary to help inform decisions and
support fiscal responsibility. The development of timely,
robust territorial statistics is best met when the statistical
agencies are working in equal partnership with organizations
that can represent, advocate, and guide the unique territorial
needs.
Lastly, the Federal investment for territorial statistics
should not be determined based on the size of these
geographies. Rather, the Federal investment should take into
consideration the integral role of the individuals, strategic
locations, and cultural and ecological diversity that the U.S.
territories contribute to the United States.
The Office of Insular Affairs is committed to serve and
help meet the priority needs of the people living in the U.S.
territories. However, we are not positioned to solve the data
problem alone, nor can the territories continue to carry the
burden of addressing the gaps. As information and statistics
play an ever more important role in informing evidence-based
decisions on policy and funding resources, we must continue to
actively participate in addressing these pervasive U.S.
territorial data gaps in a meaningful way. If we do not, we
risk perpetuating known territorial inequities, distorting
decisions based on the limited statistics that are available,
and further marginalizing communities that are important to the
United States and are already too often overlooked.
The Office of Insular Affairs appreciates the interest in
this issue and looks forward to continuing to be an active part
of the solution. Members of the Subcommittee, it is a pleasure
to appear before you today, and I thank you for your time.

[The prepared statement of Ms. Braybrooks follows:]
Prepared Statement of Melissa Braybrooks, Economist, Office of Insular
Affairs, U.S. Department of the Interior

Chair Hageman, Ranking Member Leger Fernandez, and members of the
Subcommittee on Indian and Insular Affairs, thank you for the
opportunity to testify on the need for a coordinated Federal approach
to address data gaps for U.S. territories. I am the economist of the
Office of Insular Affairs (OIA) at the U.S. Department of the Interior
(Department). OIA carries out the Secretary of the Interior's
responsibilities for administering the Federal government's
relationship with the territories of American Samoa, the Commonwealth
of the Northern Mariana Islands (CNMI), Guam, and the United States
Virgin Islands (USVI) (collectively, the territories).
It is important to have adequate data for the territories because
the existing data gaps that the U.S. territories experience create, and
perpetuate, inequities in how these Americans are served by our
policymakers and programs, and place undue burden on the U.S.
territories to solve these information needs. Accounting for all
American communities in the collection and publication of Federal
statistics is the foundation for being able to meet the public's needs
and priorities, inform solutions, and measure performance of Federal
programs and activities efficiently and effectively. Addressing Federal
data gaps for U.S. territories is long overdue.
Nonetheless, historically there has been a lack of data for the
territories due to variety of reasons. For example, the unique legal
status of these territories, i.e., not being defined as states, has
resulted in uneven treatment for how the U.S. makes policy and creates
legal or administrative frameworks for Federal programs and activities,
including the production of national statistics. Additionally, the
territories' remote geographies can impact scope as a result of travel
costs, time zone differences, and the lack of awareness of the U.S.
territories. The result has been a piecemeal approach at the Federal
level, which has resulted in data gaps in Federal statistics.
These data gaps negatively impact the territories. Insufficient
data affects the private sector's ability to leverage outside
investment and understand labor needs and the government's ability to
make informed policy decisions, like forecasting revenue for budget
purposes. The daily lives of Americans in the territories are also
negatively impacted--be it the ability to identify and participate in
mitigation of natural disaster risks or minimum wage determinates. It
is important to the territories and those living there to address these
issues, and OIA welcomes all efforts to close persistent data gaps in a
meaningful way.
GAO's Report on the Current Statistical Landscape

In a world increasingly driven by data, the U.S. territories and
the Americans that live there are at risk of being left behind. The
U.S. Government Accountability Office (GAO) recently recognized the
inequities in data and statistics that the U.S. territories face in a
report titled, U.S. Territories: Coordinated Federal Approach Needed to
Better Address Data Gaps.\1\ In order to address a problem, it is often
helpful to first identify its scope and causes.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ https://www.gao.gov/assets/gao-24-106574.pdf
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The GAO report identifies the information gaps and structural
characteristics that, to date, have served as barriers to the inclusion
of the U.S. territories in Federal statistics. To address this issue,
the GAO recommends a coordinated, government-wide approach to examine
the costs, benefits, and feasibility of including territories in
statistical products. OIA looks forward to working with our Federal
partners to evaluate GAO's recommendation, which would assess the
Federal government's historically fragmented approach to U.S.
territorial statistics that has led to an overburden on the territorial
resources, duplication of efforts, and critical statistical gaps.
As we evaluate GAO's recommendation and look to address this issue
of gaps in territorial data with our Federal partners, consideration
should be given to the fact that certain barriers--such as lack of
local capacity--have persistently been used as the justification for
these gaps and as justification for failing to address the root issues.
Rather, instead of addressing the root issues, this misunderstanding of
these island communities often leads federal agencies to try to force
island territorial communities into continental State models--in other
words, square pegs into round holes.

To identify long-term solutions to address these historic data
inequities, OIA suggests that other factors for consideration include:

1.  Unique Territorial Needs Compared to Existing State Models: The
GAO report cites several examples of challenges that
statistical agencies face when trying to include the U.S.
territories into existing products, however, these examples
largely assume the state methodology to be the goal. The
territories possess fundamentally unique attributes driven
by culture, the ability of local capacity to create
information, and the uniqueness of their economies. These
factors require an open-minded approach that borrows from
known methodologies but also meets the unique situations of
the U.S. territories. Possible approaches include looking
beyond existing U.S. methodologies to borrow from
successful international models already in use across the
Pacific and the Caribbean islands, exploring hybrid
surveys, and recognizing the role of collaboration with
entities outside of the Federal statistical community.

2.  Statutory, Administrative, and Agency-level Barriers of
Inclusion: Currently, there is no comprehensive
understanding for ``why'' the U.S. territories are excluded
from most Federal statistics. Without the context of the
``why'', the ``how to solve'' becomes very challenging.

Identifying if the territorial exclusion from each key
statistical product is a result of statute, administrative
(regulatory), or other (e.g., agency-level scope decisions,
funding, etc.) will enable us to identify what must be done
to remedy the inequity.

3.  Local Capacity to Overcome Data Collection Challenges: Statistics
are only as good as the information that goes into them. As
such, the need for territorial statistics cannot be thought
of as a single investment, but rather must be coupled with
an evaluation of source data needs and investment in local
capacity. Such examples include guidance and resources to
support electronic infrastructure, survey frames, U.S.
standards and classification schemes, and capacity and
training. Local capacity should not be justification for
U.S. territorial exclusion.

4.  Reliance on OIA Technical Assistance: To date, territorial gaps
in Federal statistics have been supplemented by technical
assistance funding from OIA (e.g., territorial CPI, GDP,
Household Income and Expenditure Survey, Visitor surveys,
Prevailing Wage Survey). Using OIA technical assistance as
the Federal strategy for supporting territorial statistics
is not sustainable or sufficient. The reliance on OIA
technical assistance to address the statistical needs of
the territories places the burden on the territories to
solve this data gap for themselves and diminishes the
ability to focus on the intended purpose of addressing
priority areas to foster development.

5.  Federal and Territorial Cooperation: Including entities that can
represent, advocate, and guide the unique territorial needs
in the discussion regarding how to address this issue would
be helpful. In doing so, expertise on statistics would be
merged with authorities who can represent and meet the
unique territorial needs where they currently are. The
ideal execution of this partnership will require
statistical and territorial support entities to be equal
partners--allowing for open sharing of information and
methods.

6.  Other Considerations:

a.  Best Practices for Navigating Existing Data Gaps Today:
The recommendations focus on a coordinated evaluation for
addressing data gaps in the future. However, OIA believes it is
necessary to identify near- and medium-term guidance and
coordination around the realities of the available science.
Coordinated guidance and best practices (e.g., treatment of
null data, use of proxy indicators, etc.) ensures that data
producers and users today do not allow existing gaps to
inadvertently perpetuate inequalities.

b.  Puerto Rico's Statistical Needs May Differ from the Other
U.S. Territories: Puerto Rico is included in more Federal
statistics and has experienced more coordinated efforts to
target the territories' data needs. Although there are several
data gaps that still need to be addressed for Puerto Rico, the
investment in the territory's statistical capacity and
inclusion in Federal statistics to date is different than that
of American Samoa, the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana
Islands, Guam, and the U.S. Virgin Islands. As such, Puerto
Rico's next steps may differ from that of the other U.S.
territories.

c.  The Value of the U.S. Territories is Beyond Their Size:
The population and land area of the territories should not be
used as a basis for determining Federal investment in
statistics. The value of the U.S. territories should capture
the comprehensive contributions that the U.S. territories
provide to the United States (e.g., economic contributions from
individuals, geographic location (defense), cultural diversity,
etc.).

Conclusion

OIA, in its role to serve and meet the needs of the people living
in the U.S. territories, has been, and continues to be, committed to
addressing the priority data needs that can help inform the decisions
of the territorial and Federal stakeholders. OIA uses its limited
resources to do so, but the Department is not positioned to solve this
problem by itself, nor can the territories continue to carry the burden
of addressing the gaps.
As information and statistics play an ever more important role in
identifying trends, measuring performance, and informing evidence-based
decisions on policy and resources, we must continue to actively
participate in addressing these U.S. territorial data gaps. If we do
not, we perpetuate known territorial inequities, distorting policy
decisions based on an overfocus on the slim data that does exist, and
further marginalize communities already too often overlooked.
OIA appreciates the interest in this issue and looks forward to
continuing to be an active part of the solution.
Chair Hageman, Ranking Member Leger Fernandez, it is a pleasure to
appear before your Subcommittee today. Thank you for your time.

______

Questions Submitted for the Record to Ms. Melissa Braybrooks,
Economist, Office of Insular Affairs, U.S. Department of the Interior

Ms. Braybrooks did not submit responses to the Committee by the
appropriate deadline for inclusion in the printed record.

Questions Submitted by Representative Westerman

Question 1. What is the Office of Insular Affair's assessment of
each U.S. territory's capability to do its own data work and partner
with federal statistical agencies?

Question 2. Please clarify the Office of Insular Affair's specific
role within the federal statistical system in supporting federal data
collection for the U.S. territories.

Question 3. During the hearing, when asked what the Department of
the Interior's role is in the Interagency Council of Statistical
Policy, you stated that DOI educates the Council on the Territories'
situation.

3a) a. Can you please expand on that point, what specifically is
the Department of the Interior educating the Council on?

3b) Is there any other role the Department of the Interior has on
the Council? If so, what?

Question 4. During the hearing, you mentioned that including the
territories in the existing federal data products may not be the best
idea, rather ``alternative ideas should be considered.''

4a) Please provide examples of what alternative ideas the Office of
Insular Affairs has considered or is considering. What are the pros and
cons of these alternatives?

Question 5. Has the Department of the Interior raised the issue of
federal data gaps for the U.S. territories with the Interagency Council
on Statistical Policy?

5a) If so, how was this issue raised?

5b) What was the response from the Chief Statistician?

Question 6. According to the GAO report, there have been concerns
within the U.S. territories that the gaps in federal data collection
for them could prevent access to federal programs and grants that they
would otherwise be eligible for.

6a) Is this true?

6b) If so, please provide specific instances where this has
happened.

Question 7. How would addressing the data gaps improve the Office
of Insular Affairs operations and policy implementation in the U.S.
territories?

Question 8. In the 1990s through the mid-2000s, the Office of
Insular Affairs proactively supported data collection for the U.S.
territories. However, since then, it seems that the Office of Insular
Affairs' support has diminished and changed to provide reactive grants.

8a) Why has the Office of Insular Affairs switched from providing
proactive support to reactive grants for data collection efforts in the
U.S. territories?

8b) Why does the Office of Insular Affairs' budget justifications
suppress details about statistical technical assistance in the U.S.
territories?

Questions Submitted by Representative Sablan

Question 1. In your testimony, you mention the possibility of
exploring international survey models in use across the Pacific and the
Caribbean islands and exploring hybrid surveys. Could you please
describe these international surveys and how they could be used to
improve data collection in the territories?

Question 2. A 2018 report by the Census Bureau I requested declared
it is infeasible to conduct the American Community Survey in the
smaller territories. This was attributed to high costs, small
populations, and the lack of home mail delivery in most areas. To
replicate the ACS in the insular areas and yield reliable data, Census
said they would need to conduct the long-form census every year, to
everyone.

This is clearly untenable, so as an alternative, I introduced
legislation to have the Census Bureau conduct the census in the insular
areas every five years. While not ideal or equivalent to the data
collection frequency in the states and Puerto Rico, this would at least
give us timelier data than we have now.

Would conducting a census in the territories every five years help
close current data gaps?

Question 3. Would it help to conduct other surveys in the
territories more frequently?

Question 4. What other ways would be useful to improve our data
collection efforts on our islands?

______

Ms. Hageman. Thank you for your testimony. The Chair now
recognizes Ms. Love-Grayer for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF LATESHA LOVE-GRAYER, DIRECTOR, INTERNATIONAL
AFFAIRS AND TRADE, U.S. GOVERNMENT ACCOUNTABILITY OFFICE,
WASHINGTON, DC

Ms. Love-Grayer. Chair Hageman, Ranking Member Leger
Fernandez, and distinguished members of the Committee, thank
you for the opportunity to discuss our work.
Federal statistical products often contain gaps for the
five inhabited U.S. territories. At each of the 13 principal
statistical agencies, a majority of the products that we
reviewed excluded at least one of the U.S. territories. Even
when territories are included, as mentioned earlier, there are
often disparities in the quality or the timeliness of the data
that is collected in comparison to the United States.
Several factors contribute to these data gaps. Laws
governing agencies may differ or be ambiguous about whether
territories should be included. Small populations in the
territories can present confidentiality challenges when
reporting on detailed data. Population estimation costs, as
sample sizes increase, so do the costs. For example, if it is
necessary to take a census of an entire territory, that becomes
sometimes cost prohibitive.
According to the Census Bureau, some territories' distances
from the U.S. mainland create challenges to their ability to
collect the data in person when that is necessary. Officials
from several of the agencies that we cited also determined that
there were other complications to collecting this data. For
example, non-standard address lists and language barriers can
complicate that data collection.
The Department of the Interior also told us that if agency
officials are accustomed to collecting data for the 50 states,
they sometimes may simply be unaware that they can also include
the territories.
Despite these known gaps, very few agencies have conducted
research on the costs, the benefits, or the feasibility of
including territories in their data collection, and these data
gaps can and often do have adverse effects, including on the
decisions that are made both at the Federal and at the
territorial government level.
For example, as mentioned earlier, officials from American
Samoa expressed concerns that some of their farmers may not be
captured in Federal statistics due to issues with the list that
the Census of Agriculture uses. This may mean that farmers who
would otherwise be eligible for Federal farm benefits may not
be.
CNMI officials emphasized the absence of reoccurring
economic indicators such as employment data from the Bureau of
Labor Statistics, which complicates their ability to understand
their labor force.
Guam officials reported that not enough information
collected in the Island Area Census on their smaller
populations is a barrier to being able to include them and
other statistical products like the Social Vulnerability Index.
USVI officials, as noted earlier, also have had troubles
assessing their recovery and their resilience from the pandemic
because they do not have data that is collected by the census
in the current population survey.
And Puerto Rico also cannot obtain and use certain detailed
information because they are also not included in the current
population survey.
According to some of these territories, they may not even
apply to some of the Federal programs because they lack the
data that is needed to apply.
Territories are trying to mitigate these data gaps.
American Samoa and USVI are trying to collect information that
is similar to the information that is collected by the Bureau
of Labor Statistics and the Census Bureau. CNMI and Guam are
updating their address lists. Puerto Rico is trying to improve
how their GDP is calculated.
And while these data collection needs may vary across the
territories, there does need to be a more coordinated,
government-wide approach for agencies to use in deciding
whether and how to collect the data and report statistics from
the territories. As a result, we recommended that OMB ensure
the Chief Statistician develops a coordinated, government-wide
approach for addressing these territorial data gaps. Doing so
would improve the information that is available to decision
makers at all levels of government, and would allow for us to
make better decisions about the allocation of those resources
and to evaluate the effectiveness of our programs.
Chair Hageman, Ranking Member Leger Fernandez, and members
of the Committee, this concludes my prepared statements. I
would be pleased to answer any questions you may have.

[The prepared statement of Ms. Love-Grayer follows:]
Prepared Statement of Latesha Love-Grayer, Director, International
Affairs and Trade, U.S. Government Accountability Office

U.S. TERRITORIES: Coordinated Federal Approach Needed to Better Address
Data Gaps

Chair Hageman, Ranking Member Leger Fernandez, and Members of the
Subcommittee:
Thank you for the opportunity to discuss our work on gaps in data
for the U.S. territories. Our comments today are based on our May 2024
report entitled U.S. Territories: Coordinated Federal Approach Needed
to Better Address Data Gaps.\1\ We were asked to report on gaps in
federal statistics for the territories, the impact of such data gaps,
and any administrative or legislative actions that can be taken to
address them.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ GAO, U.S. Territories: Coordinated Federal Approach Needed to
Better Address Data Gaps, GAO-24-106574 (Washington, D.C.: May 9,
2024).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The U.S. government needs evidence--including statistics--to guide
decision-making, evaluate the effectiveness of programs, and determine
where best to target resources. It is also expected to ensure the
quality of the data used for these purposes.
Public-facing federal statistical products often contain gaps in
data for the five permanently inhabited U.S. territories: American
Samoa, the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands (CNMI), Guam,
the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, and the U.S. Virgin Islands (USVI).\2\
At each of the 13 federal statistical agencies we reviewed (comprising
the core of the federal statistical system), a majority of statistical
products we examined excluded at least one of the territories.\3\ In
products where the territories were included, we found disparities in
the timeliness and in the measurement of quality of territorial data
relative to the rest of the U.S.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ The Federated States of Micronesia, the Republic of the
Marshall Islands, and the Republic of Palau--the freely associated
states--are independent countries and so are excluded from our scope.
\3\ The 13 principal statistical agencies are the Bureaus of
Economic Analysis, Justice Statistics, Labor Statistics, Transportation
Statistics, and the Census; Economic Research Service; Energy
Information Administration; Internal Revenue Service Statistics of
Income; National Agricultural Statistics Service; National Center for
Education Statistics; National Center for Health Statistics; National
Center for Science and Engineering Statistics; and Social Security
Administration Office of Research, Evaluation and Statistics.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Numerous factors prevent precise quantification of the effects of
data gaps for federal funding to the territories. However, officials in
these territories described a wide variety of resulting adverse
effects, such as the inability to demonstrate need and eligibility for
a range of federal support programs. Officials also underscored the
difficulty in assessing the effectiveness of resilience and recovery
efforts during the COVID-19 pandemic, due to lack of data.
To better understand data gaps and related issues, we collected
lists of statistical products from the principal federal statistical
agencies, analyzed authorizing statutes of those agencies, and
interviewed territorial and federal statistical officials--including
from the Office of the Chief Statistician of the United States--among
other methodologies. This work was conducted in accordance with
generally accepted government auditing standards. More details on our
scope and methodology can be found in the full report.\4\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\ GAO-24-106574.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Background

As we have previously reported, the five territories continue to
face a range of economic challenges, including

declining populations,

high cost of energy and imported goods,

increasing vulnerability to extreme weather, and

undiversified economies.

The COVID-19 pandemic exacerbated some of these conditions in
several territories by decreasing tourism.

American Samoa, CNMI, Guam, and USVI are small island areas with
small economies, as measured by gross domestic product (GDP). As of
2020, all the territories but Puerto Rico had lower levels of GDP than
Vermont--the state with the smallest GDP. Puerto Rico's GDP is larger
than the GDP of 14 states. Reporting of GDP statistics for the
territories is lagged relative to the rest of the U.S.
Forming a key part of the federal statistical system are the 13
principal statistical agencies--agencies whose missions are
predominantly the collection, compilation, analysis, and dissemination
of information for statistical purposes. The Office of Management and
Budget (OMB), through the Office of the Chief Statistician of the
United States, works with these agencies and other statistical
officials to discuss and implement federal statistical policy through
multiple consultative bodies such as the Interagency Council on
Statistical Policy and the Federal Committee on Statistical
Methodology.
Several Factors Contribute to Data Gaps in the Territories

Geographic. According to Census Bureau officials we spoke with,
some territories' distances from the U.S. mainland can make it
difficult for dependable and timely in-person data collection if
agencies do not have staff permanently assigned to the territories. The
Census Bureau's evolution in data collection for the stateside
decennial census shows that technology and automation can help overcome
geographic challenges.\5\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\ GAO, 2020 Census: Innovations Helped with Implementation, but
Bureau Can Do More to Realize Future Benefits, GAO-21-478 (Washington,
D.C.: June 14, 2021).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
As figure 1 shows, Puerto Rico and USVI in the Caribbean Sea are
much closer to the headquarters of most federal agencies than are the
Pacific territories. We found that Puerto Rico and USVI appeared as
often as the Pacific territories--or more frequently--in all but one
agency's lists of statistical products we received.

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Statistical. Small populations in the territories can present
confidentiality concerns when reporting detailed data and can affect
the ability of agencies to calculate precise estimates, according to
officials with the Office of Management and Budget (OMB) and Census
Bureau. Figure 2 illustrates a hypothetical example of how
jurisdictions with relatively smaller populations require higher
sampling percentages than relatively larger jurisdictions to achieve
the same margin of error. Higher sampling requirements for a given
level of precision do not preclude the use of sampling in a territory
with a smaller population, but they do raise the associated costs.

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Note: For this figure, we use a hypothetical example to
demonstrate what percent of the respective populations would need to be
sampled to attain the same level of precision (i.e., the same margin of
error). Our calculation assumed an error rate of 0.5, a design effect
of 2, and a confidence level of 95 percent.

Cost. Estimation costs increase as sample size increases. The
Census Bureau in 2018 cited the cost of needing to do a full census of
the territories (except Puerto Rico) in lieu of sampling as a primary
barrier to including them in the American Community Survey (ACS). The
ACS provides detailed demographic statistics used in a large number of
federal formula grant programs. The Census Bureau administers the
Puerto Rico Community Survey, which collects and produces companion
data to the ACS.

Statutory. Statutes that govern and fund principal statistical
agencies may differ or be ambiguous about the requirement to collect
data from the territories. For example, the authorizing statute for the
Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS) does not specify whether to include
the territories in data collection efforts.\6\ Absent any additional
guidance from OMB, variation exists in how territories are treated in
BLS's statistical products. For instance, Guam is not included in the
Current Employment Statistics program due to a lack of unemployment
insurance program data, which are a key data source for the product.
However, Puerto Rico is included in the Current Employment Statistics
program and requires reporting of such data under local law.\7\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\6\ 29 U.S.C. Sec. Sec. 1-2.
\7\ 3 L.P.R.A. Sec. Sec. 308, 309, 315.

Technical. According to officials from OMB and multiple statistical
agencies, several factors can complicate data collection: non-
standardized address formats in the territories, difficulty integrating
federal information technology with that of the territories, language
barriers, and use of paper surveys. In addition, some statistical
products have topics that may not be applicable to the territories,
such as those that measure geography-specific agricultural commodities
or energy sources.
Additionally, agencies attributed some of the data gaps to
limitations in source data within the territories. For example, Census
Bureau officials told us that the lack of a robust and up-to-date
address list in the territories reduces the bureau's ability to include
territories in certain mail-based surveys.
Department of the Interior officials added that federal statistical
products may sometimes exclude territories in cases where officials at
statistical agencies are accustomed to limiting the scope of their
products to the 50 states and are not aware that they could also
include the territories.
Gaps in Data Have Various Adverse Effects on Territories

Numerous factors prevent policymakers from precisely quantifying
the effects of data gaps for federal funding to the territories.
However, territories cited a variety of ways in which data gaps
significantly affect their jurisdictions. For example:

American Samoa officials expressed concern that
subsistence farming is not fully captured due to underlying
issues with the address list the Census of Agriculture
relies on, which may mean that its farmers are not eligible
for certain farm support programs.

CNMI officials emphasized the absence of recurring
economic indicators, such as certain employment statistics
from BLS.

Officials from Guam said that not enough reportable data
in the Island Areas Census for some of the territory's
smaller communities prevent those communities from being
included in other composite statistics, such as the Social
Vulnerability Index. Officials noted that this affects
their ability to identify communities of need before,
during, and after natural disasters and affects how
decisions are made to allocate emergency preparedness
funding.

USVI officials indicated that since they are not included
in the Census Bureau's Current Population Survey (done in
concert with BLS) and Household Pulse Survey, they had
difficulties assessing the effectiveness of local
resilience and recovery efforts during the pandemic.

Officials from Puerto Rico described not being able to
obtain and use certain detailed labor-force information
because of not being included in the Current Population
Survey.

According to Guam and USVI officials, territories may in some cases
simply not seek or be able to apply for opportunities for federal funds
allocations because they are not included in a statistical product or
lack the local data sources needed to apply. In some cases, territories
are still able to participate in a federal program even when data from
a statistical product are not available. For example, despite not being
part of the ACS, American Samoa, Guam, CNMI, and USVI have separately
been included in an equivalent Community Development Block Grant
Insular Areas Program.\8\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\8\ The Community Development Block Grant Program reserves $7
million annually for American Samoa, Guam, CNMI, and USVI which is
distributed based on their relative populations, while program funds
are allocated to states and Puerto Rico based on separate formulas. See
42 U.S.C. Sec. 5302(a)(24); 42 U.S.C. Sec. 5306(a)(2).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Data gaps can also affect the mechanisms agencies use to allocate
funds to the territories. For example, federal Supplemental Nutrition
Assistance Program payments to Guam and USVI are adjusted to reflect
the cost of food in these territories based on federal poverty and
consumer price data that are not collected the same way as for the 50
states.\9\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\9\ 7 U.S.C. Sec. Sec. 2012-2014; 42 U.S.C. Sec. 9902(2).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Overall, our body of work examining assistance to the territories
has, at times, illustrated that limitations in federal data collected
in the territories can adversely affect the federal government's
ability to make informed decisions about the distribution of resources.
As one example, in May 2024, we reported that the Department of
Veterans Affairs (VA) uses a model to estimate the size of the veteran
population (by certain demographic characteristics and across
geographic areas through fiscal year 2050) to inform resource
allocation and outreach needs.\10\ However, because one of the major
data sources is the Census Bureau's American Community Survey, which
does not include data on territories except Puerto Rico, the VA lacks
assurance that its estimates are accurate for territory veterans. We
reported that for at least two of the territories, federal estimates
were about or less than half of what the territories estimated to be
accurate. We recommended that the Secretary of VA identify the extent
to which known data limitations impact the accuracy of population
estimates for veterans living in the U.S. territories and freely
associated states, and VA agreed with the recommendation.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\10\ GAO, Veterans Affairs: Actions Needed to Improve Access to
Care in the U.S. Territories and Freely Associated States, GAO-24-
106364 (Washington, D.C.: May 23, 2024). VA's model uses three main
data sources: VA's U.S. Veteran Eligibility Trends and Statistics
database, Department of Defense separation projections, and the U.S.
Census Bureau's American Community Survey. According to VA, the U.S.
Veteran Eligibility Trends and Statistics database likely includes
information on veterans from all U.S. territories and the freely
associated states, but the other two major data sources--Department of
Defense separation projections and the American Community Survey--do
not. We did not review any local data sets to assess their accuracy or
reliability because it was not within the scope of our review.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Territories, with Federal Support, Have Made Efforts to Mitigate Data
Gaps through Local Data Collection

We found that territories have taken steps to mitigate federal data
gaps. For example, officials from both American Samoa and USVI
described local efforts to collect data equivalent to data collected by
BLS and the Census Bureau, respectively. Officials from CNMI and Guam
described efforts to update their address lists in order to enhance the
quality of their participation in the Island Areas Censuses, while
officials from Puerto Rico described local efforts to improve how their
GDP is calculated.
Improved statistical efforts are part of activities the Department
of the Interior's Office of Insular Affairs funds through a technical
assistance program for the territories (other than Puerto Rico, for
which the department does not have administrative responsibility). This
program allocated a total of over $60 million from fiscal years 2019
through 2023 for activities such as Guam's effort to update its
Household Income and Expenditures Survey.
Federal Efforts to Collect and Report Data on the Territories Are
Limited and Uncoordinated

OMB is responsible for coordinating the federal statistical system
to ensure its effectiveness and efficiency.\11\ However, there is not a
coordinated, government-wide approach for agencies to use in deciding
whether to collect data and report statistics from territories in
federal statistical products. For example, OMB has not developed
guidance or directives that explicitly address data collection in the
territories. Moreover, despite the pervasive nature of data gaps in the
territories, we found that agencies other than the Bureau of Economic
Analysis and Census Bureau generally have not researched the costs,
benefits, and feasibility of expanding the scope of their statistical
products to include the territories.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\11\ 44 U.S.C. Sec. 3504(e)(1), (7).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
As a result, we recommended that OMB ensure the Chief Statistician
develops a coordinated, government-wide approach for federal
statistical agencies to use in examining and addressing territorial
data gaps. Doing so would improve the transparency of statistical
decisions. Improved data collection for the territories could also
better inform decision-makers about how to allocate resources to the
territories and how to evaluate the effectiveness of those investments.
OMB neither agreed nor disagreed with our recommendation but
provided technical comments to our draft report, which we incorporated
as appropriate. The causes of data gaps in the U.S. territories are
multifaceted. We believe our recommendation will help spur federal
attention and facilitate a more comprehensive approach to understanding
and addressing the territories' data needs.

Chairman Hageman, Ranking Member Leger Fernandez, and Members of
the Subcommittee, this completes my prepared statement. I would be
pleased to respond to any questions that you may have at this time.

*****
[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Ms. Love-Grayer submitted her prepared statement as a GAO
report. The full GAO report can be viewed at:

https://www.gao.gov/assets/870/869419.pdf

------

Questions Submitted for the Record to Ms. Latesha Love-Grayer, Director
of International Affairs and Trade, Government Accountability Office

Ms. Love-Grayer did not submit responses to the Committee by the
appropriate deadline for inclusion in the printed record.

Questions Submitted by Representative Westerman

Question 1. What role can be interested outside groups play in
helping to address territorial data gaps?

Question 2. Why can't the federal statistical agencies already
close the data gaps in the U.S. territories?

Question 3. Your report and written testimony list the various
economic challenges the U.S. territories face.

3a) Can you explain the connection between these challenges and the
need for good data?

Question 4. What steps can federal statistical agencies take now,
without waiting for additional funding or authorizations?

Question 5. Your written statement notes that there have been few
efforts by statistical agencies to research the costs, benefits, and
feasibility of expanding statistical coverage in the U.S. territories.

5a) For those few efforts that have been made, what were the
results?

Question 6. Your written statement notes that statistical agencies
sometimes exclude territories from data collection because ``they are
accustomed to limiting the scope of their products to the 50 states and
are not aware that they could also include the U.S. territories.''

6a) Can you elaborate on this point? Do you have any examples?

Question 7. What did each territory identify as their specific need
to improve their statistical operations?

Question 8. What did each territory identify as their most
important existing gap in federal statistics coverage?

Question 9. Aside from the Office of the Chief Statistician, are
the other federal statistical agencies aware of the gaps in data
collection for the U.S. territories?

9a) Do they agree that this is a serious issue?

Question 10. In the GAO report, it was stated that federal agencies
attributed some of the data gaps to limitations in source data within
the U.S. territories.

10a) What limitations does each territory have?

10b) Would addressing the data gaps at a federal level be
sufficient or would this also require the U.S. territories to address
some of these limitations? Why?

Question 11. Do federal agencies have cost estimates and
feasibility assessments for including the U.S. territories in their
statistical products?

11a) If so, what are they?

Question 12. Why do some federal statistic products collect
territory for one or some territories, but exclude the rest?

Question 13. Why does Puerto Rico receive more coverage in federal
data collection than the other territories?

Question 14 How does addressing these data gaps sooner rather than
later save American taxpayer dollars and improve fiscal responsibility
in the long run?

Questions Submitted by Representative Gonzalez-Colon

Question 1. In its report, GAO recommended that the Office of
Management and Budget (OMB) should ensure the Chief Statistician
develops a government-wide approach for federal statistical agencies to
use to examine the costs, benefits, and feasibility of including
territories in statistical products and, as appropriate, identify ways
to address data gaps.

Could you discuss why, in GAO's view, a whole-of-government
approach such as this one is necessary to understand and address
federal data gaps impacting the territories? How would this help
address the lack of coordination GAO identified in its report?

Question 2. When GAO recommends that the Chief Statistician should
develop a coordinated, government-wide approach, what do you envision
that approach would look like in practice? Would it be OMB developing
and publishing a Statistical Policy Directive, or distributing general
guidance for all 13 principal statistical agencies? Or a potential plan
with short-, medium-, and long-term objectives?

Question 3. In my and my office's conversations with federal
agencies like the Census Bureau, one of the major obstacles that is
always raised when it comes to expanding statistical programs to
include Puerto Rico is costs or the need for additional funding.

However, sometimes these statistical products or surveys are
sponsored by two agencies--such as the Current Population Survey, which
is jointly sponsored by the Census and the Bureau of Labor Statistics--
or carried out by one agency but sponsored by another--such as the
American Housing Survey, which is conducted by the Census but sponsored
by HUD. This means that costs are shared between multiple agencies, and
efforts to expand a particular survey or product to include Puerto Rico
or the other territories would require interagency cooperation and
agreements.

Could you discuss how OMB would be best positioned to address
situations like this one?

Question 4. As GAO notes in its report, OMB neither agreed nor
disagreed with its recommendation on developing a coordinated,
government-wide approach. Since the report's release, has GAO heard
from OMB or had any follow-up conversations with them as to whether
they are taking actions to implement the recommendation? Is GAO
concerned that OMB will not implement the recommendation, given they
neither agreed nor disagreed with it?

Question 5. Now that the report is released, what comes next? How
will GAO monitor compliance with its recommendation? For instance, how
frequently do you intend to engage with OMB moving forward, if at all?

Question 6. In its report, GAO mentions that OMB officials shared
that there are plans to open a new data center in Puerto Rico as part
of the Federal Statistical Research Data Center Program. Would you be
able to provide or share additional information on these plans?

Question 7. One of the major concerns with federal data gaps is
their potential impact on how federal funding is allocated to the
territories. Could you discuss what GAO found regarding this issue?
Were you able to identify instances of federal programs allocating
funding to the territories differently because of the lack of data?

Questions Submitted by Representative Sablan

Question 1. In our discussion of sample sizes and associated costs,
you stated that in smaller populations the cost per person is higher
when collecting data. Could you tell us why the cost per person would
be different? Could you tell us what the cost per person sampled would
be in each of the U.S. territories for a representative sample? And
could you tell us what the cost per person would be to collect that
same sample in representatives states (Alaska, Hawai'i, Wyoming,
Kentucky, California, for instance)?

Question 2. How is household or individual data typically collected
by the federal government? Are there best practices or technologies--in
use by the federal government, in use by other governments or
institutions worldwide, or emerging--that can make such collection more
accurate, more efficient, less costly? Are such technologies available
for use in the U.S. territories?

Question 3. Could artificial intelligence play a role in
extrapolating information about the U.S. territories that could be used
as a reliable stand-in for data that may be collected directly or by
other means in the rest of the United States?

Question 4. Prior to statehood in 1959, what data collected by the
federal government in the 48 states was not collected in Alaska and
Hawai'i?

Question 5. For agencies and departments GAO surveyed, which have
policies on record or are statutorily barred from collecting data in
the U.S. territories? And what are those policies or statutes, if any?

Question 6. What data compiled by the federal government originates
from state data collections and what data is collected directly by the
federal government itself?

Questions Submitted by Representative Velazquez

Question 1. Did your audit consider data gaps related to the use
and impact of federal funding allocations to Puerto Rico, including
funds for emergency response and/or post-disaster recovery and
reconstruction? If so, what is GAO's evaluation of the available data?
How does it differ from data gaps in tracking the use and impact of
recurring federal funds?

Question 2. Non-profit organizations, community-based entities, and
scholars have contributed to highlighting Puerto Rico's primary needs
through data collection, analysis, and publications. However, GAO's
audit relies heavily on the insight of public officials for its data
gaps assessment. To what extent do the gaps identified by GAO address
the primary needs at the community level in Puerto Rico, and what can
be done to ensure that the voices and needs of people on the ground are
present in federal data?

Question 3. Resources are an important aspect when talking about
collecting, analyzing, and disseminating data. In the case of Puerto
Rico, recent austerity measures hinder these abilities. To that end,
could you provide some information as to why the $60 million allocated
to other territories for improving their data were not available to
Puerto Rico? What specific technologies are needed in Puerto Rico to
address internal limitations?

Question 4. According to your presentation, Department of the
Interior (DOI) officials were unaware they could include U.S.
territories in their data. What specific actions could be taken by the
Office and Management and Budget (OMB) to address this situation?

Question 5. GAO stated in its report that a mix of cost,
geographic, technical and other issues have contributed to the
exclusion of the U.S. territories from federal statistical products. Do
you consider this lack of data a leading contributing factor to the
neglect of federal agency attention to the needs of the territories?

______

Ms. Hageman. Thank you for your testimony. The Chair now
recognizes Ms. Leon Guerrero for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF LOLA LEON GUERRERO, DIRECTOR, BUREAU OF STATISTICS
AND PLANS, GOVERNMENT OF GUAM, HAGATNA, GUAM

Ms. Leon Guerrero. Good morning, Chairman Hageman, Ranking
Member Fernandez, and distinguished members of the
Subcommittee. It is an honor to appear before you and the
Members to provide Guam's testimony on examining GAO's findings
to address data gaps and improve data collection in the
territories.
I will present testimony on the critical issue of data
equity and the exclusion of the U.S. territories from many
Federal statistical products, unlike Puerto Rico and the 50
states. This exclusion leaves Guam reliant on administrative
data and periodic local and Federal surveys to meet community
needs.
Data collection is crucial for insight to key topics,
predicting trends, and developing sound policies. This is
especially important for island economies like Guam, which
depend on tourism, military spending, and Federal funding.
Despite extensive data collection efforts, we face challenges
due to limited resources and skilled personnel impacting our
ability to obtain meaningful data. I commend the GAO for
highlighting these issues.
Consistent, reliable, and up-to-date demographic, social,
and economic information is essential for effective government
planning and resource allocation. The Bureau of Statistics plan
supports recommendations to address data equity for the U.S.
territories.
Examples of data inequities and disparities. Exclusion from
surveys. U.S. territories do not participate on ongoing Federal
surveys, such as the American Community Survey, the current
population surveys, consumer expenditure surveys, and other
surveys conducted by the Bureau of Labor Statistics and other
Federal programs. Instead, the U.S. territories rely on the
decennial census to obtain critical housing and population
statistics. While the decennial census provides comprehensive
information for the U.S. territories, the lack of current
statistics hinders the territories' ability to address
immediate and long-term issues accordingly.
On the decennial census, the census provides critical data
on Guam's demographics, socio-economic, and housing
characteristics every 10 years. However, limitations in
outdated information impacts funding allocation formulas for
territories, as well as for planning purposes. For instance,
the 2020 census had fewer details than the 2010 census. We have
villages without demographic data, no detail on military
members and their households, which affects data on income and
housing conditions.
On the IMPLAN. IMPLAN is an economic modeling software the
Department of Labor's Chief Economist uses. We were informed
IMPLAN is no longer generating data sets for American Samoa,
Guam, and CNMI, due to changes in the U.S. Census Bureau's
disclosure policies. This affects our ability to estimate
economic impacts accurately.
On the gross domestic product, this is funded by the U.S.
Department of the Interior and contracted to the Census Bureau.
We were recently informed that the funding for the GDP is
temporarily suspended or paused due to the cost. OIA officials
were on our island to review and address Guam's existing
administrative and economic data to produce the GDP and
economic statistics.
On the Justice40 initiative's climate and justice screening
tool. Under the Justice40 initiatives, the climate and economic
justice screening tool lacks sufficient data for Guam in most
categories, which affects our ability to qualify for funding
under the Bipartisan Infrastructure Law and Inflation Reduction
Act for disadvantaged communities.
On hazard mitigation, territories face challenges in
meeting FEMA's data requirements for hazard mitigation plans
due to inadequate data and tools. The FEMA's National Risk
Index Mapping and FEMA's hazards programs are not populated
with the data and layers for American Samoa, Guam, and CNMI as
they are for the states, USVI, and Puerto Rico. These tools
provide the type of mapping, data, and reporting needed for a
hazard mitigation plans.
Since they are not readily available to Guam, we have had
to develop the mapping and tools and the reporting on our own.
This is not a simple task, and this involves developing a
Social Vulnerability Index for Guam, building stock for Guam,
GIS tools, and much more. While Guam is able to accomplish
this, it should not be necessary, and the territories should
not be held to the same standards as the states for Federal
funding opportunities when they are not given the same
resources and tools to make them eligible.
On the Social Vulnerability Index. Guam developed its SVI
using CDC's methodology, but there is missing data from the
2020 census which hinders updates crucial for disaster
management.
Recommendation. To address these issues, we need
legislative mandates and funding to share consistent data
collection and support for the territories on guidance from
other Federal agencies on acceptable methodologies to follow to
obtain data where the territories are excluded.
Most importantly, improved coordination with the Office of
the Chief Statistician of Federal Agencies to include the U.S.
territories in the major statistical products is crucial to
bridging these gaps and enhancing data collections in the U.S.
territories.
Thank you for the opportunity to present Guam's
perspective.

[The prepared statement of Ms. Leon Guerrero follows:]
Prepared Statement of Lola E. Leon Guerrero, Director, Bureau of
Statistics and Plans, Government of Guam

Good morning! Chairwoman Hageman, Ranking Member Fernandez, and
distinguished members of the Subcommittee, it is an honor to appear
before you and the members to provide Guam's testimony on ``Examining
GAO's Findings to Address Data Gaps and Improve Data Collection in the
Territories''.
I am presenting testimony to address the critical issue pertaining
to the lack of data equity and exclusion of the U.S. Territories in
many of the federal statistical products that is afforded to Puerto
Rico and the 50 states. This exclusion leaves Guam and the U.S.
Territories with limited access to current information and are left to
rely on administrative data and/or local and federal resources to
conduct periodic data collection and surveys to address the priority
needs of the community.
Data collection is fundamental to gaining and drawing valuable
insights on critical topics, predicting trends, preventing risks,
making informed decisions and in developing critical and sound policy.
Good data is especially important for island economies with limited
resources and who are dependent on external factors such as tourism and
federal spending for sustained economic growth. Guam, being the
farthest western-most territory, and second in land area, is dependent
on three pillars for economic growth: tourism, military spending and
federal funding. Although extensive data is collected, relevant labor
market and population files are not often readily available to
facilitate data analysis. The lack of resources to facilitate the data
capture along with the skilled data technicians or analysts to define,
analyze, and evaluate the process are challenges faced by U.S.
Territories to obtaining meaningful data.
I commend GAO for addressing this long-standing issue recognizing
the unique challenges the U.S. Territories face when making decisions.
Whether we live in small island communities, populous states, or
nations, we are all driven by data and the absence of consistent,
reliable and up-to-date demographic, social and economic information
impacts the government's ability to plan effectively and secure the
resources needed for a sustainable future.
The Bureau of Statistics and Plans (BSP) is in support of the
recommendations to the subcommittee regarding the lack of data equity
for the U.S. Territories. We recognize that the U.S. Territories do not
participate in the ongoing surveys conducted in the United States
including the American Community Survey (ACS), the Current Population
Survey (CPS), Consumer Expenditures Survey, Current Employment
Statistics Survey, and other surveys conducted by the Bureau of Labor
Statistics and other federal programs. As such, the U.S. Territories
rely on the once a decade census to obtain critical housing and
population statistics.
While the decennial census provides comprehensive information for
the U.S. Territories, the lack of current statistics does not present a
clear picture of the current condition of the U.S. Territories to
address immediate and long-term issues accordingly.

Presented are some examples pertaining to the data inequities and
disparities regarding the exclusion of the U.S. Territories from the
federal statistical data products.

Decennial Census. The Decennial Census data provides a major source
of comprehensive information about Guam's demographic, socio-economic
and housing characteristics. Because Guam receives this data once every
10 years, the more detailed the information that is made available, the
better the understanding of the housing and population make-up for
Guam.
The U.S. Census Bureau reported a population decline between 2010
and 2020 for Guam and the territories. The population decline from 2010
and the impact of the coronavirus pandemic on the 2020 Census results
draws serious concerns for the government of Guam. While we recognize
that there are limitations to the census data, we are concerned how the
data will impact funding allocation formulas for the island and the
territories. We have villages without demographic data, no detail on
military members and their households, and there is less detail than in
the 2010 Census of Guam. For example, the Bureau of Statistics and
Plans notes the impact of data tables released by the Census Bureau
reporting ``N'' cases in a number of municipalities (villages) as it
pertains to certain data like income. This signifies that the ``data is
not available for selected geographic areas due to concerns with
statistical reliability.''
Many agencies rely on income data to determine eligibility for
programs (i.e. HUD's Community Development Block Grant (CBDG) relies on
low/moderate income data to determine if an area meets the criteria of
having at least 51-percent of the population meeting HUD's definition
of those falling in the low to moderate income category.) For the
island areas, the decennial Census is used to determine low/moderate
income (LMI) areas. As such, these ``eligible'' areas do not change
until the next decennial census. HUD works directly with the Census
Bureau to prepare the LMI eligible areas of which 51-percent of the
residents are low-moderate income individuals or households. HUD,
however, does allow a jurisdiction to conduct income surveys to
determine the percentage of LMI persons in the service area. HUD
provides guidelines to do this. Like HUD, other federal agencies should
provide guidance on acceptable methodologies to follow to obtain data
that is acceptable to justify funding requests.
In preparations for the decennial census, Guam worked closely with
Census Bureau officials in reviewing and updating census topics,
questionnaire content, geography and the like. With respect to the
census questionnaire, I want to point out that several census questions
in Guam's ``long form'' were removed for the 2020 Guam Census, and
these questions include ``use of battery-operated radios, air-
conditioning, main type of material used for the roof, and main type of
material used for the foundation.'' The Bureau of Statistics and Plans
requested to retain the census questions; however, our request was not
considered, and the questions were removed in the 2020 Guam Census. The
use of battery-operated radios is critical in times of emergency when
there is a loss of power, internet and telecommunication services. This
was evident in May 2023 when Guam was struck with Category 4, Typhoon
Mawar, and internet and phone communication were lost. Residents lacked
information about the condition of the storm and impact to the
municipalities, flooded areas where roads were impassable, when the
power and water will be restored, and where services can be obtained.
It is important to note the Guam Homeland Security/Office of Civil
Defense lists battery-powered radios and NOAA weather radios as part of
the emergency supply list to Get Guam Ready in preparation for an
emergency or natural disaster. This and the other topics specific to
the Island Areas needs are necessary for emergency preparations and
response planning and to determine the level of housing structure
conditions on Guam.
In addition, we had requested for the release of the Public Use
Microdata Sample (PUMS) for Guam based on the 2020 Census of Guam;
however, the PUMS is not listed as part of the 2020 Island Areas Data
Products release schedule, and we are unclear if the Census Bureau will
make available the PUMS at a later date. The 10-percent sample of
housing and population records allows users to run specified
tabulations at the Guam level. The PUMS is a useful data application
tool that allows the data user to run frequencies and cross any
variable by other population and housing variables. In this regard, the
user can run cross tabulations and frequencies at the Guam (island-
wide) level when information is not available from the standard set of
tables released by the Census Bureau.
The Census Bureau serves as ``the primary U.S. government source of
population estimates and projections for the U.S. Island Areas.''
Because many government and civic organizations use population
projections for program planning and application for federal
assistance, we have requested the Census Bureau to provide projection
updates. Currently, we are waiting for the Bureau officials to update
the population projections since the release of the detailed results
from the 2020 Census of Guam.
We recognize that the Census statistics that Guam receives serves
as the most valuable, comprehensive resource and reference tool used by
government, community officials, students and the public for research,
planning, and for access to federal funding opportunities. Having to
rely on a once a decade census data set leaves little for our policy
and community leaders to work with to effectively plan and lead our
island for the next 10 years. Presently, Guam does not have the
resources to bridge the gap. Had the territories been able to
participate in the ongoing federal statistical surveys such as the
American Community Survey (ACS), Current Population Survey (CPS) and
Consumer Expenditure Survey (CES), federal funds could have been better
allocated to meet the present and ever-changing needs of our
communities.

IMPLAN. IMPLAN is the leading provider of economic impact data and
analytical software and utilizes an economic modeling technique called
Input-Output analysis. Through US EDA funding, BSP procured a one year
subscription for the Department of Labor. Last year, my office was
informed that due to a change in the disclosure policy in the U.S.
Census Bureau, the IMPLAN data sets will ``no longer be generating data
sets for American Samoa, Guam, and the Commonwealth of the Northern
Mariana Islands (CNMI).'' This economic software contains populated
data elements from a variety of federal sources that is available in
the United States and can be used to estimate economic impact of past
or existing economic conditions of an area. The intent is to use
existing data sets in the economic model software from federal or state
sources as well as input other locally obtained data to calculate the
effects to local industries or income change to the economy. The IMPLAN
data sets are available for the 50 states, the U.S. Virgin Islands, and
Puerto Rico, but are not available to the territories of American
Samoa, Guam, and CNMI. This lack of the IMPLAN data sets for the three
territories may adversely impact grant projects and programs that use
IMPLAN to analyze and forecast impacts of proposed economic development
events influenced by changes in economic conditions.

Economic Census. The Economic Census is a census of every paid
employee in the United States and territories. Conducted once every 5
years in the years ending in ``2'' and ``7'', the Economic Census for
the Island Areas is funded by the U.S. Department of Interior and
contracted to the Census Bureau to conduct the census of all business
establishments in the area. Historically, the Economic Census has been
funded by the Department of Interior. We understand that former Guam
delegate, Madeleine Bordallo, during her tenure had drafted legislation
for Congress to mandate the Census Bureau to conduct the mandatory
census of economic activity for the territories. However, we are not
aware that legislation has ever been enacted to legally mandate the
Census Bureau to fund and conduct the Economic Census for the
territories. Moreover, the Government of Guam had been informed by
Interior officials that they will be suspending its contract with the
Census Bureau in this matter due to financial limitations. Currently,
Interior officials have been coordinating with Guam officials to review
and assess administrative and economic data to produce GDP and other
economic statistics. Again, the U.S. Territories do not have the
adequate representation nor funding resources to ensure this survey
continues so that our local government officials and business sector
maintain access to critical economic statistics necessary to make sound
business decisions and to promote economic development initiatives.

Justice40 Initiative--Climate and Economic Justice Screening Tool
(CEJST). The Biden Administration created the Justice40 Initiative to
address the decades of underinvestment in disadvantaged communities. It
requires forty percent of the overall benefits of certain Federal
climate change, clean energy, affordable and sustainable housing and
other investments covered programs under the Bipartisan Infrastructure
Law (BIL) and Inflation Reduction Act (IRA) funding opportunities to
flow to disadvantaged communities that are marginalized by
underinvestment and overburdened by pollution. The CESJT was created
with an interactive map and uses datasets that are indicators of
burdens in eight categories (climate, energy, health, housing, legacy
pollution, transportation, water and wastewater, and workforce
development). However, the CEJST does not illustrate nor provides for a
no-burden threshold metrics for Guam in 7 of the 8 categories. It only
applies for workforce development and is specific to unemployment. Most
of the data used to make the underserved determination were from
surveys and databases that Guam was not included in. These include but
are not limited to the ACS, FEMA National Risk Index, US Department of
Energy LEAD Tool, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC)
places data, and HUD Comprehensive Housing Affordability Strategy
dataset. In reference to the sources used for the CEJST, again the
majority of the sources are not available for American Samoa, Guam, the
Northern Mariana Islands, and the U.S. Virgin Islands.
There are 70 data points used to determine ``disadvantaged''
eligible categories where there was insufficient data for Guam. The
only data qualified as sufficient for Guam applied primarily to income,
race, and educational attainment. This meant that categories related to
Climate Change, Environmental Hazards, Energy Burden, Health Risks, and
proximity to hazardous facilities were not categories that Guam would
apply for under the BIL and IRA funding opportunities. These are
categories that Guam's census tracts should qualify as disadvantaged,
however, Guam did not meet the criteria. Since FEMA is also following
this for the Social Vulnerability Index (SVI) requirements that apply
to resilience funds, Guam is going to have issues with those FEMA
programs as well.

Hazard Mitigation. Data inequities for the territories also impact
emergency management and hazard mitigation. To be eligible for Hazard
Mitigation and Building Resilient Infrastructure and Communities
Grants, Guam must have an active and FEMA approved Hazard Mitigation
Plan. This plan needs to be renewed every 5 years. A major component of
developing this plan is hazard mapping, and a spatial vulnerability
analysis of hazards to government assets and vulnerable populations.
Like EPA's CJEST, FEMA's National Risk Index Mapping and FEMA's Hazus
Program are not populated with the data and layers for American Samoa,
Guam, and CNMI as they are for the states, USVI, and Puerto Rico.
These tools provide the type of mapping, data and reporting needed
for a Hazard Mitigation Plan for the states. Since they are not readily
available to Guam, we have had to develop the mapping, the tools, and
the reporting on our own. This is not a simple task since this involved
developing a Social Vulnerability Index for Guam, building stock for
Guam, GIS tools, and much more. While Guam was able to accomplish this,
it should not be necessary, and the territories should not be held to
the same standard as the states for federal funding opportunities when
they are not given the same resources and tools to make them eligible.

Social Vulnerability Index (SVI). The Centers for Disease Control
and Prevention and Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry
Social Vulnerability Index (hereafter, CDC/ATSDR SVI or SVI) developed
this tool (SVI) to identify and provide emergency response to
vulnerable communities. This tool serves as a database and mapping
application designed to identify and quantify communities experiencing
social vulnerability (demographic and socioeconomic factors such as
poverty, lack of access to transportation, and crowded housing) based
on data collected from the American Community Survey. Because Guam does
not participate in the ACS, Guam developed and calculated its Social
Vulnerability Index using CDC methodology and an adjusted SVI using
CDC-modified method incorporating additional Guam-specific
characteristics on housing structure and other relevant indicators
specific to the island. In 2021, Guam released the ``Calculating the
Social Vulnerability Index for Guam'' report using the data from the
2010 Guam Census to rank and identify the most vulnerable communities
on the island. The Guam SVI results serve as an important step in
providing reliable insights on how to solve community issues. The
information helps to increase knowledge and awareness of vulnerable
communities and inform strategies for disaster management. Specific
census subjects such as building materials used for walls and roof,
telephone service availability, access to computer/laptop and internet
use, and battery-operated radios provide critical planning and support
service information needed for areas prone to natural disasters
including hard-to-reach areas and wooden and metal housing structures.
Of interest to note is that the 2020 Census of Guam results will not
include data on building materials, air conditioning, and access to
battery-operated radios which could have contributed to updating Guam's
Social Vulnerability Index. As such, critical data distinct to the
island areas will not be available.

Equal Employment Opportunity Plan (EEOP). Under the U.S. Department
of Justice, grant recipients are required to develop an Equal
Employment Opportunity Plan which is a workforce report for funding
authorized by the Omnibus Crime Control and Safe Streets Act of 1968.
The EEOP's purpose is to ensure that recipients of financial assistance
from the Justice Department are providing full and equal participation
of women, men and minority individuals regardless of sex, race or
national origin in employment opportunities in the criminal justice
system. To help recipients comply with the EEOP regulations, recipients
utilize the online EEOP Utilization Report that collects and analyzes
key employment data, organized by race, national origin and sex.
Although the U.S. Census Bureau has collected extensive data on
Guam, the relevant labor market files for preparing an EEOP Utilization
Report are not readily available and are published several years
following the decennial census. The Bureau of Statistics and Plans
analyzes and collects labor market statistics, however, the Bureau of
Statistics and Plans and its US DOJ subrecipients cannot use the US
DOJ, Office for Civil Rights Equal Employment Opportunity (EEO)
Reporting System (EEOP online system) for developing the EEOP Report
because the Bureau of Statistics and Plans uses racial and national
origin categories that are more extensive than the ones used in the
EEOP Report. The disparity in the data reported cannot be measured in a
systematic manner to ensure accuracy and facilitate data analysis.
Since the data collected is meant to provide content for data analysis,
the information must be of the highest quality for it to be of value.
Thus, it is important the Census Bureau include the PUMS in the 2020
Island Areas Data Products to release as Guam utilizes the PUMS to
prepare the community workforce utilization report.

National Incident-Based Reporting System (NIBRS). In FY 2016, the
FBI formally announced its intention to sunset the Uniform Crime Report
(UCR) program's traditional Summary Reporting System (SRS) and replace
it with National Incident-Based Reporting System (NIBRS) by January 1,
2021. By statute, Bureau of Justice Assistance (BJA), Justice
Assistance Grant (JAG) awards are calculated using summary part 1
violent crime data from the FBI's UCR program. Specifically, the
formula allocations for JAG rely heavily on the ratio of ``the average
number of part 1 violent crimes of the UCR of the FBI reported by such
State for the three most recent years reported by such State to the
average annual number of such crimes reported by all States for such
years'' (34 U.S.C. 10156(a)(1)(B)). Guam achieved NIBRS certification
in 2022, however, challenges are experienced with the mobile field
reporting and the continued manual reviews to properly categorize crime
offenses using the NIBRS offense code and related arrest information of
the offense. As such, potential limitations may result in the
underreporting of crimes, limited coverage of certain demographics, and
reliance on self-reported data. Recorded crime statistics may not
provide reliable measures in the levels or trends in crime and
victimization making it difficult to create appropriate law enforcement
budgets, programs and policies. With the transition to NIBRS, the Byrne
JAG formula calculations will be based on NIBRS reporting. Without
reliable and accurate statistics, it would be difficult to create
appropriate law enforcement budgets or resource allocation to help
determine which programs or communities will receive criminal justice
grants.

US Bureau of Labor Statistics Programs. According to the Guam
Department of Labor, the specific statement about Guam's participation
in US Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS) programs is in error. It states
that Guam does not participate in the US BLS Current Employment
Statistics (CES) program because of the nonexistence of a permanent
unemployment insurance program. That is incorrect.
Guam is legally eligible to apply for the US BLS CES program and
was seriously considered at one time years ago. Guam BLS reviewed the
Cooperative Federal/State statistical programs with the BLS regional
office in depth. According to the Chief Economist of the Guam
Department of Labor, Guam decided to not submit an application for this
cooperative program because 1) Data collection is done primarily
centrally by phone and the call center hours did not align with Guam's
business hours; 2) The BLS program is monthly whereas the Guam version
is quarterly (DOL did not believe there was a need for monthly data for
Guam and the workload for the department and employers did not seem to
be justifiable); and 3) The US CES BLS timelines for CES requirements
are very short and frequent. The DOL would have great difficulty and
stress in attempting to meet the requirements without a lot of funding
beyond the program allocations. Further, it would require more regional
and national office support. It would not be impossible to operate the
US CES program with a lot of support, but with the existing
circumstances it would be unrealistic.
Guam does not participate in the Quarterly Census of Employment and
Wages (QCEW) program because of a lack of an Unemployment Insurance
(UI) program. Guam also does not participate in the Local Area
Unemployment Statistics (LAUS) program because of the lack of the UI
and lack of the US Current Population Survey (CPS) and Current
Employment Statistics (CES) survey. The Unemployment Insurance program
database is needed to operate the QCEW and Local Area Unemployment
Statistics LAUS programs.
Guam did begin to apply for the US BLS program and began
participating in the BLS Occupational Employment and Wage Statistics
(OES), now OEWS, program and added the Census of Occupational
Fatalities (CFOI) program to the existing Survey of Occupational
Injuries and Illness (SOII) program. Some federal statistical programs
are handled exclusively by the Federal Government and others are
Cooperative Federal/State programs in which the US BLS provides program
guidelines, software and administration with local government
participation to collect data and provide input to the statistical
program.
The Current Population Survey (CPS) is a household survey to
collect information as a component to the LAUS unemployment model
estimates. It is a US DOL BLS program which contracts the Census Bureau
to collect unemployment information in the 50 states, the USVI and
Puerto Rico. This is not conducted in Guam. In such absence the Guam
Department of Labor, BLS conducts a similar locally funded survey to
collect information and publish unemployment rates for Guam. Inclusion
of Guam in the US CPS and/or technical support for the survey could
enhance the quality and timeliness of the data for Guam.
The US Consumer Price Indexes produced by the US DOL BLS collect
price information in select US cities, but not Guam. Guam funds and
conducts its own consumer price index survey program with support from
DOI for periodic market basket adjustments with the Household Incomes
and Expenditures survey (HIES). Guam is presently conducting the HIES
in efforts to update the consumer price index and contribute to the GDP
for Guam. The last HIES was conducted in 2005 and there are new items
that exist in the market that would need to be identified and
classified. This project was made possible through technical assistance
funding from the Department of the Interior. US BLS technical and
administrative support could make this program more precise and
comparable with the US price indexes.
Increasingly a great deal of information exists in Government and
private sector databases. Increasing the use of already collected
administrative data should be a primary focus for tremendous
improvements in quality and quantity of statistical data rather than
imposing the costs and burdens of survey collected data.
A prime opportunity for this is with the CPI market basket updates.
Instead of hundreds or thousands of households determining the quantity
of goods consumed, the availability of comprehensive, electronically
obtained trade import statistics would provide more accurate and timely
adjustments to consumption patterns. This is a unique opportunity for
the islands as virtually all of the major volumes of imports are
documented at the ports of entry, air and shipping. Additionally
updated price information could be obtained in mass electronically from
various vendors, government and private without survey workers shopping
for relatively few items to check their prices periodically. This would
improve the real--inflation adjusted GDP figures.
Similarly, adding electronic income tax filing capacity beyond the
basic forms would provide more current, more detailed information on
the economy and serve as inputs for the GDP estimates. These items on
the business tax form include wages, profits, expense rents and expense
categories such as capital investments. Some of these items are not
manually typed into the Tax computers as it is too expensive and not
required for refund administration.
A US legislative mandate to task and fund the US Bureau of Economic
Analysis (BEA) to produce GDP estimates for the Island Areas would
produce institutional stability and consistency to the production of
GDP estimates. Freeing up DOI funds could make them available to
support technical improvements to the data production systems so that
the statistical information inputs for these reports would be more
accurate and timelier.
If a federal government agency was able to share or provide
technical information or systems for secure, confidential,
electronically reported and collected data to the Island Areas, that
would assist expedite the transition from paper data collection through
mail, fax, email, phone and personal visits. This would reduce the
collection cost for respondents and the island areas. It would also
avoid data entry costs and provide instant error checking and
correction by pointing out missing or invalid items. The federal
government has transitioned to such electronic web-based reporting
systems for its own data collection with the Economic Census and with
US BLS survey programs such as the Occupational Employment and Wage
Statistics (OEWS) program.
These are just some of the examples and challenges that Guam and
the territories face to make decisions based on limited information,
resources and/or access to limited federal data sets. We agree that
improved coordination and cooperation with the Office of the Chief
Statistician of the United States is necessary to address this long-
standing issue and ensure adequate representation of the U.S.
Territories in federal data collection programs and statistical
products. On behalf of Governor Lou Leon Guerrero, we look forward to
working with federal agencies to address the data gaps and improve data
collection efforts in the U.S. Territories.
Again, I thank the Chair and Ranking Member for the opportunity to
appear before you today and I look forward to your questions.

______

Questions Submitted for the Record to Ms. Lola Leon Guerrero, Director,
Bureau of Statistics and Plans, Government of Guam

Ms. Leon Guerrero did not submit responses to the Committee by the
appropriate deadline for inclusion in the printed record.

Questions Submitted by Representative Westerman

Question 1. What data gaps are the most immediate concern for Guam
and why?

Question 2. Does the Government of Guam currently have the capacity
to fill gaps in data on Guam by collecting its own data?

2a) Please elaborate why or why not?

Question 3. Guam is particularly prone to severe weather incidents.

3a) How do gaps in federal data collection for Guam affect disaster
recovery efforts?

Question 4. Why is important for the federal government to address
the gaps in data collection for Guam sooner rather than later?

Question 5. During the hearing, an idea for a pilot program or
demonstration program for federal data collection in the territories
being run by the territories themselves was brought up. You mentioned
that you would support that idea if there were the federal resources to
do so.

5a) Please clarify, would you support Guam managing federal data
collection via a pilot program or demonstration?

5b) Why or why not?

5c) What specific federal resources do you think are needed for
this idea to be successful?

5d) Are there any other factors you see as being needed for this
idea to be successful?

______

Ms. Hageman. Thank you for your testimony. The Chair now
recognizes Mr. Orenstein-Cardona for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF JACOBO ORENSTEIN-CARDONA, EXECUTIVE ASSISTANT,
PUERTO RICO INSTITUTE OF STATISTICS, GOVERNMENT OF PUERTO RICO,
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO

Mr. Orenstein-Cardona. Good morning.
High-quality statistics are fundamental to a functioning
democracy because they provide a factual foundation for
informed decision making. In a democratic society, the ability
of citizens to make educated choices about their governance and
policies is paramount.
Moreover, high-quality statistics help in the allocation of
government resources, as they indicate where investment is
needed most, whether in education, health care, infrastructure,
or other areas. They also promote a culture of accountability,
where public officials are answerable for their decisions and
the resulting outcomes. In addition, complete and standardized
statistics facilitate comparability between different
jurisdictions.
The Puerto Rico Institute of Statistics, or PRIS, is an
independent public agency of the Government of Puerto Rico. It
works tirelessly to ensure universal and timely access to
comprehensive and reliable statistics on Puerto Rico. PRIS has
been instrumental in correcting Puerto Rico's mortality
statistics, eliminating an upward bias in Puerto Rico's
consumer price index, identifying millions of dollars in
recurring cost savings for the Government of Puerto Rico, and
documenting a statistical bias of the formulas used by the
Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services. Additionally, price
represents the Government of Puerto Rico for statistical
purposes before Federal agencies and acts as an effective
intermediary.
Despite the fundamental importance of statistics, Federal
statistical products often contain gaps in data for Puerto
Rico. These gaps limit the local and Federal Government's
understanding of the jurisdiction's needs, and how to best
distribute resources and evaluate the effectiveness of public
policy interventions. For example, for estimates of Puerto
Rico's gross domestic product, the Bureau of Economic Analysis
relies heavily on information provided by Puerto Rico
Government agencies to fill as best as possible several gaps in
Federal statistical agency data.
PRIS has encountered specific and significant gaps of
statistical information regarding Puerto Rico in Federal
statistical products in diverse topics such as employment,
unemployment, and labor force characteristics, local government
expenditures, timely and quarterly GDP calculations, statistics
about the educational system, infrastructure such as motor
vehicle registration and building permits, child abuse, the
economic impact of the high rate of homicides, and statistics
regarding the penal system.
This is by no means an exhaustive list of topics for which
Puerto Rico lacks complete, standardized, reliable, timely, and
accessible statistics due to not being included in Federal
statistical products. However, we would like to emphasize two
key Federal statistical products or programs in which we
consider vital for Puerto Rico to be included.
The first one is the current Population Survey conducted by
the Bureau of Labor Statistics and the U.S. Census Bureau,
which provides comparable and reliable information regarding
employment statistics. This information becomes particularly
salient following natural disasters and adverse events such as
Hurricane Maria in 2017 and the COVID-19 pandemic in 2020.
The second product or program is the Census of Governments,
conducted by the U.S. Census Bureau, which provides information
regarding expenditures at all levels of government.
PRIS supports the Government Accountability Office's recent
report that recommends that the Director of the Office of
Management and Budget should ensure that its Chief Statistician
develop a coordinated, government-wide approach for Federal
statistical agencies to use in consultation with the U.S.
territories and other stakeholders to examine the costs,
benefits, and feasibility of including territories and
statistical products and, as appropriate, identify ways to
address any data gaps.
To improve statistical reliability, Puerto Rico should be
included in more Federal statistical products, complementing
local efforts to mitigate data gaps. This would permit
comparability with other U.S. jurisdictions. It is crucial to
fill the existing Federal statistical gaps to ensure that
Puerto Rico's social and economic needs are correctly
understood and addressed effectively. Greater inclusion in
Federal statistical products would provide Puerto Rico with
valuable data that would inform a wide range of decisions, from
disaster response to economic planning, and lead to more
accurate resource allocation and policy making.
Through collaboration with Federal and local governments,
PRIS can serve as an intermediary and significantly contribute
to the inclusion of Puerto Rico in Federal statistical
products. Thank you for your time.

[The prepared statement of Mr. Orenstein-Cardona follows:]
Prepared Statement of Jacobo M. Orenstein-Cardona, Executive Assistant,
Puerto Rico Institute of Statistics

High-quality statistics are fundamental to a functioning democracy
because they provide a factual foundation for informed decision-making
and public debate. In a democratic society, the ability of citizens to
make educated choices about their governance and policies is paramount.
Reliable and accurate statistics ensure that these choices are based on
evidence rather than conjecture or misinformation. They enable voters
to assess the performance of their government, understand economic and
social trends, and hold elected officials accountable. Moreover, high-
quality statistics help in the allocation of government resources, as
they indicate where investment is needed most, whether in education,
healthcare, infrastructure, or other areas. High-quality statistics are
also complete and standardized, permitting comparisons between
different jurisdictions.
Furthermore, in the context of governance, high-quality statistics
are crucial for transparency and trust. They allow for the monitoring
of government actions and the measurement of policy outcomes against
stated objectives. This transparency fosters trust between the
government and the governed, as citizens can see the direct impact of
their participation in the democratic process. It also promotes a
culture of accountability, where public officials are answerable for
their decisions and the resulting outcomes. In essence, high-quality
statistics are not just numbers; they are the pillars that uphold the
principles of democracy, enabling it to function with integrity and
responsiveness to the needs of its people.

The Puerto Rico Institute of Statistics (PRIS) is an independent
public entity of the Government of Puerto Rico with authority over the
statistical policy of Puerto Rico's public entities. It works
tirelessly to ensure universal and timely access to comprehensive and
reliable statistics on Puerto Rico. PRIS has been instrumental in
correcting Puerto Rico's mortality statistics, eliminating an upward
bias in Puerto Rico's Consumer Price Index, identifying millions of
dollars in recurrent cost savings for the Government of Puerto Rico,
and documenting a statistical bias in the formulas used by the Centers
for Medicare and Medicaid Services. PRIS also maintains a publicly
available database of statistical products generated by local
government and facilitates access to federal data sources.
Continuously, PRIS advises the Legislature and the Governor of Puerto
Rico on statistical issues and answers statistical petitions presented
by key stakeholders and the general public. Additionally, PRIS
represents the government of Puerto Rico for statistical purposes
before federal agencies and acts as an effective intermediary.
Despite the fundamental importance of statistics, there exist
significant federal statistical gaps with respect to Puerto Rico.
Federal statistical products often contain gaps in data for Puerto
Rico. These gaps limit understanding of the conditions and resource
needs of Puerto Rico. Filling these gaps is critical for Puerto Rico.
These gaps limit the local and Federal government's understanding of
the jurisdiction's needs and how to best distribute resources and
evaluate the effectiveness of policy interventions. For example, for
estimates of Puerto Rico's Gross Domestic Product (GDP), the Bureau of
Economic Analysis (BEA) relies heavily on information provided by
Puerto Rico government agencies to fill, as best possible, several gaps
in federal statistical agency data.\1\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ BEA, Technical Report: Gross Domestic Product for Puerto Rico,
2021 (Washington, D.C.: July 31, 2023): https://www.bea.gov/sites/
default/files/2023-07/prgdp0723-tech.pdf

PRIS has encountered specific and significant gaps of statistical
information regarding Puerto Rico in federal statistical products in
diverse topics such as: employment, unemployment and labor force
characteristics,\2\ local government expenditures,\3\ timely and
quarterly GDP calculations,\4\ statistics about the educational
system,\5\ infrastructure, such as motor vehicle registration \6\ and
building permits,\7\ child abuse,\8\ the economic impact of the high
rate of homicides,\9\ and statistics regarding the penal system.\10\
This is by no means an exhaustive list of topics for which Puerto Rico
lacks complete, standardized, reliable, timely and accessible
statistics due to not being included in federal statistical products.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ Current Population Survey, conducted by the U.S. Census Bureau
and the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics: https://www.census.gov/
programs-surveys/cps.html.
\3\ Census of Governments, conducted by the U.S. Census Bureau:
https://www.census.gov/programs-surveys/cog/about.html.
\4\ The Bureau of Economic Analysis reports GDP data annually for
Puerto Rico, but quarterly for States.
\5\ Puerto Rico is not fully included in the National Center for
Education Statistics' National Assessment of Educational Progress, also
known as The Nation's Report Card: https://www.nationsreportcard.gov/
ndecore/xplore/nde.
\6\ Federal Highway Administration State motor vehicle
registration: https://www.fhwa.dot.gov/policyinformation/statistics/
2021/mv1.cfm.
\7\ Building Permits Survey, conducted by the U.S. Census Bureau:
https://www.census.gov/construction/bps/index.html.
\8\ Centers for Disease Control and Prevention's child abuse
statistics: https://www.cdc.gov/child-abuse-neglect/programs/
index.html.
\9\ Centers for Disease Control and Prevention's Web-based Injury
Statistics Query and Reporting System (WISQARS): https://
wisqars.cdc.gov.
\10\ National Prisoner Statistics, conducted by the Bureau of
Justice Statistics: https://bjs.ojp.gov/data-collection/national-
prisoner-statistics-nps-program#publications-0.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
However, we would like to emphasize two key federal statistical
products, or programs, in which we consider it vital for Puerto Rico to
be included. The first one is the Current Population Survey, conducted
by the U.S. Census Bureau in conjunction with the Bureau of Labor
Statistics, which provides comparable and reliable information
regarding employment statistics. This information becomes particularly
salient following natural disasters and adverse events, such as
Hurricane Maria in 2017 and the COVID-19 pandemic in 2020. The second
product, or program, is the Census of Governments, conducted by the
U.S. Census Bureau, which provides information regarding expenditures
at all levels of government. The data collected from the Census of
Governments are crucial for federal agencies, state and local
governments, and researchers to measure economic and financial
performance, develop programs and budgets, assess financial conditions,
and conduct public policy research. These two statistical products, or
programs, are essential for Puerto Rico's sustained economic
development, including helping to resolve Puerto Rico's high level of
public indebtedness.

In general, PRIS supports the findings of the General
Accountability Office's recent report.\11\ We proceed to share the
following comments regarding these findings.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\11\ GAO, U.S. Territories: Coordinated Federal Approach Needed to
Better Address Data Gaps, GAO-24-106574 (Washington, D.C.: May 9,
2024): https://www.gao.gov/assets/gao-24-106574.pdf.

It is important to note, as does the report, that Puerto
Rico has almost 3.3 million residents which represents a
population greater than 21 states and a land area close to
the size of Connecticut. Additionally, Puerto Rico's GDP in
2021 was greater than 14 states, as can be gathered from
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Figure 2 of the report.

We observed the total number of federal statistical
products provided by the 13 principal statistical agencies
as listed in appendix I of the report. We calculated that
there are a total of 449 federal statistical products and
Puerto Rico is only included in 81 products (18%).
Particularly notable is the case of the National
Agricultural Statistics Service which produces 52
statistical products, and of that amount, Puerto Rico (as
well as the rest of the territories) is included in only 1
product. This is concerning given that agriculture is an
important sector of the economy but has faced immense
challenges in the last few decades. PRIS has studied and
generated a website that offers information on all
agricultural products produced by Puerto Rico from 1990 to
2019.\12\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\12\ Please refer to: https://estadisticas.pr/en/Agricultura.

It is understandable that a mix of cost, geographic,
technical, and other issues contribute to the federal
statistical gaps with respect to U.S. territories,
including Puerto Rico. However, it is of upmost importance
to accurately specify and characterize these issues to be
able to address them and thereby strive to increase Puerto
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Rico's inclusion in federal statistical products.

Puerto Rico does face enormous economic challenges, which
are similar to the other 4 permanently inhabited
territories. As indicated in the report, these challenges
include outmigration, the high cost of energy and imported
goods, vulnerability to extreme weather, an undiversified
economy, dependance on tourism and its vulnerability to
natural disasters and adverse events (such as the COVID-19
pandemic), governmental indebtedness, and shrinking
governmental revenues. This highlights the need for Puerto
Rico to be included in federal statistical products in
order to accurately measure these challenges and formulate
effective public policies thereby enabling increased
investment in the jurisdiction.

We agree that technology and automation can help overcome
geographic challenges associated with in-person data
collection.

The problem of the lack of use of standardized address
formats can limit Puerto Rico's inclusion in federal
statistical products, but the local government, with the
assistance of the U.S. Census Bureau, is currently working
to address this challenge.

The U.S. Census Bureau's Puerto Rico Community Survey does
include topics on employment, veteran, and disability
status, but not to the extent and level of detail provided
by the Current Population Survey, especially with its
Supplemental Surveys.\13\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\13\ Please refer to: https://www.census.gov/programs-surveys/cps/
about/supplemental-surveys .html.

We concur that numerous factors prevent precisely
quantifying the effects of data gaps on federal funding to
the territories, including Puerto Rico. However, an effort
involving federal agencies and local government must be
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
attempted to measure the extent of these effects.

We recognize that there exist current initiatives on
behalf of federal statistical agencies to address existing
data gaps, including the upcoming establishment of a
Federal Statistical Research Data Center in Puerto Rico.
Local government also strives to respond to Puerto Rico's
statistical needs. However, we agree that a concerted
federal government effort, in collaboration with local
government, is necessary to effectively address statistical
data gaps. Furthermore, the inclusion of Puerto Rico in a
greater number of federal statistical products would ensure
that data is collected independently, rigorously and
enabling comparability with other U.S. jurisdictions.

PRIS supports the recommendation of the General Accountability
Office that the Director of the Office of Management and Budget should
ensure that its Chief Statistician develop a ``coordinated, government-
wide approach for federal statistical agencies to use, in consultation
with the U.S. territories and other stakeholders, to examine the costs,
benefits, and feasibility of including territories in statistical
products and, as appropriate, identify ways to address any data gaps.''
To improve statistical reliability, Puerto Rico should be included in
more federal statistical products, complementing local efforts to
mitigate data gaps. This would permit comparability with other U.S.
jurisdictions.

It is crucial to fill the existing federal statistical gaps to
ensure that Puerto Rico's social and economic needs are correctly
understood and addressed effectively. Greater inclusion in federal
statistical products would provide Puerto Rico with valuable data that
would inform a wide range of decisions, from disaster response to
economic planning. It would also ensure that Puerto Rico is equitably
represented in federal statistical products, which would lead to more
accurate resource allocation and policy making. Through collaboration
with federal and local governments, PRIS can serve as an intermediary
and significantly contribute to the inclusion of Puerto Rico in federal
statistical products.

______

Questions Submitted for the Record to Mr. Jacobo Orenstein-Cardona,
Executive Assistant, Puerto Rico Institute of Statistics,
Government of Puerto Rico

Mr. Orenstein-Cardona did not submit responses to the Committee by the
appropriate deadline for inclusion in the printed record.

Questions Submitted by Representative Westerman

Question 1. Does the Government of Puerto Rico currently have the
capacity to fill gaps in data on Puerto Rico by collecting its own
data?

1a) Please elaborate why or why not?

Question 2. In your written statement, you mention that increasing
automation and technology usage for Puerto Rico's data collection can
help overcome geographical challenges.

2a) Has your office used automation for data collection? Please
elaborate how, and what have been the results?

Question 3. Puerto Rico is particularly prone to severe weather
incidents.

3a) How do gaps in federal data collection for Puerto Rico affect
disaster recovery efforts?

Question 4. Why is important for the federal government to address
the gaps in data collection for Puerto Rico sooner rather than later?

Question 5. As a witness from a U.S. territory, you see and feel
firsthand the impacts that stem from the gaps in federal data
collection for the U.S. territories.

5a) How has the lack of or outdated data affected Puerto Rico's
government and local communities?

Question 6. During the hearing, an idea for a pilot program or
demonstration program for federal data collection in the territories
being run by the territories themselves was brought up. You mentioned
that you would support that idea if there was the federal resources and
territorial outreach to do so.

6a) Please clarify, would you support Puerto Rico managing federal
data collection via a pilot program or demonstration?

6b) Why or why not?

6c) What specific federal resources and territorial outreach do you
think is needed for this idea to be successful?

6d) Are there any other factors you see as being needed for this
idea to be successful?

Questions Submitted by Representative Gonzalez-Colon

Question 1. You mention in your testimony that the Puerto Rico
Institute of Statistics ``has encountered specific and significant gaps
of statistical information regarding Puerto Rico in federal statistical
products in diverse topics. . .''. How did the Puerto Rico Institute of
Statistics encounter these gaps?

Question 2. One of the federal statistical products Puerto Rico is
currently excluded from is the Current Population Survey, which is
jointly sponsored by the Census Bureau and the Bureau of Labor
Statistics. Can you discuss what is the Current Population Survey, the
data it collects, and why the inclusion of Puerto Rico in that survey
is so important? And what kind of benefits will policymakers have if
Puerto Rico is included?

Question 3. You also mention in your testimony the Supplemental
Surveys of the Current Population Survey. Can you offer some examples
of these supplemental surveys? Has the Puerto Rico Institute of
Statistics explored collecting data locally for some of these specific
topics?

Question 4. As GAO's report mentions, territories have taken steps
to mitigate data gaps through local data collection efforts. In Puerto
Rico, for example, the Puerto Rico Department of Labor conducts the
local Labor Force Survey, or Encuesta de Grupo Trabajador, in Spanish.
Some may see this and argue that expanding the Current Population
Survey to include Puerto Rico would therefore be unnecessary or
duplicative.

How would you respond to such a statement? What are the differences
between the Current Population Survey and the Puerto Rico Department of
Labor's Labor Force Survey? Are they duplicative?

Question 5. Another federal statistical program Puerto Rico is
currently excluded from is the Census of Governments. In fact, I
understand Puerto Rico was included in this product until the early
1980s. Can you discuss why including Puerto Rico again in the Census of
Governments would be important? And how would it help improve
transparency?

Question 6. Are there any examples of the recent inclusion of
Puerto Rico in a survey or statistical data product?

Question 7. In addition to the Current Population Survey and the
Census of Governments, are there other federal statistical products
that exclude Puerto Rico that you would like to briefly mention or
discuss?

Questions Submitted by Representative Velazquez

Question 1. According to your statement, the PRIS has authority
over the statistical policies of Puerto Rico agencies. In recent years,
Puerto Rico has received significant funds for emergency response, as
well as disaster recovery and reconstruction efforts, in addition to
recurrent allocations. Federal funds represented 43% of Puerto Rico's
budget for FY 2023-2024. Who is responsible for tracking the use of
federal funds? How do you evaluate their effectiveness in collecting
all necessary data and developing metrics to assess the community-level
impact of these federal allocations and investments? What is PRIS'
evaluation of the data-sharing platforms of the CDBG and COR3
transparency portals, especially when it comes to collecting and
reporting data about the use and impact of these funds?

Question 2. The Puerto Rico-based organization Sembrando Sentido
has identified more than 60 federal data sources with information
related to federal funds in Puerto Rico. Your statement mentions that
81 out of 449 federal statistical products include information about
Puerto Rico. What are PRIS' defining elements for a dataset to be
considered a data or statistical product and what technologies or
methodologies does PRIS have to track Puerto Rico's inclusion in
federal data?

Question 3. In your statement, you emphasize the importance of
identifying issues causing federal data gaps that affect the
availability of critical information for Puerto Rico. Does PRIS share
GAO's view that the reasons for federal data gaps in Puerto Rico are
associated with economic, geographic, and technical issues? If so, can
you provide specific examples illustrating how these issues affect the
inclusion of Puerto Rico in federal-level data?

Question 4. Multiple public services have recently been privatized
in Puerto Rico, through public-private partnerships. For example, a
private enterprise now operates maritime transportation to Vieques and
Culebra. Additionally, Puerto Rico's power distribution and generation
were privatized, a move that remains under public debate due to
frequent power outages and rising costs of said service. These private
enterprises often have access to federal funds and yet, their
contractual agreements lack requirements around data collection and
disclosure mechanisms to assess use and impact of public funds. How are
these privatizations impacting Puerto Rico's capacity and prerogatives
to track the use of these funds?

______

Ms. Hageman. Thank you for your testimony. The Chair now
recognizes Dr. Levin for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF MICHAEL LEVIN, MANAGING PARTNER, PACIFICWEB LLC,
HONOLULU, HAWAII

Dr. Levin. Good morning, Chair and distinguished members of
the Subcommittee. My name is Dr. Michael Levin.
I did my field work for my dissertation on an extremely
small atoll in Micronesia. Later, I coordinated statistical
activities in the insular areas at the Census Bureau during my
28 years there. I spent 8 more years continuing the work at
Harvard University's Population Center before my working
retirement in Hawaii.
Today, I will outline suggested statistical enhancements in
the Pacific Territories. My comments do not cover Puerto Rico
or the U.S. Virgin Islands.
I commend this Committee for holding this hearing to focus
on strategies for statistical work in these territories. Each
territory needs a statistical system that encompasses three
general areas: decennial and other censuses, intercensal
surveys, and administrative records. As the GAO report shows,
Federal Statistical Agency coverage in the U.S. territories
remains very limited. Since local government statistical
efforts have filled gaps in the coverage, gaps still remain.
Territorial statistical offices vary in terms of their
capacity and needs. Each of the three areas has specific
solvable needs, which I describe in the paper.
The three elements in a territorial statistical system
include, for the census, Federal agency coverage that appears
in the decennial census, the agricultural census, the economic
census, and county business patterns.
For surveys and administrative records, the Office of
Insular Affairs, OIA, started the Statistical Enhancement
Project in the mid-1980s through the Census Bureau. This
program improved territorial statistical collections and filled
Federal data gaps. Formal training through territory-wide and
in-country workshops provided capacity building. The surveys
also improved capacity and addressed Federal data gaps. The
project used Census Bureau conventions throughout the surveys.
Examples of the kinds of surveys appear in the written
testimony. The program closed about 2005.
Currently looking at OIA, the territories would benefit
from new funding for a program like the previous one, but with
central supervision. The program would allow the individual
territories to improve their labor force surveys, fund
administrative records collection and dissemination, and build
general capacity.
OIA should look specifically at two areas. One is mapping.
Both CNMI and American Samoa do continuous updating as funding
is available, so they can select survey samples as required.
For the Guam Household Survey conducted in 2019, Guam's power
authority provided a spreadsheet of units on Guam with
electricity for sampling and sample selection.
None of the three Pacific territories and the U.S. Virgin
Islands have complete street addressing. They cannot draw
samples based on a list of physical addresses. The Census
Bureau previously overcame this hurdle by, for example,
selecting enumeration blocks in Guam and the CNMI for the
Micronesian migrants surveys. So, this method is appropriate
for ongoing surveys.
For the Census Bureau and Congress, the experience with
Micronesia migrant surveys shows that Census Bureau-run surveys
cost much more than surveys that OIA funds directly to the
territories. The Census Bureau could help by developing and
using updated maps in the three territories and to help select
samples for surveys. But clearly, the territories can
administer the surveys themselves when governments provide
funds. And for Congress, congressional interest in territorial
statistics is certainly welcome. Addressing the gaps found in
the GAO report and then mandating that agencies respond will
improve statistical coverage.
In closing, I thank the Subcommittee for this opportunity
to speak with you today. The territories are integral to U.S.
security interests and the needs in the Pacific. Statistics are
crucial for making policy decisions for the territories and for
the United States. Congress should be proactive to strengthen
statistics in the U.S. Pacific Territories.
I look forward to your questions. Thank you.

[The prepared statement of Dr. Levin follows:]
Prepared Statement of Michael J. Levin, Managing Partner,
PacificWeb, LLC

I. Introduction

Good afternoon, Chair, Ranking Member, and distinguished members of
the subcommittee.
My name is Michael Levin. I worked at the U.S. Census Bureau for 28
years and spent 8 more years at Harvard University's Population Center,
before my working-retirement to Hawaii.
Today, I will outline needed statistical enhancements in the U.S.
Pacific Territories of American Samoa, the Commonwealth of the Northern
Mariana Islands (CNMI), and Guam. My comments do not cover Puerto Rico
and only briefly touch on the U.S. Virgin Islands. I commend this
committee for holding this hearing to focus on strategies to support
statistical work in these territories.

II. Statistics in the Territories

Every country and major civil division, in our case, every U.S.
state and territory, needs a statistical system that encompasses three
general areas. These areas are: (1) censuses, (2) intercensal surveys,
and (3) administrative records. Censuses, surveys, and administrative
data all contribute to these data areas.
As the GAO report shows, Federal agencies limit statistical
coverage in the U.S. territories. Local government statistical efforts
fill gaps, but gaps remain.
Federal Data

Federal agency coverage of the territories includes population data
collected by the Decennial Census, quinquennial Census of Agriculture
and the Economic Census, and annual data on County Business Patterns.
This leaves extensive gaps in Federal territorial data. For the
U.S. states, Census administers the continuous American Community
Survey-collecting demographic and household data, the Census of
Governments, annual surveys of State and Local Governments, and surveys
collecting economic data on retail trade, manufacturing, and services.
The government collects none of these data in the territories. The
Department of Labor's Bureau of Labor Statistics is almost absent in
the territories, providing no price indices for consumers and producers
and almost no employment and workforce data.
Office of Insular Affairs Support of Territorial Data Collection

The Office of Insular Affairs (OIA), Department of the Interior,
started the Statistical Enhancement Project in the mid-1980s to support
the statistics offices of the territories and to fill Federal data
gaps. OIA funded the Census Bureau each fiscal year to provide
technical help to the U.S. Virgin Islands in the Caribbean, and the 6
Areas in the Pacific: American Samoa, the Commonwealth of the Northern
Mariana Islands (CNMI), Guam, and what became the three Freely
Associated States of the Federated States of Micronesia (FSM), the
Marshall Islands, and Palau.
From 1988 to 2003 I led Census Bureau work to support OIA
statistical efforts in the territories and FAS--building local
statistics capacity through formal training and through direct and in-
person work on surveys and censuses. I continued working with the
Pacific territories and FAS region after I left Census, and even now in
retirement.

Training: Formal training was a key part of capacity building.
Training occurred through a series of workshops where territorial
statistical staff would meet at the East-West Center or at the Census
Bureau's International Programs Center (IPC). The workshops included:
Developing Statistical Yearbooks (1988), Intercensal surveys (1991),
Census processing (editing and tabulation) (1992), Workshop and
Conference of results of the 1990 censuses in the Insular Areas (1993),
Population Estimates Workshop (1993), Vital Statistics Workshop (1993),
Advanced Census Processing (1994),Trade, Medical Yearbooks, Cause of
Death Coding, and Statistical Yearbooks (1995).

Surveys: Conducting surveys further built capacity and addressed
Federal data gaps. The project used Census Bureau conventions for
questionnaires, enumerator instructions, monitoring, and training.
Local statistics offices monitored and executed survey enumeration,
coded survey results, and keyed the data. I used Census Bureau
procedures to edit and tabulate the data and draft the reports on
survey results.

The Census/OIA project supported:

Household Income and Expenditures Surveys (HIES). The HIES
provides information on consumer income and expenditure
patterns by income, birthplace, ethnicity, education, and labor
force participation. If the territories were States, the U.S.
would include them in consumer expenditures surveys (CES). The
HIES is critical to prepare local price indices and to offset
the lack of Bureau of Labor Statistics price indices in the
territories. These surveys have also been a ``work-around'' for
exclusion from the U.S. American Community Survey and provide
population an estimate within the 10-year Census interval.

Wage and Labor Force Surveys. If the territories were States,
the U.S. would conduct wage and labor force surveys, but they
currently exclude the territories. These missing U.S. surveys
include the Current Population Survey (CPS), Survey of Program
Participation (SIPP), and, especially, the American Community
Survey (ACS).

Behavioral Risk Surveys. The territories started annual
behavioral risk surveys.

Micronesian Migrant Surveys. Beginning in 1992, and every 5
years, I supervised full censuses of FAS migration to the CNMI,
Guam, and Hawaii (beginning in 1998) using Micronesian
enumerators and supervisors. This provided OIA with counts and
characteristics of the migrant populations in CNMI, Guam, and
Hawaii.

GDP and CPI. Other Census and other Federal staff worked with
the territory statistics offices to prepare Gross Domestic
Product benchmark information for 2002 and consumer price
indexes.

Over time, OIA reduced its support to build insular statistics
office capacity. While OIA continued to fund insular survey costs, its
funding committed to paying for expensive Census Bureau productions of
FAS migration data and to pay the Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA) to
produce annual territory GDP data.

FAS migration data. While the Census 2003 FAS migration data
cost OIA about $300,000 to cover Guam, CNMI, and Hawaii, the
Bureau charged OIA $1.2 million for the 2008 FAS migration
data. OIA and the Bureau limited the items on the CNMI and Guam
questionnaires to only provide counts of migrants and not
collect information on education, employment, and other
characteristics. For Hawaii, Census had detailed information
from the ACS. For the 2013 report, the Census Bureau used 2010
CNMI and Guam Census data and Hawaii ACS data. Census returned
to its 2008 procedure for the 2018 data round. Compact III does
not include compact impact funds, so they no longer require
enumerations to distribute funds.

Territorial GDP. Beginning in 2008, OIA annually pays BEA to
produce territorial GDP. These are data produced by BEA for the
50 U.S. States and the District of Columbia each quarter.

The practice of OIA paying BEA to produce GDP contrasts with
the Puerto Rico experience. In 2018, BEA started a project to
calculate the GDP for Puerto Rico to support its economic
recovery following devastating hurricanes in 2017. The project
addressed recommendations from the Congressional Task Force on
Economic Growth in Puerto Rico and from GAO that BEA calculate
the GDP for Puerto Rico.
Territorial Statistics Office Activities

As OIA reduced its engagement and support for territorial
statistics offices, offices reduced their own data efforts.

Statistical Yearbooks. One important contribution of
territorial statistics offices is to pull together government
administrative records and publish annual Statistical
Yearbooks. Most countries publish Statistical Yearbooks to
provide information from administrative records in a timely
manner and using accepted statistical conventions. Common
administrative records include vital statistics (births and
deaths), education (school enrollments), labor force
activities, and migration through immigrants and emigrants.
Statistics collected internally, like school enrollments, are
important for planning schools and classrooms. When the OIA
program started, only American Samoa produced Statistical
Yearbooks regularly and Guam produced a series of tables in the
back of its annual Economic Review. The CNMI and the Freely
Associated States did not produce annual yearbooks. By the mid-
1990s, under the OIA program, most territories were producing
at least limited yearbooks, and they improved year by year.
Unfortunately, they lost momentum.

Labor surveys. American Samoa has not done labor force surveys.
CNMI did periodic labor force surveys until 1995 and did
quarterly labor force surveys from 1996 to about 1998. These
then drifted off into semi-regularity, and then mostly
unfunded, not done at all. Guam had quarterly labor force
surveys, starting at least during the 1980s. The Guam's Bureau
of Labor's website shows quarterly reports from 1993 to
September 2023.

The statistical offices could design labor surveys to maintain
a smaller and professional group of enumerators. To organize
such a survey, I would suggest pulling a 6 percent sample from
the complete housing listing, and then dividing it into 3
parts. If the territory centers the quarterly labor force
survey in February, the enumerators would go to one-third of
the units in January, then one-third in February, and then the
last one-third in March, making the 6 percent sample centered
in February. When they select the next 6 percent sample (or use
the same sample again over a year), the first one-third in
April can combine with the February and March samples to get a
6 percent sample centered on March. Because the surveys would
need few enumerators for these procedures, a group of super-
enumerators could work continuously over the year with
appropriate payment.

Migration data. Among the most problematic statistics are those
concerning migration. Guam has experimented in the past with
entry and exit ``cards'' or sheets. Currently, both Guam and
CNMI collect entry forms, including agriculture and voluntary
tourism and returning resident information, but they are not
making efforts to collect exit information. Considering that
tourists overwhelm this data collection, it is not surprising
that the territories do not make more efforts to collect these
data. But, given the responses to changing economic conditions,
governments might make more effort. And the statistical
summaries might then appear in the yearbooks.
Territorial Statistics Office Needs

Today the Territorial Statistical Offices vary in terms of their
capacity and needs.

Guam has capable statisticians in both the public and private
sectors who can generate the statistics it needs for planning and
policy development. Guam's problem is the dispersion of statistical
activities among the agencies, with the Bureau of Statistics and Plans,
Department of Labor, Public Health and Social Services, and the
University of Guam each taking part in separate ways in collecting and
disseminating statistical activities. The government should designate
one office as the central agency, with all statistical activities going
through it to eliminate duplication and to make sure that agencies
cover appropriate areas. A single agency, like those in American Samoa
and CNMI, would enhance the communication between government agencies
and produce better and more reliable statistics.

The CNMI government does not understand the need for constant and
consistent statistical work. The CNMI government is not providing
sufficient staff to cover work on the CPI, labor force, and other
surveys, or their statistical yearbook. Congress and the OIA might fund
a couple of positions to assist in at least bringing the program up to
a minimal level. The CSD Director is exceptional, but he cannot do it
alone.

American Samoa has a different challenge. The chief statistician
recently retired after 40 years in that position. The office has few
employees, but because it is in the Department of Commerce, it uses
staff from other areas when needed. Since they do not undertake labor
force surveys (although they should), and only have a single survey in
the mid-decade, most work goes to administrative data and publishing
their yearbook.

The Freely Associated States (FAS): Although the GAO report does
not cover the Federated States of Micronesia, the Marshall Islands, and
Palau, their need for technical help is even greater than the remaining
U.S. Areas. None of the three National Statisticians were university
trained in statistics, and that shows. Palau publishes a good annual
yearbook, but FSM and the Marshalls do not. The Pacific Community (SPC)
assists the FAS with their surveys, especially the HIES. SPC uses UN
statistical conventions rather than U.S. conventions, so that FAS data
is not always compatible with U.S. Federal agency program requirements.
For example, the SPC considers subsistence activities as working,
whereas the U.S. uses paid employment. Thus, FAS employment and
unemployment data are not compatible with U.S. measures. Previously,
the OIA Statistical Enhancement Project included the FAS.
Even without direct technical help, the FAS governments should
track the flow of the emigrants to Guam, Hawaii, and the U.S. Mainland,
using scanned passport information. The flow is extraordinarily strong:
the Marshall Islands' population decreased from 55,000 to 42,000 over a
decade and it looks like FSM will report a similar decrease if they
finish processing their late census. Periodic surveys of the migrants
or inclusion in labor force surveys could provide valuable information
to Guam on these migrants from the FSM.

III. Are street addresses a survey problem?

Sample selection. As noted in the GAO report, the Census Bureau
cites the lack of street addresses as an excuse for excluding the
territories from Census survey work. None of the three Pacific
territories (and the U.S. Virgin Islands) have complete street
addresses, allowing for sample selection based on a list of physical
addresses.
However, the Census Bureau overcame this hurdle in the past. For
both the 2008 and 2018 Micronesian Migrants Surveys for Compact impact
reporting, the Census Bureau selected blocks and attempted to enumerate
all housing units in those blocks in Guam and Saipan. Further, part of
the effort to implement the 2020 Census in the territories required the
mapping and listing each home, apartment, and shelter by enumerators
before door-to-door in-person household interviews.
Guam has other sources for sample selection. For its Labor Force
surveys, Guam continuously updated maps to assist enumerators in
locating survey sample housing units. Coastal Zone management was also
making detailed maps and staff in the administration were attempting to
combine the two. For the 2019 HIES, we used the Guam Power Authority's
Excel spreadsheets of all housing units on the island attached to
electric power and drew a 5 percent sample from that.

Mapping. As noted in the GAO report, the Census Bureau claims none
of the three territories has a proper mapping for sample selection.
This excuse excludes the territories from Census survey work. But the
areas do have workable maps.
Both CNMI and American Samoa do continuous map updating, so they
select samples as required for surveys. The 2015 Household Income and
Expenditures (HIES) in American Samoa derived a 20 percent sample of
housing units, as it also did in 1995 and 2005. American Samoa's
Department of Commerce has developed samples for health and other
surveys. The CNMI maintains GIS shape files for islands (Saipan,
Tinian, and Rota), villages, political boundaries (districts), census
blocks, roads, and housing units and updates them periodically to use
them as the sampling frame for surveys. CNMI keeps Excel workbooks
listing housing units for sample selection. Most samples are 5 or 10
percent of the units. CNMI used these samples for the 2012 survey of
Federated States of Micronesia (FSM) migrants, the 2016 HIES, and the
2017 Labor Force Survey. Both American Samoa and CNMI have an advantage
over Guam for sample selection ``on the ground'' because neither has
the level of apartment buildings that Guam has.
In 2019, when we started the Guam HIES, Guam's Power Authority
provided an Excel spreadsheet of the housing units on Guam with
detailed address information. I selected a 5 percent sample, by
starting with a random number and then selected each 20th household
after that. Because the enumerators were unlikely to go to 2,500 units,
I then made 5 one percent samples. Despite the success of the sample
selection, the survey failed because of the lack of enumerators, the
lack of publicity, and worries about crime, making people not open
their doors for interviews.

IV. Suggested actions for OIA, Census, and Congress

Office of Insular Affairs. The Department of the Interior's Office
of Insular Affairs is the lead agency to support statistical work in
the Pacific territories. The OIA Statistical Enhancement Project
through the Census Bureau in the late 1980s through the early 2000s got
continuing statistical data through surveys and improved administrative
records. The territories would benefit from funding a similar program
with central supervision, allowing the individual territories to
improve their statistical work, and to share their results with the
other territories, with Federal agencies, and the Congress.
One example of work for OIA to support is labor force surveys. Guam
is undertaking a form of quarterly labor force surveys. OIA might
provide funding to American Samoa and CNMI to do quarterly labor force
surveys. The questionnaire, other materials, training, editing, and
tabulation should follow Census Bureau standards so be compatible with
the Census and other surveys.
There is again a need for OIA to focus on building capacity. The
CNMI and American Samoa currently have limited capacity within their
statistical offices. OIA could assist in developing capacity through
placing territorial staff in work-study programs at the Census Bureau,
Department of Labor, and other appropriate agencies. Also, U.S.
agencies would place appropriate staff in the territorial statistical
offices to enhance the use of statistical procedures and staff
development.

U.S. Census Bureau. The Census Bureau has a mandate to do the
Decennial Census and its enabling legislation allows for collecting
survey information if Congress provides funds for these activities. The
experience with the Micronesian migrants surveys shows that Census run
surveys cost more than surveys that OIA funds as projects directly with
the territories.
However, all Federal agencies recognize Census Bureau data, so OIA
should selectively fund the Bureau. The Census Bureau and the CNMI are
now using (and updating) the same maps (shape files) for villages,
census blocks, political boundaries. But they do not share the housing
units' shape files. The Census Bureau could develop and use updated
maps in the three territories to develop samples for surveys.

Congress. Congressional interest in territorial statistics is
welcome. Requesting follow-up work from the GAO on the statistical
needs of the territories and tracking Federal agency actions could be
among the next steps. Congress should fund needs discussed above.

V. Conclusion

In closing, I thank the subcommittee for this opportunity to speak
with you today. The territories of American Samoa, the CNMI, and Guam
are integral to U.S. security interests and needs in the North and
South Pacific. Statistics are crucial for planning and for making
policy decisions for the territories themselves and for the United
States as a whole. Congress can take pro-active steps to strengthen
statistics in the U.S. Pacific territories. I look forward to any
questions you may have.

______

Questions Submitted for the Record to Dr. Michael Levin, Independent
Consultant, PacificWeb LLC

Dr. Levin did not submit responses to the Committee by the appropriate
deadline for inclusion in the printed record.

Questions Submitted by Representative Westerman

Question 1. In your experience having worked for the Census Bureau,
what challenges do federal agencies face when collecting data on the
U.S. territories?

Question 2. In your written testimony, you pointed out that formal
training was a key part of capacity building efforts by the U.S.
government, such as training programs hosted by the Census Bureau.

2a) Is formal training no longer provided by U.S. agencies for the
territories? If so, why are they no longer provided?

Question 3. According to your written testimony, the Office of
Insular Affairs reduced its support for capacity building for the
territorial statistic offices. While the Office of Insular Affairs
continued to fund insular survey costs, it seems funding was committed
to paying for expensive Census Bureau and Bureau of Economic Analysis
products.

3a) How much more does it cost for the Office of Insular Affairs to
outsource data collection to agencies like the Census Bureau for
surveys such as Freely Associated States migration data that was used
for Compact Impact Grant funding?

Question 4. When looking at the Census Bureau's data collection for
Freely Associated States migration data from 2003 to 2018, was this
data reliable and consistent?

Question 5. Would it be fair to say that capacity building is a
more cost-effective solution than funding these expensive projects in
the long run?

5a) Is it also fair to say that outsourcing this data to other
agencies does not guarantee high quality data?

Question 6. In your written testimony, you state that the
territorial statistic offices reduced their own data efforts, including
on the statistical yearbooks.

6a) In your opinion, is this a capacity issue or something else?

Question 7. The GAO report notes that the Census Bureau cited the
lack of street address data as a reason for the lack of data collection
for the territories.

7a) Do you believe this reason is justified?

7b) Has the Census Bureau overcome this hurdle in the past? If so,
how?

Question 8. The GAO report notes that the Census Bureau claims that
none of the Pacific territories have proper mapping for sample
selection.

8a) Do Guam, American Samoa, and the CNMI have workable maps?

8b) If so, why was this claim made?

Question 9. The Department of the Interior used to play a larger
role in supporting federal data collection for the U.S. territories.
However, this role has largely decreased by the mid-2000s as the
Department of the Interior shifted from proactive support to reactive
grants.

9a) As someone who has worked in the U.S. federal statistical
system during this period and continues to collect data on the Pacific
territories, how has this affected the availability and quality of data
for the Pacific territories?

Question 10. Do you have any recommendations for addressing the
gaps in federal collection for the U.S. territories?

______

Ms. Hageman. Thank you, Dr. Levin, for your testimony, and
I apologize for mispronouncing your name earlier.
Dr. Levin. That is fine.
Ms. Hageman. The Chair will now recognize the Members for 5
minutes of questions, and I am going to begin with me.
The U.S. territories vary in population and size,
geography, economic conditions, and needs, something that I
think every one of you have addressed today. And this often
means that policy for the territories should be tailored for
each of the territories to ensure that it achieves the intended
effect. I would like to address my questioning to Ms.
Braybrooks and Ms. Love-Grayer.
Does addressing the gaps in Federal data collection for the
territories require a similar approach, or is that unnecessary?
Ms. Braybrooks?
Ms. Braybrooks. Thank you for the question. To date, the
review of how to include the territories has examined the
assumption that we should fit them into the existing products.
But I think what has been shared and what we observe is that
there are data needs, but we should look at the existing
products, as well as alternative ideas on how to include the
territories. Their size makes them unique, and we see the
technical issues of running surveys and sample sizes there.
One of the areas to provide an example is, when we look at
the economic statistics we have recently been working to
understand, well, how does it work in other island nations?
What are they doing in lieu of not being included in surveys?
And how can we better extract information from administrative
data to move towards more timely and meaningful information?
So, OIA would advocate that, while we talk about addressing
the gaps, we think about doing it outside of the box to
recognize the unique situation and attributes of the U.S.
territories.
Ms. Hageman. Ms. Love-Grayer, does addressing gaps in the
Federal data collection for the territories require a similar
approach, or is that unnecessary?
Ms. Love-Grayer. I agree with my colleague here from DOI. I
do believe that the territories have different needs. They have
different data gaps, as well, and different demographics. So,
there is not a one-size-fits-all answer.
However, we do believe that OMB can play a major role in
pulling all of the Federal agencies together to understand how
to assess the feasibility of conducting data and conducting
more data collection in each of the territories, so that there
can be a sharing of lessons learned where data has been
collected, where some of the challenges that exist at
collecting the data have been overcome. So, while there is not
a one-size-fits-all approach, there does need to be a
coordinated approach.
And we also do believe that that coordination should
include coordinating closely with the territories to understand
their highest priorities and understanding their data needs and
their data gaps, and what is available even locally to assist
with the data collection. And a coordinated approach, even with
some of the parties that are stakeholders like universities,
who often have the capacity to do some of the statistics that
maybe the officials do not have. So, one-size-fits-all approach
doesn't work, but a coordinated approach certainly does.
Ms. Hageman. Well, I am going to stick with you for a
moment. Do you have any specific concerns or factors that you
can identify as you sit here today that Congress should
consider when attempting to address the gaps in Federal
collection for the territories?
Ms. Love-Grayer. Yes, there are a few I think are important
to take into consideration.
One is what we just talked about, that there are different
needs, that there isn't a one-size-fits-all approach, that it
will take collaboration with all of the levels, and OMB should
play a role in that.
But another is that there are a myriad of statutes that
really authorize these different statistical agencies in
collecting the data. So, understanding what those legislations
outline, what they do and don't include, and really considering
that in any solution is going to be important, as well, and
also that we do need to engage the territories in this. This
cannot be something that the Federal Government does on its
own.
Ms. Hageman. Ms. Guerrero, as a witness from the
territories, you both see and feel firsthand the impacts that
stem from the gaps in Federal data collection for the
territories. How has the lack of or outdated data affected the
territorial governments and local communities?
Ms. Leon Guerrero. Basically, there are funding
opportunities that we are unable to apply for because of the
data gap. And we have had to improvise to actually----
Ms. Hageman. Could you give me a specific example of
something like that?
Ms. Leon Guerrero. The CEJST Justice tool, the IRA funding,
there are some grant opportunities that we can't apply because
we are only eligible for one category, and that is workforce.
And in general, the areas located in the categories basically,
in some areas, do not represent underserved communities or
disadvantaged communities. We have areas that should have been
identified but were not included. So, that is a really good
example.
So, with regards to U.S. Department of Justice grants,
there are things there with regards to crime statistics, and
the data is based on population. So, with the 2020 census, we
see a reduction in population, so we are going to see a
reduction in Federal resources coming to Guam.
Ms. Hageman. Thank you for that information. I now
recognize Mr. Sablan for 5 minutes of questioning.
Mr. Sablan. Thank you. Good morning, everyone.
Madam Chair, thank you for holding this important hearing.
I welcome all the witnesses.
Before I start, I would like to recognize Dr. Underwood, a
former member of this Congress, who has spent the entire time
he was here on this Committee also. So, Dr. Underwood, welcome
back.
Now, this is a good hearing. I like all the witnesses and
testimonies, but I am going to start with Ms. Latesha Love-
Grayer, did you just add another last name? Because I think you
did, right?
[Laughter.]
Ms. Love-Grayer. It has been updated. It was Latesha Love
for a while.
Mr. Sablan. OK, all right. Congratulations, then.
Thank you for GAO's work on producing this report and many
other reports that have been very useful to me in my time here.
But this report was important also.
We all know that data policymakers can take for granted for
the states often does not exist for the territories. And the
question is often why, why don't we have that data for the
territories?
And in your report, it says it is because of our small
populations, one of them, right, a larger percentage of the
population, for example, has to be sampled in the territories
versus the states to get the same statistical margin of error.
[Slide.]
Mr. Sablan. So, here is the chart from your report on the
screen. About 25 percent of the population of Guam, for
example, has to be sampled to get the same margin of error as
sampling just 0.85 percent of the population of Kentucky. Now,
that seems like a big difference, you know?
So, help me here with the math: 25 percent of Guam's
population is 38,000; .85 percent of Kentucky's population is
38,000. So, in your example, the sample size for Guam is the
same as the sample size for Kentucky, 38,000. So, wouldn't the
cost of collecting data be about the same?
Ms. Love-Grayer. That is a great question, thank you for
it.
One of the things that we wanted to highlight here is it is
about the cost per capita, so the cost relative to the size of
the territory or the state. When there is a smaller population,
and you have to sample a larger percentage of it for the same
level of precision, so the cost overall and the number of
individuals that you sample overall might be the same, but
relative to the size of the entire population there is a higher
cost per person.
Mr. Sablan. OK.
Ms. Love-Grayer. And I do want to clarify that in our
report we wanted to highlight that this is one of the
challenges that we hear, that we heard from statistical
agencies. But it is not a challenge that we think should
necessarily stop you from collecting the data. And currently
what many agencies do is collect a smaller sample, which leads
to less precision.
Mr. Sablan. Yes, and I need to move on, but thank you. And
hopefully, we can continue to work on this issue.
Ms. Braybrooks, welcome. In your testimony you stated, for
example, the territories' lack of local capacity should not be
a reason to exclude them from surveys. The Federal Government's
reliance on OIA for technical assistance is not sustainable or
sufficient, as it unduly places the burden on territories to
solve data deficiencies themselves--I am running out of time--
population, and land area. Thank you, I agree with all of that.
But GAO also reports that the insular areas have access to
TAP money, T-A-P money, and suggests that the money could be
used to improve Federal data collection. So, GAO says that
nearly $62 million in TAP was provided from Fiscal Year 2019 to
2023. That sounds like a lot, $62 million divided by 5 years,
and divided among the four territories and some Federal
agencies, too. I would say about $3 million, on average, for
each territory, except that I know the Northern Marianas got
about half of that this year.
So, do you know how much of this technical assistance is
going to data collection improvements, Ms. Braybrooks?
Ms. Braybrooks. On average, it is about $1 to $2 million
out of a pot of $22 million.
Mr. Sablan. All right, not much, right?
Ms. Braybrooks. But that is with competing priorities.
Mr. Sablan. Not much. So, these technical assistance grants
can be used for a wide range of purposes, right?
Ms. Braybrooks. Correct.
Mr. Sablan. They compete. And collecting data may not be
the highest priority for the insular areas.
Earlier this month, grants were awarded for fluoroscopy
equipment for our hospital in the Marianas and for improving
tax collections. Ms. Braybrooks, would you say paying for data
the Federal Government collects in the states should be a
higher priority for the territories than taking care of the
people's health, or making sure our government is solvent?
That is a rhetorical question, really. I am just saying if
my late friend, Eni Faleomavaega, was here, he would remind me
again that until Delegates here have votes on the Floor, this
problem is going to continue to remain because agencies do not
have responsibilities to Delegates in the territories. Let's
make that go away, please. Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Ms. Hageman. Thank you. The Chair now recognizes Mr. Moylan
for 5 minutes of questioning.
Mr. Moylan. Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank you to our panel.
This data collection problem, it has been a long problem,
ongoing. And without the correct data, as we understand from
the panel, we just can't get what we are supposed to have. And
the GAO's report finally came out and said that the local
groups may not apply for grants and programs as Ms. Leon
Guerrero has stated, as well, which we would have qualified for
these programs if we were able to be included. And we are not
included in this. It is just totally unacceptable. I am glad to
see there is some action, but it is really long overdue.
And Guam particularly suffers from these effects. SNAP
payments are based on the Federal Poverty and Consumer Price
data, and the approach not taken for any of the states. So,
this lack of composite data hinders our efforts to identify
needed resources and delays what we need for the island.
The Office of Insular Affairs is meant to advocate for our
territories. And I hear it coming. But again, we are just way
behind, and we have to do more. We have to advocate louder. And
I hear it from our panels, too, but I want to hear a little bit
more from Director Leon Guerrero.
The GAO report identified these barriers toward accurate
data collection in the territories, especially within Guam.
What barriers does the Government of Guam find most troublesome
in the accurate data collection and transmission to the Federal
agencies?
Ms. Leon Guerrero. I think the most important thing is the
need for improved coordination between the Federal agencies and
the Government of Guam to ensure compliance with the required
standards and methodology when conducting federally
administered surveys and census.
So, we do need Federal territory relationships to be in
place, and there needs to be that line of communication between
the entities when we are conducting. So, on surveys we just
need to make sure we are informed of the proper methodology in
order so that we can also take action to implement those things
and provide the necessary information to the Federal agencies.
We need to work together to bridge the gap.
Mr. Moylan. Excellent. Thank you. And I hear the same from
Puerto Rico, as well. We are excluded. We are just not
included. We are excluded from all these things. You are trying
to raise your voice to say, include us, include us. And this is
just terrible. So, now at least we finally got to sit down, and
we are talking, based on this report, on how we can make the
corrections. So, that is a good thing.
But also Director Leon Guerrero, what actions could the
Federal Government take to best support data collection in the
territories?
Ms. Leon Guerrero. Resources. We need Federal resources in
order to include for the territories, Guam, for major
statistical products.
And the other thing also is to educate the Federal entities
about the territories. That is very important.
And the other one is also to conduct a comprehensive review
of the territories' data gaps, as well as, again, resources and
funding support for capacity building for Guam, as well as the
other territories.
Mr. Sablan. Thank you.
Ms. Braybrooks, this problem of data collection has been
known since at least 2018, though I would not be surprised if
this issue has been occurring for far longer. Why has the OIA
been so stagnant in its response to address data gaps in the
territories?
OIA's mission statement is to coordinate Federal policies
for American Samoa, Guam, Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana
Islands, and the U.S. Virgin Islands with the aim to support
and develop an efficient and effective government. So, why has
this Administration basically, to me, ignored such a critical
problem?
Ms. Braybrooks. Thank you for the question.
Regarding our resources in OIA, we have used our available
resources. From the funding resources, TAP is $22 million a
year. In reality, we get over $100 million in grant requests
that range from public safety, to education, to health. So, we
do reflect back to the priority of the territories when we make
the decisions of where to fund, but we are using it to fund
data and advocate.
Other resources that we use include leveraging and
advocating to our Federal partners. But we are not in a
position to tell the Federal partners how to use their
resources. So, that is the role that we are taking, is making
awareness and trying to leverage where we can, but we are
simply not in a position to fill the gap by ourselves.
Mr. Moylan. Thank you. So, I suggest to the Administration
that they need to assist you folks to fill that gap, because
this is just unacceptable.
I also think, just for the last few seconds, I think these
Federal agencies that are excluding the territories, that they
should have a territories class 101 every 6 months until they
get it in their mind, or we put up maps in their offices to say
this is Guam, this is Puerto Rico, so they don't forget. It is
just so simple. We need to be included in these things.
If you need more money, then talk to the Administration and
get yourself more money to support the territories. We are
really important. We must get this done. We have the Indo-
Pacific region that is very important. We can't let this happen
again. But I appreciate all your statements. Thank you very
much.
Director Leon Guerrero, thank you for the long trip coming
to from Guam. Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair, I yield back.
Ms. Hageman. The Chair now recognizes Ms. Velazquez for 5
minutes of questioning.
Ms. Velazquez. Thank you so very much, and I want to take
this opportunity to thank all the witnesses that are here.
It is kind of painful to be here, and to hear Federal
agencies talking about their responsibility toward the
territories. In my case, my homeland of Puerto Rico is a
colony, so it is the responsibility of the U.S. Government. It
is the responsibility of the U.S. Congress to provide the
funding so that the Federal agencies include Puerto Rico and
the territories on the data collection. How could we possibly
develop any kind of public policy that could have life or death
consequences for the people who live in the territory if we
don't have data collection? That is totally wrong.
Mr. Orenstein-Cardona, you mentioned in your testimony that
the Puerto Rican Institute of Statistics is prioritizing Puerto
Rico's inclusion in the Current Population Survey and the
Census of Governments, due to their importance to employment
statistics and government spending. Can you tell us which
Federal surveys or studies could be most helpful to advance
disaster recovery efforts in the territory?
Mr. Orenstein-Cardona. The CPS, or the Current Population
Survey, and the Census of Governments are very comprehensive,
allow comparability, and are very reliable. So, we have those
two as the most important Federal statistical products we would
like to be included in.
In our written testimony, we talk about other statistical
products we have encountered in which Puerto Rico is not
included in their data.
Ms. Velazquez. And what type of implications it has for
Puerto Rico?
Mr. Orenstein-Cardona. Right, well, enormous implications.
I will repeat the diverse topics that are not being covered:
reliable employment and unemployment and labor force
characteristics, local government expenditures at different
levels and in different areas, timely and quarterly GDP
calculations, statistics about the educational system,
infrastructure, motor vehicle registration, building permits,
et cetera.
Ms. Velazquez. OK, thank you. Mr. Orenstein, you mentioned
that Puerto Rico is included in only 18 percent of the total
440 Federal statistical products. For instance, of the 52
statistical products produced by the National Agricultural
Statistics Service, Puerto Rico is included in only 1. Could
you provide some examples of how this limited inclusion
adversely affects efforts at the community, local, and Federal
levels to address food insecurity and agricultural development
on the island?
Mr. Orenstein-Cardona. Well, definitely, the agricultural
sector of the economy is very important for Puerto Rico and has
suffered a lot in the last few decades, and we don't have
reliable information about that area. PRIS, our agency,
attempted to compile data from 2009 to 2019 on the production
and consumption of agricultural products, but that is not
enough. There is more information that we need in order to be
able to----
Ms. Velazquez. Thank you.
Ms. Love-Grayer, GAO's report found that efforts to
understand and address territorial data gaps across the Federal
Statistical System has been uncoordinated and scarce. And I
would like to add that there is a lack of urgency. We have a
prime example with the American Housing Survey. Despite HUD
expressing their interest in expanding the survey to include
Puerto Rico, after I sent a letter, which will require a
feasibility study estimated at $7 million, the agency did not
include this additional funding in its latest budget.
Could you please explain the social and economic benefits
of implementing this survey in Puerto Rico, and why it should
be prioritized by the pertinent Federal agencies?
Ms. Love-Grayer. Well, I am sure my colleagues in Puerto
Rico will probably be able to answer this even better than I.
Having accurate and timely housing data is important to
making decisions both at the Federal and the local level. HUD
makes decisions about its programing based on this data.
Certainly, local governments make decisions about the
allocation of resources in certain communities and who should
get what based on this data. So, the lack of data limits
decision making at all levels of government.
Ms. Velazquez. And would you please bring that message back
to your bosses in the Administration, why it is important?
Life or death could be defined by the lack of data. And we
saw this during Hurricane Maria. We are still facing a problem
of 30,000 homes in Puerto Rico not being rebuilt after Maria.
How many years later? Shame on us. Thank you.
Mr. Moylan [presiding]. Thank you. The Chair now recognizes
the Full Committee Chairman, Mr. Bruce Westerman.
Mr. Westerman. Thank you, Chairman. Thank you to the
witnesses for being here today.
And the whole reason we are here is because of facts and
data, because of a report that GAO did that looked at gaps with
data. I come from an engineering background, and one thing you
learn in engineering is that the results you produce are no
better than the data that you start with. So, if you start with
bad data, you are going to get bad results, no matter how well
you do in between. So, it is critical that we start with good
data.
And I think this hearing is an example of a good use of
congressional time, where we are really looking at a problem
and trying to figure out a way to fix the problem. And I go
back to the days when computers were just kind of getting off
the ground, and there was this acronym, I think it was GIGO,
garbage in, garbage out. So, we have to make sure we are not
putting garbage into the equation, or else we will get bad
results.
With that said, my first question is for Ms. Braybrooks and
Ms. Love-Grayer. Do you have any recommendations for how we can
close the gaps in data collection for the territories, and do
it in a fiscally responsible manner?
Ms. Braybrooks. Thank you for the question.
My testimony lays out a number of specific recommendations.
But generally, we support and encourage that a group of
stakeholders, including the statistical community, but those
that are entities that work with the territories and can
represent their needs come together and have a coordinated
discussion that discusses how to overcome the barriers and move
towards more meaningful statistics.
Some suggestions within that is understanding why they
exist. Knowing why they exist helps us determine how we solve
it. Is it statutory, administrative, or something other?
And within that ``other'' category, we know a lot of that
is related to technical infrastructure. So, working with
organizations who are qualified and can help guide the
territories and support them in developing local capacity is
essential. But that conversation really starts with a
coordinated effort which we haven't had to date.
Ms. Love-Grayer. And my answer will be very similar. We
have recommended that OMB lead that coordinated effort that my
colleague just mentioned. We think it is very important for
there to be a coordinated, government-wide approach to
assessing the feasibility of increasing or enhancing data
collection in many of the territories.
I don't think there is a one-size-fits-all, so there needs
to be a coordinated discussion between the territories, other
stakeholders, the Federal agencies in order to identify the
gaps that are the highest priorities, which may vary by the
territories, and to discuss the costs of being able to address
those gaps and the actions that need to be taken to do so. And
those actions would include both Federal and local actions that
would usually have to occur to address the barriers that exist
now.
So, that is our recommendation, and we will be following up
with OMB to determine what actions they are taking to fulfill
it.
Mr. Westerman. And if I can follow up with that, we kind of
use the term ``statistics'' loosely, but a lot of what it seems
we are talking about is more data collection than statistics.
The science of statistics is basically examining the data to
figure out what kind of confidence you have in the data and how
much variation is in the data.
So, is the problem at the root level of gathering data, or
is the problem in analyzing the data that we have?
Ms. Love-Grayer. I think we think it is both. There is not
enough data collection in many areas. And then, when data is
collected, sometimes the accuracy of that data is not high. So,
in those instances, the issue is with the type of data.
As you mentioned, if the data is not good going in, the
statistics are not great going out in terms of confidence, and
what they mean, and the actions that should be taken in
response to them.
Ms. Braybrooks. I agree with that. She hits right on the
source data about what goes in is what you get out.
But I also think that it is who is producing the
statistics. Right now, we are using Office of Insular Affairs
funds, a limited pool of funds to support the territories to
stand up surveys, the Consumer Price Index, the Household
Income and Expenditure Survey. We are funding GDP for four of
the five territories.
So, I think a conversation needs to be had about who is
best suited to produce these statistics and guide these
statistics, and we don't know enough now, but that conversation
is a worthy one to have.
Mr. Westerman. Thank you.
The membership of the Interagency Council on Statistical
Policy consists of 30 representatives of various U.S. Federal
agencies, and the DOI is a member of the Interagency Council.
Ms. Braybrooks, what is the DOI's role in the Interagency
Council on Statistical Policy?
It is kind of a follow-up to what we were just talking
about.
Ms. Braybrooks. I can't speak to the depth of DOI's
participation. It is a big agency and there are a lot of data
factors.
We have been involved to some degree with the Interagency
Council in recent months, both representatives from the Census
Bureau representing efforts in Puerto Rico and DOI. But to the
best of my knowledge, it has largely been educating the
Interagency Council about the territorial situation. And that
is where we are at now. DOI, the Office of Insular Affairs, has
gone to the table to explain the data issues to the Interagency
Council. There is an interest there, but it hasn't gone farther
than that, as far as I understand.
Mr. Westerman. Yes, I am over time, I yield back.
Mr. Moylan. Thank you, Mr. Westerman. The Chair now
recognizes Mr. LaMalfa from California.
Mr. LaMalfa. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate it.
Apologies for parachuting in at this time, as dueling
Committees is one of the curses we have around here. But I am
glad to join, glad to have our panelists here today. Let me
just launch into a couple of thoughts we have here with these
data collection mechanisms.
So, what resonates, really, is that the unique nature of
life in the territories, as compared to the continental United
States, and then the need to adapt to that, it is much like
what we deal with in rural areas of the continent, and like my
own state of California, for example. So, rural areas versus
the urban areas, where the rules pretty much are made, like in
Washington, DC or in my home state, in Sacramento at the state
level, where it just seems like they are miles different on
what priorities are or how the thinking even is, and when they
create guidelines, et cetera, that, basically, rural folks, or
maybe in your case the territories, would have a hard time
dealing with to comply, or they don't even make sense to be
doing it that way.
So, Ms. Love-Grayer, the report we are speaking of talks
about how the methods for data collection used in states don't
always translate well to the territories. Many of these methods
can be very specific prescriptions from the Federal agencies
that oversee them. Do you think the overall goal of data
collection could be met if we focused less on how the
territories should carry out the programs, and more focused on
what the goals of each set of data is supposed to be? What do
you think?
Ms. Love-Grayer. We do think an important part of
addressing this issue is understanding the needs of each of the
territories, and the unique data needs they have, and the
unique needs they have in their community. There is not a one-
size-fits-all approach for all of the territories. There are
different demographics, different economic circumstances, and
different data collection capacities within each of the
territories.
So, we do think that there needs to be more time spent
understanding those differences and thinking through how to
address them where there is a highest priority for each of the
territories.
Mr. LaMalfa. What do we need in order to allow the entities
involved to do that? What is holding them back from doing that?
Is it just DC says do it this way and that is it, or are they
allowed more locally to form their own prescription of doing
that?
Ms. Love-Grayer. We think there has been a lack of a
coordinated approach, which is why we made a recommendation to
OMB to create one. We don't know that there has been enough
dialogue between the Federal Government and the territories.
I think my colleagues on this panel have all noted the lack
of that coordination between the Federal Government and the
territories and other stakeholders who could inform those
decisions.
So, our recommendation is that OMB pull in all of these
stakeholders so that we can have a constructive conversation
about what those needs are and how best to address them.
Mr. LaMalfa. Has much been done in the work of a
demonstration or pilot programs that can be experimented at the
territory level to run these statistical and data programs in
their own way?
Is there that autonomy being done on a pilot level, at
least, for again, Ms. Love-Grayer, and then I would like to
throw that also to Ms. Leon Guerrero and Mr. Orenstein-Cardona.
Ms. Love-Grayer. To our knowledge, there have been
instances where--for example, my colleague here, Department of
the Interior, has helped fund technical assistance to local
territorial statistical bodies, and that has helped them
understand how to collect data better in their communities.
And there have been some instances, some collaboration
between the Census Bureau and the local or territorial census
or statistical bodies to understand how to collect data. But we
don't think that is something that is happening across the
board in a very comprehensive way.
Mr. LaMalfa. But on a pilot level it is occurring, or can
occur?
Ms. Love-Grayer. I don't know if I would call it a pilot,
but I would call it sort of individual one-off situations. And
in some instances, it appears that the territories have to be
the ones to initiate it.
Mr. LaMalfa. OK, thank you. Let me allow some time for Ms.
Leon Guerrero.
Ms. Leon Guerrero. We haven't done any pilot programs for
survey. We really rely on the Department of the Interior for
funding to conduct our surveys. For example, the Household
Income Survey, we actually got a grant funding from DOI for the
Household Income Survey. So, we have not done any pilot survey
programs.
Mr. LaMalfa. OK. Mr. Orenstein-Cardona.
Mr. Orenstein-Cardona. Sorry, in Puerto Rico we haven't had
piloted programs that I can think of.
Mr. LaMalfa. OK. But amongst the two of you, do you welcome
this sort of thinking, this sort of experimentation, or new
idea?
Ms. Leon Guerrero. If there are Federal resources involved.
Mr. LaMalfa. Yes, OK.
Mr. Orenstein?
Mr. Orenstein-Cardona. Yes, definitely resources are
important. And also close collaboration with local governments
is really important, too.
Mr. LaMalfa. OK. My time is up. Thank you for answering my
questions here on that, and I hope we can build upon this. I
appreciate it.
I will yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Moylan. Thank you, Mr. LaMalfa, and I want to thank the
witnesses for their valuable testimony and the Members for
their questions, as well.
The members of the Committee may have some additional
questions for the witnesses, and we will ask you to respond to
these in writing.
Under Committee Rule 3, members of the Committee must
submit questions to the Subcommittee Clerk by 5 p.m. on
Tuesday, June 18, 2024. The hearing record will be held open
for 10 business days for these responses.
If there are no further business, without objection, the
Committee stands adjourned.

[Whereupon, at 12:17 p.m., the Subcommittee was adjourned.]

[all]
