- OVERSIGHT HEARING ON EXAMINING THE PRESIDENT'S FY 2025 BUDGET REQUEST FOR THE UNITED STATES GEOLOGICAL SURVEY AND THE OFFICE OF SURFACE MINING RECLAMATION AND ENFORCEMENT

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

EXAMINING THE PRESIDENT'S FY 2025
BUDGET REQUEST FOR THE.
UNITED STATES GEOLOGICAL SURVEY
AND THE OFFICE OF SURFACE MINING.
RECLAMATION AND ENFORCEMENT

=======================================================================

OVERSIGHT HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND
MINERAL RESOURCES

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON NATURAL RESOURCES
U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

Wednesday, May 22, 2024

__________

Serial No. 118-123

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Natural Resources

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.govinfo.gov
or
Committee address: http://naturalresources.house.gov

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
55-751 PDF                  WASHINGTON : 2024

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

COMMITTEE ON NATURAL RESOURCES

BRUCE WESTERMAN, AR, Chairman
DOUG LAMBORN, CO, Vice Chairman
RAUL M. GRIJALVA, AZ, Ranking Member

Doug Lamborn, CO Grace F. Napolitano, CA
Robert J. Wittman, VA Gregorio Kilili Camacho Sablan,
Tom McClintock, CA     CNMI
Paul Gosar, AZ Jared Huffman, CA
Garret Graves, LA Ruben Gallego, AZ
Aumua Amata C. Radewagen, AS Joe Neguse, CO
Doug LaMalfa, CA Mike Levin, CA
Daniel Webster, FL Katie Porter, CA
Jenniffer Gonzalez-Colon, PR Teresa Leger Fernandez, NM
Russ Fulcher, ID Melanie A. Stansbury, NM
Pete Stauber, MN Mary Sattler Peltola, AK
John R. Curtis, UT Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez, NY
Tom Tiffany, WI Kevin Mullin, CA
Jerry Carl, AL Val T. Hoyle, OR
Matt Rosendale, MT Sydney Kamlager-Dove, CA
Lauren Boebert, CO Seth Magaziner, RI
Cliff Bentz, OR Nydia M. Velazquez, NY
Jen Kiggans, VA Ed Case, HI
Jim Moylan, GU Debbie Dingell, MI
Wesley P. Hunt, TX Susie Lee, NV
Mike Collins, GA
Anna Paulina Luna, FL
John Duarte, CA
Harriet M. Hageman, WY

Vivian Moeglein, Staff Director
Tom Connally, Chief Counsel
Lora Snyder, Democratic Staff Director
http://naturalresources.house.gov
------

SUBCOMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND MINERAL RESOURCES

PETE STAUBER, MN, Chairman
WESLEY P. HUNT, TX, Vice Chair
ALEXANDRIA OCASIO-CORTEZ, NY, Ranking Member

Doug Lamborn, CO                     Jared Huffman, CA
Robert J. Wittman, VA                Kevin Mullin, CA
Paul Gosar, AZ                       Sydney Kamlager-Dove, CA
Garret Graves, LA                    Seth Magaziner, RI
Daniel Webster, FL                   Nydia M. Velazquez, NY
Russ Fulcher, ID                     Debbie Dingell, MI
John R. Curtis, UT                   Raul M. Grijalva, AZ
Tom Tiffany, WI                      Grace F. Napolitano, CA
Matt Rosendale, MT                   Susie Lee, NV
Lauren Boebert, CO                   Vacancy
Wesley P. Hunt, TX                   Vacancy
Mike Collins, GA
John Duarte, CA
Bruce Westerman, AR, ex officio

----------

CONTENTS

----------
Page

Hearing held on Wednesday, May 22, 2024..........................     1

Statement of Members:

Stauber, Hon. Pete, a Representative in Congress from the
State of Minnesota.........................................     1

Ocasio-Cortez, Hon. Alexandria, a Representative in Congress
from the State of New York.................................    14

Statement of Witnesses:

Applegate, David, Director, U.S. Geological Survey, U.S.
Department of the Interior, Reston, Virginia...............     3
Prepared statement of....................................     5
Questions submitted for the record.......................     7

Buccino, Sharon, Principal Deputy Director, Office of Surface
Mining Reclamation and Enforcement, U.S. Department of the
Interior, Washington, DC...................................     8
Prepared statement of....................................    10
Questions submitted for the record.......................    13

OVERSIGHT HEARING ON EXAMINING THE PRESIDENT'S FY 2025 BUDGET
REQUEST FOR THE UNITED STATES
GEOLOGICAL SURVEY AND THE OFFICE OF
SURFACE MINING RECLAMATION AND ENFORCEMENT

----------

Wednesday, May 22, 2024

U.S. House of Representatives

Subcommittee on Energy and Mineral Resources

Committee on Natural Resources

Washington, DC

----------

The Subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 2:45 p.m. in
Room 1324, Longworth House Office Building, Hon. Pete Stauber
[Chairman of the Subcommittee] presiding.
Present: Representatives Stauber, Gosar, Fulcher, Tiffany,
Rosendale; Ocasio-Cortez, Kamlager-Dove, Dingell, and Lee.
Also present: Representative Hageman; and Porter.

Mr. Stauber. The Subcommittee on Energy and Mineral
Resources will come to order.
Without objection, the Chair is authorized to declare a
recess of the Subcommittee at any time.
Under Committee Rule 4(f), any oral opening statements at
hearings are limited to the Chairman and the Ranking Minority
Member.
I ask unanimous consent that the gentlewoman from Wyoming,
Ms. Hageman, and the gentlewoman from California, Ms. Porter,
be allowed to participate in today's hearing.
Without objection, so ordered.
I now recognize myself for an opening statement.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. PETE STAUBER, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF MINNESOTA

Mr. Stauber. Thank you for being here today to discuss the
budgets of the United States Geological Survey, or the USGS,
and the Office of Surface Mining Reclamation and Enforcement,
or OSMRE.
In an ideal world, the various offices within the
Department of the Interior should work together, each doing
their own part to fulfill DOI's mandates. When one or several
of these offices deviate from DOI's normal process or, on
occasion, congressional intent, other offices are unable to do
their jobs, throwing a wrench into the agency's entire
operation.
Unfortunately, the Bureau of Land Management's recent
actions have stalled OSMRE's ability to oversee the coal
industry and ensure proper management of abandoned mine lands.
Two weeks ago, the BLM published its Conservation and Landscape
Health Rule, which would tie up broad swaths of Federal lands,
prevent economic development, and push the United States into
further reliance on foreign nations for resources we have right
here at home, all in the name of the Biden administration's
radical net zero agenda.
Last week, and yet another knock against economic and
resource development, BLM published two final supplemental
environmental impact statements for resource management plans
in Wyoming and Montana. By selecting the no-action
alternatives, the Biden administration took millions of acres
off-line for new coal leasing in each state. In doing so, the
Biden administration dealt a disastrous blow to the grid, tax
revenues, jobs, and ultimately the environment.
Rather than source our energy responsibly here, we will yet
again be forced to look overseas. Wyoming alone produces over
41 percent of our country's coal output and 85 percent of all
Federal coal production, a resource that fuels 16 percent of
the nation's electric grid. In 2021, coal production in Wyoming
accounted for nearly $500 million in taxes, royalties, and
fees, and provided an additional $127 million in Federal
mineral royalties.
In a time when global coal demand is at an all-time high
and continues to grow, removing cleaner American coal as an
option will force international reliance on dirtier fuel
solutions. Further, as current goal operators pay fees that in
turn go towards cleaning up coal mines abandoned decades ago,
OSMRE, which facilitates abandoned mine land funding
disbursement, should be incredibly concerned as to how BLM's
recent decision will thwart environmental restoration in the
future.
While the BLM oversees the Federal Coal Leasing Program,
OSMRE regulates active coal leasing and oversees mining in
states granted primacy under Title V, or SMCRA. In OSMRE's
budget justification, the office stated it expects to complete
the mine plan recommendation or modification process and
associated NEPA analysis for only three to four projects in
Fiscal Year 2024-2025.
States granted primacy also have concerns regarding OSMRE's
potential authoritative encroachment regarding the 10-day
notices rule that went into effect on May 9, as well as OSMRE's
3-year hiatus on regular state funding updates. OSMRE has also
allowed a backlog of 60 state program amendment approvals to
pile up, with some going as far back as 15 years.
Congress should not have to stress its expectations that
OSMRE engages with states in a timely and transparent manner.
That should be the standard.
USGS provides a wide range of research and data analysis
critical for the development of our domestic mineral resources.
For example, the Earth MRI program locates and maps the USA's
resource deposits. However, if the BLM continues to slow-walk
leasing and permitting, localities, states, and the entire
country will not be able to benefit from the important work
USGS is undergoing nor the rich resources within our own
borders.
Even the materials covered on the Critical Minerals List,
which USGS publishes every 3 years, remain in the ground under
President Biden's anywhere-but-America, any-worker-but-American
mining policies. Hypocritically, the Biden administration is
funneling billions of taxpayer dollars into foreign mining
operations that pose greater risks to the American mineral
supply chain, our national security, and global emissions.
I look forward to hearing from USGS and OSMRE.
And I was going to yield to the Ranking Member, but she is
not here. So, what we will do now is we will introduce our
witnesses.
I want to thank you all for coming, and just as a reminder,
to begin your testimony, please press the ``talk'' button on
the microphone.
We use timing lights. When you begin, the light will turn
green. When you have 1 minute remaining, the light will turn
yellow. And at the end of 5 minutes, the light will turn red,
and I will ask you to please complete your statement as soon as
practical after that. Otherwise, you will hear this. It means
hustle up.
I will also allow all witnesses to testify before Member
questioning.
Our first witness is Dr. David Applegate. He is the
Director of the U.S. Geological Survey in the Department of the
Interior, and he is stationed in Reston, Virginia.
Dr. Applegate, you are now recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF DAVID APPLEGATE, DIRECTOR, U.S. GEOLOGICAL SURVEY,
U.S. DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR, RESTON, VIRGINIA

Dr. Applegate. Thank you very much, Chairman Stauber, and I
want to thank you and Ranking Member Ocasio-Cortez for inviting
me here today to discuss the Biden-Harris administration's
Fiscal Year 2025 budget request for the USGS.
This $1.6 billion request supports the advancement of
scientifically sound and useful tools and information to
support effective and efficient decision-making on our nation's
lands, waters, and natural resources. The budget invests in
science and analysis to support national security, natural
resource management, and infrastructure decisions. These
investments will help the USGS to better support the economic
growth and well-being of the nation.
Established in 1879, the USGS is the science arm of the
Department of the Interior. The USGS does not promulgate
regulations or make land management or policy decisions.
Instead, the USGS brings an array of Earth, water, biological,
and mapping data and expertise to deliver objective, policy-
neutral, actionable science that informs decision-making on
environmental, natural resource, and public safety issues. As
the Director of the USGS, I am committed to building on this
remarkable institution's 145 years of scientific excellence,
and I am grateful for your continued support for USGS science.
One very important part of this budget is its investment in
protecting USGS scientific quality and integrity. We are
requesting a $1.7 million increase for an integrated laboratory
support, training, and oversight program that will strengthen
safety, bio-risk management, and animal welfare best practices
in our USGS laboratories.
Next, I would like to highlight a few priorities for our
core science systems, energy and mineral resources, and natural
hazards mission areas that fall within this Subcommittee's
jurisdiction. Recognizing that our ecosystems and water mission
areas are overseen by the Water, Wildlife and Fisheries
Subcommittee, I will only mention them briefly in my oral
remarks, but they are discussed further in my written
statement.
The budget for our core science systems mission area calls
for an increase of $39.8 million over the Fiscal Year 2024
enacted level, with investments that strengthen the nation's
hydrographic, biogeographic, and remotely-sensed data and
supercomputing power.
An especially important investment focuses on the Landsat
satellite program. This joint USGS-NASA venture is the world's
longest running space-based Earth observation program. The
budget provides a $12 million increase to fund the development
of Landsat Next, even while we continue to operate the Landsat
8 and 9 satellites that are now on orbit.
The request also enables new partnerships to systematically
re-map the nation's surface water by acquiring high-accuracy 3D
hydrography data derived from LiDAR produced by the 3D
Elevation Program.
The President's budget includes an increase of $19.2
million for our Energy and Mineral Resources mission area. This
funding will support USGS development of the first National
Inventory of Subsurface Pore Spaces, which is essential to make
economic use of oil and gas wastewaters and storing carbon
dioxide in geologic formations.
The budget also includes a $5.6 million increase to expand
our critical minerals and supply chain analysis and
forecasting, which currently informs billions of dollars in
Federal and private-sector investments. This expansion will
accelerate our ability to identify mineral supply chain
disruptions in advance of economic impacts for events ranging
from earthquakes to pandemics.
We are also requesting the formal designation of the USGS
National Minerals Information Center as a unit of the Federal
Statistical System of the United States.
The President's budget includes an increase of $12 million
for our natural hazards mission area. This includes a $1.5
million increase to support science in subduction zones, which
caused the largest and most damaging earthquakes and associated
hazards. This will build on some of the recent innovations
deployed by the USGS, such as the nation's first earthquake
early warning system, in collaboration with the NOAA National
Weather Service, to improve warnings for volcanic ash and for
debris flows in wildfire-burned areas.
The President's budget includes increases of $26.7 million
and $20 million for our ecosystems and water mission areas,
respectively. These increases include new science to address
drought, enabling USGS to develop state-of-the-art tools and
deliver actionable information for near-term land and water
management, and to help guide longer-term planning.
On behalf of the more than 8,000 employees at the USGS,
thank you again for the opportunity to testify in front of this
Subcommittee. I will be happy to answer any questions.

[The prepared statement of Dr. Applegate follows:]
Prepared Statement of David Applegate, Director, U.S. Geological
Survey, Department of the Interior

Chairman Stauber and Ranking Member Ocasio-Cortez, thank you for
inviting me here today to discuss the Biden-Harris Administration's
Budget request for the U.S. Geological Survey (USGS) for Fiscal Year
(FY) 2025. The budget request for the USGS is $1.6 billion, supporting
the advancement of scientifically sound and useful tools and
information to support effective and efficient decision-making on our
Nation's lands, waters, and biological resources. The Budget also
supports additional science and analysis to support national security,
natural-resource management, and infrastructure decisions. Together,
these investments will help USGS better support the economic growth and
well-being of the Nation.
Established in 1879, the USGS is the science arm of the Department
of the Interior. The USGS does not promulgate regulations or make land-
management or policy decisions. Instead, the USGS brings an array of
earth, water, biological, and mapping data and expertise to deliver
objective, policy-neutral, actionable scientific information that
informs decision-making on environmental, natural-resource, and public-
safety issues. As the Director of the USGS, I am committed to building
on this remarkable institution's 145 years of scientific excellence
focused on the needs of the Nation and ensuring that our science
reaches those who need it the most. I am grateful for your continued
interest in and support for USGS science.
One very important part of this Budget is its investment in
protecting USGS scientific quality and integrity. This Budget includes
a $1.7 million increase for an integrated laboratory support, training,
and oversight program that will strengthen safety, bio-risk management,
and animal welfare best practices in USGS laboratories. I know that
this is of particular interest to many Members of Congress.
Another significant priority in this Budget is science to address
drought. As those in the West can attest, changing weather patterns and
decreased rainfall mean that now, more than ever, there is an increased
need for drought science. The 2025 budget invests an additional $7
million to develop state-of-the-art tools and actionable science to
inform near-term land- and water management while also providing
science to help guide longer-term management planning and decision-
making efforts. These efforts will include the build-out of a Colorado
River Basin Science Hub to improve partners' access to scientific data
and tools. These efforts will lead to an improved understanding of
gains and losses of water as it moves through the Basin from one
Colorado River reservoir to another.
Our science is overseen by Mission Areas, and I will highlight a
few priorities supported by this Budget for each.
Core Science Systems

The President's Budget includes $313 million for Core Science
Systems programs, an increase of $39.8 million over the FY 2024 enacted
level. The Budget increase supports several investments to strengthen
the Nation's hydrographic, biogeographic, and remotely sensed data and
supercomputing power.
The Landsat satellite program, a joint USGS-NASA venture, is the
world's longest running space-based Earth observation program. The
Budget provides a $12.0 million increase to fund the development of
Landsat Next while simultaneously operating the Landsat 8 and 9
satellites. This investment is critically important to keep Landsat
Next ground station development on track, thus ensuring we maintain the
unparalleled 52-year record of Landsat Earth observation into the next
decade and beyond.
The USGS will enable new partnerships to systematically remap the
Nation's surface water by acquiring high-accuracy 3D hydrography data
derived from lidar produced by the 3D Elevation Program. The Budget
also supports next-generation supercomputer capacity, expanded
collaboration with partners in scientific computing methods and
technology, and enhanced data and analysis underpinning the American
Conservation and Stewardship Atlas.
Energy and Mineral Resources

The President's Budget includes $120.3 million for Energy and
Mineral Resources programs, an increase of $19.2 million over the FY
2024 enacted level.
The Budget supports some exciting new science activities that
strengthen our Nation's economic growth and security. For example, the
USGS will develop the first inventory of subsurface pore spaces. This
will advance the management of extraction and injection practices, but
it is also essential to advance the cutting-edge efforts to make
economic use of waste waters associated with oil and gas development
and to develop storage of carbon dioxide in geologic formations. Both
will contribute to meeting our carbon-emission reduction goals. Other
priorities that support energy development include new assessments of
geothermal resources, including in Alaska and Hawai`i, and continued
support for existing collaborations with coal-mine operators to capture
methane.
Regarding mineral resources, the Budget includes an additional $5.6
million to expand our critical minerals and supply-chain analysis and
forecasting which currently informs billions of dollars in Federal and
private-sector investments. This expansion will accelerate our ability
to identify mineral supply-chain disruptions in advance of economic
impacts for events ranging from earthquakes to pandemics. We are also
restructuring our mineral research programs to support the formal
designation of the USGS National Minerals Information Center as a unit
of the Federal Statistical System of the United States, coordinated by
the Chief Statistician. The Biden-Harris Administration announced last
November that the USGS would seek Congressional endorsement for this
designation.
Natural Hazards

The President's Budget includes $210.6 million for Natural Hazards
programs, an increase of $12 million over the FY 2024 enacted level.
USGS research builds on decades of science to understand the
natural hazards that pose risks to life and property. This work is the
foundation of more resilient communities that strengthen our economic
security. The USGS has deployed the Nation's first earthquake early-
warning system, ShakeAlert, improved the timeliness of lava-flow
forecasts at Kilauea volcano from hours to minutes, and collaborates
with the National Oceanographic and Atmospheric Administration's
National Weather Service (NWS) to improve warnings for volcanic ash,
debris-flows in recently burned areas, and landslides in Alaska's
Prince William Sound. We cannot prevent natural hazards from occurring,
but USGS science helps reduce their impacts.
The Budget includes an increase of $2.8 million for our coastal and
marine hazards work that supports climate-related risk assessments
under Executive Order 14030. It also includes an increase of $1.5
million to support science in subduction zones, which cause the largest
and most damaging earthquakes and associated hazards.
Bureau Infrastructure and Cross-Cutting Initiatives

In addition to the support for our science Mission Areas, the
Budget includes funding to modernize our facilities, including the
construction of new biosafety level 3 labs at the National Wildlife
Health Center in Madison, WI, mitigation of PFAS (per- and
polyfluoroalkyl substances) impacts at the Upper Midwest Environmental
Science Center in La Crosse, WI, and planning for the consolidation of
our facilities at the Woods Hole Coastal and Marine Science Center in
Falmouth, MA. This is in addition to ongoing work to relocate
facilities to Moffett Field in Santa Clara, CA, to complete the
construction of a new Hydrological Instrumentation Facility in
Tuscaloosa, AL, to construct the Energy and Minerals Research Facility
in Golden, CO, and to re-establish the Hawaiian Volcano Observatory
outside Hilo, HI.
I note that the Water, Wildlife, and Fisheries Subcommittee has
jurisdiction over two other USGS science Mission Areas.
Ecosystems

The President's Budget includes $326.1 million for Ecosystems
programs, an increase of $26.7 million over the FY 2024 enacted level.
The Budget includes an increase of $3.5 million for migration
science for huntable big-game populations. Thanks to unique USGS
expertise and technical capacity, we have been able to lead a national
effort to advance this science. The USGS and our partners have already
discovered previously unrecorded migration patterns, and this
information is being used to identify effective and efficient
opportunities to improve the management of big-game resources. Under
this Budget, the USGS will provide a full inventory of existing
ungulate migrations and develop the technology needed to make these
data publicly available and useful. Migration is required for abundant
big-game herds, which sustain hunting, subsistence, and tourism
economies across the West; a clearer understanding of such migration
patterns across large landscapes will improve Federal, state, Tribal,
local, and private conservation efforts.
This Budget also includes an additional $5.7 million increase for
the National and Regional Climate Adaptation Science Centers program,
or CASCs. This funding will support the CASCs' work, in partnership
with their host institutions at research universities, to update
publicly available climate information and to provide tools to support
the U.S. Global Change Research Program's first-ever National Nature
Assessment.
Water Resources

The President's Budget includes $309.6 million for USGS Water
Resources programs, an increase of $20.8 million over the FY 2024
enacted level.
The USGS works with partners to monitor, assess, conduct targeted
research, and deliver information on a wide range of water resources
and conditions including streamflow, groundwater, water quality, and
water use and availability. The Budget will allow the USGS to continue
providing the critical data and science needed to help address the
current and future water-resource issues that confront the Nation, such
as managing water availability in drought-stricken regions of the
country to balance our societal and ecological needs.
Under this Budget, the USGS will expand capacities to develop and
deliver the next 5-year National Water Availability Assessment. The
assessment will include historic trends and current status of
freshwater availability. The increased investment will also advance
models of future projections of water availability and quality in the
Nation's streams and groundwater storage. Modeling advancements will
account for needs within human and ecological use which will benefit
decisions on infrastructure, water security, and economic optimization.
Supporting the national assessment capabilities are advances in
water-monitoring capabilities. The Budget provides funding to continue
deployment of the pilot Next Generation Water Observing System, or
NGWOS. Started in 2018, NGWOS designs and implements very dense
observational networks in targeted basins, five of which are underway
(the Delaware, Illinois, upper Colorado, Trinity-San Jacinto, and
Willamette rivers). In addition, the budget will allow continued
partnerships with academia and the private sector to develop innovative
water monitoring technologies that are scalable to regional and
national monitoring networks, which is necessary to expand the
availability of water data for the Nation. These pilots are developing
the innovative equipment and techniques that will eventually be
integrated into our nationwide monitoring networks, such as automated
underwater drones, machine-learning models, and the latest advances in
sensor technology developed by our industry partners. There is a
revolution happening in water data that will transform management of
this most fundamental natural resource. I invite you to visit one of
our NGWOS basins to see these transformative new approaches for
yourself.
The Federal Priority Streamgage network (FPS; previously called the
National Streamflow Information Program) and the National Groundwater-
Quality Network are the foundational national-scale monitoring networks
that make the national assessments possible and which are continuously
improving using lessons and results from NGWOS. FPS serves as the
backbone of the larger National Streamgaging Network, which
incorporates sites supported by partners. The Budget increase includes
funding to support the continued operation of approximately 3,460
active streamgages in the FPS network, with an additional 30 flood-
hardened streamgages to fill gaps and support data needs for better
water-model predictions. Furthermore, the USGS will enhance several
existing FPS sites by hardening them against flooding and improving the
communications that connects them to the network. Through the National
Groundwater-Quality Network, the USGS monitors groundwater-quality
conditions in more than 80 long-term regional aquifer networks spanning
the Nation. This is an important capability because groundwater is the
source of drinking water for more than 130 million Americans each day.
Increased funding will support a variety of improvements, such as
increased sampling at public-supply wells and expanded collection of
water-level measurements in addition to water-quality measurements.
Conclusion

On behalf of the more than 8,000 employees of the USGS, thank you
again for the opportunity to testify. I will be happy to answer any
questions.

______

Questions Submitted for the Record to Dr. David Applegate, Director,
U.S. Geological Survey (USGS)

Dr. Applegate did not submit responses to the Committee by the
appropriate deadline for inclusion in the printed record.

Questions Submitted by Representative Stauber

Question 1. For purposes of developing the critical minerals list,
the USGS tracks most minerals in terms of domestic deposits, and it can
take some time for the USGS to undergo in-depth reporting on any
specific element, with years passing before an update can be published.
Accordingly, should minerals that are deemed a Defense Production Act
(DPA) Title III priority material be immediately reviewed for USGS
domestic resource reporting? Additionally, can this review period for
DPA Title III minerals be shortened?

Questions Submitted by Representative Fulcher

Question 1. Earlier this month, Secretary Haaland testified that
the Biden administration has only permitted five mines, and the BLM
clarified last week that one of these mines began its permitting
process under the previous administration. How could a lack of domestic
permitting lead to increased import reliance on all minerals, including
those on the current critical mineral list?

Questions Submitted by Representative Mullin

Question 1. There are various ways we can improve earthquake
preparedness: by supporting scientific programs, developing better
building codes, or improving disaster planning, among others. Could you
outline what you see are the best opportunities for the Federal
Government to improve earthquake resilience?

Question 2. What challenges exist for the National Climate
Adaptation Science Centers, with respect to funding and beyond? How do
you envision its mission will need to evolve as climate impacts
continue to increase in severity?

______

Mr. Stauber. Thank you, Dr. Applegate. Our next witness is
Ms. Sharon Buccino. She is the Principal Deputy Director for
the Office of Surface Mining Reclamation and Enforcement in the
Department of the Interior, and she is stationed in Washington,
DC.
Ms. Buccino, you are now recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF SHARON BUCCINO, PRINCIPAL DEPUTY DIRECTOR, OFFICE
OF SURFACE MINING RECLAMATION AND ENFORCEMENT, U.S. DEPARTMENT
OF THE INTERIOR, WASHINGTON, DC

Ms. Buccino. Thank you. Good afternoon, Chairman Stauber,
Ranking Member Ocasio-Cortez, and other members of the
Subcommittee and Committee. Thank you for the invitation to
testify on the behalf of the Office of Surface Mining
Reclamation and Enforcement on the President's Fiscal Year 2025
budget request and priorities for the Bureau.
OSMRE has two fundamental responsibilities: first, to
ensure that the nation's coal mines operate in a manner that
protects citizens' health and safety and the environment; and
second, to restore land affected by mining for future
productive uses.
OSMRE's 2025 budget request is for $304.7 million. It is
about $26 million above the Fiscal Year 2024 enacted level. The
increase reflects higher fixed costs, rents, utilities, and
payroll. The funds requested will enable OSMRE to fulfill its
Title IV restoration and Title V active coal mining
responsibilities under the Surface Mining Control and
Reclamation Act passed by Congress in 1977.
While I ask that my complete testimony be entered into the
record, I will highlight three critical pieces in my brief oral
statement.
First, I want to emphasize the increasing needs of states
operating their regulatory programs. Despite the long-term
decline in coal demand and production, the cost to operate
state regulatory programs has not fallen. In fact, state
regulators are grappling with new challenges associated with
overseeing an industry in decline. Financial stress, including
bankruptcies, is making the job of regulating harder, not
easier. Frequently, the task of reclamation is falling to state
regulatory authorities as bonds for cleanup are forfeited,
which requires additional state program staff capacity.
The Administration supports the request of states for
increased funds for their regulatory programs. The President's
budget asks for $65 million for this purpose. This is $2.6
million more than Fiscal Year 2024 enacted, but the same as was
provided in Fiscal Year 2023.
Second, the Administration's budget requests $9.7 million
above the Fiscal Year 2024 enacted level for environmental
restoration. The request focuses on state and tribal AML
program evaluations, abatement of high-priority coal mining-
related hazards through the Federal reclamation program, and
strategic partnerships to address acid mine drainage and other
water pollution problems.
This amount also supports OSMRE's administration of the
AMLER program for economic development, including job training
and creation. Since its inception in 2016, OSMRE has not
received dedicated funding for AMLER administration. We asked
for it here to keep this invaluable program going. Changes made
to AMLER in the Consolidated Appropriations Act of Fiscal Year
2024 remove OSMRE oversight from grant approvals. As a result,
states and tribes will face oversight and compliance issues
such as those associated with the Endangered Species Act on
their own.
Finally, I would like to share a few highlights from
OSMRE's progress implementing the Bipartisan Infrastructure
Law. OSMRE awarded $721 million to 22 eligible states and the
Navajo Nation in Fiscal Year 2022 funding. The Bureau has
awarded funding for all of the Fiscal Year 2023 grant
applications it has received, totaling another $698.6 million
to 21 states. And I am pleased to announce the Bureau will be
releasing the Fiscal Year 2024 BIL Notice of Funding
Opportunity, along with applicable guidance, within the next 2
weeks.
OSMRE will continue making these grants each year over the
next 13 fiscal years, totaling almost $11 billion over the 15-
year life of BIL funding. As part of the bipartisan commitment
the President and Congress made together to the American
people, OSMRE is helping states and communities turn past
pollution into future prosperity. I am proud of the job OSMRE's
employees are doing in collaboration with our state and local
partners to clean up waterways, reforest abandoned mine lands,
provide training, create jobs, and support coal mining
operations. The Administration's Fiscal Year 2025 budget
request of $304.7 million to support this work is a necessary
and reasonable amount.
Thank you for the opportunity to present this testimony
today, and I am happy to answer your questions. Thank you.

[The prepared statement of Ms. Buccino follows:]
Prepared Statement of Sharon Buccino, Principal Deputy Director,
Office of Surface Mining Reclamation and Enforcement,
U.S. Department of the Interior

Introduction and Background

Chairman Stauber, Ranking Member Ocasio-Cortez, and other Members
of the Subcommittee, thank you for the invitation to testify on behalf
of the Office of Surface Mining Reclamation and Enforcement (OSMRE) on
the President's FY 2025 budget request and priorities for the bureau.

Through the Surface Mining Control and Reclamation Act of 1977
(SMCRA) of 1977 (Pub. L. No. 95-87), Congress established OSMRE for two
primary purposes:

First, to ensure that the Nation's coal mines operate in a
manner that protects citizens and the environment during
mining, and to restore the land affected to a condition capable
of supporting the uses it could support before any mining, or
higher or better uses following mining.

Second, to implement an abandoned mine land (AML) program to
address the hazards and environmental degradation resulting
from coal mining activities that occurred before the law was
passed in 1977.

OSMRE is committed to protecting people, land, water, and the
environment while ensuring coal mining is conducted in an
environmentally responsible way. Currently, 23 States have approved
regulatory programs in place pursuant to the requirements of Title V of
SMCRA. There are 25 States and three Tribes that administer approved
AML reclamation plans pursuant to Title IV of SMCRA. The major task for
OSMRE is to ensure that States and Tribes administer effective
regulatory and AML programs. OSMRE oversees these programs and provides
significant funding, technical assistance, training, and technological
tools to support their success.

FY 2025 Budget Request Highlights

OSMRE's FY 2025 budget request is $304.7 million, $26.0 million
above the FY 2024 enacted level (Pub. L. No. 118-42). The FY 2025
budget request for the Regulation and Technology appropriation is
$128.9 million and the Abandoned Mine Reclamation Fund appropriation is
$175.8 million. The $304.7 million budget request in discretionary
appropriations will enable OSMRE to fulfill its Title IV (Abandoned
Mine Land Reclamation) and Title V (Environmental Impacts of Surface
Coal Mining) responsibilities under SMCRA.
In addition to discretionary appropriations, the budget includes
$1.3 billion in mandatory funding, as required under current law, for
reclamation grants to States and Tribes and for three health care plans
that are part of the United Mine Workers of America (UMWA) Health and
Retirement Funds and the 1974 UMWA pension plan. The FY 2025 budget
focuses on funding OSMRE's core mission and supporting the highest
priority activities.
The FY 2025 budget request funds the oversight of responsible coal
production through the protection, and restoration of mined lands and
the restoration of mined lands left unreclaimed from historical mining
operations. Approximately 66% ($200 million) of OSMRE's FY 2025 total
request for discretionary appropriations provides financial assistance
to eligible States and Tribes in the form of regulatory grants ($65
million) and AML Economic Revitalization (AMLER) grants ($135 million).
The remaining 34% ($104.7 million) covers OSMRE's operational costs in
fulfilling its SMCRA responsibilities.
OSMRE's discretionary appropriation includes five Budget
Activities: Environmental Protection, which supports Title V programs,
including regulatory grants; Environmental Restoration, which supports
AML programs and funds AMLER grants; Technology Development & Transfer;
Financial Management; and Executive Direction & Administration.
The fixed cost and baseline capacity increases proposed in the FY
2025 budget reflect increased rent, utility, and payroll expenditures
that OSMRE has incurred and expects to incur. More details regarding
the fixed cost and baseline capacity increases are available in the
Office of Surface Mining Reclamation and Enforcement Budget
Justifications and Performance Information FY 2025.
Environmental Protection--Title V--Regulation and Technology

OSMRE's FY 2025 budget request for Environmental Protection is
$91.4 million, supported by 181 FTEs. This will enable OSMRE to meet
its 2025 performance goals for the Environmental Protection budget
activity, which includes providing $65 million in regulatory grants to
support 23 primacy State regulatory programs and funding the regulatory
program development costs for three Tribes.
Despite the long-term decline in coal demand and production, the
costs to operate State regulatory programs has not fallen. In fact,
State regulators are grappling with new challenges associated with
overseeing an industry in decline. Financial stress--including
bankruptcies--is making the job of regulating harder, not easier.
Frequently, the task of reclamation is falling to State regulatory
authorities as bonds for cleanup are forfeited, which requires
additional State program staff capacity. SMCRA authorizes the Federal
government to pay up to half of the costs of States to run their
regulatory programs. Congress should provide $65 million in FY 2025,
the full amount requested in the budget, to ensure that State
regulatory programs have sufficient resources to meet SMCRA goals.
The FY 2025 Environmental Protection request also includes $10
million to oversee and evaluate State and Tribal regulatory programs
and $8.7 million to fund Federal regulatory programs in non-primacy
States, such as Tennessee and Washington, and on Indian lands. Also
included in the FY 2025 budget request is $1.7 million for OSMRE to
carry out mining plan reviews for Federal lands and $6 million for
program development and maintenance to continue efforts to streamline
the approval process for State program amendments and ensure that
regulatory standards adequately reflect changes in technologies and
program needs.
Environmental Restoration--Title IV--Abandoned Mine Reclamation Fund

The FY 2025 budget request for Environmental Restoration is $156.1
million, supported by 43 FTEs, a program increase of $9.7 million above
the FY 2024 enacted level. The request supports State and Tribal AML
program evaluations, abatement of high-priority coal mining-related
hazards through the Federal Reclamation Program, and strategic
partnerships to address acid mine drainage (AMD) and other water
pollution problems through the Passive Treatment Protection Program.
In FY 2025, the Environmental Restoration program plans to continue
to support abandoned coal mine land reclamation through traditional
mandatory AML grants and annual appropriations, eliminating health,
safety, and environmental hazards and providing several hundred
thousand people with reduced exposure to safety risks from abandoned
mine lands. Under the State Program Evaluation activities, OSMRE
oversees and evaluates the State and Tribal AML reclamation operations.
Federal Reclamation Program projects and operations mitigate AML
hazards in States and on Indian lands where an approved AML program
does not exist. This program also funds the Watershed Cooperative
Agreement Program to support cooperative conservation with local
nonprofit organizations. The Environmental Restoration budget activity
also funds Program Development and Maintenance, which provides policy
direction, support, and services to States and Tribes.
Abandoned Mine Land Economic Revitalization Program (AMLER)

In addition to the above-mentioned activities, the Environmental
Restoration budget activity provides eligible States and Tribes with
AMLER grants and funds OSMRE's administration of the program, including
guidance on project eligibility criteria and reporting requirements.
This program provides grants to six States and three Tribal nations
(Alabama, Kentucky, Ohio, Pennsylvania, Virginia, West Virginia, Crow
Tribe, Hopi Tribe, and Navajo Nation) with the dual purpose of
reclaiming AML sites and supporting economic and community development.
The FY 2025 budget includes $135 million for AMLER grants and
allocates 0.75 percent of that amount to OSMRE for program
administration and 0.5 percent for oversight by the DOI Office of the
Inspector General. The request would provide OSMRE with dedicated
funding for AMLER administration for the first time since the program's
inception in 2016 and would enable the bureau to enhance support for
States and Tribes to develop projects and improve the Federal project
approval process. The additional authorization to transfer 0.5 percent
of AMLER funding to the DOI Office of the Inspector General for
oversight of AMLER implementation will further improve the overall
administration and strength of the program. Continued funding of the
AMLER program will create recreational opportunities, support tourism,
enhance infrastructure, and provide job training, skills, and economic
opportunities to Appalachian coalfield communities and on Indian lands.
In its oversight capacity, OSMRE has historically worked with
States and Tribes to ensure that selected projects are eligible for the
AMLER program, Federal interests are protected, and funds are spent in
compliance with statutory language. However, changes made to AMLER in
the Consolidated Appropriations Act for Fiscal Year 2024 (Pub. L. No.
118-42) remove OSMRE oversight from grant approvals. As a result, for
FY 2024 AMLER funding, States and Tribes will face oversight and
compliance issues--such as those associated with the Endangered Species
Act--on their own. The appropriations language proposed in the FY 2025
budget will remedy those issues by restoring program oversight and
providing OSMRE with the necessary funding to effectively administer
the program.
Priority Federal Reclamation Projects in Oklahoma

Pursuant to the Supreme Court decision in McGirt v. Oklahoma, OSMRE
assumed SMCRA implementation on Indian lands within Oklahoma, including
responsibility for the Title IV AML reclamation program. In FY 2024,
OSMRE developed the Federal Indian Lands AML program in Oklahoma and
funded an increase in FTEs to administer the program. The FY 2025
request of an additional $1 million will build on the $4 million in
base funding to increase the number of AML projects that can be
reclaimed in Oklahoma.
Passive Treatment Protection Program (PTPP)

Passive Treatment Protection Program projects are investments that
will reduce water pollution from abandoned mine lands. In FY 2023,
OSMRE was appropriated $500,000 to begin the PTPP program. The FY 2025
budget request includes $2 million for the PTPP program for grants to
non-governmental organizations and to local and State government
agencies to help operate, maintain, and rehabilitate AML passive
treatment systems, and $500,000 for OSMRE to administer the program.
Technology Development & Transfer--Title IV & V

The FY 2025 budget request for Technology Development and Transfer
(TDT) is $21.7 million, supported by 99 FTEs, with $17.2 million to
support Regulation and Technology activities and $4.5 million to
support Abandoned Mine Reclamation Fund activities. TDT activities
provide technical support and training, including technology
development, and technology transfer activities for Federal, State, and
Tribal regulatory and reclamation staff, to ensure States and Tribes
have the necessary technical skills and expertise needed to effectively
operate their SMCRA programs. The TDT funding also facilitates OSMRE's
efforts to implement effective partnerships with stakeholders to meet
SMCRA's restoration and protection goals.
National Technical Training Program

OSMRE is working diligently to keep up with the needs of its State
and Tribal partners with training programs delivered through the
National Technical Training Program. During FY 2024, OSMRE plans to
hold 45 in-person courses and has 16 virtual courses available through
the Departmental learning management system. OSMRE provides States,
Tribes, and staff with the best available technical data and
information to support science-based decisions for mining plans,
reclamation project design, permit reviews, blasting, and AMD
prevention. OSMRE is redeveloping course materials to ensure the most
up-to-date standards within each discipline are being taught. OSMRE is
also soliciting technical experts from the States and Tribes to help
teach courses and exchange information and best practices among Title
IV and Title V practitioners.
Financial Management--Title IV & V

The FY 2025 budget request for the Financial Management budget
activity is $7.1 million, supported by 36 FTEs. The Financial
Management budget activity provides resources for OSMRE to carry out
its financial management program responsibilities through three
activities: fee compliance, revenue management, and grants accounting
management. Under this budget activity, OSMRE also manages the
statutorily required transfers to three health care plans that are part
of the UMWA Health and Retirement Funds and the 1974 Pension Plan and
is responsible for AML fund investments.
Executive Direction & Administration--Title IV & Title V

The FY 2025 budget request for Executive Direction and
Administration is $28.3 million, supported by 69 FTEs. This is an
increase of $7.2 million and 1 additional FTE from the FY 2024 enacted
level. The Executive Direction and Administration budget activity
activities are integral to OSMRE's Environmental Restoration and
Environmental Protection budget activities and Technology Development
and Transfer efforts. The Executive Direction and Administration budget
activity provides leadership, policy, and program management guidance,
and support for all areas of OSMRE's SMCRA responsibilities. The
Executive Direction and Administration activity includes the salaries
and operating expenses for the Office of the Director and six immediate
staff offices, including the offices of Equal Opportunity;
Communications; Planning, Analysis, and Budget; Information Resources;
Administration; and Human Resources--all critical to the success of
OSMRE's activities.
Bipartisan Infrastructure Law (BIL)

The BIL (Pub. L. No. 117-58), enacted on November 15, 2021,
provided OSMRE a total of $11.3 billion to be distributed over a period
of 15 years to accelerate AML cleanup. OSMRE awarded $721 million to 22
eligible States and the Navajo Nation in FY 2022. As of May 3, 2024,
OSMRE has awarded another $679.6 million to 18 of 22 eligible States
that have submitted a grant application for FY 2023. Over the life of
the BIL AML program, OSMRE will make grants totaling almost $10.9
billion to States and the Navajo Nation. These funds are having a
significant impact on local communities by helping to address dangerous
and polluting AML sites; creating good-paying, family-sustaining jobs;
and catalyzing economic opportunity in coal communities.

Conclusion

With the funding requested for FY 2025, OSMRE looks forward to
working with our State and Tribal partners to implement SMCRA
activities that will protect people and the environment from the
adverse effects of past and current coal mining activities. OSMRE's
ongoing efforts to improve its partnerships with local, State, and
Tribal governments, industry, non-profits, and watershed and citizens
groups will ensure greater effectiveness in addressing the
environmental and public health and safety problems associated with
coal mining activities.
Thank you for the opportunity to present this testimony today, and
I am happy to answer any questions you may have at this time.

______

Questions Submitted for the Record to Ms. Sharon Buccino, Principal
Deputy Director, Office of Surface Mining Reclamation and Enforcement
(OSMRE)

Ms. Buccino did not submit responses to the Committee by the
appropriate deadline for inclusion in the printed record.

Questions Submitted by Representative Westerman

Question 1. Taking the prohibition on future coal leasing in the
Buffalo and Miles City Resource Management Plans that result from BLM's
recent decisions into account, what will be the impact on projected
Abandoned Mine Land, or AML, fee collections in fiscal years 2024
through 2034?

1a) Follow-up: What will be the impact on the amount of interest
generated by the AML Trust Fund for support of the UMWA Pension and
Retire Health Funds be in Fiscal Years 2024 through 2034?

Question 2. OSMRE's Budget Justification states that OSMRE plans to
begin the mine plan recommendation or modification process and
associated NEPA analysis for only ``three to four projects'' in FY 2024
and FY 2025. How long do you anticipate the NEPA process will last for
these three or four projects?

Question 3. Global demand for coal has never been higher. How can
American coal production help bridge the projected supply gap to meet
global demand increases?

3a) Follow-up: 16 percent of the U.S. grid is powered by coal. Does
OSMRE consult with FERC to determine how swings in coal production
could result in a nationwide shortage of baseload power?

Questions Submitted by Representative Grijalva

Question 1. During the hearing, Representative Tiffany repeatedly
claimed that President Biden directed OSMRE to rewrite the Ten-Day
Notice rule and that the agency did not follow proper procedures in
coordinating with the states during rulemaking. Could you clarify what
directive OSMRE received regarding the Ten-Day Notice rule and whether
there is an established precedent for this type of executive action?
Furthermore, could you elaborate on the process OSMRE undertook to
review and update the Ten-Day Notice rule, and how this process accords
with the Administration Procedure Act?

______

Mr. Stauber. Thank you very much. We will now go to the
Ranking Member, Representative Ocasio-Cortez, for her opening
statement.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. ALEXANDRIA OCASIO-CORTEZ, A
REPRESENTATIVE IN CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF NEW YORK

Ms. Ocasio-Cortez. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you,
Director Applegate and Principal Deputy Director Buccino, for
being here.
The United States Geological Survey and the Office of
Surface Mining Reclamation and Enforcement provide important,
timely services to the American people. But this important work
is being threatened by Republican budget cuts and some who are
more focused on division than delivering for Americans.
Meanwhile, just last week, the House Appropriations
Committee announced Republican budget numbers for Fiscal Year
2025 that would add billions to our already bloated defense
budget and make cuts across the board to the programs that
serve our constituents every day. Those pushing for cuts to
these agencies don't want the American people to know the
essential work they do day in and day out for the public and
for private companies, too.
So, let me get into what USGS and OSMRE do for the American
public. USGS is the Department of the Interior's science arm,
providing the public, private companies, and government
decision-makers with critical information about our public
lands and resources. USGS scientists and partners provide non-
partisan, actionable science on issues that touch all our
everyday lives, from drought, to wildfire, to lifesaving,
rapid-response information on natural disasters.
However, following this year's budget cuts which were
already put into place, USGS' 2025 budget request is
essentially at Fiscal Year 2023 levels when accounting for
inflation, and that is before the Majority even tries to slash
these services even further. While USGS plans to continue
ramping up important work like their critical minerals
research, this comes at the cost of cuts to crucial programs
like wildlife disease monitoring, just as avian flu is making
headlines yet again. We should not sacrifice one form of
preparedness for another, but robustly fund all of USGS'
important science programs.
OSMRE was created in 1977, when communities said enough was
enough to pollution from coal mines and demanded the Federal
Government regulate the industry and clean up abandoned mines.
Under the Surface Mining Control and Reclamation Act, or SMCRA,
OSMRE oversees the cleanup of pre-regulation mines and ensures
currently-operating coal mines are responsibly mined and
reclaimed.
Unfortunately, another critical cleanup program, the
Abandoned Mine Land Economic Revitalization Program, or AMLER,
which provides grants to states and tribes to clean up
hazardous abandoned coal mines and supports economic and
community development, has potentially been hamstrung by
appropriations language slipped into this year's bill.
OSMRE was given only 90 days after enactment, until June 7,
to get out all Fiscal Year 2024 AMLER funds to states and
tribes or face steep daily budget cuts. If OSMRE fails to
comply, they will face $100,000 in budget cuts per day until
all payments are made. While we all want to see this money get
to coal communities as quickly as possible, this change is a
drastic removal of all prior Federal oversight of how our
public dollars will be used on AMLER projects. That shifts the
burden of regulatory compliance to states and tribes, making
them bear any risk associated with NEPA compliance on the use
of these funds. I am concerned this will hurt, not help, the
effort to restore and revitalize coal communities.
OSMRE is also charged with making sure current coal
companies operate responsibly and clean up after themselves in
order to protect communities and the public. However, coal
communities are raising the alarm that many mines may be
skirting their responsibilities, and that current financial
assurances will not be enough to cover reclamations if the coal
industry goes through another wave of bankruptcies, a very
present concern in a declining industry.
Principal Deputy Director Buccino, I look forward to
hearing what steps OSMRE is taking to hold these coal companies
accountable, as well.
Members know that making budget cuts to critical agencies
like the ones before us today is a lot easier when it is done
quietly. But I am hopeful that we can use today's hearing to
sound the alarm on the proposed budget cuts, and uplift the
crucial work of these agencies before us today.
Thank you, and I yield back.

Mr. Stauber. Thank you very much. The Chair will now
recognize Members for 5 minutes of questioning. I now recognize
myself for 5 minutes.
Dr. Applegate, the USGS develops the Critical Minerals
List, which is updated every 3 years, as you know. However, the
2020 Energy Act specifically requires the USGS to ``establish
an analytical and forecasting capability when identifying
covered minerals.'' Where is the USGS in developing this
forecasting capability, and will forecasting metrics be
incorporated when identifying the minerals on next year's
updated list?
Dr. Applegate. Thank you very much for that question, Mr.
Chairman.
As we are developing the next list, we are focusing on the
incorporation of modeling, for example, to try to look at
different scenarios, and to incorporate that into the process.
Now, this isn't getting us all the way to forecasting. Indeed,
part of the President's budget request is to be able to really
expand our capabilities instead of, right now we are doing a
lot of sort of one-off kinds of modeling efforts. We are
looking to be able to expand that.
There will be additional elements that would contribute,
but not full-blown forecasting.
Mr. Stauber. OK. I look forward to seeing what you have
reflected in next year's list.
Ms. Buccino, where is OSMRE on addressing the backlog of
state reclamation plan amendments?
Ms. Buccino. Thank you, Congressman. In terms of the review
of state program amendments, we are working diligently to
address those before us. We have 45 currently before us, but I
am pleased to report that since last November we have reduced
that backlog by 10 percent, and we are continuing to work hard
to address the rest of them that are pending before us.
Mr. Stauber. OK. Ms. Buccino, the AML fund directs money
collected from coal production to help clean up mines deserted
decades ago. Additionally, the Infrastructure Investment and
Jobs Act appropriated an additional $11.3 billion for AML
cleanup, on top of the revenues from ongoing coal production.
However, OSMRE requires states to apply for grants from the
traditional OSMRE funds and the IIJA funds separately,
effectively doubling the states' offices' workload. To you,
does this seem like an efficient use of either state or Federal
resources?
Ms. Buccino. Congressman, we have, actually, three pots of
money that we need to track separately. One is the fee-based
AML programs, and then the BIL, the additional money that you
referred to, the $11.3 billion over 15 years. And then there is
the third program, as well, AMLER. And it is important that we
keep track of those funds separately.
We are consistently and constantly looking for ways to do
that in an efficient as well as effective way, and, in fact, we
have right now pulled together a group of OSM grant specialists
with state grant managers to figure out how to simplify that
process as much as possible.
Mr. Stauber. I think that is good news, and, hopefully, you
get to a good resolution. Thank you.
Ms. Buccino, how would streamlining the AML funding request
process lead to a faster remediation of abandoned mine lands
and quicker environmental reclamation?
Ms. Buccino. We have the same goal, I think, Congress'
intent, both in terms of passing the Bipartisan Infrastructure
Law with that additional, dramatic increase in funding, as well
as the fee-based program, is designed to move coal communities
forward and reclaim those abandoned mine lands, and turn them
into productive future uses. And, absolutely, making the
process of getting those projects reviewed and approved as
efficient as possible is the best way to get those results on
the ground.
Mr. Stauber. Last question. When do you expect to publish
the next iteration of AML guidelines?
Ms. Buccino. I am pleased to report that we have been
working hard on that to get the Fiscal Year 2024 BIL guidance
out, and you should expect to see that within the next couple
of weeks.
Mr. Stauber. OK. I guess my time is up. I am going to yield
to the Ranking Member for 5 minutes.
Ms. Ocasio-Cortez. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Critical minerals have been garnering a lot of attention
recently, and for good reason. They are in everything from our
cell phones, to wind turbines, and solar panels. The demand for
certain minerals is projected to skyrocket to fuel the clean
energy transition. And while we will need new minerals, this
often leaves important aspects of the critical minerals supply
chain out of the picture, as well, topics like recycling,
research and strategies to reduce demand.
But, unfortunately, sky-high demand projections are being
used to push for a new domestic mining rush and streamlining of
mining permitting on public lands, which too often means
cutting corners on environmental review, community input, and
tribal consultation.
The USGS' Critical Minerals List is used to inform billions
of dollars of Federal investments in new mines for critical
minerals. But given the decades-long life spans of mines and
the environmental impacts they can have, new mines should be
the last resort, not the first, for getting the new minerals
that we need.
Dr. Applegate, how does USGS incorporate unconventional
sources like mine waste and recycling into resource assessments
and critical mineral determinations?
Dr. Applegate. Thank you for that question. We try to look
at the entire life cycle of minerals, from both looking at
extraction, but also then understanding the downstream
processes.
And I am very pleased. With direction from the Energy
Policy Act of 2020, we have been able to increase, for example,
our mineral commodities summaries, looking at and incorporating
recycling into that sort of complete picture.
The Bipartisan Infrastructure Law expanded our Earth
Mapping Resources initiative, which was initially focused at
sort of in-ground resources, to expand that to include mine
waste. And we have actually had very good partnerships with
OSMRE as we work to understand what the potential is for being
able to add that as a potential economic driver to help support
reclamation in those areas.
So, I think we are trying to, in our analyses, get as
complete a picture as we can of the life cycle for minerals.
Ms. Ocasio-Cortez. Thank you. And switching to OSMRE, the
ongoing efforts and billions put into cleaning up abandoned
coal mines should also be a stark reminder of the potential
environmental, public health, and fiscal impacts of certain
mining activities on our community, and we should be making
sure that we are doing everything we can to hold the coal
industry accountable for operating responsibly and cleaning up
after themselves, instead of leaving it to the public.
I am concerned that financial assurances and state agencies
will not be enough to reclaim mined lands that should be within
the operators' responsibility. It has been brought to my
attention that we are already seeing this happen in real time,
with so-called zombie mines, where mines are labeled active but
essentially abandoned by their operators.
Principal Deputy Buccino, can you speak to the work that
OSMRE is doing to address this issue?
Ms. Buccino. Yes. Thank you, Congresswoman. We are looking
into those questions, questions that have been raised both by
non-profit citizen organizations and Congress. We also welcome
the involvement of the General Accountability Office in this
issue, and are actively supporting their investigation. In
fact, we just had a meeting last week with GAO.
It is important to flag that your question raises a
critical issue, and that is that regulatory oversight is
actually going to be increasingly important as coal production
declines. This requires more, not less, support for states. And
that is why the Administration asks that Congress fully funds
its request of $65 million to support both OSMRE and the
states' efforts.
Ms. Ocasio-Cortez. Thank you.
And to conclude, let's be clear about one thing here. The
work that these two agencies do, OSMRE and USGS, is pivotal in
ensuring the safety and wellness of everyday Americans and the
folks that we represent. So, I think it is very, very important
that we take these cuts seriously. People's health is on the
line, their wellness is on the line. And we have to make sure
that these mines are stewarded responsibly so people don't get
sick.
Thank you very much.
Mr. Stauber. Thank you. Next up, Representative Gosar, you
are up for 5 minutes.
Dr. Gosar. Thank you.
Ms. Buccino, until 3 years ago, the Office of Surface
Mining and Enforcement met with states at least twice a year to
review states' utilization of funding as appropriated by
Congress for regulatory program grants under Title V of SMCRA.
However, the Office of Surface Mining Reclamation and
Enforcement discontinued this practice despite multiple
requests from states for regular meetings.
After 3 years of these requests, the Office of Surface
Mining Reclamation and Enforcement finally announced a small
group meeting with states that will take place tomorrow. My
question: Without the funding transparency these meetings
provide, how are states able to get an accurate picture of
their own program finances one year to the next?
Ms. Buccino. Thank you, Congressman, for the question, and
I agree with you. Transparency, both in terms of funding and
the activities of the agency, is critically important, as is
cooperation between OSMRE and the states.
And I can report that, since coming onto this job, one of
the things that I have enjoyed the most about it is the ability
and the opportunity to work with the leaders of the state
programs. In fact, that is why one of the first things listed
in my written testimony, and what I reiterated in my statement,
is the Administration's support for the regulatory funding for
the Title V funding for the states, so that OSMRE can help them
do the job of overseeing operating coal mines, and to ensure
the protection of the public safety, health, and the
environment.
Dr. Gosar. OK. As the Office of Surface Mining calculates
and distributes each state's share of Federal funding, will the
Office of Surface Mining commit to providing up-to-date,
regular briefings with states to discuss these funds'
disbursements?
Ms. Buccino. I should share that it was just earlier this
month, in fact, that we did actually already get out the
distribution of regulatory grants to the states for Fiscal Year
2024, and that was $62.4 million. So, I am pleased to report
that. And as I said, those monies are critical. OSMRE cannot do
its job if the states can't do theirs.
Dr. Gosar. Got you. Under the Infrastructure Investment and
Jobs Act, the Abandoned Mine Land Fund received an influx of
$11.3 billion to help clean up deserted mines that were done
decades ago. What is the Office of Surface Mining doing to work
with states to ensure personnel at the state and Federal levels
are adequately trained to handle this massive influx of funds?
Ms. Buccino. I am not sure I heard your question exactly
clearly, but you are interested in what we are doing to ensure
an accurate, efficient, effective investment of those funds?
Dr. Gosar. Absolutely. If you can make it really quick, I
have some really interesting follow-ups.
Ms. Buccino. OK, very good. Well, we take that job very
seriously in terms of ensuring that those funds are actually
used on the ground, consistent with the intent of Congress in
the Bipartisan Infrastructure Law.
And the process by which we use of awarding grants and then
evaluating projects and issuing authorizations to proceed is a
critical part of delivering Congress' intent and delivering to
the American taxpayers. So, we use that process to look at
compliance with a variety of Federal laws, and also Build
America, Buy America, and a variety of applicable laws.
Dr. Gosar. In your budget justification, you estimated that
the AML funds were being dispersed at a rate of approximately
$725 million a year. Are you on pace to distribute that amount
this year, yes or no?
Ms. Buccino. Yes, we are.
Dr. Gosar. OK. Now, since Congress appropriated billions
towards remediation, are you seeing an increased pace of
abandoned mine cleanup nationally? Have you seen an increase in
that?
Ms. Buccino. Yes, and it has taken quite a bit of work on
the part of OSMRE employees and the states. We have ramped up
our staff, and I can say that I have had the pleasure of
getting out to see some of the results that are happening. I
was able to travel to Pennsylvania, where a community, Bovard,
is proactively being able to address, with a local cement
company, the subsidence that is happening there as a result of
past coal mining, proactively protecting 130 homes, rather than
waiting for the subsidence to harm the structure of those
homes.
Dr. Gosar. Let me ask you, really, one more question. We
have had this conversation for a long period of time here. Have
you leveraged money in any way in which to use special interest
groups like Trout Unlimited, the Audubon Society, who have
volunteered time and money to help mitigate some of this?
And then, have you also leveraged neighboring mines? I
mean, the Resolution Copper Company, which I got through in
2011, hasn't produced a single piece of copper, and yet they
have spent over $2 billion remediating around them an old mine
that was over 100 years old. So, are we looking creatively at
how do we expand this to make this work really, really
interestingly?
Well, I think the biggest thing was the Ranking Member at
the time did not care for the liability protection. If you are
remediating this to code, doesn't that suffice to make it work
right?
Ms. Buccino. Well, if I am hearing the question in there
correctly, you are asking me if we do leverage partnership with
local and state groups and governments. And, absolutely, that
is the only way we can do the job that Congress gave us under
the Bipartisan Infrastructure Law.
Dr. Gosar. But also look at mining companies that are
nearby, because they are very interested. They have the means,
and it works out very well.
Thank you for the indulgence, Mr. Speaker.
Mr. Stauber. Thank you very much.
Representative Lee from Nevada, you are up for 5 minutes.
Ms. Lee. Thank you, Mr. Chairman and Ranking Member, for
hosting this hearing. I want to thank our witnesses.
Mr. Applegate, I want to turn to you. I have a particular
interest in the continued development of the OpenET program.
This is a key public-private partnership providing early,
accessible, satellite-based evapotranspiration data for
improved water management across Nevada and the West. The
OpenET community includes stakeholders ranging from individual
farmers making irrigation decisions at the field scale to
agencies across all levels of government who are making
decisions about drought and water budget assessments at larger
scales.
And I can't stress, living in Nevada in the drought that we
are experiencing, just how important this tool is for water
management.
On the Appropriations Committee, I led the effort to
increase funding within the USGS for the OpenET program from
$1.5 million to $3.5 million in Fiscal Year 2023. And I worked
hand in hand with Republican colleagues from former
Representative Chris Stewart to current Interior Appropriations
Chair Mike Simpson to successfully maintain that level of
funding in Fiscal Year 2024.
As you are well aware, the USGS plays an important role in
the OpenET program, together with NASA and USDA and a multitude
of non-governmental partners ranging from the Environmental
Defense Fund to Nevada's own Desert Research Institute. My
question to you is simple. I am just sort of perplexed as to
why, for a second year in a row, the USGS is proposing to cut
the funding for OpenET by more than 85 percent, from $3.5
million down to half a million.
Dr. Applegate. Thank you for your question and, yes,
evapotranspiration is a key element of understanding water
budgets, particularly in the arid West. We have been part of
the broad OpenET consortium to look at how these remote sensing
technologies can be applied to that.
The budget request includes a number of hard choices, and
this would allow us, at the levels that are proposed, we would
be able to continue to refine the approach for the 17 Westerns,
for the arid states. But it would extend the time frame in
terms of expanding that work, looking at it on a more national
scale.
Ms. Lee. Well, I was just curious if this was a way for the
USGS to signal that the funding for this program, even with its
bipartisan backing in Congress as well as the 18 states
comprising the Western State Water Council, if maybe it would
be on a firmer foundation at NASA or another agency. Is that
the signal you are hoping to send?
Dr. Applegate. We are not attempting to send any particular
signal with this, other than that, in a constrained budget
environment, we have had to make some hard decisions.
But, again, I will emphasize we are very much part of a
broader consortium, including other agencies, including NASA,
and I think the ultimate success of this, particularly as we
think about it from the standpoint of ultimate implementation,
is going to take sort of an all-hands-on-deck approach to be
able to get there.
Ms. Lee. Thank you. I just want to reiterate the support
that this has received from both parties here in the House. And
even just last week the Vice Chair of the Colorado River
Caucus, Representative Celeste Maloy of Utah, just signed on as
the newest co-lead in my OpenET Act bill. So, hopefully, we can
continue to work to further grow this program.
I want to turn now to Earth MRI. Under the Bipartisan
Infrastructure Law, as you know, $320 million was provided for
that. Can you update us on what progress that USGS is making on
this, on Earth MRI, on decreasing the nation's reliance on
foreign sources of critical minerals, and also on assisting and
locating mapping of abandoned hardrock mine sites?
Dr. Applegate. Thank you for this question and, of course,
we are very excited by the increased investment made possible
through the Bipartisan Infrastructure Law in Earth MRI, and the
strong partnership that it represents with the state geological
surveys, as well as the private sector in terms of the data
acquisition.
One of the early collaborations with the states was to be
able to really identify those areas with the greatest
prospectivity across the nation, and that was an important
first step. And now, with this additional investment, we have
been able to conduct geologic mapping, geospatial data
acquisition, geophysical, geochemical, some incredible
partnerships and leverage.
You mentioned NASA earlier, for example. We have been able
to do an incredible amount of hyperspectral data acquisition
over Nevada and adjacent states. I think we are seeing
significant progress in terms of being able to work toward the
long-term goal of being able to get to a quantitative
assessment for critical minerals, particularly those essential
for clean energy supply chains.
Ms. Lee. Great. Thank you, I am out of time. Thank you,
sorry.
Mr. Fulcher [presiding]. The Congresswoman yields. I will
recognize myself for 5 minutes, and this is going to be a
question for Dr. Applegate.
But I need to give you a quick statement up front to kind
of set that question up. I represent the state of Idaho, and
the U.S. Geological Survey has been a good partner for Idaho.
So, thank you for that. And one of the major issues for my
state is that the many programs within the USGS need a one-to-
one match. And in a small state like Idaho, that is not always
easy to do. We have a total budget for that of about $1.2
million, so it is pretty much impossible to apply for all those
programs.
The Idaho Geological Survey ends up being slightly
penalized in comparison to, say, larger states who can maximize
those asks because of that match. One example of that recently
was the state map award which was capped at $800,000, and the
Idaho Geological Survey simply could not apply for that full
amount. Over the past three decades, Idaho has received around
$6 million through the USGS state map program. So, you can kind
of see the quandary there. Yet, this does have a very big
economic impact.
So, Dr. Applegate, just for some counsel, are there ways or
is there any advice on how to maximize the USGS programs if you
are a smaller state?
Dr. Applegate. Thank you for that question. And the
matching requirements that are associated, legislatively, for
several of our cooperative programs, the wonderful thing about
it is the amount of leverage that it produces. Often, we see
states exceeding that match or other cooperators, but recognize
the challenge that it represents, as well.
We have tried to work with our State Geological Survey
partners to take as an expansive view as we can in terms of in-
kind support within the constraints that are provided under the
law.
I will also say that there are other elements, for example,
when it comes to geologic mapping, some of the Bipartisan
Infrastructure Law investments have not required that same
matching. So, that has made it possible to really expand some
of the state involvement. And the state geological surveys have
been an absolutely central partner in that endeavor.
Mr. Fulcher. I thank you for that feedback. I might just
point out for the record that part of the reason of the
budgetary constraints is that nearly two-thirds of the land
mass in my state is federally owned. So, that has a ripple
effect through various budgets, as you might imagine.
But to shift gears a little bit, but I would like to stick
with you, Dr. Applegate, with another question, the USGS
publishes a critical mineral list every 3 years, and minerals
are evaluated under several parameters, including whether they
are essential to the economic and national security of United
States.
Dr. Applegate, which critical minerals in the United States
are the most import-reliant?
Dr. Applegate. Thank you for that question, and yes, we put
out a wonderful chart that kind of helps to underscore this. We
have quite a number. I can submit it for the record. I actually
have a copy of it here I would be happy to provide.
One of the aspects, of course, that we look at in terms of
the criticality of the minerals is, as you mentioned, whether
it is essential, also understanding the vulnerability of supply
chains, because the key is that it is not just whether it is
import-reliant, it is who are we reliant on.
So, particularly looking at these are partners with whom we
have a long-standing trade agreements.
Mr. Fulcher. That is where I was going to go with this
next.
Dr. Applegate. Yes, so we factor that in, as well.
Mr. Fulcher. Sure. I want to try to factor in one more
question, if I can. Are we 100 percent import-reliant on
anything? Can you just fast forward to that 100-percent
question?
Dr. Applegate. Yes, we are 100 percent reliant for a number
of different mineral commodities.
Mr. Fulcher. OK, all right, thank you. I am going to try to
get a quick question in.
[Pause.]
Mr. Fulcher. Maybe I will not. I will yield my time because
I will submit some for the record because this is going to take
a little while, but I have some additional ones, as well.
With that, I recognize Ms. Kamlager-Dove for 5 minutes.
Ms. Kamlager-Dove. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Dr. Applegate, last year alone the United States
experienced 28 climate disasters that caused over $1 billion in
damages each. All together, they caused $94.2 billion in
damages and killed at least 492 people.
I represent very urban Los Angeles, and even we were
devastated by floods. I was watching homes slide down Stalker
Avenue. We had never seen anything like that, yes, ever. So, we
know that it is getting worse, and we know that climate change
is real.
How does USGS help communities across the country
understand, prepare for, and adapt to climate change?
Dr. Applegate. Thank you for your question. And,
absolutely, as the climate is changing, this poses significant
challenges for land and resource managers, for emergency
managers, and for communities across the country.
A lot of the science that the USGS does related to climate
is, I emphasize, very practical, pragmatic. This is about
understanding what those impacts are, whether it is
intensification of, for example, the wildfire debris flow
cycle, and being able to better characterize that so that the
communities that are at risk are better prepared for that, or
whether it is, we also, of course, work on not just the
adaptation side, but also working from a mitigation standpoint
to understand carbon sequestration, whether it is geologic or
in biologic systems, what the potential is for that.
So, there are just a lot of very practical issues that
communities are wrestling with. This is why we have the climate
adaptation science centers. These university consortiums allow
us to tap into an incredible range of expertise to match with
our own expertise and our science centers. And they are all
about answering and addressing the questions that the
stakeholders in those regions, in those areas are wrestling
with. So, this is a major focus for our science, whether it is
changes in ecosystems, or whether it is changes to the
landscape.
Ms. Kamlager-Dove. Thank you for that. And I think your
budget request of $69 million for the Climate Adaptation
Science Centers seems not only wise, but practical and
pragmatic, as well.
We have also heard some criticisms from across the aisle
that some USGS programs are not specifically authorized, and
therefore potentially not in line with your mission. Could you
please clarify the authorities granted to the USGS by the 1897
Organic Act, and why it is important for a science agency to
have flexibility to address emerging issues?
Dr. Applegate. Yes, thank you for that question. And we do
have a broad Organic Act that authorizes a wide range of work.
We also have lots of specific authorizations that Congress has
subsequently provided additional guidance related to a number
of issues.
I think that having that sort of broad approach has been
very important for the USGS as we have evolved to be able to
address the most challenging environmental and natural resource
and public safety issues. When the USGS was formed back in
1879, it was to understand the resources of a physically
expanding nation. Today, what is expanding is population, the
economy, technology, and is producing an incredible range of
complex issues that we need many different disciplines to be
able to try to get at.
And I think that that sort of broad scope that the USGS has
is what enables us to be effective. I often say it is not the
one thing that we bring to bear, it is that ability to bring a
range of capabilities to help address these really complex
issues.
Ms. Kamlager-Dove. Great, thank you.
Now, turning to OSMRE, Principal Deputy Director Buccino,
it is my understanding that AMLER has directed over $900
million into Appalachian and tribal communities who have been
devastated by legacy mining. So, in the short time that we have
left, can you share where you have seen success in this
program, and how Congress can help support those successes?
Ms. Buccino. Yes, thank you, Congresswoman. I am very proud
of the impact that the AMLER program has had, and I was lucky
enough to actually visit one of the sites at the Eastern
Kentucky Advanced Manufacturing Institute. And hearing the
stories of former coal miners, seeing the excitement and the
pride in their faces as they were preparing for new jobs and
careers in automation and robotics was actually one of the best
days I have had on the job so far.
I should flag that this change that was put in to this
year's Fiscal Year 2024's enacted appropriations bill requiring
the payment within 90 days, I have some very serious concerns
with that because it removes our ability to use that grant and
ATP process to provide the oversight, both fiscal oversight and
compliance with what SMCRA requires, how those funds are to be
used.
So, as was mentioned by the Ranking Member, the effect of
that, paying that money, having to pay it, which we do intend
to comply with, we will be making those payments by the 90
days, by June 7, but the effect of that is that the compliance
duties and responsibilities are going to be left with the
recipients, the states and the tribes, without any additional
resources to address those.
Ms. Kamlager-Dove. Thank you.
And Mr. Chair, thank you for letting her answer the
question completely.
Mr. Stauber [presiding]. You are welcome.
Ms. Kamlager-Dove. I appreciate it.
Mr. Stauber. I now recognize Representative Hageman from
Wyoming for 5 minutes.
Ms. Hageman. Thank you. I first want to note that the
billion-dollar club that was referenced by my colleague on the
other side doesn't actually calculate the cost of so-called
climate-related disasters. And, in fact, at this point NOAA is
refusing to provide the information in support of their so-
called billion-dollar club. But we will continue to dig into
that, get the information. But that doesn't relate to climate
and weather-related events.
Dr. Buccino, as you are probably aware, the BLM recently
announced its final SEIS and amendment to the Buffalo Field
Office's Resource Management Plan. The RMP laid out three
alternatives, two of which were terrible for the state of
Wyoming and the nation as a whole, and will literally cost our
economy tens of billions of dollars, if not trillions of
dollars over time. Unfortunately, the BLM selected the No
Leasing Alternative, which ends all Federal coal production in
the Powder River Basin by 2041.
Director Buccino, yes or no, are you aware of this RMP?
Ms. Buccino. Yes Congresswoman, I am, but it is not a
decision that OSMRE made.
Ms. Hageman. I understand that, but you were aware that
that RMP was recently issued? I believe it was on Friday.
Ms. Buccino. Yes, I am.
Ms. Hageman. Assuming that you are aware of the importance
of the Federal revenue generated through coal mining, were you
consulted at any point in the BLM's decision related to that
RMP?
Ms. Buccino. So----
Ms. Hageman. Yes or no.
Ms. Buccino. Well, you know, I don't have that answer with
me, but I will----
Ms. Hageman. You don't know whether your office was
consulted or not?
Ms. Buccino. A lot of the work happens by the hard-working,
talented staff of the agency.
Ms. Hageman. Sure. Were you personally consulted before the
BLM made this decision to stop all coal production in the
Powder River Basin in Wyoming?
Ms. Buccino. I was not personally consulted.
Ms. Hageman. Thank you.
Ms. Buccino. Wyoming produces 40 percent of the nation's
coal and, as you are no doubt aware, fees from coal produced on
Federal lands support the Abandoned Mine Lands, or AML fund,
which goes to cleaning up mines that were deserted decades ago.
Did the BLM consult with you to determine how placing a
moratorium on Federal coal leasing today will affect the AML
and environmental remediation in the future?
Ms. Hageman. Not with me personally.
Ms. Hageman. The coal industry currently employs 5,111
individuals, 4,400 in the Powder River Basin, at an average
wage of $95,000 per job. This is well above the state average
of $53,000 per job, and each of these jobs supports another two
jobs in the service and supply sectors.
As the primary agency overseeing regulating coal mines and
abandoned mine lands, how are you preparing to mitigate the
impact of these lost jobs?
Ms. Buccino. Well, as you know, Congresswoman, I actually
come from Wyoming, and I care very much about those
communities. In fact, I was working at the University of
Wyoming to help those communities.
Ms. Hageman. But what are you doing to address these lost
jobs?
Ms. Buccino. Let me make clear that was not our leasing
decision. We do oversee the mining plans, and we are moving
forward. In fact, we have approved mining plans----
Ms. Hageman. So, at this point you don't have a plan of
action in place to address those lost jobs?
Ms. Buccino. We are doing what we can within our authority.
Ms. Hageman. OK. Dr. Applegate, the United States has an
abundance of minerals that can and should be developed to
increase energy reliability, stimulate our economy, and make us
less dependent on foreign countries.
The Energy Act of 2020 defines critical minerals to include
minerals that the supply chain of which is vulnerable to
disruption, et cetera.
Currently, Russia produces about 20 percent of the global
potash supply, while China produces about 10 percent, and the
United States has an estimated 1.07 billion tons of recoverable
ore and about 243 million tons of potassium oxide deposits.
Dr. Applegate, you are aware, aren't you, that fertilizer
is considered one of the four pillars of modern civilization,
the other three being cement, steel, and plastics, all of which
require coal and petroleum products to produce?
Were you aware that fertilizer is one of the four pillars
of a civilized society?
Dr. Applegate. Fertilizer is absolutely essential for the
modern economy, absolutely.
Ms. Hageman. And does the Service agree that, considering
growing demand for fertilizer on a global scale, that it is
absolutely essential that we don't allow China and Russia to
control such an essential market?
Dr. Applegate. Our focus is on the specific mineral
commodities. We are tracking both potash, as well as phosphate.
Ms. Hageman. Have you considered putting potash and
phosphate or phosphorus on the Critical Minerals List?
Dr. Applegate. Both have been considered. In the case of
potash, we do rely on imports, but they are almost exclusively
from Canada, as well as we have mining in multiple states.
In the case of phosphate, we do produce more than 80
percent of that domestically, and our reliance for imports is
largely on Peru, which has been a stable trading partner.
Ms. Hageman. Again, are you going to consider putting
either one of these on the Critical Minerals List?
Dr. Applegate. Yes, these are minerals that, with each
round of the Critical Minerals List, we have a methodology, we
will apply that to those minerals for consideration. They are
not currently on the list for the reasons that I cited, but
absolutely, we are always looking----
Ms. Hageman. Are you considering putting them on the list
now?
Dr. Applegate. We are considering them for the upcoming
list that we are mandated under the Energy Policy Act of 2020
to deliver. We are working on that right now, and we are
targeting for the 2025 time frame.
Ms. Hageman. Thank you, and I yield back.
Mr. Stauber. Thank you.
Representative Tiffany from Wisconsin, you are up for 5
minutes.
Mr. Tiffany. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Ms. Buccino, is it correct that OSM recently finished the
rewrite of the 10-day notice rule?
Ms. Buccino. Yes, that is correct.
Mr. Tiffany. What was wrong with the version that was done
in 2020?
Ms. Buccino. We engaged in that rulemaking after a review
that was requested of us in a direct Executive Order from the
President. And as a result of that review----
Mr. Tiffany. So, the President directed you to rewrite that
rule. Is that accurate?
Ms. Buccino. Sorry, not specifically. What the President
directed was that the agencies look at a variety of regulations
that had previously been issued. We did our job to do that, and
there were ways that we felt would be more consistent with
SMCRA by making some changes.
Mr. Tiffany. So, when the President tells you to look at
something, it is probably not a maybe, is that right? It is a
directive?
Ms. Buccino. It was an Executive Order to review the
regulations.
Mr. Tiffany. Mr. Chairman, I would just say, when the
President says you need to look at something, they are probably
saying, ``Do it.'' So, the President was behind the rewrite of
the 10-day notice rule that was just rewritten in 2020.
Doesn't SMCRA give primacy to the states, Ms. Buccino?
Ms. Buccino. SMCRA does set up a process for which states
can obtain primacy.
Mr. Tiffany. Did the states ask for this change to the 10-
day notice rule?
Ms. Buccino. As I mentioned, the review that occurred was
the result of an Executive Order, which has been done by other
presidents that come into office, as well.
Mr. Tiffany. In the 10-day notice rule that is written now
under your version, isn't it correct citizen complaints have
been elevated above consultation with local and state
governments?
Ms. Buccino. No, Congressman, that is not the case in terms
of elevated above. But SMCRA does explicitly provide for a
process by which citizens have the right to come to OSMRE with
a possible violation. States then are the ones who are directed
and left to address that potential violation and respond to it.
Mr. Tiffany. But you included that in this recent 10-day
notice rule in regards to citizen complaints, correct?
Ms. Buccino. We were acting consistent with SMCRA.
Mr. Tiffany. But you elevated it to an even higher
authority. Isn't that correct?
Ms. Buccino. I am not quite sure I understand the question.
Mr. Tiffany. Yes, I will move on to another question here.
Did you consult and coordinate with the states before
writing this 10-day notice rule?
Ms. Buccino. Yes, we received numerous comments from the
states as part of the rulemaking process.
Mr. Tiffany. OK, Not comments, not comments. You are
required to coordinate with states and local governments. The
establishment of rank equal, not subordinate. Did you sit down
at the table with them and say, ``The President has directed us
to rewrite the 10-day notice rule. Will you help us do that?''
Did you have that discussion with those states like Wyoming?
Ms. Buccino. What I can tell you, Congressman, is that the
process we followed is the one that is laid out in the
Administrative Procedure Act to engage in rulemaking. And that
is what we did, which included reviewing numerous comments by
states, as well as other stakeholders.
Mr. Tiffany. Yes, this is not coordination or consultation
in any way, shape, or form, Mr. Chairman, and we have been
hearing this for a couple of weeks now from the Administration
officials that have been coming forward.
Yes, ``We heard comments,'' and things like that. That is
not how it works. It is when these fundamental environmental
laws that were put in place back in the early 1970s, when they
were put in place lawmakers here made it very clear you must
sit down and treat these local and state units of government as
equals so that they would have a say. Legislators,
congressional members of the time, they knew the Federal
Government could be overarching. And that is exactly what we
are hearing today. They decided to do this.
Because states have told us, Ms. Buccino, that they were
not given a voice at the table. They have told us that.
You said the industry is in decline. Why is it in decline?
Ms. Buccino. You are asking why? You are asking me why the
coal industry is in decline?
Mr. Tiffany. That is right, yes.
Ms. Buccino. I think there are a variety of reasons. And I
guess, if I had to pick one, I would say there are market
forces that have resulted. And I am pleased to have come to
OSMRE because of the job that it is doing in coal communities
to help them move forward.
Mr. Tiffany. Those are not market forces, Mr. Chairman,
when the Federal Government tries to put you out of business.
And when the President himself is behind this effort, as with
the 10-day notice rule, people can fully understand why we see
a country in decline.
I yield back.
Mr. Stauber. Thank you very much. Now we will go to Mr.
Rosendale from Montana.
You are up for 5 minutes.
Mr. Rosendale. Thank you, Chairman Stauber, and thank you
for holding this hearing on the budgets for OSMRE and the
United States Geological Survey. And I thank both the witnesses
for showing up today.
It is crucial for Montana that the Federal agencies are
benefiting our constituents, rather than threatening their
livelihoods. Under Biden, OSMRE has shown that they are more
focused on radical climate agenda than serving the citizens who
actually pay their salaries.
Ms. Buccino, this is basically a budget hearing. So, while
we talk about a lot of policy issues, I do want to get directly
to the spending. And while your request for your budget is $304
million, that is not a true reflection of your total spend. And
the American people that are out here listening, once again, as
I did last week, need to understand that this is becoming,
unfortunately, the norm for all of the agencies that are coming
in here. They say, ``We are only requesting $304 million,''
when in reality you are going to be spending about, according
to my calculations, $1.58 billion for 2025. That seems to
utilize roughly $1.2 billion from the Infrastructure Investment
and Jobs Act.
So, this is something that we are not even having
discussions about because it is not falling under the request
by the $304 million. But of that $1.58 billion, $11.3 billion
over the next several years is dedicated exclusively for
salaries, of which $22.6 million a year is set aside for
salaries. And again, the American people, they need to
understand that.
In addition to that, isn't it true that these funds are
also going to be used for economic revitalization such as
advanced manufacturing and renewable energy deployment?
Ms. Buccino. Congressman, I am glad you brought that up,
because those funds that you are referring to are the funds
that were directly provided to OSMRE through the Bipartisan
Infrastructure Law. And what the agency, OSMRE, is able to do
with that, really, once-in-a-lifetime investment is help
communities. We are working in partnership----
Mr. Rosendale. Look, here is where I am. Here is what my
obligation is. When I have an agency head come in and say, ``I
am requesting $304 million,'' and act like that is what your
budget, how much it is going to be, and we hear from my
colleagues on the other side of the aisle about these dramatic
cuts that these agencies are going to have to experience, when
you take the total money that you are going to be receiving
from the IIJA, you actually had $11.3 billion. If you didn't
accept any appropriated funds, none, zero, you would actually
be able to fund your agency for 37 years, 37 years if there
weren't any additional appropriated funds.
And when you take the appropriated funds and you add that
with the IIJA funds that you are going to be bringing in, it
actually increases your request by fivefold. It is five times
the amount that you are going to be appropriated and budgeted.
So, there is a lot of money that is going to be spent there
that this body doesn't have much to say over in any given year.
Ms. Buccino. Well, Congressman----
Mr. Rosendale. Excuse me. The OSMRE has recently further
delayed the proposed completion dates of the EISs, or
supplemental EISs, for Montana mines of Bull Mountain, Spring
Creek, and Rosebud. These delays have pushed the EIS completion
dates beyond the point where the mines have enough permitted
coal to continue their operation. OSMRE continues these delays,
contrary to the representations they have made in Federal
courts, risking serious economic destruction to Montana.
So, when will your agency complete the required NEPA
process for these delayed actions in Montana for Rosebud area F
EIS that your agency estimated the completion date for April
2025? That date is 18 months after the original estimate of
November 2023, and 4 months after the court-mandated date of
January 2025, when the court will vacate the Rosebud's entire
Area F plan, leaving Rosebud no remedy.
When can we expect the NEPA process to be completed?
Ms. Buccino. Congressman, I would be remiss if I did not
flag that most of the money you were identifying are direct
funds that are going to the states. In fact, it is over $10
billion that are funds that are going to the states and the
local communities.
Mr. Rosendale. But up to 3 percent of the amounts made
available under this heading in this Act shall be for salaries.
I am just reading from the text.
So, when can we expect the EIS and the NEPA process to be
completed for the mines of Montana?
Ms. Buccino. Well, the BIL money is not helping with that,
but we are working diligently. We intend to comply with the
law, and we are working diligently to meet those applicable
deadlines.
Mr. Rosendale. Mr. Chair, if you would, just give me one
more moment.
The law says that you are supposed to have it completed by
January 2025, and you are already saying that Area F EIS is
going to be completed in April 2025. So, you are already
telling us that you are 4 months beyond the date ordered by the
court.
Ms. Buccino. Our intent is to comply with the law, and we
are doing all that we can to do so. Thank you.
Mr. Rosendale. Thank you, Mr. Chair, I yield back.
Mr. Stauber. All right. I want to thank the witnesses for
their testimony and the Members for their questions this
afternoon.
The members of the Subcommittee may have some additional
questions for the witnesses, and we will ask you to respond to
these in writing. Under Committee Rule 3, members of the
Committee must submit questions to the Subcommittee Clerk by 5
p.m. on Tuesday, May 28. The hearing record will be held open
for 10 business days for these purposes.
If there is no further business, without objection, the
Subcommittee stands adjourned.

[Whereupon, at 4 p.m., the Subcommittee was adjourned.]

[all]
