- EXAMINING THE BIDEN ADMINISTRATION'S ABANDONED MINE LANDS AND ACTIVE MINING PROGRAMS

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

EXAMINING THE BIDEN ADMINISTRATION'S ABANDONED MINE

LANDS AND ACTIVE MINING PROGRAMS

=======================================================================

OVERSIGHT HEARING

before the

SUBCOMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND
MINERAL RESOURCES

of the

COMMITTEE ON NATURAL RESOURCES
U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

Tuesday, November 14, 2023

__________

Serial No. 118-75

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Natural Resources

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.govinfo.gov
or
Committee address: http://naturalresources.house.gov

______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
54-100PDF                 WASHINGTON : 2024

COMMITTEE ON NATURAL RESOURCES

BRUCE WESTERMAN, AR, Chairman
DOUG LAMBORN, CO, Vice Chairman
RAUL M. GRIJALVA, AZ, Ranking Member

Doug Lamborn, CO                        Grace F. Napolitano, CA
Robert J. Wittman, VA                   Gregorio Kilili Camacho Sablan,
Tom McClintock, CA                              CNMI
Paul Gosar, AZ                          Jared Huffman, CA
Garret Graves, LA                       Ruben Gallego, AZ
Aumua Amata C. Radewagen, A             SJoe Neguse, CO
Doug LaMalfa, CA                        Mike Levin, CA
Daniel Webster, FL                      Katie Porter, CA
Jenniffer Gonzalez-Colon, PR            Teresa Leger Fernandez, NM
Russ Fulcher, ID                        Melanie A. Stansbury, NM
Pete Stauber, MN                        Mary Sattler Peltola, AK
John R. Curtis, UT                      Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez, NY
Tom Tiffany, WI                         Kevin Mullin, CA
Jerry Carl, AL                          Val T. Hoyle, OR
Matt Rosendale, MT                      Sydney Kamlager-Dove, CA
Lauren Boebert, CO                      Seth Magaziner, RI
Cliff Bentz, OR                         Nydia M. Velazquez, NY
Jen Kiggans, VA                         Ed Case, HI
Jim Moylan, GU                          Debbie Dingell, MI
Mike Collins, GA                        Susie Lee, NV
Wesley P. Hunt, TX
Anna Paulina Luna, FL
John Duarte, CA
Harriet M. Hageman, WY

Vivian Moeglein, Staff Director
Tom Connally, Chief Counsel
Lora Snyder, Democratic Staff Director
http://naturalresources.house.gov
------

SUBCOMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND MINERAL RESOURCES

PETE STAUBER, MN, Chairman
WESLEY P. HUNT, TX, Vice Chair
ALEXANDRIA OCASIO-CORTEZ, NY, Ranking Member

Doug Lamborn, CO                     Jared Huffman, CA
Robert J. Wittman, VA                Kevin Mullin, CA
Paul Gosar, AZ                       Sydney Kamlager-Dove, CA
Garret Graves, LA                    Seth Magaziner, RI
Daniel Webster, FL                   Nydia M. Velazquez, NY
Russ Fulcher, ID                     Debbie Dingell, MI
John R. Curtis, UT                   Raul M. Grijalva, AZ
Tom Tiffany, WI                      Grace F. Napolitano, CA
Matt Rosendale, MT                   Susie Lee, NV
Lauren Boebert, CO                   Vacancy
Wesley P. Hunt, TX                   Vacancy
Mike Collins, GA
John Duarte, CA
Bruce Westerman, AR, ex officio

------
CONTENTS

----------
Page

Hearing held on Tuesday, November 14, 2023.......................     1

Statement of Members:

Stauber, Hon. Pete, a Representative in Congress from the
State of Minnesota.........................................     1
Ocasio-Cortez, Hon. Alexandria, a Representative in Congress
from the State of New York.................................     2

Statement of Witnesses:

Owens, Glenda, Deputy Director, Office of Surface Mining
Reclamation and Enforcement, Washington, DC................     4
Prepared statement of....................................     6
Questions submitted for the record.......................     7
McCament, Benjamin, Chief, Division of Mineral Resources
Management, Ohio Department of Natural Resources, Columbus,
Ohio.......................................................     9
Prepared statement of....................................    11
Questions submitted for the record.......................    12
Morin, Dustin, Director, Mining and Reclamation Division,
Alabama Department of Labor, Montgomery, Alabama...........    13
Prepared statement of....................................    15
Questions submitted for the record.......................    20
Morgan, Peter, Senior Attorney, Sierra Club Legislative
Office, Washington, DC.....................................    21
Prepared statement of....................................    22
Questions submitted for the record.......................    31
Wendtland, Kyle, Administrator, Wyoming Department of
Environmental Quality, Land Quality Division, Cheyenne,
Wyoming....................................................    34
Prepared statement of....................................    36
Questions submitted for the record.......................    42

Additional Materials Submitted for the Record:

Submissions for the Record by Representative Stauber

National Mining Association, Statement for the Record....    44

OVERSIGHT HEARING ON EXAMINING THE BIDEN ADMINISTRATION'S ABANDONED

MINE LANDS AND ACTIVE MINING PROGRAMS

----------

Tuesday, November 14, 2023

U.S. House of Representatives

Subcommittee on Energy and Mineral Resources

Committee on Natural Resources

Washington, DC

----------

The Subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:15 a.m. in
Room 1324, Longworth House Office Building, Hon. Pete Stauber
[Chairman of the Subcommittee] presiding.
Present: Representatives Stauber, Fulcher, Tiffany,
Rosendale, Collins, Westerman; Ocasio-Cortez, and Kamlager-
Dove.
Also present: Representative Hageman.

Mr. Stauber. The Subcommittee on Energy and Mineral
Resources will come to order.
Without objection, the Chair is authorized to declare a
recess of the Subcommittee at any time.
Under Committee Rule 4(f), any oral opening statements at
hearings are limited to the Chairman and the Ranking Minority
Member.
I ask unanimous consent that the gentlewoman from Wyoming,
Ms. Hageman, be allowed to participate in today's hearing.
Without objection, so ordered.
I now recognize myself for an opening statement.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. PETE STAUBER, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF MINNESOTA

Mr. Stauber. Today, we will discuss the programs that
manage two important aspects of coal mining in the United
States: the regulation of active coal mining and the cleanup of
coal sites abandoned before modern environmental protections,
known as Abandoned Mine Lands, or AML.
These activities are subject to the same Federal statute,
the Surface Mining Control and Reclamation Act of 1977, or
SMCRA. SMCRA is administered by the Office of Surface Mining
Reclamation and Enforcement, or OSMRE, at the Department of the
Interior.
The AML and active mining programs have functioned well for
decades. But, unfortunately, recent years have seen a major
increase in delays for needed mine approvals, the creation of
overly-burdensome administrative guidance, and new Federal
requirements outside of SMCRA that have made it harder and
harder for states and tribes to develop their resources and
clean up AML.
Since the passage of SMCRA, AML cleanup has been funded by
a fee on each ton of coal produced. These funds are then
distributed to the states and tribes as grants, many of which
run their own AML programs. This funding source was recently
augmented by the Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act (IIJA),
which reduced the fee by 20 percent and added an additional
$11.3 billion in taxpayer funds to go towards AML cleanup.
The new influx of funding could do a lot of good in
assisting AML work. But, unfortunately, many states across the
country have struggled with new so-called ``recommendations,''
which OSMRE has added on top of its existing requirements in
statute. States have also been given new administrative tasks
in order to apply for IIJA funding, making them spend more time
and resources on paperwork instead of filling the hole in the
ground.
When it comes to active mining, projects coast to coast are
facing delays in the approval process. New Federal coal leasing
is, unfortunately, under moratorium. However, even projects
exempt from the leasing ban have run into major delays. Some of
these approvals, such as a mine plan amendment to expand
production at a site in Wyoming, have already gone through
multiple rounds of NEPA but continue to languish somewhere at
the top levels of OSMRE and the Department of the Interior.
At the core of both the AML and active mining programs is
the idea of state primacy. Under primacy, a state or tribe has
been granted delegated authority from OSMRE to run their own
programs. This long-standing authority under SMCRA is only
granted to states and tribes with regulations at least as
stringent as Federal standards. This authority was created in
1977 very deliberately recognizing that states and tribes have
both the technical expertise and local knowledge necessary to
find, prioritize, and select AML projects for cleanup, as well
as manage other aspects of coal production specific to that
state's geology.
Any attempts by OSMRE to supersede that authority such as
their proposed dam safety rule and 10-day notice rule would not
only be unwise, but would go against one of the most important
tenets of the coal program's defining statute.
I look forward to hearing from our witnesses today about
their experiences, so that we can move towards a more
transparent and efficient running of these programs.
I am now going to yield to my colleague, Ranking Member
Ocasio-Cortez, for her opening statement.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. ALEXANDRIA OCASIO-CORTEZ, A
REPRESENTATIVE IN CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF NEW YORK

Ms. Ocasio-Cortez. Thank you, Mr. Chair, and thank you to
our witnesses for coming here today.
Coal workers take well-deserved pride in building a
prosperous U.S. economy and the American middle class. A
century ago, coal workers fought and died to win workplace
protections like the weekend that we now see as commonplace.
And every American has a debt to coal workers for that fight.
These workers want well-paid union jobs that provided good work
for generations of families.
But for around 15 years now, coal mining itself has been on
a steep decline. In fact, no new coal plants have come on-line
in almost 10 years, and nearly a third of operating coal plants
are slated to close by 2030. Several factors are at play.
Competition from natural gas and the rise of low-cost renewable
energy has led to the closure of hundreds of coal mines. When
coal plants retire, they are more often replaced by new
renewable energy and not a new coal plant.
And while the coal industry once helped communities across
the country prosper, it also contributed to devastating health,
environmental, climate, and long-term economic impacts. The
black lung epidemic has ravaged miners. An estimated one in
five tenured miners in central Appalachia has black lung
disease, a devastating and potentially fatal illness caused by
inhaling dust underground.
Meanwhile, cancer occurs at significantly higher rates in
communities with mountaintop removal mining. Water pollution
from abandoned coal mines has devastated thousands of miles of
streams and rivers. Un-reclaimed mountains of waste rock create
looming threats of landslides for homes downhill. Carbon
emissions from burning coal are responsible for about 40
percent of global emissions from fossil fuels, a significant
contribution to the climate crisis that simply cannot be
ignored.
And due to coal's decline over the last 10 years, more than
60 coal companies have gone bankrupt, including companies that
were once some of the largest and most prosperous. When coal
companies file for bankruptcy, they too often spin off their
unproductive mines, and this is what we should be focusing on
and talking about today. They drop their obligations to clean
up old mines, and they stop paying health care and pension
obligations to the communities and the very workers who gave up
so much of their lives in service to these companies. In doing
so, these companies break their promise to neighboring
communities and everyday Americans who expected clean water and
air, and to the workers who risked their well-being and
expected these benefits for the rest of their lives. They were
promised them.
In 2017, seeing this crisis unfold, Congress and this
Committee stepped in to guarantee health care benefits for more
than 22,000 retirees and widows when coal companies left them
behind. In 2019, we again stepped in to protect mine workers'
pension benefits for 100,000 more. In doing so, we worked
closely with the United Mine Workers of America, and made sure
that no worker was left behind. I am proud of the work that we
have done with UMWA to protect these essential services. But to
be clear, it was the public, not the coal companies, who picked
up the tab for the coal industry's failures, the public.
And now, the remaining coal companies, which are all at
risk of bankruptcy in a dying industry, may try to forfeit
their environmental reclamation liabilities and the promises
they made to workers, as well. So, let's be clear. This problem
is not inevitable. It is not that these companies simply cannot
afford to pay for reclamation, it is that they are choosing not
to.
Through bankruptcy, these companies are consolidating mines
with little recoverable coal to smaller companies, many of
which may also go bankrupt, in order to avoid the
responsibility of cleanup, responsibility that they have not
just to the American people, but to this entire country.
Meanwhile, reclamation bonds for cleaning up these mines are
consolidated to newer and riskier insurance companies. It is
not right, it is not fair, and it is a matter of environmental
and economic justice.
And the solution to this unfolding crisis is not to provide
false hope that coal will return. We need to face this fight
head on, and make sure that we are holding coal companies
accountable, that we are taking care of workers and their
communities while we still can.
With that, I yield back to the Chair.

Mr. Stauber. Thank you very much. Normally at this point I
allow the Chair and Ranking Member of the Full Committee their
opening statements, but I don't see them here. So, we are going
to go right into opening statements.
Let me remind the witnesses that under Committee Rules,
they must limit their oral statements to 5 minutes, but their
entire statement will appear in the hearing record.
To begin your testimony, please press the ``talk'' button
on the microphone.
We use timing lights. When you begin, the light will turn
green. When you have 1 minute remaining, the light will turn
yellow. And at the end of the 5 minutes, the light will turn
red, and I will ask you to please complete your statement.
I will also allow all witnesses to testify before Member
questioning.
And before I introduce Ms. Owens, I will say that votes are
expected to be called any time. So, we will stop so we can
vote, and we will come back as soon as practical and start
again.
Our first witness is Ms. Glenda Owens, and she is the
Deputy Director for the Office of Surface Mining Reclamation
and Enforcement, located right here in Washington, DC.
Ms. Owens, you are now recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF GLENDA OWENS, DEPUTY DIRECTOR, OFFICE OF SURFACE
MINING, RECLAMATION AND ENFORCEMENT, WASHINGTON, DC

Ms. Owens. Good morning, and thank you, Chairman Stauber,
Ranking Member Ocasio-Cortez, and other members of the
Subcommittee. Thank you for the invitation to testify on behalf
of the Office of Surface Mining Reclamation and Enforcement.
Through the Surface Mining Control and Reclamation Act of
1977, Congress established OSMRE for two primary purposes:
first, to ensure that the nation's coal mines operate in a
manner that protects citizens and the environment during
mining, and to restore the land affected to a condition capable
of supporting the uses it could before any mining, or to higher
or better uses; second, to implement the Abandoned Mine Land
program and address the hazards and environmental degradation
resulting from two centuries of coal mining activities before
the law was passed.
OSMRE's Title V programs provide resources to 23 primacy
states to administer their regulatory programs on state and
private lands. These programs protect the public and the
environment from the adverse effects of current mining, and
support the reclamation of impacted lands after active mining
operations have concluded. OSMRE provides oversight of state
regulatory programs, and directly implements SMCRA on Indian
lands and in states that do not have primacy.
The Title IV programs provide grants to states and tribes
to conduct reclamation on sites mined before the enactment of
SMCRA. OSMRE evaluates state and tribal AML programs and
ensures reclamation of mining-related hazards while promoting
partnerships to address water quality issues. OSMRE also
administers the Federal reclamation program, including
watershed cooperative agreements, civil penalty projects, and
emergency projects.
Since the establishment of the Abandoned Mine Land Economic
Revitalization Program, Congress is authorized through annual
appropriations $912.5 million in total AMLER funding, with the
purpose of reclaiming abandoned mine lands in conjunction with
economic and community development opportunities. The AMLER
program has provided funding to the six eligible Appalachian
states, as well as the Crow, the Hopi, and the Navajo Nation.
OSMRE verifies and assists with project eligibility
determinations on the submitted AMLER grant applications, and
since Fiscal Year 2016 has received over 290 project
applications. Of those project applications, 284 have received
preliminary approval, nearly 180 have received authorizations
to proceed, and almost 70 are complete.
The Bipartisan Infrastructure Law (BIL) provided a once-in-
a-generation investment in revitalizing the economy and
environment of America's coalfield communities. In addition to
extending the AML fee collection authority under SMCRA, the
Infrastructure Law authorized an appropriated $11.293 billion
for deposit into the Abandoned Mine Reclamation Fund, with
approximately $10.8 billion to be distributed to eligible
states and tribes on an equal annual basis, approximately $725
million a year over a 15-year period to help restore impacted
coalfield communities.
So, far, OSMRE has provided $721 million in Fiscal Year
2022 BIL grant funding to the 22 eligible states and the Navajo
Nation, and awarded more than $21 million in Fiscal Year 2023
grants to 5 states, with 7 additional state grant applications
currently pending.
OSMRE is ensuring that current coal mining is conducted in
a manner that protects the public and the environment, and that
formerly mined lands are reclaimed to productive, safe, and
beneficial uses. OSMRE will continue to work closely in
partnership with our state and tribal partners and stakeholders
to achieve these goals.
Thank you again for the opportunity to provide this
testimony and to appear before you today.

[The prepared statement of Ms. Owens follows:]
Prepared Statement of Glenda H. Owens, Deputy Director, Office of
Surface Mining Reclamation and Enforcement,
U.S. Department of the Interior

Introduction and Background

Chairman Stauber, Ranking Member Ocasio-Cortez, and other Members
of the Subcommittee, thank you for the invitation to testify on behalf
of the Office of Surface Mining Reclamation and Enforcement (OSMRE).

Through the Surface Mining Control and Reclamation Act of 1977
(SMCRA) (Public Law No. 95-87), Congress established OSMRE for two
primary purposes:

First, to ensure that the Nation's coal mines operate in a
manner that protects citizens and the environment during
mining, and to restore the land affected to a condition capable
of supporting the uses it could before any mining, or higher or
better uses following mining.

Second, to implement an Abandoned Mine Land (AML) Program to
address the hazards and environmental degradation resulting
from two centuries of coal mining activities before the law was
passed in 1977.

Since SMCRA's enactment 46 years ago, OSMRE has accomplished the
following:

Closed more than 47,000 abandoned underground mine shafts
and openings;

Eliminated more than 1,050 miles of dangerous highwalls;

Eliminated more than 131,000 acres of dangerous spoils and
embankments;

Restored more than 700,000 acres of streams and land; and

Replaced infrastructure for more than 58,000 polluted
water supplies.

Environmental Protection, Regulating Active Coal Mining (Title V)

OSMRE's Environmental Protection program provides resources to 23
primacy states to administer their regulatory programs on state and
private lands, and where there is an OSMRE-State cooperative agreement,
on Federal lands as well. These programs protect the public and the
environment from the adverse effects of current mining and support the
reclamation of impacted land after active mining operations conclude.
OSMRE provides oversight of State regulatory programs and directly
implements SMCRA on Indian lands and in states that do not have
primacy--known as Federal Program states--and ensures that adequate
actions are taken to reclaim mined areas as expeditiously as possible.
Environmental Restoration, Abandoned Mine Land (AML) Fee-Based Grants
(Title IV)

The Environmental Restoration program provides grants to states and
Tribes to conduct reclamation on sites mined before the enactment of
SMCRA in 1977. OSMRE evaluates state and Tribal AML programs to ensure
mining-related hazards are reclaimed, while promoting partnerships to
address water quality issues from pre-Act sites. OSMRE also administers
the Federal Reclamation Program, including watershed cooperative
agreements, civil penalty projects, and emergency projects.
Coal mine permittees pay a fee to the AML Reclamation Fund (AML
Fund) based on the tonnage of coal produced. As of September 30, 2022,
approximately $12.01 billion in industry AML fees have been collected,
including interest earned. This does not include funding from the
Abandoned Mine Land Economic Revitalization (AMLER) Program or the
Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act, also known as the Bipartisan
Infrastructure Law (BIL), which is described in further detail below.
Abandoned Mine Land Economic Revitalization (AMLER) Program

Since the establishment of the Abandoned Mine Land Economic
Revitalization (AMLER) Program--initially the Abandoned Mine Land
Economic Development Pilot--Congress has authorized through annual
appropriations $912.5 million in AMLER funding, with the purpose of
reclaiming abandoned mine lands in conjunction with economic and
community development opportunities. The AMLER Program has made funding
available to six Appalachian States: Kentucky, Pennsylvania, West
Virginia, Alabama, Ohio, and Virginia; and three Tribes: the Crow, the
Hopi, and the Navajo Nation.
AMLER grants support local investment opportunities in coalfield
economies by creating recreational and tourism opportunities, enhancing
infrastructure, and by providing jobs and associated training and
skills. AMLER also advances the goals of the Justice40 Initiative.
OSMRE verifies and assists with project eligibility determinations on
AMLER grant applications submitted by these states and Tribes. OSMRE
has received over 290 AMLER project applications since the start of the
program in FY 2016. Of those project applications, 284 have received
preliminary approval, nearly 180 have received authorizations to
proceed, and nearly 70 have been completed.
OSMRE currently maintains an external-facing AMLER project tracking
spreadsheet on its website to inform the public and provide
transparency on status of current projects. The spreadsheet provides a
snapshot of each project and its review and approval status. We are
currently developing an improved tracking system to provide more
detailed and timely information on projects as they progress through
the approval cycle. Tracking information and other pertinent
information and reports on the AMLER program are currently available at
www.osmre.gov/amler.
Bipartisan Infrastructure Law (BIL)

The BIL (Public Law No. 117-58) provided a once-in-a-generation
investment in revitalizing the economy and environment of America's
coalfield communities. In addition to extending the AML fee collection
authority under SMCRA, the Infrastructure Law authorized and
appropriated $11.293 billion for deposit into the Abandoned Mine
Reclamation Fund, with approximately $10.873 billion to be distributed
to eligible states and Tribes on an equal annual basis--approximately
$725 million a year--over a 15-year period to help restore impacted
coalfield communities and provide benefits for current and future
generations.
OSMRE appreciates Congress' acknowledgement of the tremendous
environmental and economic value of the AML program and effectively
implementing this historic investment and delivering meaningful results
is a top priority for OSMRE. These funds will improve and significantly
increase OSMRE's efforts to support states, Tribal nations,
stakeholders, and communities. The BIL expands investment in the AML
program, creates an unprecedented opportunity to reclaim abandoned mine
features at a scale not otherwise achievable, and is creating good-
paying jobs and spurring economic development in coalfield communities.
So far, OSMRE has provided $721 million in FY 2022 BIL grant
funding to the 22 eligible states and the Navajo Nation, and awarded
more than $21 million in FY 2023 grants to five States (Alaska,
Arkansas, Colorado, Iowa, and New Mexico), with seven additional state
grant applications currently pending (Illinois, Kansas, Kentucky,
Maryland, Missouri, Pennsylvania, and Virginia).
Closing

OSMRE is ensuring that current coal mining is conducted in a manner
that protects the public and environment, and that formerly mined lands
are reclaimed to productive, safe, and beneficial uses, and that
impacted waters are remediated. OSMRE will continue to work closely in
partnership with states and Tribes, local watershed groups, citizens,
and other stakeholders to achieve these goals and to advance economic
revitalization opportunities in coal communities.

Thank you for the opportunity to provide this testimony and to
appear before you today.

______

Questions Submitted for the Record to Ms. Glenda Owens, Deputy
Director, Office of Surface Mining Reclamation and Enforcement (OSMRE)

Ms. Owens did not submit responses to the Committee by the appropriate
deadline for inclusion in the printed record.

Questions Submitted by Representative Stauber

Question 1. At the hearing, Congressman Collins asked if the
substantial increase in abandoned mine land (AML) funding from the
Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act (IIJA) is causing some states to
divert resources from their Title V programs to their Title IV
programs, in order to maximize the new AML funding available under the
IIJA as quickly as possible. Deputy Director Owens responded that she
was not aware of staff being pulled from Title V implementation for
Title IV work.

1a) Can you confirm that the Department of the Interior is not
placing more emphasis on AML projects, including by acquiring an
unequal number of new or reassigned Department or OSMRE personnel for
AML related work, at the expense of the Title V program?

1b) What steps is OSMRE taking to ensure that Title V program
implementation will not be affected by the interest in rapid
distribution and utilization of AML funding from the IIJA?

Question 2. The shortfall in human resources has led to significant
delays in permitting approvals and bond releases for coal mining
operations in some states. These functions are needed to ensure
sufficient coal supplies and proper completion of reclamation work.

2a) Do you believe a fair and timely bond release process supports
the ability of coal operators to keep reclamation activities current?

Question 3. Could you identify five action items OSMRE is taking to
increase efficiency in administering the IIJA AML program?

Question 4. Can funds provided for AML under IIJA and funds
provided by the AML fee be separately tracked through adoption of
accounting procedures? If not, why not? If so, why is OSMRE requiring
separate grant applications for IIJA-sourced and AML fee-sourced
funding?

Question 5. Since OSMRE's vetting of Abandoned Mine Lands Economic
Revitalization (AMLER) projects is not mandated by law, why is OSMRE
requiring this of states?

Question 6. When will OSMRE provide clear written guidance on how 2
CFR Part 200 requirements related to real property and property
improvement will be implemented in the AMLER program?

Question 7. Please provide a detailed, step-by-step breakdown of
OSMRE's decision process for state program amendments and state
reclamation plan updates, including the chain of approval among agency
and other Department of the Interior (DOI) personnel, and a brief
explanation of each step in the approval process a program amendment or
reclamation plan update must undergo before it can be approved.

Question 8. What is OSMRE's plan to eliminate the backlog of
program amendments and pending reclamation plan updates? Will this plan
ultimately reduce the backlog to zero?

Question 9. In your testimony before the committee, you referred to
federal court decision(s) requiring that an environmental impact
statement (EIS) be prepared for the Black Butte Mine's Federal Mine
Plan. Please identify these court decision(s), and explain why they are
applicable to the decision to require an EIS for Black Butte's mine
plan.

Question 10. Prior to OSMRE analysis of a mine plan, prospective
coal mining must undergo at least two reviews under the National
Environmental Policy Act (NEPA) at the Bureau of Land Management
(BLM)--one regarding a Resource Management Plan, and another during the
coal leasing process, both of which require full analysis of potential
environmental impacts of the proposed mining operations.

10a) Why does OSMRE need to conduct a third, separate NEPA analysis
during its mine plan approval process?

10b) If a third NEPA review is truly required, why can't OSMRE rely
on the NEPA analysis conducted previously by BLM?

10c) How is the requirement for three separate NEPA reviews of the
same prospective mining impacts consistent with ``one federal
decision'' principles?

Questions Submitted by Representative Westerman

Question 1. Please provide a list of pending action items in your
agency's purview, including mine plan amendments and state plan
amendments, that require analysis under the National Environmental
Policy Act by OSMRE. In this list, please include every applicable
specific action item, when it was submitted by an applicant to OSMRE
for NEPA analysis, when that review was actually initiated at OSMRE,
what threshold of NEPA analysis has been determine appropriate (i.e.
environmental assessment or environmental impact statement), what the
current status is for each item in regards to NEPA review, and if those
items are on track to have their NEPA review completed in accordance
with the one year (for environmental assessments) and two year (for
environmental impact statements) timelines as proscribed by the Fiscal
Responsibility Act.

Questions Submitted by Representative Grijalva

Question 1. During the hearing, Representative Hageman stated that
the Office of Surface Mining Reclamation and Enforcement's
``environmental justice requirements'' make it more difficult for
certain states to secure federal funding. In response, you said that
OSMRE is encouraging states to follow the environmental justice
guidelines. Could you please expand on your response? Do OSMRE's
guidelines affect distribution of abandoned mine land funds from the
Infrastructure Investments and Jobs Act? Do these guidelines affect
funding to states?

Questions Submitted by Representative Ocasio-Cortez

Question 1. The Office of Surface Mining Reclamation and
Enforcement has provided detailed guidance to the states on how to
prioritize projects that employ former coal workers and address
environmental injustices. What has been your experience so far in
implementing these guidelines? How can we ensure that states are
incentivized to follow this guidance?

______

Mr. Stauber. Thanks for your testimony, Ms. Owens.
Our next witness is Mr. Benjamin McCament. He is Chief for
the Division of Mineral Resources Management, Ohio Department
of Natural Resources, located in Columbus, Ohio.
Mr. McCament, you are now recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF BENJAMIN McCAMENT, CHIEF, DIVISION OF MINERAL
RESOURCES MANAGEMENT, OHIO DEPARTMENT OF NATURAL RESOURCES,
COLUMBUS, OHIO

Mr. McCament. Good morning, Chairman Stauber, Ranking
Member Ocasio-Cortez, and members of the Subcommittee. I am
honored to appear before you today.
My name is Bennie McCament, and I serve as the Chief of the
Ohio Department of Natural Resources, Division of Mineral
Resources Management. My division includes both Ohio's
Abandoned Mine Lands program and the coal regulatory program
under the Surface Mining Control and Reclamation Act. I am also
the immediate past President of the National Association of
Abandoned Mine Land Programs.
The state of Ohio appreciates Congress' continuing support
for the state SMCRA programs, especially the investment in the
AML program. My testimony today will highlight the successes of
Ohio's SMCRA programs, as well as the challenges that we face.
The funding Congress provided via the IIJA has enhanced
coal AML work in Ohio. In addition, the STREAM Act, which
Governor DeWine supported, was a very helpful clarification to
the IIJA, ensuring that we can focus adequate funding and
attention on restoring water resources that were impaired by
historic coal mining.
Ohio has operated the SMCRA program successfully for over
40 years, but the nearly $700 million over 15 years we will
receive via the IIJA is a four- to five-fold increase in
historic funding levels. This comes with much responsibility to
ensure the funding is used for eliminating as many safety and
environmental hazards as efficiently as possible, both for
states and for the Office of Surface Mining Reclamation and
Enforcement.
I would now like to highlight some challenges caused by the
new administrative processes and decisions at OSMRE that could
be problematic.
Regarding the Abandoned Mine Land program, OSMRE has
determined that all mandatory annual grants must be applied
for, tracked, and reported on separately. States have a long
history of having adequate financial controls in place, and
have asked OSMRE to combine and simplify IIJA and fee-based AML
grants at a minimum, allowing states to spend less time on
administrative tracking and reporting for multiple grants that
cover essentially the same activities.
OSMRE is also requiring an update of approved reclamation
plans. This update should be a lower priority than ramping up
reclamation work, especially considering Ohio has a reclamation
plan update that has been pending for over 5 years.
Lastly, the continued funding support for the Abandoned
Mine Land Economic Revitalization Program, AMLER, is greatly
appreciated, and the outcomes of creating new job opportunities
through this program are needed in Ohio.
Even with Ohio's successes for this program, it could also
be streamlined by removing the preliminary vetting step for
projects which creates unnecessary delays at times, and by
providing permanent program guidelines for states and for our
grant recipients.
Regarding the coal regulatory program, SMCRA is founded on
the state primacy model, where states are given exclusive
regulatory authority over the environmental impacts of coal
mining in their jurisdiction. Maintaining the state's ability
to do their job under SMCRA is critical to the success of coal
mining regulation.
Currently, there are several areas of concern with SMCRA:
one is that OSMRE has two pending rulemakings that could be
problematic; and two, OSMRE has a significant backlog of state
program amendments.
Regarding the rulemakings, a few years ago OSMRE updated
the 10-day notice rule, which created greater cooperation
between OSMRE and the states on responding to and investigating
citizen complaints. This rule has worked well for us. OSMRE's
current proposed change to the 10-day notice rule is a reversal
of that functioning rule change. The new proposed rule reverses
that cooperation, and creates uncertainty and possibly Federal
over-reach.
OSMRE has also notified states that it plans to conduct
rulemaking regarding dam safety. The Mine Safety Health
Administration currently regulates dams on mining sites that
are hazardous. In Ohio, the Department of Natural Resources
manages a dam safety program at the state level for all dams
after a mining permit is released. Therefore, the additional
regulation proposed could be duplicate.
Plan amendments. We appreciate that OSMRE is currently
prioritizing and ramping up efforts to streamline the review of
state program amendments. We strongly encourage OSMRE to
utilize its pending resources to do that, and we need approval
in order to change the state laws and rules to be in
compliance.
Mr. Chairman, thank you again for your opportunity to
testify, and I look forward to answering the questions from the
Committee.

[The prepared statement of Mr. McCament follows:]
Prepared Statement of Benny McCament, Chief, Division of Mineral
Resources Management, Ohio Department of Natural Resources

Good morning, Chairman Stauber, Ranking Member Ocasio-Cortez and
members of the committee. I am honored to appear before you today.
My name is Benny McCament and I serve as the Chief of Ohio
Department of Natural Resource's Division of Mineral Resources
Management. My division includes both Ohio's abandoned mine lands (AML)
program and the coal regulatory program under the Surface Mining
Control and Reclamation Act (SMCRA). I am also the immediate past
President of the National Association of Abandoned Mine Land Programs,
which represents 27 states and tribes.
The state of Ohio appreciates Congress' continuing support for
state SMCRA programs, especially the investment in the AML program. My
statement today will highlight the successes of Ohio's SMCRA programs
as well as challenges we face.
The funding Congress provided via the IIJA has enhanced coal AML
work in Ohio. In addition, the STREAM Act, which Governor DeWine
supported, was a very helpful clarification to the IIJA--ensuring that
we can focus adequate funding and attention on restoring water
resources impaired by historic coal mining in our state.
Ohio has operated the SMCRA program successfully for over 40 years,
but the nearly $700 million over 15 years we will receive via IIJA is a
four to five-fold increase in historical funding levels. This comes
with much responsibility to ensure the funding is used for eliminating
as many safety and environmental hazards as efficiently as possible,
both for states and the Office of Surface Mining and Reclamation
Enforcement. (OSMRE).
I would now like to highlight some challenges caused by new
administrative processes and decisions at OSMRE that could be
problematic.
Abandoned Mine Lands

OSMRE has determined that all mandatory annual AML grants must be
applied for, tracked, and reported on separately. States have a long
history of having adequate financial controls in place and have asked
OSMRE to combine and simplify IIJA and fee-based AML grants, allowing
states to spend less time on administrative tracking and reporting for
multiple grants that cover essentially the same activities. OSMRE is
also requiring an update of approved reclamation plans. This update
should be a lower priority than ramping up reclamation work, especially
considering Ohio has a reclamation plan update that has been pending at
OSMRE for over 5 years. Lastly, the continued funding support for the
Abandoned Mine Lands Economic Revitalization (AMLER) Program is greatly
appreciated and the outcomes of creating new job opportunities through
this program are needed in Ohio. Even with Ohio's successes, this
program could also be streamlined by removing the preliminary vetting
step for projects which creates unnecessary delays. Providing permanent
program guidelines for states and our grant recipients would be more
effective.
Coal Regulatory Program

SMCRA is founded on the state primacy model where states are given
exclusive regulatory authority over the environmental impacts of coal
mining in their jurisdiction. Maintaining the state's ability to do
their job under SMCRA is critical to the success of coal mining
regulation.

Currently, there are several areas of concern with SMCRA: (1) OSMRE
has two pending rulemakings that are problematic; and (2) OSMRE has a
significant backlog of state program amendments.

1. Rulemakings:

a.  A few years ago, OSMRE updated the Ten Day Notice rule
which created greater cooperation between OSMRE and states on
responding to and investigating citizen complaints--this rule
has worked well. OSMRE's current proposed change to the Ten Day
Notice rule is a reversal of the functioning rule change. The
new proposed rule reverses cooperation and creates uncertainty
and federal overreach.
b.  OSMRE has also notified states that it plans to conduct
rulemaking regarding Dam Safety. The Mine Safety Health
Administration currently regulates dams on mining sites. In
Ohio, the Department of Natural Resources manages a dam safety
program for all dams after a mining permit is released. The
additional regulation proposed by OSMRE would be duplicative.

2.  Plan Amendments: We appreciate that OSMRE is currently
prioritizing and ramping up efforts to streamline the
review of state program amendments. We strongly encourage
OSMRE to utilize its resources regarding this effort. For
example, Ohio has six pending program amendments, with at
least one that dates to 2015, that need approval in order
to change state laws/rules to be in compliance with federal
requirements.

In conclusion, communication and collaboration between OSMRE and
its state and tribal partners is critical to effectively implement
SMCRA programs. Citizens in coal regions are counting on all of us to
solve these problems quickly and to reclaim mining sites and create
jobs at the same time.
Mr. Chairman, thank you again for the opportunity to testify and I
look forward to answering questions from the committee.

______

Questions Submitted for the Record to Mr. Benjamin McCament, Chief,
Division of Mineral Resources Management,
Ohio Department of Natural Resources

Questions Submitted by Representative Ocasio-Cortez

Question 1. Congress made its intention clear in the Infrastructure
Investments and Jobs Act that the abandoned coal mine land reclamation
funding should create good paying jobs for displaced coal workers and
incentivize union labor. (30 USC 1231a(f): ``priority may also be given
to reclamation projects described in subsection b(1) that provide
employment for current and former employees of the coal industry;'' 30
USC 1231a(b)(3): ``In applying for grants under paragraph (1), States
and Indian Tribes may aggregate bids into larger statewide or regional
contracts;'' and 42 USC 18851: ``all laborers and mechanics employed [
. . . ] on a project assisted in whole or in part by funding made
available under this division [ . . . ] shall be paid wages at rates
not less than those prevailing on similar projects in the locality''.)
How are you implementing the employment priorities included in the law,
and are you in touch with the United Mine Workers of America and the
AFL-CIO on how best to do so?

Answer. The Ohio AML program is required to operate under current
state procurement laws and procedures and establishing new employment
priorities for the AML program would require legislative changes to
state law. The Ohio Revised Code provides that labor requirements are
not to be imposed on contractors and subcontractors on public
improvement contracts. Specifically, it provides that a public
authority on a construction project for a public improvement cannot
require a contractor or subcontractor to enter into agreements with a
labor organization, require contractors to become members of a labor
organization, or pay dues to a labor organization.
Currently no changes to this procurement code are in process in the
Ohio legislature. However as provided for in the Ohio Revised Code, the
Chief of the Division of Mineral Resources is contracting with coal
operators directly without advertising for bids to perform AML
reclamation that is adjacent to an active permit. In Ohio, many of the
remaining coal surface mining operations are in areas with extensive
pre-law mining. Utilizing this provision in state law helps meet the
intended goal of the IIJA of providing employment to current and former
coal industry employees and businesses.
Ohio is implementing federal prevailing wage for all AML projects.
This is being done for consistency across AML projects, whether federal
or state funded, to ensure fair and consistent wage rates. Based off
the recent increase in competitive bids for AML projects we believe the
inclusion of federal prevailing wage rates has led to heighted interest
by contractors--including contractors who utilize unionized labor.
These wage rates are critical going forward to have a ready and
available workforce to implement AML projects in Ohio.
Several meetings and communication have taken place about AML
project opportunities and program requirements with stakeholders,
including the AFL-CIO, United Mine Workers of America, NGO's, and other
contracting and labor organizations operating in the state. A legacy
pollution roundtable, led by the Office of Surface Mining Reclamation
and Enforcement (OSMRE) and the Ohio Department of Natural Resources
Divisions of Mineral Resources Management and Oil and Gas Resources
Management was held in Columbus, Ohio in the spring of 2023 to discuss
AML and Orphan Well programs and opportunities in the state. This
meeting included the AFL-CIO, UMWA, Laborers International Union NA,
NGO's, and other state agencies. A follow up site meeting, with many of
the same organizations, was held in November 2023 at a training
facility in Hocking County, Ohio. A coalition of NGO's and labor
organizations provided labor recommendations to ODNR for both the AML
and Orphan Well programs and those are being reviewed.

______

Mr. Stauber. Thank you, Mr. McCament, for your testimony.
Our next witness is Mr. Dustin Morin. He is the Director of
the Mining and Reclamation Division of the Alabama Department
of Labor, located in Montgomery, Alabama.
Mr. Morin, you are now recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF DUSTIN MORIN, DIRECTOR, MINING AND RECLAMATION
DIVISION, ALABAMA DEPARTMENT OF LABOR, MONTGOMERY, ALABAMA

Mr. Morin. Thank you. Good morning, Chairman Stauber and
Ranking Member Ocasio-Cortez. My name is Dustin Morin, and I am
honored to be here as the Director of the Mining and
Reclamation Division of the Alabama Department of Labor and as
the current President of the National Association of Abandoned
Mine Land Programs.
The importance of abandoned mine reclamation cannot be
overstated. While the AML programs have achieved tremendous
success in our 46-year history, the mantra of the programs
continues to be, ``Our work is not done.'' With the passage of
the Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act, Congress clearly
acknowledged this reality, and greatly increased the scope and
scale of what AML programs can continue to accomplish for our
communities.
The $11.3 billion provided by the IIJA, combined with the
AML Economic Revitalization Program, or AMLER, marks a
transformative era for AML programs across the country.
However, as we embrace this opportunity, challenges in
implementation loom large.
The Office of Surface Mining Reclamation and Enforcement,
or OSMRE, has added numerous administrative complexities to
IIJA and AMLER funding that hinder its efficient utilization.
As the AML program grows with new funding, state staffing
capacity is strained, and there is no time to waste on
unnecessary administrative tasks.
Distribution of additional funding to a well-established
program should have been simple, fast, and efficient. It
wasn't. Instead, OSMRE empowered itself to reinvent the AML
program. And while its intentions may be good, the result has
not been an overall improvement. The states fear that the new
burdens imposed by OSMRE will have a compounding effect on
program implementation with each subsequent year, unless OSMRE
changes tact.
OSMRE's initial rollout of the IIJA AML funding took more
than a year and involved minimal state program input. State
program managers have practical experience and a unique
perspective into accomplishing AML work. By not meaningfully
collaborating with state programs, the decision makers at
OSMRE, who have never run an AML program themselves, are making
implementation policies without consulting those of us who
have.
Had states been better consulted, we could have avoided
many of the problems we are facing. For example, OSMRE's
requirement of separate grant applications for IIJA and AML fee
grants essentially doubles the administrative efforts required,
and it is not necessary. Their insistence on a comprehensive
review of every state's legal authority to operate an AML
program, simultaneous with our efforts to ramp up to utilize
this new funding, is very ill timed.
OSMRE is increasingly scrutinizing state decision making
well beyond its proper oversight role, and attempting to insert
its own priorities and how states manage their programs. This
is a crucial moment. States are striving to maximize
reclamation results with temporarily limited staff capacity. To
successfully implement the new funding, increased efficiency is
vital. But it does not appear that OSMRE is recognizing this.
The AMLER program faces similar difficulties. Through
AMLER, states collaborate with communities and local economic
development experts to develop projects geared towards economic
development on reclaimed sites.
OSMRE requires that it have the chance to vet each AMLER
project during development. Again, its intentions are good, but
it does not have the economic expertise to vet projects well,
certainly not better than the states and their project
partners. And the result of OSMRE vetting has been consistent
confusion and delay.
For both IIJA and AMLER, OSMRE's interference with sound
processes and state decision making is not resulting in more
impactful AML projects. It is actually reducing the beneficial
impact of the AML program by hindering and delaying the
completion of our work.
Instead of reinventing the AML program and second guessing
the states, OSMRE should be focused on giving the states the
support we need. For example, expanding the national training
program. We have repeatedly pleaded with OSMRE to double the
capacity of the instructor cadre within the East and West
training team, and to explore creative new ways to expand the
capability to provide training to new employees for states,
tribes, and OSMRE itself. Thus far, they have been slow to heed
this call.
I urge Congress to consider directing OSMRE to adjust its
implementation plans and underlying priorities, and to refocus
on supporting the states by streamlining administration of the
programs so that less time and money can be spent on
administration and more on reclamation, as intended. Our shared
success depends on it, and together we can accomplish the
mission we have been entrusted with.
Thank you for your time, and I look forward to answering
any questions or further discussion on this matter.

[The prepared statement of Mr. Morin follows:]
Prepared Statement of Dustin Morin, Director, Mining and Reclamation
Division, Alabama Department of Labor

My name is Dustin Morin, and I am Director of the Mining and
Reclamation Division within Alabama's Department of Labor, which houses
Alabama's Abandoned Mine Lands (AML) Program under Title IV of the
Surface Mining Control and Reclamation Act (SMCRA). I am also the
current President of the National Association of Abandoned Mine Lands
Programs (NAAMLP), which represents all 27 states and tribes that
implement Title IV AML programs.
I appreciate the opportunity to speak to the Subcommittee about the
AML program. The state and tribal AML programs are very thankful for
Congress' continued support. As Congress has clearly recognized, the
AML program is a key part of efforts to put coal communities on solid
footing, especially those that are impacted by the energy transition.
Through this program, states and tribes are empowered with funding and
authority to repair damage left over from historic coal mining. We are
making coal communities a safer place to live by closing mine portals,
removing dangerous cliffs, and stabilizing subsided property; we are
restoring their environment by planting vegetation and eliminating
pollution, bringing streams back to life and providing safe drinking
water; and as is increasingly being recognized, we are invigorating
their economies by making them better places to live, to visit, and to
grow a business, helping to prepare land for future development, and
providing well-paying construction jobs.
The Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act (IIJA) greatly increased
the scale of what the AML programs can accomplish in all these
respects. The $11.3 billion in new funding, along with reauthorization
of the AML fee, will allow us to complete the vast majority of
remaining coal AML work throughout the country over the next 15+ years.
The improved ability to work on environmental hazards through the IIJA
funding and STREAM Act will allow us to expand our focus on restoring
water resources, one of the most impactful parts of the program. The
IIJAs focus on providing good jobs to citizens in legacy coal
communities is helping to ensure AML contracting is done in a manner
that is most beneficial.
I am confident that the AML programs will continue to deliver the
benefits that Congress intends, both through the IIJA-funded coal AML
program and the Abandoned Mine Lands Economic Revitalization Program
(AMLER). However, there are a number of implementation challenges
facing these programs, which I believe deserve Congress' attention. The
Office of Surface Mining Reclamation and Enforcement's (OSMRE)
implementation of the IIJA funding and AMLER program has been slow and
cumbersome and has done more to complicate and delay than to enhance
the AML program's ability to fulfill its goals. To ensure the AML
program has the greatest possible impact, it is very important that the
priorities guiding its implementation be properly ordered and the
foundations of its success be maintained. I ask Congress to direct
OSMRE to streamline administration of the program, ensure states have
access to the resources they need, and most importantly, collaborate
meaningfully with the states and tribes on implementation plans. The
states have been successfully implementing AML programs for over 45
years and have historically reliable processes for doing so. Changing
the recipe for success at a time when we face our greatest challenge
hinders our ability to accomplish the important work of AML
reclamation.
Streamlining Administration of the Program

The IIJA greatly amplified the annual funding devoted to the state
and tribal coal AML programs. Alabama has historically received between
$3 and $5 million in annual AML funding and is now receiving roughly
$34 million. This is an exciting new era for the AML programs but
brings with it the unavoidable challenge of substantially and quickly
increasing the staff capacity of the programs to utilize the new
funding. Prior to the passage of the IIJA many AML programs across the
country were preparing for the expiration of the AML fee-based grant
and were therefore slowly shrinking. With the influx of the new funding
provided by the IIJA, many programs have had to switch gears and re-
staff to capacity to handle the funding increase. The AML programs will
be hiring and training hundreds of new engineers, environmental
scientists, NEPA specialists, inspectors, and grants management and
administrative personnel. Alabama plans to hire between 25-30 new
staff. The AML programs must also prepare plans and gain approvals for
an increased number of annual projects, which each generally takes 3-4
years from inception to completion. It will therefore take several
years before the AML programs have reached the full new potential made
possible by the IIJA, but the ramp-up process is well underway, and AML
projects continue to be conducted based on existing plans in the
meantime.
Given the strained capacity the AML programs are facing, OSMRE's
first priority for IIJA implementation should be helping the AML
programs put their increased funding into effect as quickly and
efficiently as possible, minimizing the time spent on administrative
tasks. Unfortunately, OSMRE's approach has done the opposite. It has
created a significant number of new administrative processes and tasks,
introduced confusion into existing ones, and generally resulted in
delays. The roll-out for the first year of IIJA AML funding took more
than a year while OSMRE deliberated over its initial plans with minimal
state involvement. The AML program has been operating successfully for
over 45 years, so implementation of the IIJA funding should have been a
relatively simple matter, utilizing reliably successful processes.
Instead, OSMRE has essentially taken upon itself to re-invent the AML
program, and while its intentions are good, the result has not been an
overall improvement. The states fear that the new burdens imposed by
OSMRE will have a compounding burdensome effect on effective program
implementation with each subsequent year of IIJA funding, unless OSMRE
changes tact.
One of OSMRE's goals is to gather information to track and report
on progress with AML work. The most unfortunate example is that OSMRE
is requiring IIJA grants to be applied for separately from AML fee
grants. Having two separate grant applications effectively doubles (or
more) the amount of administrative work states and tribes must do to
receive their funding and is simply not necessary. The funding is for
the same programs and same purposes with relatively minor differences
in how the funding can be spent, and states and tribes can easily track
how they are spending their IIJA funding and AML fee funding separately
through the same kinds of accounting measures we have been using for
decades. The burden is further compounded for the states and tribes
also receiving AMLER funding.
Similarly, OSMRE is requiring a variety of new kinds of information
to be tracked and reported so that a better ``story'' can be told about
the AML programs' accomplishments. Each new reporting requirement and
performance measure seems innocuous on its own, but added together,
they represent a significant amount of new administrative work, which
means less time and money being directed to actually achieving the
accomplishments OSMRE intends to report. Meanwhile, there is already a
substantial amount of information available to track AML
accomplishments through state's and tribe's annual reports and through
e-AMLIS, both of which list every project completed and what the
project accomplished.
Another of OSMRE's goals is to accentuate the positive social
impacts of AML work and ensure that public input is strongly
considered. Again, well-intentioned goals, but misguided in their
application. OSMRE is scrutinizing the states' plans for projects and
``encouraging'' the use of a number of additional priorities for their
selection and design. This has proven problematic for a number of
reasons. For one, states and tribes are bound by SMCRA to focus on
addressing safety, health, and environmental hazards when selecting and
designing projects. This system works well, including for creating
social benefits, because those benefits flow directly from eliminating
safety, health, and environmental hazards. To the extent there is room
for including other priorities in selecting AML projects, states and
tribes are in much better position to judge how to balance those
priorities than OSMRE, which is a fundamental reason for the state/
tribal primacy approach imbued in SMCRA. Furthermore, AML project
selection is already driven largely by public input. States regularly
receive calls from local landowners and members of the public bringing
their attention to pressing issues and recommending that certain
projects be done, which is one of the primary bases for project
selections. OSMRE's scrutiny of states' and tribes' decisions,
meanwhile, tends to delay and confuse the process. State's grant
applications are routinely being sent back with requests from OSMRE for
more information and with encouragements to do things differently. The
IIJA Guidance Document is updated every year and uses vague terms,
making it difficult for states and tribes to gain a solid understanding
of OSMRE's expectations. These practices are not resulting in more
impactful AML projects; they actually reduce the beneficial impact of
the AML program by delaying AML work.
As a final example of misguided implementation, OSMRE is requiring
every state and tribal AML program to conduct a comprehensive review of
its legal authority to operate an AML program. OSMRE insists that this
must be done, seemingly out of a preference for process and desire for
an additional opportunity to ``encourage'' states and tribes to make
changes to their programs. The states and tribes feel strongly that
this process is not immediately, if at all, necessary and a very poor
use of limited AML program staff time. States and tribes already have
legal authority to conduct their AML programs, Congress has outlined in
the law how the IIJA AML program is to operate, and OSMRE continues to
have the opportunity to review and authorize every AML project before
funding is drawn down to execute it. Meanwhile, there is a pre-existing
backlog of roughly 55 proposed state/tribal reclamation plan revisions
and Title V program amendments awaiting OSMRE's approval, some dating
as far back as 2009. It is unclear what is at the root of the long-term
delays in OSMRE's approval of these program amendments and plan
revisions. I believe a Government Accountability Office (GAO) study may
be helpful to illuminate and resolve the issue. In the mean time, it is
difficult to see how this new state/tribal legal authority review
process on which OSMRE has embarked, which would add 27 more proposed
state/tribal reclamation plan revisions, can be done efficiently. We
have repeatedly asked that this process be postponed for a minimum of
two years until the programs have been able to increase their staff
capacity, but OSMRE is proceeding with its plan.
The fundamental problem borne out in these examples is that OSMRE
has neglected to recognize that the existing processes for
administering the AML program work very well and that the primary
challenge facing the AML program is efficiently utilizing increased
funding with strained staff capacity. I hope that Congress can direct
OSMRE to reorient its implementation plans and underlying priorities to
focus on streamlining administration of the program so that less time
and money can be spent on administration and more on reclamation as it
was intended.
Ensuring States Have the Resources They Need

Supporting the state and tribal AML programs with the resources
they need to do their jobs is a key part of OSMRE's role in the
program. There are two aspects of this that I would like to bring to
Congress' attention: the training program and the IIJA-provided
inventory funding.
There are two SMCRA training programs managed by OSMRE in
cooperation with the states and tribes: the National Technical Training
Program (NTTP) and the Technical Innovation and Professional Services
(TIPS) Program. NTTP offers courses to OSMRE and state and tribal
employees on technical aspects of performing AML reclamation work,
while TIPS offers access to and courses on the use of specialized
software required for planning and performing reclamation work.
Together, these two training programs (referred to collectively
hereafter as the ``training program''), are a vital organ in the
healthy operation of SMCRA, ensuring that knowledge on how to do AML
work well is developed and shared throughout the programs.
Current training program offerings are not enough to satisfy the
growing demand due to the influx of new OSMRE, state, and tribal
program staff. There are several things that need to be done, and
quickly. The way training is scheduled needs to be revamped so that the
currently available resources are fully utilized. A number of courses
need to be provided in separate eastern and western-focused sections so
that they can be tailored to the greatly differing geology and ecology
across the country. Most fundamentally, the total number of class
sections on offer needs to increase significantly, which means that new
instructors are needed. SMCRA training program instructors are all
volunteers from the states, tribes, and OSMRE who contribute to the
training program in addition to their regular role in the AML program.
With the substantial increase in required instructors, it is no longer
practical to rely entirely on volunteers. There are subject matter
experts available, for example recent retirees from state and tribal
AML programs and OSMRE, that would be excellent instructors, but cannot
afford to participate without compensation. OSMRE has so far not
committed to the notion of funding instructor compensation, despite
being granted $339 million for implementation of the IIJA-funded coal
AML program. In my opinion, part of this funding should be used to
expand the training program. The NTTP and TIPS steering committee has
been discussing these issues, but I am not confident that current plans
will be enough to provide the level of training that is now needed.
Inventorying AML sites is another important function within the AML
program. While most AML sites have already been inventoried, the
inventory is dynamic and, over time, previously unknown sites are
identified and existing site entries in the database need to be updated
as costs increase and conditions change. The state and tribal AML
programs' primary focus is on reclamation work, but keeping up with
inventorying is important too. Recognizing this, Congress provided $25
million in the IIJA specifically to support the state and tribal AML
programs' inventorying work. $25 million split across 27 state and
tribal AML programs will not result in a significant update to the AML
inventory, but it is enough for states and tribes to do additional
inventorying or upgrade their inventory systems, and there are some
states and tribes that are very much in need of direct support for
inventorying.
Unfortunately, OSMRE has decided to distribute only $8 million of
the $25 million provided by the IIJA for inventorying to the states and
tribes, and only to the states and tribes that have remaining coal AML
work reflected in their current inventory. OSMRE reportedly plans to
utilize the rest of the $17M on upgrades to the national AML database
known as e-AMLIS (the Electronic Abandoned Mine Land Inventory System).
We have been told by OSMRE that the upgrades in part relate to
necessary cyber security updates being required of all such federal
systems. I do not believe this is how Congress intended for this
funding to be used. $8M will not go very far in supporting the states
and tribe's inventory efforts, and it seems that OSMRE's plans for the
$17M they have decided to use could have been accomplished with other
sources of funding, such as OSMRE's regular Title IV budget or the $339
million it received for IIJA implementation.
A second reason that OSMRE's current plan for the IIJA inventory
funding is troubling is that they intend to distribute funding only to
states and tribes that have remaining, unfunded coal AML work reflected
in their current inventory. Inventories are dynamic and need to be
updated over time as conditions change, and it is possible that the
states and tribes in question in fact have sites that need additional
attention. Those states and tribes cannot receive IIJA funding to
address such sites without having remaining AML costs already reflected
in the AML inventory but cannot update their inventory without funding.
These states and tribes should be given the chance to apply for IIJA
inventory funding so that they can in turn receive the IIJA funding
they need for reclamation.
Collaborating with States on Implementation Plans

At the core of the problems with OSMRE's IIJA implementation plans
is a consistent tendency to discount input received from the state and
tribal AML programs. OSMRE's collaboration with state and tribal
programs is often in word only. Since the inception of AMLER and the
subsequent passage of the IIJA, OSMRE has developed evolving annual
guidance and implementation plans in a vacuum, with little to no state/
tribal input, and then unveiled them to the states and tribes at the
eleventh hour with no time for meaningful state/tribal input or
revision. This is not collaboration and must improve. The states and
tribes are the primary, front-line implementors of the program and
possess a unique perspective on what it takes for the programs to be
successful. We have consistently given OSMRE extensive input on how
best to implement the IIJA funding, beginning before the IIJA was
officially passed. More often than not, we have found that our input is
not meaningfully reflected in implementation plans. Many of the
problems discussed above with slow, unduly complicated implementation
processes could have been avoided by heeding our advice.
A roundtable meeting at OSMRE headquarters was held in January of
this year in attempt to improve the working relationship between the
states/tribes and OSMRE and resolve implementation difficulties. Coming
out of that meeting, we established several OSMRE-state/tribe
workgroups to make recommendations on particular aspects of IIJA
implementation. The roundtable meeting and workgroups led to good
results on several aspects of IIJA implementation, and we appreciate
OSMRE's collaboration on those issues. It is proof that mutually
workable solutions are possible through cooperation. However, we are
concerned that focus on use of the workgroups as venues for this kind
of cooperative problem-solving is beginning to wane. It is vital that
OSMRE stay committed to developing implementation plans in concert with
the states and tribes through the workgroups.
AMLER

The AMLER program has been a great success and major benefit to
Alabama. So far, Alabama has spent or committed over $56 million to
AMLER projects. Examples of Alabama's projects include:

The Grand River Tech Park--will provide a future site for
the relocation for the Southern Museum of Flight and office
space for light industrial manufacturing in the community
of Leeds, AL.

The Hillsboro Coke Oven Park--a park and playground
adjacent to some historic coke ovens near the City of
Helena, AL.

The Walker County Agricultural Restoration Project--a
dangerous highwall was reclaimed, eliminating a safety
hazard and allowing for the expansion of an operational
cattle farm in Oakman, AL.

Piper AML project--reclaiming a mile of dangerous highwall
along the Cahaba River adding recreational trails and
amenities to the USFWS Cahaba National Wildlife Refuge in
West Blocton, AL.

West Blocton Coke Oven Park--adding RV camping and
recreational amenities to a historic coke oven area.

Eagle Cove Marina--adding boat lifts to the marina
adjacent to a legacy mine portal in Tuscaloosa County, AL.

West Blocton theater restoration--restoring a historic old
theater for the city to host its annual Cahaba Lily
festival and provide a physical office space for the Cahaba
National Wildlife Refuge.

Hillsboro Sports Park--adding baseball fields adjacent to
City of Helena, AL.

North Fork Creek--highwall reclamation and Acid Mine
Drainage clean-up in the Hurricane Creek watershed in
Brookwood, AL.

However, AMLER's successes have come despite implementation
difficulties similar to those discussed above regarding the IIJA
program. OSMRE has assumed a major role in managing the AMLER program
and unfortunately, is doing more harm than good. In addition to the
typical approval process for all AML projects, OSMRE requires that
every potential AMLER project be ``vetted'' with them while the project
is in its development stage. Whereas, in the typical approval process,
OSMRE's approval is a fairly simply matter of verifying that the
proposed reclamation project fits SMCRA's guidelines, in the AMLER
vetting process, OSMRE evaluates for themselves whether the project
would, in their view, adequately fulfill the economic development goals
of AMLER. There are multiple problems with this process.
One problem is that OSMRE's vetting procedure is slow, confusing,
and constantly evolving through an annually released guidance document.
Proposed projects are vetted sequentially through the OSMRE Field,
Regional, and Headquarters Office and often with the Interior
Solicitor's Office. Extensive amounts of detailed information and major
revisions to the proposal are often requested. This process typically
takes at least a month, often several months, and in a few cases, a
year or even several years. Meanwhile, communication from OSMRE to the
states/tribes and their AMLER project partners is often lacking or non-
existent. It is generally difficult to gain clear understanding of
where a project is in the process or what issues may be delaying its
approval.
OSMRE has been resistant to putting clear guidelines into writing
regarding their expectations for AMLER projects so that issues that
have caused delays can be avoided in the future. To the extent written
guidelines exist, they are hard to rely on because they are updated
every year, typically without prior consultation with states/tribes on
what changes will be made. The result is that states and tribes spend
an inordinate amount of time trying to understand OSMRE's requirements
and chase down information on project's vetting status, project
partners are increasingly hesitant to participate in the program, and
the flow of AMLER funding into the communities that need it is
significantly slower than need be.
A related problem with the vetting process is that OSMRE is not
well-equipped to evaluate the economic development prospects of
proposed AMLER projects. Unlike states/tribes and their local partners,
OSMRE does not possess insight into which projects are most likely to
result in the greatest economic impact. OSMRE also does not have prior
experience overseeing economic development projects since the
traditional AML program is focused only on reclamation. That being the
case, it is understandable that OSMRE has struggled to develop
expertise on, for example, how federal financial and grant management
rules for economic development grants apply to AMLER. A pattern has
developed of OSMRE discovering that it must apply some previously
unascertained aspect of federal rules to AMLER grants and taking years
to determine and clarify how to manage the issue. This occurred first
with the issue of when AMLER contracts should be managed as ``sub-
recipient'' vs ``contractor'' arrangements, then again with respect to
``program income'', and now is occurring with respect to ``real
property''.
Based on the authorizing language for the AMLER program, I do not
believe that Congress envisioned OSMRE taking on the role it has in the
AMLER program. I believe Congress intended for AMLER projects to be
developed by state and tribal AML programs in concert with their state/
tribal economic development agencies and local community interests so
that project design and selection is driven by locally-informed
knowledge of what will have the best impact. The best way to improve
implementation of the AMLER program is to return it to that original,
state/tribe- and locally-driven vision. The report language Congress
has included in recent budgets regarding AMLER, encouraging OSMRE to
better collaborate with the states/tribes and produce clearer guidance,
is appreciated, but I do not believe they have been or will be enough
to resolve the fundamental problems. I recommend that Congress require
OSMRE to directly transfer AMLER funding to states and tribes,
eliminating the vetting process, as is contemplated in the House of
Representative's FY24 Budget bill.
Conclusion--How Congress Can Help

The AML program has been successful for 45 years and will continue
to be successful despite the implementation challenges discussed in my
statement. I believe Congress can help to improve implementation of the
IIJA and AMLER programs by directing OSMRE to re-orient its priorities
toward streamlining program administration and respecting state/tribal
primacy and expertise, in addition to the specific changes I have
recommended, which are summarized below. I believe these changes will
reestablish the proper functioning of the AML program, with OSMRE in
its vital support role, and implementation driven by the state and
tribal AML programs.

Institute a single, combined grant application for IIJA-
and AML fee-sourced AML funding thereby eliminating the
unnecessary administrative burden currently imposed on
states by OSMRE new program requirements.

Limit the amount of additional reporting and information
gathering required for use of IIJA and AMLER funding and
rely on the traditional reporting of reclamation completion
data.

Provide a single, consistent set of guidance for the IIJA
and AMLER programs, respectively, rather than changing
guidance each year

Direct GAO to study the long-term delays in OSMRE's
approval of state and tribal program amendments and
reclamation plan revisions.

Increase the number of training courses offered, including
western-focused sections where appropriate, and compensate
qualified training program instructors.

Provide the full $25 million in IIJA inventory funding to
the states and tribes, and include all 27 states and tribes
with Title IV AML programs.

Provide AMLER funding directly to the states and tribes
and eliminate the ``vetting'' process for proposed
projects.

______

Questions Submitted for the Record to Mr. Dustin Morin, Director,
Mining and Reclamation Division, Alabama Department of Labor

Questions Submitted by Representative Ocasio-Cortez

Question 1. Congress made its intention clear in the Infrastructure
Investments and Jobs Act that the abandoned coal mine land reclamation
funding should create good paying jobs for displaced coal workers and
incentivize union labor. (30 USC 1231a(f): ``priority may also be given
to reclamation projects described in subsection b(1) that provide
employment for current and former employees of the coal industry;'' 30
USC 1231a(b)(3): ``In applying for grants under paragraph (1), States
and Indian Tribes may aggregate bids into larger statewide or regional
contracts;'' and 42 USC 18851: ``all laborers and mechanics employed [
. . . ] on a project assisted in whole or in part by funding made
available under this division [ . . . ] shall be paid wages at rates
not less than those prevailing on similar projects in the locality''.)
How are you implementing the employment priorities included in the law,
and are you in touch with the United Mine Workers of America and the
AFL-CIO on how best to do so?

Answer. The Alabama AML program is implementing the Infrastructure
Investment and Jobs Act funding to meet Congress' intentions to the
best of our ability. The benefit to the communities and citizens of
Alabama is inherent in the work itself by abating the extremely
dangerous safety features associated with abandoned mine lands. There
are two accepted methods of procurement for AML work that must be
adhered to under the Alabama Procurement Law by the authority of the
State's Chief Procurement Officer: 1) Request for Bid (RFB), or
Invitation to Bid (ITB) for supplies and non-professional services
(including AML construction/reclamation work) which awards work to the
``lowest responsive and responsible bidder''. 2) Request for Proposals
(RFP), and/or Request for Qualifications (RFQ) for professional
services which awards work to the offeror ``whose proposal conforms to
the solicitation'' and is ``the most advantageous to the state taking
into consideration price and evaluation factors''. Neither mechanism of
procurement currently allows for ``preference'' to be given to
displaced coal workers or unionized labor. Despite repeated requests to
OSMRE no definition has been provided to the states for who qualifies
as ``displaced coal worker'' which makes this priority difficult to
implement in theory or practice. However, we appreciate the intent.
Alabama, like much of the country, is facing significant work-force
challenges in the post-COVID era and there are numerous good paying
jobs across the state available to individuals' seeking employment. We
have an established practice of bid aggregation into single contracts
when advantageous to the state to do so. We also require any
contractors performing work on behalf of the AML program to meet the
requirements of the Davis Bacon Act and provide us with documentation
of certified payroll ensuring that prevailing wages or above are paid.

______

Mr. Stauber. Thank you, Mr. Morin.
Our next witness is Mr. Peter Morgan. He is the Senior
Attorney for the Sierra Club Legislative Office located here in
Washington, DC.
Mr. Morgan, you are now recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF PETER MORGAN, SENIOR ATTORNEY, SIERRA CLUB
LEGISLATIVE OFFICE, WASHINGTON, DC

Mr. Morgan. Thank you, Chairman Stauber and Ranking Member
Ocasio-Cortez, for the opportunity to testify today.
I am a Senior Attorney with the Sierra Club, based in
Colorado. For more than 15 years, my work has focused on
assisting local communities nationwide, ensuring coal mines
minimize their pollution and are fully reclaimed once they stop
production.
The fundamental point I would like to convey with my
testimony today is that OSMRE is not confronting the reality
that we are on track to see a return to the conditions that led
Congress to pass the Surface Mining Control and Reclamation
Act, SMCRA, in 1977. That is, thousands of mines abandoned with
no source of funds to complete reclamation, requiring an
expansion or duplication of the taxpayer-funded AML program.
Modern abandoned un-reclaimed mine sites pose a variety of
threats to communities in coal-producing states and tribal
lands across the country. These sites are sources of air and
water pollution, and contain hazards such as exposed highwalls
and open mine portals.
Un-reclaimed mines also exacerbate flooding, due to a lack
of vegetation and absence of properly maintained drainage
controls. Historic flooding in eastern Kentucky in July 2022
most heavily impacted communities living below un-reclaimed
strip mines.
Congress designed SMCRA to address abandoned mines in two
ways. Title 4 provides funding to clean up the inventory of
abandoned mines already in existence in 1977, while Title V
seeks to prevent any additional mines from ever becoming
abandoned in an un-reclaimed state. It requires operators to
post reclamation bonds and mandates that operators complete
reclamation concurrent with coal removal. Both elements of
Title V are currently failing.
The primary problem is that OSMRE has not adjusted its
approach to account for the now permanent reality of decreasing
demand for coal. The U.S. Energy Information Administration
recently forecast that annual coal production in the United
States will drop almost 23 percent in 2024, compared with 2022.
EIA predicts 2024 U.S. coal production will be 60 percent below
the peak of coal production seen in 2008.
Industry experts attribute the drop in demand for coal to
market forces, primarily the cheap cost of methane gas and
renewable energy. Because these market forces will persist,
coal production will remain low. This decline in demand for
coal has already resulted in dozens of mine operator
bankruptcies, and more are coming. Nearly 70 coal mine
operators filed for bankruptcy between 2012 and 2020. Four of
the largest mine operators offloaded almost $2 billion in
environmental liabilities through the bankruptcy process
between 2012 and 2017.
Given these economic conditions, OSMRE and state mine
regulators should be doing everything they can to give effect
to SMCRA's core requirements, which are ensuring that bonds are
adequate to cover the full cost of reclamation, and requiring
operators to minimize the amount of disturbed, un-reclaimed
area at each mine site. In fact, we are seeing the opposite:
bond amounts are set too low and in forms that virtually
guarantee funds will not be available when needed. And
regulators are allowing operations to sit idle, neither
removing coal nor conducting reclamation. As a result, there
are already hundreds of zombie mines across the country that
will never return to production, and where the operators lack
the funds to complete reclamation.
There is a narrowing window for OSMRE to take action.
First, the agency must collect and make public information on
mine production and reclamation status for all coal mines in
order to identify the full set of these functionally abandoned
zombie permits. Next, OSMRE must conduct a stress test for
state bond pools and surety bond providers. OSMRE must also
work with states to rigorously enforce SMCRA's contemporaneous
reclamation requirements, and OSMRE must finalize the 10-day
notice rule in order to afford impacted communities their full
right to public participation in mine oversight.
Only with rapid and decisive action by OSMRE can we avoid a
new generation of dangerous, polluting, economically
unproductive, abandoned mine lands. Thank you.

[The prepared statement of Mr. Morgan follows:]
Prepared Statement of Mr. Peter Morgan, Senior Attorney, Sierra Club

Thank you Chairman Stauber, Ranking Member Ocasio-Cortez, and
members of the Committee for the opportunity to testify regarding the
Office of Surface Mining Reclamation and Enforcement (OSMRE) and its
oversight of abandoned mine lands and active mining programs.
I am a Senior Attorney with the Sierra Club, the nation's oldest
and largest grassroots environmental organization. My work focuses on
assisting local communities nationwide ensure coal mines minimize their
pollution and are fully reclaimed once they stop production. As part of
this work, I frequently interact with OSMRE staff at the national and
regional level.
I. OSMRE is not confronting the reality that we are on track to see a
return to the conditions that led Congress to pass SMCRA in
1977: thousands of mines abandoned with no source of funds to
complete reclamation, requiring an expansion or duplication of
the taxpayer-funded AML program

Over the 15 years that I've worked on coal mining-related issues,
I've seen major transformations in the coal industry: from a boom in
permitting at the peak of the coal market in the 2000s, to a period of
declining production and increasing environmental violations, to
multiple waves of bankruptcies and the present situation where we are
seeing increasing mine abandonments and decreasing funds available to
cover the costs of reclamation. Unfortunately, across this timespan
OSMRE has not adjusted its approach and continues to operate as if
demand for coal is never-ending and new coal mines will continue to be
permitted, rather than acknowledge the reality that the industry is in
decline, reclamation funding is inadequate, and communities are being
forced to bear the burden of living next to disturbed areas that
generate pollution and are prone to flooding and erosion. OSMRE's
failure to adjust to this reality has created conditions under which,
if appropriate action is not immediately taken, thousands of additional
unreclaimed permits will be abandoned, the costs to be borne by nearby
communities and taxpayers.
A. Market forces have led to a permanent decline in demand for coal
that is leading to rapidly decreasing production, shuttered
mines, and a high risk of mine abandonments

Every decision relating to the regulation of coal mining must be
informed by a clear-eyed understanding that the demand for coal is in
dramatic and permanent decline. The decline of the coal industry is
well documented and attributable to the comparatively lower price of
natural gas and renewable energy. In its recent October Short-Term
Energy Outlook, the US Energy Information Administration (EIA) forecast
that annual coal production in the U.S. will drop 2.7 percent in 2023
compared with 2022, and that this decline will then dramatically
increase in 2024 with an additional 20.0 percent decrease.\1\ EIA
predicts 2024 U.S. coal production will be 465 MMst. This is about 13.1
percent below the previous low set in 2020 and 60 percent below peak
coal production of 1,172 MMst in 2008. Industry-tracking experts
attribute the drop in demand for coal to market forces. In a recent
interview with the publication S&P Global Commodity Insights,
Morningstar Research Services analyst Travis Miller said: ``I just
don't see a pathway to coal generation being a material part of the
generation mix in the next decade and beyond. There is too much growth
in renewable energy. Nuclear economics appear to be stable now with
some of the tax incentives, and gas is just such a valuable generation
fuel source that the US is never going to be replacing gas with coal.''
\2\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ U.S. Energy Information Administration, Short-Term Energy
Outlook, October 2023. Available at https://www.eia.gov/outlooks/steo/
archives/Oct23.pdf
\2\ Kuykendall, T. ``Monthly US coal production heading for a
cliff, starting . . . now,'' S&P Capital IQ, October 30, 2023.
Available at https://www.capitaliq.spglobal.com/apisv3/spg-web
platform-core/news/article?KeyProductLinkType=2&id=78096170
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
This decline in demand for coal has already resulted in dozens of
mine operator bankruptcies, and more are coming. Nearly 70 coal mine
operators filed for bankruptcy between 2012 and 2020.\3\ Four of the
largest mine operators--Patriot Coal, Alpha Natural Resources, Arch
Coal, and Peabody Energy--offloaded almost $2 billion in environmental
liabilities and more than $3 billion in retiree liabilities through the
bankruptcy process between 2012 and 2017.\4\ Because coal production
and the demand for coal continue to drop, more mine operator
bankruptcies are coming. And these are much more likely to be total
liquidations resulting in large waves of abandoned permits. Indeed,
we're already seeing permits that were transferred out of prior
bankruptcies go back through the bankruptcy process as the operators
who acquired them on the cheap are themselves forced to liquidate. The
prospects for these permits to be reclaimed by industry without cost to
taxpayers is extremely low.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ Kuykendall, T. ``Roster of US coal companies turning to
bankruptcy continues to swell.'' SNL. June 4, 2015. https://
www.snl.com/interactiveX/Article.aspx?cdid=A-32872208-12845&FreeAccess
=1; Saul, J. and Doherty, K. U.S. Bankruptcy Tracker: Coal's a Canary
in the Mine for Energy. Bloomberg. December 8, 2020. https://
www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2020-12-08/u-s-bankruptcytracker-coal-
s-a-canary-in-the-mine-for-energy
\4\ Macey, J. and Salovaara, J. ``Bankruptcy as Bailout: Coal
Company Insolvency and the Erosion of Federal Law,'' Stanford Law
Review. April 2019. Available at https://review.law.stanford.edu/wp-
content/uploads/sites/3/2019/04/Macey-Salovaara-71-Stan.-L.-Rev.-
879.pdf
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
B. Congress' intent in passing SMCRA in 1977 is being frustrated by
OSMRE's inaction

Congress passed the Surface Mining Control and Reclamation Act
(SMCRA) in 1977 to address the problem of mines being abandoned
unreclaimed, finding that ``there are a substantial number of acres of
land throughout major regions of the United States disturbed by surface
and underground coal on which little or no reclamation was conducted,
and the impacts from these unreclaimed lands impose social and economic
costs on residents in nearby and adjoining areas as well as continuing
to impair environmental quality.'' \5\ Congress took two fundamental
approaches in SMCRA, providing for clean-up of already abandoned mines,
and setting out regulations to prevent any new mines from being
abandoned unreclaimed. Title IV of SMCRA created the Abandoned Mine
Lands program to provide funding to clean up the existing inventory of
unreclaimed sites across the county. In Title V, Congress created a
structure of regulations to ensure that no new mines would ever again
be abandoned unreclaimed or without the means for regulators to
immediately complete reclamation. This regulatory structure for new
coal mines is built around two central requirements. First, mine
operators must provide bonds or other financial assurances adequate to
cover the full costs of any reclamation that may be outstanding should
the company go out of business. Second, mine operators must conduct
reclamation as they go, so that at any given time the total disturbed
area (and therefore the remaining reclamation cost) is as small as
possible. SMCRA is currently being implemented in a manner that fails
on both fronts.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\ 30 U.S.C. Sec. 1201(h).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
C. OSMRE and state regulators are failing to require adequate bonding,
meaning the money is not there to pay for reclamation of
abandoned sites

SMCRA requires that before a mining operation can begin, the permit
holder must provide adequate financial assurances. These can take a
variety of forms, including third-party surety bonds and participation
in state-administered bond pools. As currently implemented, SMCRA
bonding fails to deliver on Congress' intent in two ways. First,
regulators often underestimate the actual costs of reclamation in a
manner that keeps bonding expenses low for operators, but leads to
there being inadequate funds to actually pay for reclamation. In 2021,
in the bankruptcy liquidation of major coal mine operator Blackjewel
LLC, the Kentucky Energy and Environment Cabinet estimated that the
cost of reclaiming 33 permits revoked by order of the court would
exceed those permits' bond amounts by over $28 million. This came after
an earlier report by OSMRE in 2017 found that the bonds forfeited by
bankrupt coal companies in Kentucky covered only 52.8 percent of actual
reclamation costs.\6\ A 2021 West Virginia legislature audit found that
individual bonds in the state cover only 10 percent of projected
reclamation costs, leaving the state's inadequate Special Reclamation
Fund bond pool to cover the entire shortfall.\7\ But, as discussed
below, those costs would quickly overwhelm and drain that bond pool.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\6\ OSMRE Annual Evaluation Report for Kentucky, 2017. Available at
https://perma.cc/8WWU-V2F4
\7\ West Virginia Legislative Audit Report, ``WV Department of
Environmental Protection Division of Mining & Reclamation--Special
Reclamation Funds Report,'' June 7, 2021, at p. 13. Available at
https://www.wvlegislature.gov/legisdocs/reports/agency/PA/
PA_2021_722.pdf
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Second, the forms of financial assurances allowed by regulators are
not appropriate for the current reality of declining production and
increasing abandonments. Surety bonds may seem reliable because they
pass the risk on to third-party bond providers. But a small number of
sureties have been allowed to dominate the market, meaning they are
dramatically over-exposed to a declining industry and have issued bonds
far in excess of what they can afford to pay out. This creates a risk
of widespread defaults, and also gives those bond providers enormous
leverage over regulators. The West Virginia audit found that a single
surety bond provider has issued bonds covering approximately two-thirds
of bonded reclamation costs in the state, leaving the state extremely
vulnerable should that provider default. Five surety companies,
including that one, have issued 91 percent of bonding in the state.\8\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\8\ West Virginia Legislative Audit Report, June 2021.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
State-run bond pools also carry enormous risks. By definition,
these bond pools are intended to hold only a fraction of the funds
actually needed to cover reclamation costs for all of the permits
participating in the pool. How much money is maintained in the pool is
determined by an actuarial analysis. But this analysis is inherently
backward-looking, being based on historic rates of forfeiture from a
time when demand for coal was high. The actuarial analyses, and
therefore the amount of funds maintained in the pools, do not account
for the coming avalanche of abandoned mines. And even if regulators try
to increase the amount of funds in the pools, they are constrained by
the fact that the traditional sources of funds--new permits issued and
tons of coal mined--are also dwindling. Just as the demand for funds
from these pools is increasing, the source of funds into the pools is
shrinking. Bond pools are currently utilized in West Virginia,
Kentucky, Virginia, Indiana, and Ohio. A recent actuarial analysis of
the Ohio bond pool noted that coal production in the state dropped by
more than 50% between 2019 and 2020, and found that the bankruptcy of
any one of the five largest mine operators in the state would wipe out
the entire bond pool.\9\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\9\ Taylor & Mulder, Inc., ``Ohio Reclamation Forfeiture Fund
Actuarial Study as of December 31, 2022.'' Available at https://
ohiodnr.gov/wps/wcm/connect/gov/8342b87d-3f06-466c-a0e6-5d00185a9c27/
May+2023+actuarial+study+of+Reclamation+Forfeiture+Fund.pdf?MOD=
AJPERES&CVID=ozU-XML
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Inadequate bonding also makes it less likely that operators will
complete reclamation. SMCRA provides for the release of bonds in
phases. The largest portion, approximately 60 percent, is released once
backfilling and regrading is complete. The next tranche is released
following revegetation. And the smallest portion is released at final
reclamation. If bonds are too small, then operators lack an adequate
incentive to secure bond release--particularly the final stages.
An example from West Virginia illustrates a number of these
problems with reclamation bonding. In early 2020, one of the largest
operators of coal mines in West Virginia--ERP Compliant Fuels--was
teetering on the verge of bankruptcy. Many of ERP's mines had been
acquired through the bankruptcies of other operators, including Patriot
Coal, which itself had been spun off from Peabody Energy and Arch Coal.
Rather than allow ERP to go into bankruptcy, which would have risked
approximately 100 unreclaimed mines becoming the responsibility of the
state, the West Virginia Department of Environmental Protection took
the extreme step of placing the company into a special receivership. In
its court filings seeking creation of that receivership, WVDEP stated
that ``DEP stands poised at the precipice of having to revoke the
Defendant's permits, forfeiting the associated surety bonds, and
transferring the responsibility for cleaning up the Defendant's mess to
the State's Special Reclamation Fund, potentially bankrupting the
Defendant's principal surety and administratively and financially
overwhelming the Special Reclamation Fund, the State's principal
backstop for all revoked and forfeited mine sites in West Virginia.''
\10\ We're now three-and-a-half years into that ``special
receivership,'' many of ERP's mines remain unreclaimed, and it appears
clear that the special receiver will not have the funds to complete the
reclamation. The 2021 West Virginia audit report indicated that at the
time of the report, ERP still held 91 permits, after forfeiting or
transferring some permits. Those permits are backed by $83 million in
reclamation surety bonds.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\10\ West Virginia Department of Environmental Protection's Motion
for Temporary Restraining Order and Preliminary Injunction, March 26,
2020, at p. 3; and Affidavit of Harold Ward, Acting Director WVDEP,
March 26, 2020, at para. 62-64. Available at https://
www.sierraclub.org/sites/default/files/2023-11/
Motion%20for%20TRO%20and%20Ward%20Affidavit.pdf
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
However, because bonds in West Virginia typically only cover 10
percent of the actual reclamation liability, the true outstanding cost
of reclamation at the remaining ERP mines could be as high as $830
million. As of March 2021, the West Virginia bond pool contained
approximately $36 million, with another approximately $150 million in a
separate fund for water treatment.\11\ The ultimate fate of the ERP
permits, and the communities that they continue to impact, remains
uncertain, though it is clear that significant costs will ultimately be
passed on to the state. In the wake of ERP's failure, West Virginia has
not made any substantive changes to its bonding program, nor has OSMRE
compelled any such changes.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\11\ West Virginia Legislative Audit Report, June 2021.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The federal SMCRA statute also authorizes the use of ``self-
bonding,'' which in practice equates to no bonding at all. At the time
that they entered bankruptcy, Alpha, Arch, and Peabody each had
hundreds of millions of dollars of self-bonded reclamation liabilities.
This allowed them to negotiate extremely favorable agreements with
regulators, including allowing them to continue operating even though
they no longer satisfied SMCRA's reclamation bonding requirements.\12\
Fortunately, in the wake of these major bankruptcies, most self-bonds
have been replaced. However, five states have allowed existing self-
bonds to remain in effect, and an additional 16 states still maintain
the option to utilize self-bonding under state law. For example,
Virginia allowed the Justice Group to maintain its self-bonds. In
return, the Justice Group has flouted reclamation requirements with
impunity, aware that the regulator cannot afford to fully enforce the
law out of fear of precipitating abandonment of these unbonded sites.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\12\ Macey, J. ``Bankruptcy as Bailout.''
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
D. OSMRE and state regulators are failing to enforce reclamation
requirements, magnifying the reclamation burden when those
mines are abandoned

SMCRA's reclamation requirements are being implemented and enforced
by OSMRE and state regulators in a manner that makes it likely
significant reclamation work will remain outstanding when permits are
abandoned.
Although SMCRA requires ``contemporaneous reclamation,'' in
practice OSMRE and state regulators have allowed operators to focus on
coal removal at the expense of reclamation. But once all of the coal
has been removed, operators have an incentive to move their resources
elsewhere. For example, in West Virginia, Brooks Run Mining's Seven
Pines mine is a large mountaintop removal strip mine. According to West
Virginia inspection reports, the number of disturbed and reclaimed
acres at the site have not changed since September 2018. In December
2020, the West Virginia regulator cited the mine for failing to conduct
contemporaneous reclamation.\13\ Local communities feared that the
significant drop in the price of coal at that time meant that the mine
would likely be abandoned. The company appeared to have pulled all
resources from the site, and even allowed its Clean Water Act discharge
permit to lapse. Then, when coal prices temporarily rebounded in 2022,
the company resumed mining. According to coal production records from
the West Virginia Office of Miners' Health, the mine produced 261,430
tons of coal in 2022, making it the 16th highest producing mine out of
the 83 mines with any coal production that year.\14\ But the mine still
did not conduct any reclamation, despite the influx of revenue and the
generation of spoil material. Instead, in April 2023 the West Virginia
mine regulator conducted a flyover of the mine site, reporting
extensive areas of exposed highwall.\15\ The regulator again cited the
company in August 2023 for failing to conduct the required reclamation,
stating ``NOV 41 has been running for more than 2.5 years and permittee
has had ample time and has had sufficient excess material to fully
backfill and grade the `Apple Core' area.'' \16\ Now that coal prices
have dropped, the history of violations and lack of reclamation at this
site make it unlikely that work will be completed by the operator. This
example illustrates how, despite the issuance of paper violations by
the regulator, the coal mining industry understands itself to have free
rein to maximize profit while ultimately passing reclamation costs on
to taxpayers and the local community.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\13\ West Virginia Department of Environmental Protection, Notice
of Violation 41 for permit S201002, Dec. 11, 2020. Available at https:/
/www.sierraclub.org/sites/default/files/2023-11/
WVDEP%20S201002%20NOV%2041%2012-11-2020.pdf
\14\ West Virginia Office of Miners' Health, CY2022 Annual Report
and Directory of Mines. Available at https://minesafety.wv.gov/wp-
content/uploads/2023/07/CY-2022-Annual-Report.pdf
\15\ West Virginia Department of Environmental Protection aerial
inspection photos for the Brooks Run Seven Pines mine, April 27, 2023.
Available at https://www.sierraclub.org/sites/default/files/2023-11/
Aerial%20photos%20of%20Seven%20Pines%20mine.pdf
\16\ West Virginia Department of Environmental Protection,
Cessation Order for Notice of Violation 87 for permit S201002, August
14, 2023. Available at https://www.sierraclub.org/sites/default/files/
2023-11/WVDEP%20S201002%20CO%20for%20NOV%2087%208-14-2023.pdf
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Regulators are also allowing mine operators to abuse the process
for placing mines into ``idle'' or ``temporary cessation'' status, and
are failing to effectively enforce requirements that active mines
either produce coal or conduct reclamation. In theory, the process for
allowing mines to be idled or placed into temporary cessation is
supposed to provide for a temporary pause in operations, for example
during a short-term drop in coal prices. But this process is regularly
abused, including by operations with no intent--or ability--to ever
resume production. The result is mines left in a persistently
unreclaimed status. The West Virginia audit found twenty-six surface
mine sites that have been allowed to remain inactive for more than 10
years, including nine permits that have been inactive for more than 20
years. At the time of the report, 160 permits, bonded for $72 million,
were inactive. Out of 100 inactive status applications reviewed, the
audit found 171 instances where the applicant failed to meet the
requirements for inactive status, yet the mine was allowed to cease
operations without reclamation.\17\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\17\ West Virginia Legislative Audit Report, June 2021, at pp. 3-4.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
In many cases, mine operators don't even bother to seek or obtain
formal permission to stop production. As a result, the official permit
status maintained by the regulator may not reflect the on-the-ground
reality. Preliminary analysis by Appalachian Citizens' Law Center
(ACLC) suggests that a large portion of Kentucky's surface coal mines
have been idled, but nonetheless are still listed as active. ACLC
examined 126 permits that the state has categorized as actively
producing coal, but found that nearly 40 percent of them have actually
had no coal removal since 2020 and have not been moved into reclamation
status. These permits alone cover nearly 12,000 disturbed acres of
land.\18\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\18\ Appalachian Citizens' Law Center, ``Functionally Abandoned
`Active' Surface Mine Permits in Kentucky'' November 2023. Available at
https://drive.google.com/file/d/11pW0HWHaBiQK 1x5cfvCHzc2a05Qx-Io5/
view.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
These paperwork exercises are being used to shield the fact that
many mines--maybe even the majority of mines--are being permanently
shut down in an unreclaimed condition. Workers are let go, equipment is
sold or moved off site, operators have no intention or expectation of
ever resuming operations. These are abandoned mines. But on paper, they
continue to be listed as active or just temporarily idled. Regulators
turn a blind eye, or actively facilitate this practice, because so long
as these mines are not officially abandoned, the regulators don't need
to contend with the lack of money to pay for reclamation.
The failure of OSMRE and state regulators to compel operators to
complete reclamation, and to accurately track the actual status of
operations, has made it difficult for the public to understand the
actual state of the coal industry. One problem is that production data
is tracked on an independent system that does not align with SMCRA
permit numbers, so it can be difficult to tell which mines listed as
active are actually producing. In an effort to close this data gap,
Members of Congress--including members of this Subcommittee--recently
submitted letters to the Government Accountability Office (GAO)
requesting a report compiling information on actual coal production and
reclamation. Should the GAO agree to conduct this study, full and
complete participation by OSMRE and state regulators will be critical.
Even when operators conduct reclamation, OSMRE and other regulators
often fail to require compliance with SMCRA's reclamation requirements,
or the applicable requirements prove inadequate and inappropriate.
OSMRE directly implements SMCRA on certain tribal lands, including on
Navajo and Hopi land in Arizona where Peabody Energy operated the Black
Mesa and Kayenta mines for 50 years. Black Mesa closed in 2005 and
Kayenta in 2019. Peabody's reclamation efforts have been inadequate to
restore the land and water impacted by its mining. In particular,
Peabody has failed to repair the damaged Navajo Aquifer, the only
source of drinking water for the more than 50,000 people living on
Black Mesa. Rather than use native vegetation adapted to the arid local
environment of this part of the Southwest, Peabody has been allowed to
reseed an overwhelming majority of the tens of thousands of disturbed
acres with non-native Midwestern grass species that will not be viable
over the long-term. Local residents have repeatedly tried to raise
these concerns with OSMRE, including asking OSMRE to treat closure of
the Kayenta mine as a significant permit revision that would allow for
public participation, local input, and a comprehensive all-of-
government review of reclamation plans that have not been updated in
more than three decades. Instead, OSMRE has allowed Peabody to delay
both reclamation and required permit revisions, to the detriment of the
community. Although Peabody is one of the largest coal mine operators
in the world, it is subject to the same negative economic forces
affecting the entire industry. Local residents worry that OSMRE's
inaction exposes their communities to the risk that Peabody could
ultimately abandon the sites unreclaimed and with major mine-related
damage to the region's main aquifer unaddressed.
These issues of inadequate reclamation and the need for public
participation are magnified at sites where surety companies have opted
to complete reclamation in lieu of paying out the face value of bonds.
In a letter sent to OSMRE in December 2021, Sierra Club and 14 other
community groups requested that the agency issue a directive clarifying
public participation rights regarding surety-led reclamation efforts,
including modifications to the approved reclamation plan, and at bond
release. To date, OSMRE has provided no substantive response to this
request.
E. Community health and safety are at stake if OSMRE continues to fail
to act

Our nation has already placed an enormous burden on the communities
that live in coal producing regions. These communities have seen their
forests slashed, mountains leveled, streams polluted, and air choked
with dust, all to subsidize coal-generated power. But at least SMCRA
promised that at the end of the day the sites would be cleaned up,
maybe even returned to some other productive use. We are now breaking
that promise through OSMRE's inaction. Abandoned unreclaimed mine sites
pose a variety of threats to nearby communities.
In July 2022, communities in eastern Kentucky experienced
unprecedented and devastating flooding. Dozens of people died in the
floods and thousands of homes were destroyed or significantly
damaged.\19\ Local residents ascribe the severity and destructiveness
of the flooding to the presence of unreclaimed coal mines on the
ridgelines directly above the most impacted communities. Unreclaimed
coal mines contribute to extreme flooding and ancillary effects such as
landslides due to factors including the absence of vegetation to absorb
runoff, the instability of soil, and poorly maintained drainage systems
that fail to capture or redirect runoff. In the aftermath of the
flooding, local community members filed at least 125 requests for
inspection with the Kentucky mine regulator, documenting flood-related
impacts at local mine sites including slides, slips, subsidence, pond
failure and more. In February 2023, the organization Kentuckians For
The Commonwealth sent a letter to OSMRE requesting an investigation
into ``the extent to which the cumulative impact of surface mining,
past and ongoing, exacerbated the devastating toll of lives, homes,
businesses and property lost during the flood.'' \20\ The letter also
requested an investigation into the failure of the Kentucky regulator
to properly enforce SMCRA prior to the flooding, noting that ``[w]e are
gravely concerned that incomplete reclamation of inactive mines and
regulatory failure to enforce contemporaneous reclamation of active
mines contributed to the devastation of the July 2022 flood.'' OSMRE
has not responded to the community group's letter.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\19\ Elamroussi, A. and Andone, D. ``Death toll in Kentucky floods
rises to 28 as area braces for more rain,'' CNN.com, July 31, 2022.
Available at https://www.cnn.com/2022/07/31/weather/kentucky-
appalachia-flooding-sunday/index.html
\20\ Giffin, C. ``Did coal mining play a role in 2022 Kentucky
flood deaths? Group wants feds to investigate,'' Louisville Courier
Journal, Feb. 13, 2023. Available at https://www.courier-journal.com/
story/news/local/2023/02/13/group-wants-federal-investigation-of-coal-
mining-role-in-kentucky-flood-deaths/69890515007/
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Some abandoned mines include inadequately secured mine portals
allowing access to dangerous underground mine works. In 2018, three
people were trapped for days in a West Virginia mine after entering the
mine in search of copper and other materials to sell for scrap.\21\
Local residents frequently access mine sites when hunting, riding ATVs,
and engaging in other recreation activities. In Tennessee, OSMRE
inspection reports for a mine operated by Kopper Glo have repeatedly
noted the presence of open mine portals. A March 2023 report noted that
``[t]he fence at the entrance to the face-up area has been cut and the
gate is open. Buildings have been removed from the site. Tipple remains
in the pit area. Portals are open. There is non-coal waste throughout
the permit that needs to be disposed of. The gate was open at time of
inspection.'' \22\ Several months later, a June report for the same
mine noted ``Mine Portals are exposed and there are signs of vandalism
at the entries. Fencing and barricades were installed at mine openings
when active operations ceased. Access to the site was also restricted
with fencing and locked gate. The gate was cut and not replaced. The
fencing and barricades at mine openings have been removed or
vandalized. There are signs of 3rd party disturbance at the mine
openings.'' \23\ Despite these clear signs of abandonment, and the
documented presence of dangerous open mine portals, the mine was listed
as ``active'' on these inspection reports. Even more shocking, OSMRE
approved a permit renewal for the mine site in April 2023, three-and-a-
half years after the renewal application had been filed, and even after
the March inspection clearly showed the site to be abandoned.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\21\ Holcombe, M., ``They went into an abandoned mine to steal
copper, police say. Then they got trapped,'' CNN.com, Dec. 13, 2018.
Available at https://www.cnn.com/2018/12/12/us/west-virginia-abandoned-
mine-trapped/index.html
\22\ OSMRE Inspection Report, Permit 3229, March 14, 2023.
Available at https://www.sierraclub.org/sites/default/files/2023-11/
3229%20Q2%20FY23%20Complete%203.14.2023.pdf
\23\ OSMRE Inspection Report, Permit 3229, June 21, 2023. Available
at https://www.sierraclub.org/sites/default/files/2023-11/
3229%20Q3%20FY23%20Complete%20followup
%20FTACO%20openings%20NOV%20liability%206.21.2023.pdf
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Unreclaimed surface coal mines often include thousands of feet--
sometimes miles--of exposed highwalls. A highwall is the unexcavated
face of exposed coal and overburden--essentially an artificial cliff
that may be dozens of feet high. Highwalls pose hazards to anyone
accessing the site, whether from the risk of falls from the top, or
being struck by falling or collapsing materials at the bottom. The Mine
Safety and Health Administration has issued a safety alert for
highwalls.\24\ In addition, highwalls can serve as sources of mining
pollution, as water that has seeped through pollutant-bearing materials
may be discharged directly to surface streams without passing through
soil that can sometimes serve as a filter to remove certain pollutants.
Mine operators are supposed to minimize the length of exposed highwall,
using newly mined material to reclaim previously mined areas. In
practice, operators often prefer to dump this spoil material into
valley fills rather than reclaim highwalls.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\24\ U.S. Dept. of Labor, Mine Safety and Health Admin.,
``Highwall--Safety Alert.'' Available at https://www.msha.gov/highwall-
safety-alert
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Abandoned mines also serve as sources of water pollution. Surface
coal mines, particularly in Appalachia, dispose of excess mine spoil by
dumping it into streams as valley fills. Once in place, the water
moving through this material picks up pollutants and carries them
downstream. This water may require active treatment for years in order
to meet water quality standards. When mines are abandoned, they stop
operating treatment systems. Regulators may also seek to avoid the
costs of water treatment, particularly if they failed to require
adequate bonding. A series of citizen enforcement suits in West
Virginia finally compelled the state mine regulator to secure Clean
Water Act permits for bond forfeiture reclamation sites.
H. OSMRE must adapt to the new reality that declining coal production
has rendered many traditional enforcement tools ineffective

One challenge for OSMRE, which the agency has yet to confront, is
that some of the enforcement tools provided in SMCRA presume a
widespread ongoing interest on the part of operators in securing new
permits and in conducting new coal removal. For example, SMCRA requires
that mine operators with unabated violations be placed on an
``Applicant/Violator System'' list, and prohibits regulators from
issuing permits to operators appearing on this list. This program is
completely ineffective as a deterrent in the current moment when the
majority of operators have no intention to acquire any additional
permits.
Another potentially powerful tool provided under SMCRA is the
ability of regulators to initiate bond forfeiture at operations that
have ceased complying with SMCRA. By requiring financial assurances
adequate for the regulator to complete reclamation, SMCRA was supposed
to free regulators to utilize bond forfeiture whenever necessary. In
practice, OSMRE and state regulators have proven extremely hesitant to
actually invoke this power. Because they know that bonding is
inadequate, regulators have become reluctant to invoke bond forfeiture.
The example of West Virginia's approach to ERP, discussed above,
provides one such example of the lengths to which regulators will go to
avoid using bond forfeiture. Another example comes from Kentucky,
where, as of June 2022--more than a year after conclusion of the
Blackjewel and Cambrian bankruptcies--at least 136 permits remained in
the name of these and other dissolved entities. However, the Kentucky
regulator had started bond forfeiture proceedings for only 37 of those
permits. Although the regulator may be hoping that some other operator
will come along who wants to resume operations at those sites, 100
permits had no active permit transfer application.
OSMRE has missed multiple opportunities to appear in mine operator
bankruptcy proceedings. This absence has allowed funds that should have
gone to site reclamation--or even site maintenance--to instead go to
hedge funds and other creditors. The lack of participation by OSMRE or
other mine regulators also allows unreclaimed mines to be transferred
to under-financed operators who lack the means to complete reclamation,
or who are prohibited from receiving new permits. During the 2019
Cambrian bankruptcy, neither OSMRE nor any state regulator objected to
the sale of permits to three coal companies whose listing on OSMRE's
Applicant/ Violator System should have made them ineligible to hold the
permits.
II. There is still an opportunity for OSMRE to take needed actions, but
only if the agency acknowledges the reality of declining
production and the need for a changed approach

It is not too late for OSMRE to act. There is still money in the
coal industry that can and must be put towards cleaning up these sites
and protecting nearby communities. But first, regulators must
acknowledge the reality that the coal mining industry is, and will
continue to be, in decline, and consequently that the approaches that
worked in 2008 will not work today. This means stopping reliance on
bond pools and other financial assurance devices premised on an
assumption of overall financial health within the industry. It also
means rigorously enforcing contemporaneous reclamation requirements.
Most importantly, OSMRE must use its oversight authority to compile
information on which mine sites are actually producing coal, which are
actively conducting reclamation, and which have been functionally
abandoned and pose the greatest risk of passing significant reclamation
costs on to the public. To achieve this, OSMRE should require states to
provide permit-specific quarterly data regarding the number of acres at
each site that require backfilling and regrading, and that require
revegetation. OSMRE should also require states to provide data on the
amount of coal produced from each SMCRA permit. Cross-referencing this
data will highlight which permits are at the greatest risk of
abandonment. OSMRE should make this data publicly available so that
regulators and the public may easily understand trends, and risks, in
coal production and mine reclamation.
OSMRE must also subject each state bond pool to a rigorous stress
test based not on backward-looking forfeiture rates, but on a
comparison of the funds currently in the bond pool against actual
projected reclamation costs. At a minimum, OSMRE must evaluate the cost
of completing reclamation at every mine in the state that hasn't
produced coal in more than a year. This will give a more accurate
estimate of the future burden on the bond pool. Similarly, OSMRE must
evaluate the financial health of surety bond providers, including their
total exposure to the coal mining industry. Sureties who have already
provided bonding to coal mine operators far in excess of their cash
reserves should be presumed to be at very high risk of defaulting and
not being able to pay out bond amounts when called upon.
In the meantime, OSMRE must advise state regulators to stop
allowing new permits to participate in bond pools. When you find
yourself in a hole, the first thing to do is stop digging. There are
still a small number of permits being issued, primarily for operations
that mine metallurgical or steel-making coal. These new mines must be
required to post full-cost bonds or other financial assurances.
Similarly, any time a permit is transferred, regulators must evaluate
the adequacy of the bond. Where a permit set to be transferred is
currently participating in a bond pool, the transferee must be required
to provide a full-cost replacement bond. Where a mine operator seeks to
use a third-party surety bond, regulators must look at how many bonds
the surety has already issued for other coal mines, and must not accept
bonds from companies that are overexposed to the coal mining industry.
OSMRE must also clarify to state regulators how they should
interpret and apply SMCRA's statutory requirement of ``contemporaneous
reclamation.'' \25\ Ensuring that the smallest possible area is left
disturbed and unreclaimed at any given time is the best way for
regulators to minimize reclamation costs that may eventually be passed
on to the public.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\25\ 30 U.S.C. Sec. 1202(3) (one purpose of SMCRA is to ``assure
that adequate procedures are undertaken to reclaim surface areas as
contemporaneously as possible with the surface coal mining
operations.''); 30 U.S.C. Sec. 1265(b)(16) (requiring permittees to
``insure that all reclamation efforts proceed in an environmentally
sound manner and as contemporaneously as practicable with surface coal
mining operations . . .'').
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
One common objection to implementation of these approaches--
tightening bonding requirements and enforcing existing reclamation
requirements--is that they will increase costs on mine operators, and
thereby accelerate or precipitate mine abandonments. What these
objections fail to grasp is that any mine that may be abandoned as a
result of such an action has already been functionally abandoned. These
are the ``zombie'' mines that appear on paper to be active, but that in
reality have ceased all operations, including reclamation. Maintaining
the status quo will do nothing to promote reclamation of these sites.
The reality is that the operators of these mines have neither the
intention nor the means to complete reclamation; and thus the sooner
the permits become the responsibility of the regulators, the sooner
surrounding communities will be freed from exposure to pollution and
the threat of flooding. Furthermore, enforcement of the bonding and
reclamation requirements does not constitute imposition of some new
regulatory scheme; operators committed to complying with SMCRA--
including its reclamation and bonding requirements--when they accepted
their permits.
III. The AMLER program is an important source of funding for
communities impacted by coal mining and abandoned mine lands

The Abandoned Mine Land Economic Revitalization Program was
established in 2016 to return pre-1977 abandoned mine lands (AMLs) to
productive use through economic and community development. The AMLER
Program provides grants to six Appalachian states and three Indian
Tribes with the highest amount of unfunded AML sites. The AMLER program
funds projects that benefit local communities and provide ongoing
economic benefits through development of new productive uses for former
mine land.
To the extent there have been delays in implementation of AMLER
funding, these delays are largely attributable to a lack of state staff
time to assist project applications. Generally speaking, administration
of AMLER grants go through four phases before completion: application,
vetting, planning, and implementation. An evaluation of the AMLER
program published in June 2022 by Downstream Strategies concluded that
the greatest delays in AMLER implementation occur during the planning
phase, that the most significant delays occurred in projects with
budgets exceeding $5 million, that the duration of the planning phase
varied state by state, and that the states with the shortest planning
stages were those where state agency staff played the most active
role.\26\ The report also concluded that the OSMRE vetting phase was
comparatively short, and not the primary driver of delays in the
overall project development and approval process.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\26\ Downstream Strategies, ``Got Five On It: Economic Impacts and
Observations of the Abandoned Mine Land Economic Revitalization Program
Five Years In,'' June 7, 2022. Available at https://appvoices.org/
resources/reports/GotFiveOnIt-FINAL-6-7-2022.pdf
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
While it is important to promote AML site remediation and to find
new productive uses for AML sites, the greatest benefit to coal
producing communities will come from preventing the creation of any new
abandoned mine lands.
IV. Conclusion

More than 47 years after Congress passed SMCRA, states have still
not eliminated the inventory of unreclaimed abandoned mine land sites
already in existence at that time. We cannot afford to add to that
inventory. Without prompt action from OSMRE, mine producing regions
will see a return to the bad old days of the 1970s. Left to its own
devices, the coal mining industry will continue to seek to cut costs by
burdening local communities with unreclaimed mine sites, and passing
reclamation costs on to taxpayers. And state regulators will continue
to turn a blind eye to these issues in an effort to delay for as long
as possible the point where unfunded reclamation costs will hit their
balance sheets. There is a narrowing window for OSMRE to take action.
First, the agency must provide a clear-eyed assessment of the number of
mines neither producing coal nor conducting reclamation. Next, it must
acknowledge which elements of SMCRA are no longer effective, and must
utilize the remaining tools to their fullest extent. Only that way can
we avoid the return of dangerous, polluting, economically unproductive
abandoned mine lands.

______

Questions Submitted for the Record to Mr. Peter Morgan, Senior
Attorney, Sierra Club

Questions Submitted by Representative Grijalva

Question 1. During the hearing, OSMRE's proposed Ten-Day Notice
rulemaking was criticized as creating uncertainty and federal
overreach. How would you respond to these criticisms of the rulemaking?

Answer. The ten-day notice (``TDN'') provisions of the Surface
Mining Control and Reclamation Act (``SMCRA'') provide a critical tool
for communities suffering from the negative effects of coal mining to
seek federal oversight of ongoing violations unaddressed or
inadequately addressed by state regulators. Unfortunately, these
protections were significantly weakened under a misguided and illegal
Trump Administration rulemaking. OSMRE's proposed rule--published in
proposed form in the Federal Register (88 Fed. Reg. 24944 (April 25,
2023)) and slated for finalization by February 2024--removes
unnecessary and inappropriate barriers to public participation imposed
by that 2020 rulemaking and restores policies and procedures that had
been in place for decades.
The TDN process was intended by Congress as the communication
mechanism by which OSMRE--prior to engaging in oversight enforcement
expressly authorized under the SMCRA statute--would provide an
opportunity for state regulators to respond to citizen information
regarding potential violations of law. Congress bounded OSMRE's
deference in order to assure that in the absence of a timely state
response, federal inspection would occur so as to assure that potential
violations would be addressed and not worsen. The Trump Administration
changes skewed the process and would have allowed systemic on-the-
ground environmental problems to continue unaddressed over an
indefinite period.

OSMRE's proposed rule restores the proper framework of cooperative
federalism and supports communities negatively impacted by coal mining
in the following ways:

The proposed rule properly eliminates the unnecessary,
burdensome, and unsupported change from the 2020 Rule that
allowed OSMRE and state regulators to engage in an open-
ended process of information gathering prior to OSMRE
issuing a ten-day notice letter to the state regulator.
This ``pre-review review'' offered a means by which state
regulators and OSMRE could delay or prevent OSMRE's
response to properly filed community-member complaints.
Under OSMRE's proposed rule, OSMRE's threshold ``reason to
believe'' analysis would be limited to consulting its own
files and publicly accessible electronic databases in
addition to the information provided in the complaint. By
once again narrowing the sources of information for OSMRE's
initial review, the proposed rule will avoid the delays in
processing citizen complaints that OSMRE has recognized was
created under the 2020 Rule, and will ensure that
complaints are promptly processed and acted upon by OSMRE.

The proposed rule also corrects an additional significant
error from the 2020 rule: the elimination of violations
relating to permit defects by state regulators from the
categories of violations addressable under the TDN process.
This approach is consistent with congressional intent and
long-standing OSMRE practice. Under the proposed rule,
OSMRE will once again be able to address case-by-case
violations arising from permit defects promptly via the TDN
process, while also recognizing that underlying
programmatic issues may then need to be further addressed
and resolved via SMCRA's separate Part 733 process for
reviewing state programs' compliance with the federal
program. This change will allow OSMRE to respond promptly
to alleged violations that have the potential to create
significant, and potentially permanent, on-the-ground
impacts.

OSMRE's proposed rule also gives effect to SMCRA's promise
of robust community participation by eliminating
unnecessary hurdles to such participation imposed by the
2020 Rule. Most notably, the proposed rule requires OSMRE
to treat any citizen complaint as a request for a Federal
inspection whether or not certain ``magic words'' are used,
and ensures that community members who file complaints can
accompany OSMRE inspectors on site inspections.

OSMRE retains critical oversight functions in states that have
secured primacy, and the proposed Ten-Day Notice Rule ensures that
those functions will be carried out with the robust community
participation required by SMCRA.

Questions Submitted by Representative Ocasio-Cortez

Question 1. Do you believe the Office of Surface Mining Reclamation
and Enforcement (OSMRE) has the authority to address today's coal
mining reclamation crisis, or does SMCRA need to be updated to reflect
today's industry?

Answer. SMCRA as currently drafted provides OSMRE with tools and
authority to begin to address the reclamation and bonding crisis. To
date, OSMRE has not made adequate use of those existing authorities.
However, in order for OSMRE to fully address the crisis, additional
changes must be made to the SMCRA statute.

OSMRE must immediately take the following actions under its
existing SMCRA authority: First, OSMRE must collect information on mine
production and reclamation status for all coal mines to identify the
full set of functionally abandoned ``zombie'' permits, and must make
this information available to the public. Second, OSMRE must conduct
stress-tests for all state bond pools and for those surety bond
providers that have issued the majority of coal mine reclamation surety
bonds. These stress-tests must be based on projections of future mine
abandonments based on forecasted trends in coal production, not on
historic rates of mine abandonment during periods of time when demand
for coal was still high. Third, OSMRE must ensure that states are
rigorously enforcing SMCRA's contemporaneous reclamation requirements
to ensure every mine minimizes the disturbed, unreclaimed area.
Finally, OSMRE must reinstate the policy advisory on self-bonding
originally issued in August 2016.

Even if OSMRE were to immediately take these actions, fully
addressing the current coal mine reclamation and bonding crisis will
require additional changes to the federal SMCRA statute, and to state
programs to bring them in line with the amended fFederal program.
Legislation is needed to amend SMCRA to require better and more timely
assessments of bond adequacy and reclamation progress, including by
requiring regulators to reconsider bond adequacy at permit renewal and
permit transfer. SMCRA must also be amended to require that mine
operation and reclamation plans assess the potential impacts of
unplanned mine closure on the cost of reclamation, including whether
sufficient spoil exists for reclamation in the event of premature
cessation of coal production activities. SMCRA must also be amended to
eliminate self-bonding, and to end the use of bond pools by prohibiting
the entry of any new permits into existing bond pools and providing a
process for states to transition permits out of existing bond pools.
Finally, SMCRA must be amended to authorize--and encourage the use of--
new financial assurance approaches better aligned with the current
reality, such as sinking trust funds, and funding mechanisms for
longterm water treatment.
Questions Submitted by Representative Kamlager-Dove

Question 1. A 2021 report from the nonprofit Appalachian Voices,
``Repairing the Damage: The costs of delaying reclamation at modem-era
mines,'' detailed the gap in coverage of bonds and the outstanding
reclamation work that needs to be done. Can you elaborate on the scale
of the bonding and reclamation issue, and what will happen if reforms
are not made soon?

Answer. The ``Repairing the Damage'' report from Appalachian Voices
\1\ evaluated outstanding reclamation obligations in seven eastern
states (Alabama, Tennessee, Virginia, Kentucky, West Virginia, Ohio,
and Pennsylvania), estimated the total cost to complete that
reclamation, and compared that cost estimate to the available bonding.
Using data from OSMRE and state regulators, the report found that
across those seven states, a total of 633,000 acres were partially or
completely unreclaimed (426,000 acres partially reclaimed, 207,000
acres completely unreclaimed). The report then estimated the total cost
to complete that reclamation at between $7.5 billion to $9.8 billion.
Meanwhile, total bonding for those permits totaled only $3.8 billion.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ https://appvoices.org/resources/
RepairingTheDamage_ReclamationAtModernMines.pdf
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Those conclusions are completely consistent with data from other
sources. In the recent bankruptcy proceedings for Blackjewel, LLC, the
Kentucky coal mine regulator--the Kentucky Energy and Environment
Cabinet--looked at 20% of the permits held by the company in that state
and found that for the 33 permits studied the actual reclamation cost
would exceed the bonded amount by $28 million. In West Virginia, a
recent legislative audit report found that individual bonds in the
state cover only 10 percent of projected reclamation costs. When one of
the largest mine operators in the state--ERP Compliant Fuels--became
insolvent in 2020, the state placed the company into a special
receivership in order to avoid having to revoke the company's permits
and forfeit its inadequate bonds. The legislative audit found that the
special receivership held 91 permits for the company, and that those
permits were backed by $83 million in reclamation surety bonds. Based
on the 10 percent coverage estimate, that means the total reclamation
liability for those mines could be as high as $830 million. The West
Virginia bond pool contains approximately $36 million, with another
approximately $150 million in a separate fund for water treatment,
meaning the outstanding reclamation obligations for just the ERP
permits would easily wipe out the entire bond pool. The most recent
actuarial assessment of Ohio's bond pool found that the pool currently
contains $26.4 million. The assessment report concluded that the
failure of any of the five largest coal mine operators in the state
would wipe out that bond pool, because their reclamation liabilities
ranged from $31.6 million to $187 million, with an average liability of
$73.3 million.
The consequences and implications of these massive bonding
shortfalls are significant. Most obviously, there is the risk that
hundreds of millions of dollars in reclamation costs could be passed on
to taxpayers. Even then, it would likely take decades for government
regulators to complete the reclamation. More than 46 years after
Congress passed SMCRA to address the then-existing backlog of abandoned
unreclaimed mines, many of those mines still remain unreclaimed. We
cannot allow that shameful story to repeat, particularly because
unreclaimed modern coal mines pose serious threats to nearby
communities in the form of air and water pollution, on-site hazards,
and elevated risks of flooding and landslides. In addition, when
reclamation bonding is inadequate it gives mine operators enormous
leverage over regulators. Regulators become hesitant to enforce the
law--including laws meant to protect human health and the environment--
out of fear that doing so could prompt an operator to abandon its
under-bonded mines and make them the responsibility of the regulator.

Question 2. Nearly three years into the Biden Administration, the
agency that oversees and enforces reclamation of active and abandoned
coal mines, the Office of Surface Mining Reclamation and Enforcement
(OSMRE), still does not have even a nominee for Director. What is the
impact of not having a Senate-confirmed Director of OSMRE?

Answer. The dramatic changes currently affecting the coal mining
industry--most notably the significant and permanent decline in demand
for coal, and increasing numbers of mine abandonments--require a
radical change in approach from OSMRE. The drop in coal production and
lack of interest in new permits, and resulting threats to reclamation
and bonding programs, mean that OSMRE and state regulators cannot
continue to implement SMCRA according to the status quo that has
prevailed for the preceding 46 years. Instead, OSMRE must immediately
implement a major course correction that realigns the agency with the
new reality. Such a change in agency mission and approach requires the
type of leadership best provided by an administration-nominated and
Senate-confirmed Director. It is too much to ask of career staff to
initiate and oversee the required change in approach. The Biden
Administration should prioritize nominating and securing confirmation
for an OSMRE director who acknowledges that coal mining is in permanent
decline, that mines across the country are under-bonded and
inadequately reclaimed, and that there is an enormous risk of mines
being abandoned in an unreclaimed condition that threatens nearby
communities.

Question 3. If the Committee takes one thing away from this
hearing, what would you want that to be?

Answer. The main thing I hope the members of the Subcommittee will
take away from my testimony is that we are experiencing a coal mine
reclamation and bonding crisis driven by the permanent decline in
demand for coal, and that there is a narrowing window for OSMRE and
Congress to act to address the crisis and protect impacted communities.
The crisis is here. As demand for coal decreases, so too does coal
production, which means less revenue coming into the coal mining
industry. Those mines that are still operating are choosing to put
their limited resources toward coal removal rather than reclamation.
Hundreds of mines have already been abandoned unreclaimed, with workers
laid off and equipment removed. But poor recordkeeping requirements,
combined with regulator complacency, have conspired to hide the true
number of these functionally abandoned ``zombie'' mines. The negative
impacts from these zombie mines--in the form of air and water
pollution, onsite hazards, and increased risk of flooding and
landslides--will continue to grow.
OSMRE can still act to address this crisis. Specifically, OSMRE
must provide a clear-eyed assessment of which mines are no longer
producing coal nor conducting reclamation. This will alert nearby
communities to sources of pollution and other threats, and will allow
regulators and Congress to accurately assess the scale of the problem
and the need for immediate action. OSMRE must also acknowledge which
elements of SMCRA are no longer effective, and must utilize the
remaining tools to their fullest extent.
Congress, too, must act. Congress must strengthen SMCRA to
eliminate harmful provisions such as self-bonding, require additional
permit reviews to better assess bond adequacy and reclamation progress,
and authorize--and encourage the use of--new financial assurance
approaches better aligned with the current reality.
Only through this sort of quick and decisive action that recognizes
and addresses the present crisis can we avoid the return of dangerous,
polluting, economically unproductive abandoned mine lands.

______

Mr. Stauber. Thank you, Mr. Morgan.
Our final witness today is Mr. Kyle Wendtland. He is
Administrator of the Wyoming Department of Environmental
Quality, Land Quality Division, out of Cheyenne, Wyoming.
Mr. Wendtland, you are now recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF KYLE WENDTLAND, ADMINISTRATOR, WYOMING DEPARTMENT
OF ENVIRONMENTAL QUALITY, LAND QUALITY DIVISION, CHEYENNE,
WYOMING

Mr. Wendtland. Good morning, Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member
Ocasio-Cortez, and members of the House Subcommittee. My name
is Kyle J. Wendtland, and I am the Administrator of the Wyoming
Department of Environmental Quality, Land Quality Division. My
testimony today will focus on the Title V coal program.
Wyoming surface coal mines are world-class operations
nationally and internationally in safety, size, scale,
production, reclamation, and environmental performance. And
these mines contribute the greatest portion of funding to the
fee-based National Coal Abandoned Mine Land Cleanup program and
black lung compensation.
If I were to classify the relationship between Wyoming and
OSMRE, it would fall into three categories. These include an
agency that is paralyzed in its ability to make timely,
efficient, and prioritized decisions; mistrust within the OSM
organization itself; and failure to conduct meaningful
engagement with its state partners.
First, I will address the paralyzed aspect in the context
of Federal mine plan approvals. Even under the most aggressive
energy transition projections, the need for reliable and
affordable Wyoming thermal coal baseload power will continue
well into the 2040 to 2050 time frame, and coal has other
beneficial uses such as coal-to-fiber, liquids, and rare earth
mineral extraction. Carbon sequestration programs such as
Carbon Safe and the Inflation Reduction Act 45Q may further
extend the need to utilize Wyoming coal reserves.
Deputy Director Owens testified to this Committee on May
16, 2023, that the proposed Fiscal Year 2024 budget focuses on
funding OSMRE's core mission responsibilities and supporting
the highest priority efforts and activities. However, Wyoming
continues to see unprecedented Federal mine plan approval
delays at OSMRE headquarters.
As noted in my written testimony, OSMRE has changed its
NEPA policy three times, and taken 3 years to determine that
the Black Butte Federal Mine Plan must now restart the NEPA
process and conduct an EIS.
Wyoming Governor Gordon sent a letter on April 25, 2023 to
Secretary of the Interior Deb Haaland, and the Wyoming
Congressional Delegation has reached out to OSMRE outlining the
serious concern over the delays in the approval of the Black
Butte Federal Mine Plan. The response has been and continues to
be deafening silence from OSMRE headquarters since July 2023.
Review of the Black Butte timeline provided in my written
testimony underscores that the approval process through OSMRE
is broken. The process has become politicized, and the NEPA
process has become weaponized. The end result is costly
permitting delays, increased land disturbance and mining costs,
delayed reclamation, fuel supply reliability concerns for the
nation's baseload power, and lost revenue to Federal and state
governments.
Now I will address OSMRE delays in the approval of state
program amendments and mistrust within OSMRE. Wyoming and other
states continue to see unconscionable delays in the approval of
state program amendments. A state program amendment is public
noticed and receives legal review from a state Attorney General
and a regional technical staff and solicitors prior to OSMRE
headquarters' final review and approval.
OSMRE's inability to approve a state rule change is best
exampled by the Wyoming Wind Turbine Blade Disposal Program
amendment. The University of Cambridge estimates that there
will be 43 million tons of blades needing to be disposed of by
2050. The Wyoming Turbine Blade Program amendment received no
public comments at the state or Federal level, and has been
endorsed by the coal and wind industries as a responsible and
sustainable solution to the disposal of these blades. Approval
of this program amendment is a clear win for everyone. However,
OSMRE headquarters has second-guessed and continues to mistrust
its regional technical staff and solicitors, and has held this
program amendment for 843 days with no sign of action.
The Interstate Mining Compact Commission has also engaged
OSMRE on this issue. OSMRE staff agreed to provide IMCC with
the agency program amendment status sheet for all states, and
after 356 days IMCC has still not received this information.
It is clear that OSMRE does not trust the reviews provided
by the state, its regional staff and solicitors, and Wyoming
respectfully requests that OSMRE begin working cooperatively
with Wyoming to address the major concerns I have highlighted
in my testimony for the Committee today.
I would like to thank the Committee for the opportunity to
present this information, and I would be happy to stand for
questions.

[The prepared statement of Mr. Wendtland follows:]
Prepared Statement of Kyle J. Wendtland, Wyoming Department of
Environmental Quality, Land Quality Division Administrator

Good Morning Chairman Stauber, Ranking Member Ocasio-Cortez, and
members of the House Subcommittee on Energy and Mineral Resources. My
name is Kyle J. Wendtland and I am the Administrator of the Wyoming
Department of Environmental Quality Land Quality Division (WDEQ LQD).
I am here to testify on Examining the Biden Administration's
Abandoned Mine Lands and Active Mining Program. More specifically I
will address the Office of Surface Mining Reclamation and Enforcement
(OSMRE) Title V program Federal Mine Plan Approvals (FMP), National
Environmental Policy Act (NEPA) reviews, Program Amendment (PA)
approvals, Revisions to the 2020 Ten Day Notice and proposed Dam Safety
rules, and Title V funding grants.
Wyoming Coal Background:

The Surface Mining Control and Reclamation Act (SMCRA) was adopted
by Congress in 1977 and Wyoming's Title V coal program was approved on
November 26, 1980. Wyoming has 43 years of experience in successful
coal leasing, mine permitting, reclamation, and successful
implementation of the Title V and Title IV SMCRA coal programs.
Wyoming's surface coal mines are unique nationally and internationally
in both size and scale. Wyoming currently manages 25 active coal
permits, and these coal operations are some of the most efficient, low-
cost operations in the nation. These mines boast world class safety,
reclamation, and environmental performance records. In 2022, Wyoming
mines produced 41% of the nation's coal (244,265,803 tons) used for
reliable and affordable baseload thermal energy across the nation. Coal
contributed $563 million dollars in taxes, royalties, and fees to
Wyoming's economy in 2022. In addition, Lease Bonus Bids have provided
additional revenue to the nation and Wyoming. Since 2003, approximately
$4.5 billion has been paid in Bonus Bids to the federal and state
governments. These funds are split between the federal and state
government, and Wyoming has received approximately $2.3 billion in
Bonus Bid funding for school capital construction since 2003. The
Wyoming coal mines also contribute the greatest portion of fee funding
for the national coal Abandoned Mine Land (AML) cleanup program, and
Black Lung compensation.
OSMRE Federal Mine Plan Amendment Approvals and NEPA:

Wyoming has embraced an all of the above energy strategy. The state
recognizes both the need for and value in having a diverse energy
production portfolio. This strategy recognizes the clear and continued
need for coal produced from Wyoming mines. The coal produced in Wyoming
has and will continue to power the nation's baseload thermal energy
production for decades to come. Even under the most aggressive energy
transition predictions, the need for reliable and affordable thermal
coal baseload power will continue well into the 2040 to 2050 timeframe.
The need for the nation's security and economy will demand that the
power grid remain reliable, stable, affordable, and require the use of
dispatchable coal fired power.
It should also be noted, that although Wyoming coal may be
initially leased for thermal power generation, other beneficial uses
are developing. Coal to fiber, coal to liquids, rare earth mineral
extraction, bio char, etc. are all becoming viable alternative uses for
coal. In addition to these alternative uses, carbon sequestration
programs such as Carbon Safe, and the Inflation Reduction Act (IRA) 45Q
program may further extend the use of thermal coal. Wyoming has Class
VI injection well primacy from the Environmental Protection Agency
(EPA), and is a leader in CCS/CCUS law, policy, regulation and
projects. More than a decade ago, the Wyoming Legislature separately
enacted a statutory framework for CCS and CCUS projects, including
permitting. These developing markets for Wyoming coal further
underscore the need for OSMRE to continue to approve Federal Mine Plans
in a timely and efficient manner.
The OSMRE Deputy Director Ms. Glenda H. Owens testified to this
committee on May 16, 2023 that ``the proposed FY 2024 budget focuses on
funding OSMRE's core mission responsibilities and supporting the
highest priority efforts and activities''. As noted in the discussion
above, coal is and will continue to be needed now and into the future
as the country balances the need for affordable, reliable, and
dispatchable energy as power generation transitions are made. The
continued approval of mining the nation's coal reserves in a
responsible manner to ensure reliability and affordability of
electricity is clearly one of the core and high priority functions of
the OSMRE. However, OSMRE is not providing support for or approving
these core activities in a timely, predictable, and prioritized manner.
Wyoming continues to see Federal Mine Plan (FMP) approval delays at
the OSMRE headquarters level. The state is currently waiting for two
FMP approvals. To provide the committee with context and foundation it
is important to first outline the process of amending a coal lease to
an existing mine permit. Prior to OSMRE review of a FMP, the coal
leasing action and permit application has been through multiple legal,
regulatory, and NEPA reviews. The Bureau of Land Management (BLM)
oversees the federal coal leasing activities in Wyoming. The BLM
conducts a Resource Management Plan (RMP) and NEPA analysis that
outlines and discloses to the public the coal reserves available for
lease and issues a Record of Decision (ROD). When a coal lease or
amendment action is applied for, BLM conducts a separate NEPA analysis
and ROD on the individual coal lease. Once the operator has
successfully completed the coal sale process and has ownership of the
leased coal, a permit amendment is applied for through the WDEQ LQD
Title V coal program. The permit goes through a rigorous technical
review and additional public notice in order to complete the state
permitting process. Upon completion of the state permitting process,
the amended permit is then sent to OSMRE regional office for oversight
review. The OSMRE regional office reviews the technical aspects of the
FMP for compliance with state regulation and subjects the FMP to an
additional, third NEPA analysis. By the time the amendment package
reaches OSMRE headquarters for issuance of a Right of Entry Letter
(REL), the FMP has undergone three NEPA reviews and three legal reviews
(e.g. the BLM RMP, the Coal Lease EIS, the state permitting process,
the OSMRE Federal Mine Plan EA/EIS, the state Attorney General and
federal BLM and OSMRE regional Solicitor legal reviews) and multiple
public notice and comment periods. In order to best outline the impacts
of OSMRE's current review process of a FMP, the Black Butte Mine (BBM)
FMP is a keystone example.

January 15, 2021: the BBM received approval from WDEQ to
amend the existing permit to include the additional coal
reserves.

On February 16, 2021: OSMRE sent BBM a Mine Plan Decision
Document questionnaire, and BBM submitted the completed
form to OSMRE on February 21, 2021.

On March 23, 2021: OSMRE notified BBM that the NEPA
analysis completed by BLM in 2017 would be sufficient for
the project to receive OSMRE approval and no further
Environmental Assessment (EA) would be required.

On April 14, 2021: OSMRE informed the BBM that given
changes in the Federal Administration and directive under
Executive Order (EO) that further NEPA analysis would now
be required. BBM was encouraged to hire a third-party
contractor to assist OSMRE with the NEPA process in order
to reduce approval time. BBM hired one of the three
contractors recommended by OSMRE.

June-September, 2021: multiple project delays were
incurred during this timeframe. The list of reasons noted
during bi-weekly meetings included a lack of personnel at
OSMRE, additional projects on OSMRE staff work lists, and
lost paperwork by OSMRE.

September 24, 2021: the EA was completed and submitted to
OSMRE staff for review and on October 27, 2021 OSMRE region
submitted the EA to the regional DOI Solicitor (SOL) for
review.

December 20, 2021: the regional SOL completed review and
the EA was sent back to OSMRE staff for review prior to
final editing by the third-party contractor.

February 25, 2022: the EA was provided to the third-party
contractor for revisions.

March 2, 2022: third party contractor completed its
responses and edits to the SOL comments and provided the
revised EA back to OSMRE. On April 6, 2022 a second round
of comments were generated from the SOL and responded to by
the BBM third party contractor.

April 13, 2022: a new timeline was approved by OSMRE for
the project. The thirty-day Public Comment Period was
scheduled to begin on April 19, 2022.

April 14, 2022: OSMRE notified BBM and the third-party
contractor that OSMRE leadership informed OSMRE region that
the Public Comment Period could not begin until April 27,
2022. OSMRE further informed BBM that in order to process
the MPDD BBM would first need to fill out a Questionnaire.
This is the same Questionnaire that was provided to OSMRE
one year prior on February 21, 2021.

April 20, 2022: during the bi-weekly update call with
OSMRE, the third-party contractor and BBM received
approvals to proceed with Public Comment Period on April
27, 2022. Notice was published in the local newspaper and
paid for by BBM.

May 3, 2022: OSMRE notified BBM that the Assistant
Secretary of Land and Mineral Management (ASLM) had
notified OSMRE headquarters that they will not initiate the
public comment period until they have written and approved
a National Press Release for the project. The ASLM provided
BBM with no timeline for this press release and no reason
as to why the change and need for this requirement.

May 11, 2022: OSMRE sent notice to BBM that the new
Federal Administration had informed OSMRE that all public-
facing NEPA documents would be reviewed by four solicitors
above the regional SOL. OSMRE refers to this group as Front
Office SOL's. No further information was provided to BBM as
to who these new solicitors would be or how long the
process would take.

May 23, 2022: the new submission process required that the
BBM EA and unsigned FONSI first be sent back again to the
regional SOL for review. This re-review was completed by
the same SOL that had already reviewed and signed off on
the EA in late 2021 and early 2022.

July 2022: OSMRE informs BBM that a change and new
requirement in the EA will be needed to address the Social
Cost of Carbon Greenhouse Gas (SC-GHG) analysis that they
use for all new NEPA documents and that this change will
need to be validated by DOI prior to being implemented.

December 22, 2022: regional SOL granted authority to load
the EA into DTS for the Front Office SOL review. On January
3, 2023 the BBM EA and unsigned FONSI were uploaded into
DTS for Front Office SOL review.

February 8, 2023: OSMRE informed BBM that the fourth and
final Front Office SOL had not signed off or provided any
comments. In hearing no response, BBM engaged state and
congressional staff for assistance and to discuss the two
plus years of project delays by OSMRE headquarters.

October 3, 2023: BBM received notification from OSMRE that
the BBM would now be required to re-start the entire
process and complete an EIS in place of the EA for the BBM
Federal Mine Plan Modification.

OSMRE has taken three years to determine that the BBM FMP must now
restart the NEPA process completely and conduct a new EIS in place of
the EA. Wyoming is experiencing similar unconscionable delays related
to a second FMP approval for the Antelope Mine, and neighboring states
are having similar difficulties and delays in receiving FMP approvals.
Based on the BBM example Wyoming has legitimate concerns over OSMRE
headquarters' ability to approve the BBM and pending Antelope Mine (AM)
FMP amendments in an efficient and timely manner. Because of these
concerns, the Honorable Governor Gordon sent a letter on April 25, 2023
to Secretary of Interior Deb Haaland, outlining the continued delays
and concerns in the approval of the BBM FMP. Review of the BBM
timeline, and OSMRE headquarters delays, further underscores that the
FMP approval process through OSMRE is broken and no longer completed
per the regulatory requirements. It is concerning that the OSMRE
process has become politicized and the NEPA process weaponized. The
delays by OSMRE are resulting in costly permitting delays, increased
land disturbance, increased costs to mining, delayed reclamation, fuel
supply reliability concerns for the nation's baseload dispatchable
power, and lost revenue to the federal and state governments.
OSMRE and State Program Amendments:

Wyoming and other states continue to see excessive delays in the
review and approval of Program Amendments (PA). The need to process and
approve a PA can be the result of a state initiative, or an OSMRE
oversight initiative. However, the fundamental process for submission
and approval is similar. The process typically begins with a state
statute or rule change. The state then develops rules through the
rulemaking process to develop regulations that are as effective as the
federal SMCRA provisions. In Wyoming, new or revised rules are first
submitted and public noticed to the Land Quality Advisory Board (LQAB)
for review; the rule package is then moved to the Environmental Quality
Council (EQC), public noticed and then a decision by the EQC to
promulgate the rule package is made; if approved by the EQC, the rule
package is then moved to the Governor's office for review and final
signature. Following the Governor's signature, the state prepares a PA
to the Title V program rules and regulations for submission to OSMRE.
The PA submission is first sent to the regional OSMRE office for
review. Following the regional OSMRE review and approval, the PA is
sent to OSMRE headquarters for final review, Federal Register (FR)
publication, public comment, and final processing. Through the course
of this process, the PA is public noticed a minimum of three times and
has received legal review from a state Attorney General, and regional
OSMRE solicitors (SOL), prior to final review at OSMRE headquarters. In
order to add context to the processing of a PA by OSMRE, the Wyoming
Wind Turbine Blade Disposal PA provides a recent example:

July 1, 2020: the Wyoming Legislature and the Governor
enacted HB0129 to address the wind waste issue and provide
for the responsible disposal of damaged and outdated inert
wind turbine blades and towers in the final pit voids and
end walls of surface coal mines in Wyoming.

April 29, 2021: Wyoming developed and signed new rules
into law that are as effective as the SMCRA requirements.
These rules went through the required Wyoming rulemaking
administrative process as outlined above.

June 4, 2021: the WDEQ submitted the required formal PA to
the OSMRE regional office for technical and regional
solicitor (SOL) review.

July 22, 2021: Wyoming received a letter from OSMRE region
stating ``we have not identified any issue of particular
concern to the public or industry in this rulemaking'' and
the PA was made available for public notice.

August 4, 2021: the PA was published in the FR (WY-049-FOR
Proposed Rule Notice) on August 4, 2021. The comment period
ended on September 3, 2021 and OSMRE received no public
comment on this PA.

OSMRE headquarters has not acted on approving this PA
since September 2021. As of the date of this testimony,
OSMRE has had this PA in review for 843 days.

Wyoming determined the need and proposed a solution to address the
growing issue of responsible disposal of damaged or outdated wind
turbine blades and towers. Disposal of the inert blades and towers in
municipal landfills is not a viable long term or sustainable option
because of the volume of landfill space required. In addition, there
are no known scalable recycling uses for these waste materials. At the
time Wyoming HB0129 was passed in 2020, there were approximately 70,000
turbine blades awaiting final disposal and the number has only
increased since that time. The University of Cambridge estimates that
there will be 43 million tons of blades needing to be disposed of by
2050. Wyoming HB0129, proposed rules, and FR publication received no
adverse public comments, and have been endorsed by the coal and wind
industries as a responsible and sustainable solution. Approval of this
PA is a win for the coal industry, the wind industry, and the public.
The lack of communication from OSMRE and the delay in approval of this
Wyoming PA raises concerns as to the priorities of the agency. Wyoming
congressional staff has also inquired as to the status and approval of
this PA. OSMRE's last correspondence with Wyoming staff occurred in
December 2022. The continued silence from OSMRE regarding this PA
approval after 843 days of review has been deafening. It is unfortunate
that the Wyoming example outlined above is not an isolated event
related to OSMRE PA approvals. The Interstate Mining Compact Commission
(IMCC) has also engaged OSMRE on this issue. IMCC on behalf of its
member states has requested a copy of the ``Status Sheet'' that OSMRE
maintains to determine the point in the process of each state's
respective pending PA's. OSMRE staff has stated that IMCC would be
provided a copy of this status sheet for the past 356 days. To date,
IMCC has not received this information. This further demonstrates
OSMRE's lack of communication and the unwillingness of OSMRE to be
transparent in its process with primacy states and the public.
The OSMRE Deputy Director has stated that there are currently
fifty-five PA's awaiting approval at headquarters. It should also be
noted that during the past decade, there have been no fewer than forty
PA's waiting for approval. Based on the lack of transparency and
communication by OSMRE, Wyoming has legitimate concerns over OSMRE
headquarters' ability to approve the two pending PA's in anything
resembling a reasonable timeframe. The inability for OSMRE to process
and approve a state PA's is problematic on several fronts, and most
importantly prevents states from updating and implementing new
regulatory requirements in a timely manner. OSMRE currently has PA's
that have not completed processing for more than a decade, and the best
response time of a Wyoming PA approval has been four years. It is clear
that the approval of PA's is not considered a ``core mission
responsibility'' as stated by OSMRE's Deputy Director's public
testimony on May 16, 2023.
2023 Ten Day Notice Rule Revision:

Wyoming has had exclusive regulatory authority over coal mining
under Title V of SMCRA since 1980. Wyoming is concerned about the April
25, 2023 proposed rule changes to the Ten Day Notice (TDN) and
Corrective Action for State Regulatory Issues and Regulations. As
published by OSMRE, the proposed revisions will fundamentally alter the
federal-state cooperative federalism relationship under SMCRA in ways
that are inconsistent with the exclusive regulatory authority SMCRA
confers on states. Wyoming also has great concern that the factual
basis OSMRE provided for the proposed rules (less than two years of
experience and data collection) in the Federal Register, as it is
significantly different than the state experience under existing law.
The OSMRE has attempted to justify the proposed rulemaking by
stating that the 2023 proposed rules will ``increase efficiency and
make it easier for citizens to report possible violations'' and
``simplify the processes for filing a citizen complaint and requesting
a Federal inspection''. Wyoming disagrees with this conclusion. The
proposed rules add unnecessary administrative overhead, deadlines and
required formalized documents to address each complaint in the event
OSMRE has ``reason to believe'' a potential violation exists. In
contrast, with the existing 2020 Federal Register (FR) notification
discussing the Ten-Day Notice (TDN) rules, a major focus and
justification for the revised rules was that instead of expending
resources on paperwork exercises, the State and OSMRE should work
cooperatively to address issues, and in particular, resolve any ``on
the ground'' actions that are necessary to protect public health and
safety in a timely manner. Unfortunately, the 2023 TDN rules, as
written, take a step backwards and OSMRE proposes to insert itself as
the singular lead regulator in place of the State Regulatory Authority
(SRA). This places the state in a position of merely justifying its
response to any issue a citizen may present to OSMRE regardless of the
merits of a citizen's complaint. It is important to note, that OSMRE
has come to these conclusions with two years or less of experience with
the 2020 finalized rules. OSMRE has stated that there has been a ``wave
of citizen complaints'' that show the State Regulatory Authorities
(SRA's) have been inadequately addressing citizen's complaints or not
implementing their programs effectively. However, this OSMRE claim
appears to be baseless as OSMRE has provided no evidence to support the
claim nor has Wyoming been able to verify this claim. Further, OSMRE
has to date not responded to a public records request to obtain these
data filed by the Interstate Mining Compact Commission (IMCC) on May
31, 2023.
The SRA's were not consulted as a cooperator prior to, or during
the 2023 rule development. The first opportunity the SRA's had to
review the 2023 rule revisions was the publication of the draft rule on
April 25, 2023 (88 FR 24944). To be a meaningful partner, OSMRE should
have engaged the SRA's early in the rule development process, rather
than a meager sixty-day comment period following the publication of the
proposed rule. OSMRE has unilaterally revised a functional, efficient,
and cooperative process, without clear evidence of need. The OSMRE has
ignored its requirement and responsibility to engage the SRA's as a
partner in a meaningful manner that represents cooperative federalism.
For example, the 2020 rules used the term ``cooperative federalism''
nineteen times when discussing the rules; in contrast the 2023 proposed
rules use the term only three times. The 2023 proposed TDN rules simply
do not achieve the goals of being more efficient or effective than the
existing 2020 rules. For the reasons stated above and those identified
in Wyoming's letter dated June 23, 2023, this proposed rulemaking
should be abandoned and OSMRE should engage in meaningful dialogue with
the states to determine if there is a factual need to make any
adjustments to the existing 2020 TDN rule.
Dam Safety Proposed Rulemaking:

The OSMRE planned rulemaking regarding dam safety, specifically to
address the findings of the Interior Department's Inspector General in
its December 27, 2012 Report No. WR-EV-MOA-0015-2011 (Inspector
General's Report) regarding Emergency Action Plans (EAPs) and After
Action Reports (AARs), is an item of concern to Wyoming. There is no
requirement or need for a nationally applicable OSMRE regulation
regarding EAP's for dams. The Inspector General's Report (IGR)
identifies the absence of an EAP requirement as a deficiency in OSMRE's
federal regulatory program. However, just because the Inspector General
identified this as an item for review by OSMRE, it does not mean that
this is an issue for the states. In fact, this is not an issue at the
state level. In the event OSMRE determines a need to take action and
develop rules to resolve concerns raised by the IGR, its action should
be limited to whatever is necessary to correct any deficiencies that
exist at the federal level, without interfering with state emergency
response functions.
If OSMRE adopts a rule that mirrors existing state EAP
requirements, which may be impossible as minor differences may exist
from state to state, this will establish separate and competing lines
of authority over EAP's and their execution. The proposed rules have
the potential to cloud the lines of jurisdiction of state emergency
preparedness response and management agencies and the Department of
Homeland Security's Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA). If
OSMRE inserts itself into this process, there is real risk that two
inconsistent and competing plans will be implemented in the event of a
real emergency. There must be one single plan for response to a dam
emergency, with one single set of clear directions for communication
channels and government authority vested in only one place.
The states should be engaged by OSMRE in a cooperative and
meaningful manner to promote cooperative federalism before any draft
dam safety rule is finalized and released for public comment. The IMCC
has offered to serve as a facilitator between the states and OSMRE to
ensure that meaningful and preferably in-person engagement occurs on
this topic prior to the drafting of any rule for these purposes.
However, OSMRE has to date elected not to engage the states and has
stated that the proposed dam rules are expected to be released by the
agency as early as the second quarter of 2024.
Title V Grant Funding:

Wyoming, as well as other states, have passed legislation to
increase base pay for employees to account for the rise in the cost of
living and inflationary pressure. These pay raises are also an attempt
by the state(s) to remain competitive in the marketplace and continue
to attract high quality and talented personnel. Wyoming has approved
pay increases in each of the past two years. At the same time these
raises have been enacted, the Title V program grants to the state have
remained flat. There is a funding gap that continues to grow, as the
Title V grant is not keeping pace with these inflationary budget
adjustments. Wyoming recommends that OSMRE work cooperatively with the
states in evaluating and addressing this funding gap in the 2025 budget
process.
Summary:

In summary, the need for reliable and affordable thermal coal fired
baseload power will continue at least into the 2040 to 2050 timeframe.
Current and potential new uses of coal are most promising, both in
economic and environmental terms. Actions, or rather lack of action by
OSMRE has imperiled critical access to the nation's vital coal
reserves. The lack of cooperative federalism in the approval of Federal
Mine Plans, NEPA reviews, Program Amendment approval, rule development,
and Title V program funding has and continues to erode the trust
between the state and OSMRE. In Wyoming, with an approved and
successful primacy program over the last 43 years, OSMRE's role should
be confined to oversight through a limited audit program, research
requested by the state, and technical assistance at the request of the
state. OSMRE headquarters is unnecessarily re-reviewing regional
approvals, implementing new and continuous duplicative requirements,
continues to delay needed state actions, and question regional OSMRE
technical staff and solicitor decisions. This lack of confidence and
trust within the OSMRE agency itself is at best concerning. The OSMRE
decision making process has become mired in political agenda and
administration policy, not sound regulatory requirements, technical
merit, and fact-based science. This has paralyzed the OSMRE decision
making abilities and created mistrust within the agency. The OSMRE is
no longer functional nor is it working cooperatively with the states
and in the public best interest.
I acknowledge that much of the above information came from a
variety of sources, including, but not limited to, the WDEQ, the IMCC,
the Wyoming Mining Association, and the Black Butte Mine. I would again
like to thank the committee for the opportunity to submit this
testimony and appear before you today.

Please find the following reference material attachments to this
document:

Governor's letter of April 25th on Black Butte Mine and
OSMRE July 10, 2023 response

WDEQ Program Amendment Submission Letter Dated June 4,
2021

OSMRE Program Amendment Transmittal Memo

Wyoming Program Amendment Federal Register Publication
Dated August 4, 2021

Wyoming Letter of June 23, 2023 comments on the Ten Day
Notice Rulemaking

______

Questions Submitted for the Record to Mr. Kyle J. Wendtland,
Administrator, Wyoming Department of Environmental Quality

Questions Submitted by Representative Ocasio-Cortez

Question 1. Congress made its intention clear in the Infrastructure
Investments and Jobs Act that the abandoned coal mine land and
reclamation funding should create good paying jobs for displaced coal
workers and incentivize union labor. (30 USC 1231a(f): ``priority may
also be given to reclamation projects described in subsection b(1) that
provide employment for current and former employees of the coal
industry''; 30 USC 1231a(b)(3): ``applying/or grants under paragraph
(1), States and Indian Tribes may aggregate bids into larger statewide
regional contracts,'' and 42 USC 18851: ``all laborers and mechanics
employed ( . . . ) on a project associated in whole or in part by
funding made available under this division ( . . . ) shall be paid
wages at rates not less than those prevailing on similar projects in
locality''.) How are you implementing the employment priorities
included in the law, and are you in touch with the United Mine Workers
of America and the AFL-CIO on how best to do so?

Answer. As stated in my written and oral testimony, I appeared
before the committee to address the Wyoming Department of Environmental
Quality (DEQ) Title V coal program. The question asked is related to
the DEQ's Title IV Abandoned Mine Lands (AML) program. Wyoming DEQ
offers the following response related to the Title IV program question:

The Title IV Wyoming program questions are best addressed by being
broken into four key areas:

1)  Priority ``may'' be given to reclamation projects that provide
employment for current or former coal mine workers.

Wyoming's State Statute W.S. 9-2-3006(a)(ii)(B) requires that
the lowest responsible bidder be awarded the contract. This
Wyoming Statute complies with the provisions of 2 CFR 200.320
Methods of procurement to be followed. Wyoming DEQ also offers
the following factors to consider.

a)  How is a former employee of the coal industry
defined? Wyoming has repeatedly requested OSMRE to
define this category of employee but that definition
has not been provided.

b)  A former employee of a coal mine is not a protected
class of worker (e.g., minority) in Wyoming. Therefore,
a former coal employee cannot be given any priority
status over another worker.

2) Aggregation of bids into larger statewide or regional contracts.

Aggregation of bids presents several challenges to contracting
requirements that the Wyoming DEQ AML Division must follow. For
example:

a)  Wyoming procurement laws allow a 5% preference
applied to in-state contractors over out-of-state
contractors.

b)  Aggregating projects could disqualify Wyoming-based
contractors who may not be able to qualify for bonding
on large projects. It is not in the best interest of
the State of Wyoming to disqualify Wyoming-based and
highly experienced contractors in our bidding process
by aggregating projects.

3) Employees paid prevailing wages on similar projects.

Following the Amendments to SMCRA in 2006, Wyoming has received
its 50% fee-based AML coal share from the U.S. Treasury and not
the AML Trust Fund. Consequently, the Davis-Bacon prevailing
wage provisions have been applied to Wyoming contracts since
that time to present.

4) Is Wyoming in touch with the United Mine Workers of America or AFL-
CIO

The Wyoming AML Division has had no communications with the
United Mine Workers of America nor the AFL-CIO.

Supplemental Information: Wyoming DEQ would also like to clarify that
several blanket statements made in the written and oral testimony
related to reclamation bonding are not applicable to the Wyoming DEQ
Title V program. Wyoming is a full cost bonding state and does not use
bond pools.

Further, Wyoming DEQ completed updates to its reclamation bonding
program in 2018, modernizing and strengthening bonding requirements. In
2021, Wyoming also created a cash based and state backed instrument
called an Assigned Trust to further strengthen Wyoming's reclamation
bonding program. Wyoming has over 43 years of experience in the
calculation of reclamation bonds and is very confident in the adequacy
of the bond amounts and the state's ability to collect on those bonds
if necessary.

______

Mr. Stauber. Thank you very much for your testimony, Mr.
Wendtland, and I want to thank all the witnesses for their
testimony.

As I told you earlier, the votes have been called. I am
going to recess the Committee. We have two votes, and we will
come back as quick as we can and start questioning.

So, the Committee stands in recess.

[Recess.]

Mr. Stauber. The Energy and Minerals Resources Subcommittee
will come back from recess.

And before I get to my questioning, I would like to enter a
statement from the National Mining Association into the record.

Without objection, so ordered.

[The information follows:]
Statement for the Record
National Mining Association (NMA)

The National Mining Association (NMA) appreciates the opportunity
to provide the House Natural Resources Subcommittee on Energy and
Mineral Resources with written testimony in response to the committee's
examination of the Biden administration's Abandoned Mine Lands (AML)
and active mining programs. The NMA is the only national trade
organization that serves as the voice of the U.S. mining industry and
the hundreds of thousands of American workers it employs before
Congress, the federal agencies, the judiciary and the media, advocating
for public policies that will help America fully and responsibly
utilize its vast natural resources. The NMA's members conduct coal and
hardrock mining operations throughout the U.S. and, as such, have a
shared interest in the cleanup and reclamation of historic coal AMLs
and related activities.
Historical Issues with AML Oversight

While today's mining industry plans for the restoration and
reclamation of mined land even before mining occurs, that was not
always the case. To address the issue of legacy mining sites, since
1977, modern coal mining companies have been paying fees on each ton of
domestically-produced coal into a fund--the AML Reclamation Fund--to
reclaim high-priority coal mines abandoned or not sufficiently
reclaimed before 1977. Unfortunately, after 46 years and more than $12
billion paid into the fund, little has been accomplished to restore
priority 1 and 2 (P1 and P2) sites.

The AML fund has repeatedly been an attractive target for diverting
coal industry funds to projects and activities not intended under the
law. According to the Department of the Interior's Inspector General
(DOI-OIG), the lack of oversight, absence of sound data management, and
an unreliable AML database have resulted in: (1) states diverting AML
money to non-coal projects notwithstanding the continued presence of
high priority coal projects in the state; (2) some states expending
substantial sums on administrative costs without completing any AML
projects; and (3) the inability to deliver accurate or useful cost
accounting for AML projects. Additionally, high federal and state
administrative costs have also diverted funds from their core purpose.

While the DOI-OIG's 2023 Final Inspection Report \1\ on the Office
of Surface Mining Reclamation and Enforcement's (OSMRE) AML program
found that OSMRE had made progress on implementation of its 2017
recommendations, more needs to be done to meet existing deadlines and
ensure greater performance of the program. Notably, OSMRE's July 2022
guidance did take a step in the right direction by outlining funding
priorities, stating that P1 and P2 projects directly related to coal
mining practices would be considered first. That said, OSMRE and states
must fight the urge to divert funding away from the high priority coal
inventory and ensure prioritization of P1 and P2 coal AML sites.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ DOI Office of Inspector General, March 2023
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Ten-Day Notices

In April, OSMRE proposed a rule \2\ to modify the way the agency
deals with Ten-Day Notices (TDN) under the Surface Mining Control and
Reclamation Act (SMCRA). SMCRA sets forth a deliberate regulatory
scheme in ``primacy states'' where operators are required to comply
with only state law and regulations, dealing with the state as its
regulatory authority. The proposed rule, as written, will significantly
increase the likelihood of surface mining operators becoming subject to
two--often conflicting--regulatory directives, of disrupting
operations, and of impairing their ability to meet contract terms for
supplying coal to customers by repealing recent clarifications that
OSMRE finalized \3\ in 2020.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ 88 Fed. Reg. 24,944 (April 25, 2023)
\3\ See 85 Fed. Reg. 75,150 (Nov. 24, 2020).

According to OSMRE, the agency began reconsidering the 2020 rule in
2021, and decided to conduct this rulemaking the same year. It is worth
noting that OSMRE did not even gain a full year of experience under the
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
2020 rule before deciding to propose a repeal and revision.

Further, OSMRE has failed to show that the 2020 rule resulted in
any material delays in considering possible violations or actual
burdens preventing citizens from engaging in the process for
identifying possible violations and alerting the state regulatory
authority and OSMRE. As such, there is no justification for the
proposed rulemaking and the proposed rule should be withdrawn.
Continued Funding

Importantly, the Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act (IIJA)
included \4\ nearly $11.3 billion for legacy abandoned coal mine
reclamation activities to be made available to eligible states and
tribes annually for 15 years. While this is significant in helping the
continued cleanup and reclamation of historic coal AMLs, funding
without strict adherence and prioritization of P1s and P2s sites under
the program is not a durable, long-term fix.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\ P.L. 117-58 Section 40701(f)

Since its inception in 1977, the coal AML program fee--paid
exclusively by coal producing companies--has been extended eight times,
most recently in the IIJA, through 2034. This means at its current
expiration, it will have been in existence for 57 years--decades past
its intended life span. This should provide the committee with a sense
of perspective and urgency to reform the administration of the program
to deliver the funding solely to its intended purpose.
Protecting Reliability and Revenues

Coal mining has been a national energy and economic success story.
In addition to providing a low cost, reliable source of energy for all
Americans and material for steel manufacturing, coal provides
substantial revenues to the federal, state and local governments
through royalties, bonus payments and rents. This is in addition to a
price per ton AML fee paid by coal companies for reclamation
activities.

Unfortunately, federal policy governing coal production--especially
on federal lands--has been whipsawed back and forth depending on who
controls the White House. The Biden administration has repeatedly
failed to grasp that, in addition to generating significant revenues,
coal production drives economic development, job creation and
retention, and provides electricity reliability and U.S.
competitiveness in building critical infrastructure. In addition, the
administration's continued pursuit of a suite of U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency regulations to force coal-fired power plant closures
and continuation of the Department of the Interior's moratorium on the
Federal Coal Leasing Program threatens our nation's energy security
negatively impacts our communities that depend on coal production, and
deprives funds for coal reclamation activities.
Conclusion

A robust domestic coal mining industry, supported by the right
federal policies, is essential to provide affordable and reliable
energy and to fund AML reclamation priorities. The NMA supports the
reclamation of AML sites but urges appropriate oversight of the fund to
ensure industry and taxpayer funds are used effectively and
efficiently, on the priority reclamation projects for which the funds
were intended. Only with such oversight can we avoid the historic
misuse of AML funding.

______

Mr. Stauber. I will start my 5 minutes of questioning.
Again, thanks to all the witnesses. We really appreciate you
being here.
Deputy Director Owens, Mr. Wendtland's testimony explained
that after several years and three rounds of NEPA review, your
office determined just last month that the mine plan amendment
for the Black Butte Mine could not be approved as written.
Instead, the entire process must be started over, this time as
an Environmental Impact Statement.
Before my question, Deputy Director Owens, how long have
you been with OSMRE?
Ms. Owens. Representative Stauber, I have been the Deputy
Director of the Office of Surface Mining Reclamation and
Enforcement since 2001.
Mr. Stauber. OK, so 22 years?
Ms. Owens. Yes.
Mr. Stauber. OK. Why did it take so many years and rounds
of review, and not to mention official correspondences,
including from the governor of the state, to get a response
from your agency on this single decision referencing the Black
Butte Mine?
Ms. Owens. Thank you for that question, Chairman Stauber.
As you know, making the mine plan decisions and rendering
those requires a NEPA review. Those NEPA reviews require many
technical reviews and analyses.
Mr. Stauber. Ms. Owens, with all due respect, three NEPA
reviews, 3 years. No correspondence for the last 6 months. I
find that unacceptable because if you were in the private
sector, you would be out of business not responding like that.
Mr. Wendtland, in your testimony, you discuss Black Butte
as an example to show that the OSMRE process has become
politicized and the NEPA process weaponized. Do you still feel
that is the case, or would you like to provide your perspective
on Ms. Owens' answer on the mine plan amendment?
Mr. Wendtland. Thank you for that question, Mr. Chairman,
and I would like to provide a perspective here.
First off, we have to go back, that the Bureau of Land
Management is the coal leasing agency. And in order to lease
coal, a BLM resource management plan goes through, discloses
the coal that is available. And then, when the coal is actually
leased, it conducts another NEPA review. And they are in charge
of leasing and selling the coal and getting it to the public.
OSMRE's review is about the mine plan. It is about the
impacts within the mine permit boundary. And OSMRE has expanded
that review now to go on into even questioning BLM's own NEPA
reviews between the agencies. And I believe that OSMRE and
their NEPA reviews need to be brought back to within their
lane. They are outside of their lane of review, and that is
what is adding time and stress to the system.
Mr. Stauber. Ms. Owens, many states have expressed concerns
about the so-called recommendations your agency created for
applications for the $11.3 billion in IIJA funding for AML
cleanup. These extra considerations have taken time away from
state regulators doing their job, and take resources away from
filling the hole in the ground. Why has your agency seen fit to
place new considerations on IIJA funding for AML cleanup, when
the program already has clearly defined goals and
considerations in statute, and in spite of the many concerns
expressed by impacted states?
Ms. Owens. Thank you, Chairman Stauber. As you know, the
$11.3 billion that the BIL provided to the abandoned mine land
program is a once-in-a-generation exponential increase of
resources to address the problems associated with Abandoned
Mine Land programs.
When the Bipartisan Infrastructure Law, BIL, was passed 2
years ago, one of the first things we did was to determine that
we would provide guidance to the states in terms of what new
requirements or what additional requirements would be
associated with their use and receipt of those funds. We could
have taken a regulatory route, and that would have been a
protracted action for us. It would have----
Mr. Stauber. Ms. Owens, just because my time is limited,
and I do appreciate your response, not that I agree with it,
but I want to ask Mr. McCament.
You have heard Ms. Owens' response now. In your experience
with OSMRE's treatment of the active coal mining program in
your state, does it seem to be a fair assessment? And I will
ask you, Mr. McCament, and then Mr. Morin and Mr. Wendtland for
quick answers to that.
Mr. McCament. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would say that our
state effectively implements the coal program according to the
SMCRA regulations, and we follow all the provisions of that
rule. And I would say that we are effective regulators in our
state.
Mr. Stauber. All right. Mr. Morin?
Mr. Morin. I think we could use increased collaboration
with the states and OSMRE, and not just in word only, but
actual meaningful collaboration where our input is heard and
then seen in the implementation guidance documents we are
provided.
Mr. Stauber. Mr. Wendtland?
Mr. Wendtland. Mr. Chairman, SMCRA says that the
requirements are as effective as, not as stringent as, and it
also confers very specific primacy rights to the states. And
because of that, the states are the principal regulator.
Wyoming has been that regulator for 43 years of the 47 years of
the program. We are very confident in Wyoming's regulatory
program, and OSMRE's role should be the oversight role that
SMCRA envisioned.
Mr. Stauber. And assisting in a positive way.
My time is up, and the next individual, Representative
Kamlager-Dove, you are up for 5 minutes.
Ms. Kamlager-Dove. Thank you, Mr. Chair, and thank you,
Ranking Member.
Ms. Owens, we have heard several complaints so far from the
other side of the aisle about how bureaucracy is holding up
getting money out to the states and tribes that Congress
authorized in the Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act.
I will remind my colleagues that cutting agency funding, as
proposed in their appropriation legislation, won't help. We are
talking about more than $11 billion of new Federal funding over
15 years. It is an enormous ramp-up of these mine cleanup
programs, and I expect it will take time. And I also believe
that we want to see it done right.
So, how are you assisting state programs in ramping up
their capacity?
And what would the Republican proposed cuts do to that
assistance?
Ms. Owens. Thank you for your question, Representative.
I am not aware of the cuts through the budget, but among
the things that we are doing to assist the states, we have
given them the Fiscal Year 2022 BIL grants, we got those out.
We have already begun to process and got seven Fiscal Year 2023
grants out.
We have improved our training programs. We have established
at least four new training programs that are focused on the new
requirements of the BIL requirements, as well as providing
training to new employees because both OSMRE and the states are
bringing in new employees so that we can administer and get
these grants out, and get the funds out, and get them out to
the states so they can actually begin to get those projects on
the ground and working.
We also are putting additional information into our AMLER
system, identifying and working with them on developing metrics
so that we indeed will be able to measure the success of this
program and do it responsibly. As you point out, this is so
much more funding than we have had, so we want to make sure
that it is maximized. We only have 15 years. This is not just a
program that is going to go on forever. And within the 15
years, we need to get it right. And our approach to this was
let's get it right from the beginning, which is why we took
time to get that bill guidance out in the first place. We
couldn't just put billions of dollars out there.
I mean, some of these states have 5, 10 times money under
the BIL grants than they have under their AML fee-based grants.
So, we wanted to provide some additional guidance for them to
make sure that it was going to be consistently applied across
the program, and that it would result in success and achieve
the goals that the BIL funds were provided in order to achieve.
Ms. Kamlager-Dove. Thank you.
And Mr. Morgan, I have some questions for you. I have
limited time, so hopefully we can get through them quickly.
You have been raising concerns about this bankruptcy and
abandonment issue for a while, so why didn't we see these
systemic bonding failures earlier?
And did coal companies know that their bonds would not hold
up?
Mr. Morgan. Thank you for the question, Representative. I
think the difficulty that your question alludes to is that
there is a significant disjunction between what we are seeing
on paper in terms of what regulators are reporting in terms of
the status of mines, and then the actual lived experience of
communities near these mines.
On paper, mines appear to be active. But in reality, in
many cases, they have been long abandoned, workers laid off,
equipment removed, left un-reclaimed. And that has prevented us
from getting an accurate assessment of the actual state of the
coal mining industry.
Ms. Kamlager-Dove. So, you referenced the problem of
functionally abandoned permits. What exactly do you mean by
that, and why is it a problem?
Mr. Morgan. These are those permits I was just describing,
where on paper they appear to be active coal mines but in
practice they have been abandoned and often left in an un-
reclaimed state.
And because regulators are aware that the sites are under-
bonded, the regulators are hesitant to take the sort of
enforcement actions that are required, because if they
recognize the reality that these are abandoned mines and they
revoked the permits and forfeited the bonds, there isn't the
money available to complete the reclamation, meaning either
taxpayers are responsible for those costs or the communities
are left living next to dangerous un-reclaimed mine sites.
Ms. Kamlager-Dove. Thank you. My time is up. I have
additional questions that I will refer to the Committee so that
we can get answers later on from you.
Thank you so much, and I yield back.
Mr. Westerman [presiding]. The Chair now recognizes the
gentleman from Wisconsin, Mr. Tiffany.
Mr. Tiffany. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Morgan, do you believe coal use should be ended in the
United States of America?
Mr. Morgan. I believe the market is speaking to that, and
coal is no longer cost competitive.
Mr. Tiffany. Do you view Boiler MACT, I am sure you are
familiar with that regulation from about a decade ago, do you
view that as a market force?
Mr. Morgan. I believe that there are a lot of headwinds
against the coal industry that, even if you removed one or two,
the overwhelming dynamic is going to be continued decline.
Mr. Tiffany. Is Boiler MACT a market force?
Mr. Morgan. I believe it is internalizing an externality
and having the industry bear the costs of its pollution. So,
yes.
Mr. Tiffany. I appreciate your answer. Boiler MACT is a
Federal regulation. Let me give you an example of its failure
of what you call market forces.
I have a mill in my district that installed a smokestack.
They had to put up a higher stack, and the company invested
north of $10 million in that. Do you know how much it reduced
in emissions?
Mr. Morgan. I do not.
Mr. Tiffany. None, zero. It didn't reduce emissions at all.
And this company had to spend $10 million of precious capital.
That is not a market force, I can guarantee you that much.
Mr. McCament, was the 10-day rule working for you guys in
Ohio?
Mr. McCament. Yes.
Mr. Tiffany. Mr. Morin, was it working in Alabama?
Mr. Morin. I am here solely for Title IV. I don't do the
regulatory side of things in my state.
Mr. Stauber. And Mr. Wendtland?
Mr. Wendtland. Absolutely, yes. The 2020 rule was a good
rule.
Mr. Tiffany. Ms. Owens, are you rewriting that rule, the
10-day rule?
Ms. Owens. Yes, Representative. We are rewriting the rule.
Mr. Tiffany. What is the deficiency? Why are you rewriting
that rule within your agency?
Ms. Owens. Well, when we reviewed the rule, there were
several aspects of it that we determined we wanted to revisit.
Among them were what we felt were unnecessary burdens that were
placed on citizens who wanted to either file a complaint, a
citizens complaint, which the SMCRA gives them the right to do,
and we wanted to make sure that they were having that
opportunity without undue burdens in doing that.
Mr. Tiffany. Thank you. Would you say your Bureau has
issues with bandwidth and staffing at times that causes delays?
I mean, we have heard some about that.
Ms. Owens. I am sorry, I didn't get the first part of your
question.
Mr. Tiffany. Does your Bureau have issues with staffing at
times, and just bandwidth to be able to get these processes
done that causes delays?
Ms. Owens. Well, yes, we do have staffing issues, as many
agencies do.
Mr. Tiffany. So, why would you pull this back from the
states? Why would you pull this back with the 10-day rule that
is working, as these gentlemen to your left have said, why
would you pull that back if you have staffing issues, if you
have delays that are happening as a result of, call it
bandwidth or staffing delays?
Ms. Owens. Thank you for your question, Representative.
We have resources that review our regulations. And one of
the things that we did at the beginning of this Administration
was to review regulations to determine if there were aspects of
those regs that required our taking another look at them, and
that is exactly what happened with the 10-day notice rule.
So, we do have adequate staff to look at that rule, and we
have now proposed some amendments to the----
Mr. Tiffany. Mr. McCament, do you expect the emissions in
your state to be reduced by the Federal Government taking
additional authority away from you by amending or changing the
10-day notice rule?
Mr. McCament. No, we do not. I think we would expect that
we would spend more time and less cooperation with OSMRE in
investigating legitimate complaints with the reversal in the
rule.
Mr. Tiffany. As a result of delays, we actually could see
more emissions by projects not getting done. Would that be
correct?
Mr. McCament. Yes, spending more time in responding to
complaints that we have already responded to previously or have
data or information on. So, yes, it could cause further delays.
Mr. Tiffany. Ms. Owens, have you been instructed to stop or
slow roll applications for coal projects?
Ms. Owens. No, sir, I have not.
Mr. Tiffany. Have you had anyone from the White House
contact you and send a clear message that they want coal
stopped?
Ms. Owens. Absolutely not.
Mr. Tiffany. Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Westerman. The gentleman yields back. The Chair
recognizes the Ranking Member, Ms. Ocasio-Cortez, for 5
minutes.
Ms. Ocasio-Cortez. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Coal mining has, and much of the abandonment of these
mines, has left a toxic legacy of contaminated soil, polluted
waters, and public health disasters across the country. And
while I am proud of the more than $11 billion passed in the
Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act to help states and
tribes clean up abandoned coal mines, I do think it is
important to reiterate that these are not costs that the
American public should have to pay.
This is a responsibility of mines and private companies
that inflict this damage, and it is yet another example of the
ways in which these large companies often privatize benefits
and profits, and socialize the costs and harm. And for the
public to have to pick up the tab on this demonstrates the
failure for us to properly assign and enforce that
responsibility, that financial responsibility, where it
belongs.
The mines we are cleaning up with the IIJA funds were
abandoned before SMCRA was enacted, the law to insure coal
companies clean up after themselves. Mr. Morgan, in just a
couple of sentences, to make sure that we can refresh the folks
that are following along at home, what is SMCRA in the most
simple terms possible, and how does it apply differently to
mines that were abandoned before and after it was enacted?
Mr. Morgan. Thank you, Ranking Member.
SMCRA was passed by Congress in 1977 to address the then-
present crisis of thousands of abandoned mines across the
country, and it sought to address that in two ways. One was
through creating Title IV, which is a fund used to clean up the
existing inventory of abandoned mine lands present at that
time. But Congress also wanted to avoid a recurrence of those
abandoned mines, so SMCRA also includes Title V, which
primarily consists of two components. One is a reclamation
requirement that companies conduct reclamation
contemporaneously with coal removal, and then the second part
is a bonding requirement which ensures that, if a company does
go out of business, there are adequate funds to the regulator
to complete the mine cleanup.
Ms. Ocasio-Cortez. Thank you, Mr. Morgan. Yet, as we heard
earlier in your testimony today, many modern coal mines are
going un-reclaimed. And right now, we are at risk of yet
another wave of abandoned mines, another wave of destroyed
land, another wave of environmental and health outcomes.
Mr. Morgan, if SMCRA was meant to ensure that modern
reclamation would be fully paid for by the industry, these are
the folks that are supposed to be paying for it, then how did
we get to this point of these abandoned modern mines?
And how are companies actually evading their health care,
pension, and reclamation responsibilities?
Mr. Morgan. There are three primary problems with the
implementation of SMCRA that is leading to these problems.
First, the contemporaneous reclamation requirements are not
being enforced, which allows mine operators to accumulate
significant acreages of disturbed land. And then, when those
companies run into financial difficulties, that increases the
reclamation burden passed on to taxpayers.
The second part is when regulators set bond amounts they
fail to require adequate bonding. So, in the recent bankruptcy
of Blackjewel, the Kentucky regulator in the bankruptcy
proceedings filed documents saying that they looked at 20
percent of the company's permits, so that was 33 permits, and
they found a reclamation bonding shortfall on those 33 permits
of $28 million.
And then the third problem is the form of bonds that are
provided are ones that do not ensure that the money will be
there. So, many of the eastern states rely on bond pools, which
don't have adequate funding and are at great risk of being
overwhelmed by the bankruptcy of even a single operator. Even
surety bonds, which are supposed to be the most secure, run
into difficulties because a very small number of surety bond
providers have issued the overwhelming number of those bonds,
meaning that if they fail, which they could do if even one big
mine operator goes out of business, it would wipe out that
surety and all of the bonds they have provided.
Ms. Ocasio-Cortez. Great, thank you very much, and I yield
back to the Chair.
Mr. Westerman. The gentlelady yields back. The Chair
recognizes the gentlelady from Wyoming, Ms. Hageman, for 5
minutes.
Ms. Hageman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and a special thanks
to each of the witnesses for being here today.
It is no secret that over the past few years we have
experienced substantial delays, unclear, and oftentimes
conflicting guidance and overbearing requirements for coal
mining states and communities because of this Administration's
war on fossil fuels.
While the BLM has promulgated rule after rule to make it
more difficult for energy-producing states to produce
affordable, reliable energy such as coal, the Office of Surface
Mining Reclamation and Enforcement has now decided to
prioritize the cleanup of abandoned mine lands based off of
certain socioeconomic factors. These new priorities ultimately
make it more difficult for coal communities in my home state to
secure Federal funding. Many coal communities are not deemed as
so-called environmental justice communities, whatever that
means, according to CEQ, and will therefore struggle to meet
the outlined requirements when it comes to recovering lands
impacted by abandoned mines.
Ms. Owens, why is the OSMRE making it more difficult for
communities in my home state of Wyoming to secure funding for
AML remediation?
Ms. Owens. Thank you for the question, Representative
Hageman.
I don't believe that the Office of Surface Mining is making
it more difficult for your state to receive funding.
Ms. Hageman. Well, but you are doing the funding based upon
these certain environmental justice requirements that have
essentially excluded the state of Wyoming. Are you aware of
that?
Ms. Owens. I am aware of the requirements.
I also would like to point out that those, along with
several other of the provisions that are contained in our bill
guidance, we are encouraging states to take certain actions----
Ms. Hageman. Environmental justice requirements?
Ms. Owens. Yes.
Ms. Hageman. OK.
Ms. Owens. We are encouraging them to do so.
Ms. Hageman. OK. During the previous administration, OSMRE
partnered with BLM and other sister agencies to perform dual
NEPA analysis, share data, and better improve the process of
getting Federal coal permits out the door, which should
actually be the mission of your agency. But since 2021, this
effort we are told, is stalled, and what began as an attempt to
speed up permitting is now the complete opposite.
State agencies and operators alike have communicated to me
that OSMRE is now just a roadblock that single handedly delays
coal mining and thwarts the permitting process. What is OSMRE
doing to become more than just a regulatory roadblock for the
coal industry?
Ms. Owens. Thank you for your question, Representative.
What we are doing is we are implementing the requirements
of NEPA, which is a requirement for all Federal----
Ms. Hageman. NEPA, as amended? NEPA, as amended earlier
this year?
Ms. Owens. NEPA, whatever the law is on the books at the
time that we take our actions, we implement the law on the
books.
Ms. Hageman. OK, but the NEPA was amended earlier this
year. It is on the books now.
Ms. Owens. Yes.
Ms. Hageman. So, are you taking the changes in NEPA, the
amendments to NEPA into consideration when reviewing these
permits?
Ms. Owens. If they have been promulgated, those regulations
have been promulgated, yes, we are.
Ms. Hageman. Well, the statute has been promulgated.
Ms. Owens. Yes.
Ms. Hageman. The amendments have gone into effect. Are you
not aware of that?
Ms. Owens. Yes, ma'am, I am.
Ms. Hageman. OK.
Ms. Owens. And we are implementing NEPA law and regulations
and guidance.
Ms. Hageman. As it exists now?
Ms. Owens. Yes.
Ms. Hageman. Program amendments are absolutely vital to the
states, and often are a result of state legislators passing
bills to help their state coal programs. OSMRE, however, has
failed to process these permits in a timely manner, resulting
in a backlog of state program amendments that go all the way
back to 2006.
Why doesn't OSMRE work through state program amendments in
a timely manner?
Ms. Owens. Well, as you may be aware, Representative, the
state program amendments often involve technical reviews. We
have to consult with technical, legal reviews, analyses. We
consult with any other Federal agency----
Ms. Hageman. So, are you saying it takes up to a decade to
process these programs?
Ms. Owens. Well, I think you may be talking about a rare
situation. I am not aware of any state program amendment that
has not been processed since 2006.
Ms. Hageman. OK, but that has been the circumstance that we
have experienced. So, I would request that we expedite those
programs so that they can go forward.
Ms. Owens. Well, I thank you for that suggestion. But as a
matter of fact, I have directed the staff to take a look at
ways that we could expedite the review of state program
amendments, and also to identify processes that would help us
streamline, and also address the backlog. We are very much
aware of that, and we are taking actions so that we can address
it.
Ms. Hageman. OK, I appreciate that.
I am out of time, so I yield back.
Mr. Westerman. The gentlelady yields back. The Chair
recognizes the gentleman from Montana, Mr. Rosendale, for 5
minutes.
Mr. Rosendale. Thank you very much, Mr. Chair and Ranking
Member Ocasio-Cortez, for holding this hearing today.
Montana is home to 3 of the top 20 most productive coal
mines in America. So, this issue is critical to my
constituents. Furthermore, Montana boasts the largest estimated
recoverable coal reserves nationwide, constituting
approximately 30 percent of the total U.S. reserves. Despite
these significant reserves, Montana has experienced a steady
decline in coal production since the Obama administration, with
a drop of nearly 900,000 tons in the past year alone.
Now, while my colleagues across the aisle would like to
attribute this to a lack of demand, we just know that that is
not the case. The case is that this supply, this production,
has been reduced simply because of the radical
environmentalists' ability to keep us from mining those very
critical energy reserves. Mining stands as the lifeblood of
Montana, woven into the fabric of our state's culture and
tradition. Regrettably, this industry has been under consistent
scrutiny from the Biden administration and the climate
activists.
The three mines that are located that I mentioned face
constant delays by the Biden administration in completing
environmental impact studies, which are essential for
initiating new mining projects. The Spring Creek Mine is
anticipated to deplete permitted coal in May 2024, with an
expected EIS completion date of November 2024. The Bull
Mountain Mine is projected to exhaust permitted coal in
September 2024, with an expected EIS completion date of June
2025. The Rosebud Mine in Colstrip, Montana is set to deplete
permitted coal in April 2024, with an expected EIS completion
date of March 2025. Notice the pattern here. The EIS dates are
projected to be beyond the date when they are going to deplete
their coal reserves that they have available to them at this
moment.
Yet, there are incredible coal deposits there that are
still available to be mined. Each of these mines individually
provides crucial jobs and energy to my constituents and to the
rest of America. The potential loss of all three would be
disastrous for Montana, leading to energy insecurity and
leaving many residents unemployed with no immediate prospects.
This goes to show how urgently our country needs permitting
reform.
Despite being one of the few issues that has bipartisan
support, the Biden administration has exhibited extreme
hesitation in pursuing the NEPA reforms. These reforms are not
only necessary, but need to be implemented promptly to ensure
our nation can efficiently utilize its natural energy
resources, maintaining energy independence amidst a volatile
global landscape. It is unacceptable that, in less than a year,
these mines may no longer produce permitted coal, forcing
Montanans to rely on foreign adversaries to meet their energy
needs.
This process must be streamlined urgently, or our states
and our nation's energy security will face peril. I hope the
testimony and questioning today will shed light on these
critical issues, fostering bipartisan solutions that will
secure and maintain our country's independence and the energy
sector for the coming decades.
Ms. Owens, could you elaborate on the reasons behind the
continued delay in issuing the EIS reports for these mining
projects?
Ms. Owens. Thank you for your question, Representative.
The requirement for the review of the mine plans that you
mentioned require us to apply NEPA, it is a requirement.
Recently, we have had ongoing court decisions that have had a
direct impact and bearing on our NEPA review of these various
mine plans. And, in fact, as a result of these court decisions,
we have had to reassess and make changes in our NEPA review,
based on the legal requirements. We have to make sure that we
adhere to those decisions.
We want to make sure that, when we render a decision, that
it will pass judicial----
Mr. Rosendale. OK, so I didn't hear the reasons, Ms. Owens,
and I hate to cut you off, but I have a very limited amount of
time here. I need reasons, OK? And what I have seen typically
in the past is somebody didn't cross a T or dot an I properly,
and you use the system in order to delay the ability to approve
this.
Ms. Owens. To the contrary----
Mr. Rosendale. Mr. Chair, I see that my time has expired. I
am going to have to yield back.
Mr. Stauber [presiding]. Thank you very much.
The gentleman from Georgia, Mr. Collins, you are up for 5
minutes.
Mr. Collins. Thank you, Mr. Chair and Ranking Member, for
having this meeting.
Folks, as someone who doesn't have a coal mine but uses
coal, I guess you could say I am a consumer in Georgia. About
20 miles from my house is Plant Scherer, which has four units
that produce electricity using coal. And out of the four units,
one is shut down. And in a recent visit while I was there, I
asked them why.
And it just so happens that, just as a side note, this was
the most profitable way of producing electricity for this other
state that was selling it to their consumers. But they shut it
down due to a backlash, or being forced to, which really didn't
make any sense when they were sitting there showing us the
stacks and how clean the air that comes out of these stacks are
now, and how clean the coal is being burned.
So, it makes me wonder exactly what is the problem here,
and what is going on. And I kind of want to bounce off of what
my colleague, Mr. Rosendale, was talking about. He is talking
about active mines, and I want to look at active mines and some
of the abandoned mines, as well. All that to be said, I have
just a few questions real quick.
Mr. Morin, is that how you pronounce your name?
Mr. Morin. Yes, sir, that is fine.
Mr. Collins. All right. Well, you are an Alabama boy, but
you have a different name. You know, we have short names in----
Mr. Morin. Yes, Morin will be fine.
Mr. Collins. Morin, OK. To your knowledge, does anyone in
the Office of Surface Management policymaking group in its
headquarters office, do they have any experience in operating
an Abandoned Mines Land management program?
Mr. Morin. Not to my knowledge, no, sir.
Mr. Collins. And what effect may that lack of technical
expertise have?
Mr. Morin. It shows in their guidance and their
implementation policies, which is why I requested not only
collaboration in word, but meaningful collaboration with state
program managers. We do possess unique knowledge of what it
takes to get these projects on the ground and operational,
reclamation projects, so I feel like they deprive themselves by
not listening to our input and incorporating it into their
guidance.
Mr. Collins. Thank you, I appreciate that.
Ms. Owens, I have heard that the substantial increase in
the Abandoned Mine Land funding from the IIJA that was
mentioned earlier is causing some states to divert their
limited state resources from the active mining programs to
their AML programs. This is being done, I think, in an attempt
to make the most of those valuable AML grants. And I think this
is where Mr. Rosendale and I were kind of, I was listening for
his answer.
So, what is the Office of Surface Mining Reclamation and
Enforcement doing to ensure that active mining programs don't
suffer because of the rush to spend that money on those AML
programs?
Ms. Owens. Thank you for that question, Representative.
If the states are organized as the Federal program, there
are two programs: Title IV, which is the AML; and Title V,
which is the active mining. We have staff, each of those
programs has staff that are familiar with and operate those
programs.
I am not aware that states would be pulling their Title V
staff to do the Title IV, particularly since with this BIL
money, one of the first things that we at OSMRE did was to
identify the positions that we would need to effectively
implement the BIL program, and get those grants out to the
states so that they would have resources, they would be able to
bring on additional staff and resources.
And I know it has been a challenge. It has been a challenge
at the Federal level, it has been a challenge at the state
level because we are all looking for the same staffing and
resources----
Mr. Collins. So, you would agree that they are diverting
staff to go after the Abandoned Mine----
Ms. Owens. I am not aware that they would be diverting the
Title V----
Mr. Collins. But you are aware that these active mines are
having problems. I mean, Mr. Rosendale just alluded to that.
Ms. Owens. I am sorry, that they----
Mr. Collins. That the active mines are having a problem
getting their projects either reapproved or approved.
Ms. Owens. Well, we----
Mr. Collins. And would you not agree that the people are
using their staff to go after the IIJA money instead of helping
these active mines?
Ms. Owens. I am not aware of that fact, sir.
Mr. Collins. Even though Mr. Rosendale just gave you a
prime example of coal mines in his district?
Ms. Owens. He asked me if that were happening. It is not
happening in our Federal program.
Mr. Collins. And he provided an example. All right. Is it
true that the backlog of pending state plan amendments include
some revisions that are going all the way back to 2009?
Ms. Owens. I am aware of one situation in which that is the
case.
Mr. Collins. So, you wouldn't say there is a backlog?
Ms. Owens. I did say there is a backlog. In fact, as we
speak, the staff is looking at ways to improve our procedures
so that we can streamline that process so that we can get rid
of that backlog.
Mr. Collins. All right. Thank you.
I am sorry, I went over. I yield back. Sorry about that.
Mr. Stauber. Thank you very much. The next one up is the
Chair of the Full Committee.
Mr. Westerman, you are up for 5 minutes.
Mr. Westerman. Thank you, Mr. Stauber, and thank you to the
witnesses.
Mr. Morin, you have testified that OSMRE's collaboration
with states and tribes is just in name only. Has it always been
that way?
Mr. Morgan. Thank you for the question, Representative----
Mr. Westerman. I said Morin, not Morgan.
Mr. Morgan. I am sorry.
Mr. Morin. No, it hasn't always been that way, but we did
identify and meet with our counterparts at OSMRE in January of
this year, over the last several years there has been a
deterioration in the relationship, and a lot of that
deterioration you can trace back to states trying to provide
input into ways to shape the implementation of this program and
the AMLER program more efficiently, and that input seems to go
by the wayside when we get the official guidance release from
OSMRE.
Mr. Westerman. So, what recommendations would you have to
improve the working relationship between OSMRE?
Mr. Morin. We are trying work groups, and I think we have
had some success with some of the state OSMRE work groups. But
continuing that discussion and getting states involved earlier
in the process, oftentimes when we get a guidance or some new
information from OSMRE, it is released to us at the same time
that it is released to the public. There have been times where
non-governmental organizations identify the release of a new
guidance document before it has been sent directly to the
states. So, giving states----
Mr. Westerman. So, somebody is working in collaboration
with the NGOs is what----
Mr. Morin. They seem to peruse the website more frequently
than somebody who is managing a state program, so we think some
of them learn about it that way.
Mr. Westerman. Yes, we think some of them may actually be
running the programs in the Federal agencies.
Mr. McCament, your testimony mentions that Ohio has six
state program amendments that are still pending approval dating
back to 2015. Mr. Morin and Mr. Wendtland said there are 55
total plan revisions waiting in DC. What have you heard from
OSMRE about why these approvals are taking so long?
And what is the consequence of not allowing these state
programs' changes to occur?
Mr. McCament. Sure, thank you for that question.
The impact to us of not having those approved is that, if
we have a new program amendment that we need to issue, then it
just adds to that backlog, right? And these changes need to be
made by state laws and state rules to make sure that we are
meeting the intent of SMCRA, so there needs to be a process
that those move quickly and are approved and in an engagement
process. And most of those, as we get annual updates on those,
are just in some review step.
Mr. Westerman. And Mr. Wendtland, I know that you would
think reclaiming abandoned mines would be a bipartisan issue,
and speaking of delayed state program amendments, you provided
an example in your testimony of how the state of Wyoming was
trying to allow retired wind turbines to be used to backfill
mine land sites, and you did this back in 2020, but the program
amendment has been under review at OSMRE for 843 days.
I was out in the state of Washington a year or so ago in
the DOE laboratory there. They said that a fact that a lot of
people don't realize about windmills is that 25 years from now
there is not a single windmill in operation that will be in
operation. So, there is going to be a huge need for places to
landfill all these windmill blades.
Has OSMRE given you any explanation of what is taking so
long?
Mr. Wendtland. Mr. Chairman, Representative Westerman, no,
they have not. We have been sitting and waiting.
And this is a good win for everybody. The coal industry,
the wind industry all supported the state initiative here. And
it also provides a revenue stream at mine closure which
accelerates reclamation. So, we just cannot see what the holdup
with this program amendment is.
Mr. Westerman. Ms. Owen, would you like to answer that
question? What is the hold-up?
Ms. Owens. Thank you for your question.
Actually, the issue of the placement of those blades is one
of the aspects of that proposal that requires legal review. And
we have been and continue to make sure that we get this right
because if SMCRA doesn't allow those wind blades to be placed
on those sites, we cannot approve it. So, we are making sure
that our approval of or review of this----
Mr. Westerman. I am sure that clarified it for everybody.
In my last few seconds here, I am doing a little tally of
agencies that are following the law and breaking the law. And
Ms. Hageman mentioned this. I know you have talked about going
through the NEPA process. You can either just say we are
breaking the law, or you can tell me how you are implementing
the FRA limits on NEPA of either 1 year for an EA or 2 years
for an EIS. The floor is yours.
Ms. Owens. Well, I wouldn't say we are breaking the law.
Mr. Westerman. Are you implementing the law?
Ms. Owens. NEPA? Yes we are implementing----
Mr. Westerman. Are you implementing the 1-year and 2-year
requirements that were passed bipartisan in the House,
bipartisan in the Senate, and signed by President Biden?
Ms. Owens. We are assessing our timetables----
Mr. Westerman. Not are you assessing. Are you following the
law?
Ms. Owens. We are attempting to follow the law----
Mr. Westerman. Not attempting to follow the law. Are you
following the law?
Ms. Owens. We are doing our best to come within the
timelines that have been established in the law.
Mr. Westerman. Well, can you provide the Committee with a
timeline of specific projects that you will have completed by
the 1-year time frame and the 2-year time frame?
Ms. Owens. Can I provide you with a list?
Mr. Westerman. Yes.
Ms. Owens. I can provide you with a list.
Mr. Westerman. With specifically projects, when they will
be completed in 1 year if they are an EA, or in 2 years,
maximum, if they are an EIS.
Ms. Owens. I understood your question, and I will----
Mr. Westerman. When will you have that list?
Ms. Owens. I will have to go back and see when we can make
it available.
Mr. Westerman. Let's do it in about 2 weeks.
I yield back.
Mr. Stauber. Thank you very much, Chairman Westerman. I
think that your questioning is very relevant, because they are
not following the law.
When Congress writes legislation and it becomes a law, it
is not a recommendation or a feeling to follow the law. You
must follow the law. EA: shot clock 1 year. EIS: shot clock 2
years. That is the bipartisan piece of legislation that was
signed into law by the President, and it is simply unacceptable
that agencies within our Federal Government are not even
following the laws that we wrote and that they must follow. So,
it is unacceptable.
I thank the witnesses for their valuable testimony and the
Members for their questions.
The members of the Subcommittee may have some additional
questions for the witnesses, and we will ask you to respond to
these in writing. Under Committee Rule 3, members of the
Committee must submit questions to the Committee Clerk by 5
p.m. on Friday, November 17. The hearing record will be held
open for 10 business days for these responses.
If there is no further business, without objection, the
Committee stands adjourned.

[Whereupon, at 12:11 p.m., the Subcommittee was adjourned.]
