- OVERSIGHT HEARING ON EXAMINING THE PRESIDENT'S FISCAL YEAR 2024 BUDGET REQUEST FOR THE U.S. FOREST SERVICE

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

EXAMINING THE PRESIDENT'S FISCAL
YEAR 2024 BUDGET REQUEST.
FOR THE U.S. FOREST SERVICE

=======================================================================

OVERSIGHT HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON FEDERAL LANDS

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON NATURAL RESOURCES
U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

Wednesday, April 26, 2023

__________

Serial No. 118-20

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Natural Resources

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.govinfo.gov
or
Committee address: http://naturalresources.house.gov

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
52-160 PDF                 WASHINGTON : 2023

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

COMMITTEE ON NATURAL RESOURCES

BRUCE WESTERMAN, AR, Chairman
DOUG LAMBORN, CO, Vice Chairman
RAUL M. GRIJALVA, AZ, Ranking Member

Doug Lamborn, CO Grace F. Napolitano, CA
Robert J. Wittman, VA Gregorio Kilili Camacho Sablan,
Tom McClintock, CA     CNMI
Paul Gosar, AZ Jared Huffman, CA
Garret Graves, LA Ruben Gallego, AZ
Aumua Amata C. Radewagen, AS Joe Neguse, CO
Doug LaMalfa, CA Mike Levin, CA
Daniel Webster, FL Katie Porter, CA
Jenniffer Gonzalez-Colon, PR Teresa Leger Fernandez, NM
Russ Fulcher, ID Melanie A. Stansbury, NM
Pete Stauber, MN Mary Sattler Peltola, AK
John R. Curtis, UT Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez, NY
Tom Tiffany, WI Kevin Mullin, CA
Jerry Carl, AL Val T. Hoyle, OR
Matt Rosendale, MT Sydney Kamlager-Dove, CA
Lauren Boebert, CO Seth Magaziner, RI
Cliff Bentz, OR Nydia M. Velazquez, NY
Jen Kiggans, VA Ed Case, HI
Jim Moylan, GU Debbie Dingell, MI
Wesley P. Hunt, TX Susie Lee, NV
Mike Collins, GA
Anna Paulina Luna, FL
John Duarte, CA
Harriet M. Hageman, WY

Vivian Moeglein, Staff Director
Tom Connally, Chief Counsel
Lora Snyder, Democratic Staff Director
http://naturalresources.house.gov
------

SUBCOMMITTEE ON FEDERAL LANDS

TOM TIFFANY, WI, Chairman
JOHN R. CURTIS, UT, Vice Chair
JOE NEGUSE, CO, Ranking Member

Doug Lamborn, CO                     Katie Porter, CA
Tom McClintock, CA                   Sydney Kamlager-Dove, CA
Russ Fulcher, ID                     Gregorio Kilili Camacho Sablan,
Pete Stauber, MN                         CNMI
John R. Curtis, UT                   Mike Levin, CA
Cliff Bentz, OR                      Teresa Leger Fernandez, NM
Jen Kiggans, VA                      Mary Sattler Peltola, AK
Jim Moylan, GU                       Raul M. Grijalva, AZ, ex officio
Bruce Westerman, AR, ex officio

-----------

CONTENTS

----------
Page

Hearing held on Wednesday, April 26, 2023........................     1

Statement of Members:

Tiffany, Hon. Tom, a Representative in Congress from the
State of Wisconsin.........................................     1
Neguse, Hon. Joe, a Representative in Congress from the State
of Colorado................................................     4

Statement of Witnesses:

Moore, Randy, Chief, National Forest Systems, U.S. Forest
Service, Washington, DC....................................     6
Prepared statement of....................................     8
Questions submitted for the record.......................    11

Additional Materials Submitted for the Record:

Submissions for the Record by Representative Westerman

MIT Report...............................................    22

Submissions for the Record by Representative Tiffany

CRS Chart................................................     4

Submissions for the Record by Representative Lamborn

NEPA Language............................................    28

Submissions for the Record by Representative Bentz

NFFE News Release........................................    36
Forest Service Message by Chief Moore....................    37

OVERSIGHT HEARING ON EXAMINING THE PRESIDENT'S FISCAL YEAR 2024 BUDGET
REQUEST FOR THE U.S. FOREST SERVICE

----------

Wednesday, April 26, 2023

U.S. House of Representatives

Subcommittee on Federal Lands

Committee on Natural Resources

Washington, DC

----------

The Subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:15 a.m. in
Room 1324, Longworth House Office Building, Hon. Tom Tiffany
[Chairman of the Subcommittee] presiding.

Present: Representatives Tiffany, Lamborn, Fulcher,
Stauber, Curtis, Bentz, Moylan, Westerman; Neguse, Kamlager-
Dove, Levin, and Leger Fernandez.
Also present: Representatives Boebert, Gosar, Hageman,
LaMalfa, and Rosendale.

Mr. Tiffany. The Subcommittee on Federal Lands will come to
order.
Without objection, the Chair is authorized to declare a
recess of the Subcommittee at any time.
The Subcommittee is meeting today to hear testimony on the
President's Fiscal Year 2024 budget request for the U.S. Forest
Service.
I ask unanimous consent that the gentleman from Arizona,
Mr. Gosar; the gentleman from California, Mr. LaMalfa; the
gentlewoman from Colorado, Mrs. Boebert; the gentleman from
Montana, Mr. Rosendale; and the gentlewoman from Wyoming, Ms.
Hageman, be allowed to participate in today's hearing.
Without objection, so ordered.
Under Committee Rule 4(f), any oral opening statements at
hearings are limited to the Chairman and the Ranking Minority
Member. I therefore ask unanimous consent that all other
Members' opening statements be made part of the hearing record
if they are submitted in accordance with Committee Rule 3(o).
Without objection, so ordered.
I will now recognize myself for an opening statement.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. TOM TIFFANY, A REPRESENTATIVE IN CONGRESS
FROM THE STATE OF WISCONSIN

Mr. Tiffany. The focus of our hearing today is on the
budget priorities of the Forest Service for Fiscal Year 2024.
This is a continuation of the important work this Committee has
conducted this month as we review the budget requests of
Federal agencies under our purview.
Despite the catastrophic wildfire crisis affecting the
West, including the districts of many members on this dais,
Committee Democrats did not hold a single oversight hearing of
the Forest Service's budget last Congress.
We are pleased to have before us today the Chief of the
Forest Service, Randy Moore, who is appearing before our
Committee for this first time since he assumed this important
role almost 2 years ago.
Chief Moore, your appearance before this Committee is long
overdue. But with Republicans in the Majority, I can assure you
there will be many more invitations coming your way as we look
to work with you to confront the myriad of challenges facing
our nation's forests.
As we begin our discussion today, I think it is important
to dispel some of the rhetoric leveled against Republican
budget proposals that seek to restore some fiscal sanity to our
Federal spending. Democrats on this Committee have inaccurately
alleged Republican proposals seek to decrease wildland fire
management funding. This could not be further from the truth.
Republicans have proposed securing funding at Fiscal Year
2022 spending levels. This is important because Fiscal Year
2022 wildfire funding for the Forest Service is actually $247
million higher than this Fiscal Year. When you include the
Department of the Interior, Republicans would be giving the
agencies an increase of more than $340 million, compared to
Democrats' Fiscal Year 2023 levels.
Further, the Limit, Save, Grow Act, which we will be
debating this week on the House Floor, would extend the fire
suppression cap adjustment past its current expiration date in
2027. This will ensure certainty for the agencies so they will
not have to resort to fire borrowing.
And let's not forget who set our current funding levels:
Congressional Democrats and the Biden administration. That is
right. Congressional Democrats cut wildfire appropriations this
year by over $340 million. So, when you hear a lot of talk
today about draconian 22 percent cuts and the devastating
effects they will have, perhaps you will ask yourself why
Congressional Democrats cut hazardous fuels appropriations for
the Forest Service by 33 percent this year.
This unfounded criticism does, however, highlight the
flawed logic of assuming we can continue to throw money at this
problem without meaningful regulatory reforms and expect any
difference in our catastrophic wildfire crisis.
The Forest Service's Fiscal Year 2024 budget is requesting
$9.7 billion, a nearly 18 percent increase over Fiscal Year
2023 enacted levels. The agency also received over $10 billion
through the IIJA and Inflation Reduction Act. Yet, the Forest
Service budget is only proposing an additional 400,000 acres
treated this year, a mere 10 percent increase. We have
repeatedly heard from the Forest Service there needs to be a
paradigm shift, and the agency must double or quadruple the
amount of acres it treats. A 10 percent increase in response to
the deluge of funding this agency has received is not the
paradigm shift the West needs.

These results are hardly a surprise. No amount of money is
going to overcome the fact that right now it takes an average
of 3.6 years to even begin a mechanical treatment on our
national forests, due to burdensome NEPA regulations.
Prescribed burns are even worse, taking an average of 4.7 years
to complete NEPA. Democrats have stayed in lockstep with
extreme environmentalist groups, and refused to offer any
substantive reforms to improve the management of our national
forests.

For the small reforms we are able to give the Forest
Service, such as emergency authorities or categorical
exclusions for fuel breaks, they are not being utilized by the
agency at the pace and scale needed. Committee Republicans
stand ready to fulfill our responsibility to the American
people, and usher in a new phase of accountability and
transparency for the Forest Service as we pursue innovative
solutions to reverse the tide against this historic crisis.

Today's hearing is an important step on this front, and I
look forward to discussing the agency's plans to actively
manage our forests, suppress wildfires promptly and carefully,
pay wildland firefighters in a fiscally responsible manner, and
increase timber production.

I want to once again thank Chief Moore for being here
today.

We look forward to hearing your testimony.

Before I recognize Ranking Member Neguse for his opening
statement, I would like to ask unanimous consent to enter into
the record a table from the non-partisan Congressional Research
Service showing Congressional Democrats and the Biden
administration had the following budget cuts this year: $93.3
million decrease for Department of the Interior wildfire
appropriations; $247.2 million decrease for Forest Service
wildfire appropriations, including a $155.4 million decrease
for hazardous fuels reduction; $340.6 million decrease for
overall Forest Service and Interior wildfire spending.

Without objection, so entered.

[The information follows:]

CRS TABLE
[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Tiffany. I will now recognize the Ranking Member, Mr.
Neguse, for his opening statement.
I know you are perhaps a bit tired this morning, but thank
you for your work on Rules last night.

Mr. Neguse. Well, I thank you, Mr. Chairman. I enjoyed
participating in Rules yesterday until about 3 in the morning,
but I am also glad to be here in this Committee today.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. JOE NEGUSE, A REPRESENTATIVE IN CONGRESS
FROM THE STATE OF COLORADO

Mr. Neguse. Chief Moore, it is good to see you again. I
really enjoyed working with you when I was Chairman of this
Subcommittee, and welcoming you to Colorado on numerous
occasions. It is good to see you back here in person in
Washington.
I have some remarks, and I had intended to, and I still
will, compliment you on the work that you have done and, I
think, the hard work that folks in the Forest Service are doing
each and every day on behalf of the American people. But you
have come to this Committee at an interesting time, as you
might have gathered from my friend, the Chairman's, opening
remarks. And this has little to do with the Forest Service, and
everything, unfortunately, to do with the politics of
Washington, DC. I am surprised because some of the same
arguments that I heard in Rules last night are the same
arguments I am hearing this morning.
Republicans put forward a budget, and they bragged about
how this budget is cutting spending, aggressively cutting
spending. They are proud of that. The moment, the moment, there
begins to be an outcry from the public about a variety of the
different draconian cuts that this budget imposes, they
disclaim that their budget does anything of the sort. It is
amazing to me. I was dumbfounded by it last night in Rules, and
I am as incredulous this morning as I guess I was yesterday
when this happened, because they will put forward a budget that
cuts the Forest Service, and then tell you that it doesn't.
And I am eager to hear from you, Chief Moore, about the
ways in which their budget proposal, this default on America
bill that they have proposed, would impact the Forest Service.
We don't have to debate about opinions about the legislation.
We have the language.
We will hear from the Chief as to how that language, if
enacted, which it won't be. This bill, it is dead on arrival in
the House, certainly dead on arrival in the Senate, it won't be
signed by the President. But in any event, as an esoteric
matter, we will hear from the Chief about the ways in which
their proposal will impact the Forest Service. I am confident
that it will not be along the lines that our Chairman
described.
I also will say I find it rather rich that the same
individuals who voted against the $1.6 billion investment in
fuel reduction, $1.6 billion in the Bipartisan Infrastructure
Law that Mitch McConnell and a half dozen Republican Senators
voted for, and that I believe not a single Member, maybe 1 or
2, of my colleagues on the other side of the aisle in this
Committee voted for, these same Members now have the audacity
to question you, Mr. Moore, and your team about the fuels
reduction projects, by the way, that are happening in their own
states, in their districts.
The last time I saw you in person was in Colorado. I
welcomed you to Colorado as we were excited to announce the
first infusion of $33 million in hazardous fuels reduction
projects in the Arapahoe Roosevelt in my district, as well as
the Pike San Isabel National Forest, a portion of which was in
my prior district, and the rest, of course, in my colleague
from Colorado Springs, my friend Mr. Lamborn's district.
I don't get it. And maybe, again, I mean, I haven't been in
Congress that long, so this is just how Washington works, I
guess. But it is puzzling to me that you have a bipartisan bill
that invests in hazardous fuels reduction, important
investments. My colleagues vote against it. The projects are
happening in their district. Nonetheless, they propose now a
bill to cut the budget of the very same agency responsible for
implementing those projects that they claim are so necessary
for the health of their forests and the well-being of their
constituents. I just don't get it.
I have limited time left. I had long remarks prepared but,
unfortunately, deviated a bit. I will simply say to you, Mr.
Moore, that we are grateful for your service. I think you have
done an exceptional job.
I am grateful for the hard work of the Forest Service folks
in my district on the White River National Forest, Routt
National Forest, Arapahoe Roosevelt. You know the supervisors
there, some of the hardest working people in the United States
who work really closely with our team. They are under-funded.
They need more resources. And I am glad to see that the
President's budget contemplates the kind of investment in
workforce that we are going to need to ensure that the projects
that we all agree are necessary can ultimately come to
fruition.
With that, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.

Mr. Tiffany. Yes. Thank you to the Ranking Member for your
opening remarks, and we will now move on to witness testimony.
Let me remind the witness that under Committee Rules, he
must limit his oral statement to 5 minutes, but his entire
statement will appear in the hearing record.
To begin your testimony, please press the ``on'' button on
the microphone.
We use timing lights. When you begin, the light will turn
green. At the end of 5 minutes, the light will turn red, and I
will ask you to please complete your statement.
I would now like to introduce Mr. Randy Moore, who is the
Chief of the United States Forest Service.
Chief Moore, you are now recognized. First of all, welcome
once again, and you are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF RANDY MOORE, CHIEF, NATIONAL FOREST SYSTEMS, U.S.
FOREST SERVICE, WASHINGTON, DC

Mr. Moore. Chair Tiffany, Ranking Member Neguse, and
members of the Committee, thank you for inviting me to testify
before you today. I appreciate the opportunity to share how the
Forest Service is putting America's money to work.
The Fiscal Year 2024 request focuses on three primary
areas: modernizing the Wildland Fire Management System;
confronting the wildfire crisis; and ensuring equitable access
to and benefits from the National Forest System.
The people we serve deserve nothing less than to see the
value of their money at work for their benefit. National
forests and grasslands cover about 193 million acres. Some 180
million people in over 68,000 communities rely on these lands
to capture and filter drinking water. Our work contributes to
over 373,000 jobs and $40.3 billion to the GDP. We work with
tribes, state and local governments, private landowners, and
many others across the country to keep forests and grasslands
healthy and safe.
Today, America's forests face dire threats from wildfire,
climate change, insects, and disease, especially in the West.
This is an emergency in many places, and we are enticing and
acting with a sense of urgency in collaboration with
communities and our partners. Our top priority is to reduce
wildfire threats by safeguarding communities and critical
infrastructure, creating healthy, resilient forests.
Through our Wildfire Crisis Strategy, we have ramped up to
treat the right places at the right scale using an all-lands,
all-hands approach. This past January, we announced investments
of $930 million in 21 high-risk landscapes in the West,
benefiting roughly 200 communities and many other resources
that people value.
In addition, we have awarded nearly $200 million in
Community Wildfire Defense Grants toward 100 projects to 22
states and 7 tribes. Recent investments by Congress gives us a
historic opportunity to take bold and strategic action. We are
working to do just that, to put every dollar to good use.
We are grateful to Congress for investing foundational
funding to do this work. Sustained execution, though, depends
on continued Federal investments. The proposed Fiscal Year 2024
budget responds to this need. All of our work to reduce
wildfire risks become increasingly important in the face of
another upcoming busy Western fire season. We will have
approximately 11,300 firefighters and a full array of aircraft
ready to respond safely to any and all fires. We will fully
engage with state, local, and tribal partners ready to respond
with us.
In support of our firefighters, this budget also calls for
a $1.4 billion investment in salaries, health and safety, and
well-being for all of our firefighters. A suite of new actions
will permanently increase pay, improve options for housing, and
provide better care and support for physical and mental health.
It also increases the number of firefighters, and we need the
help of this Committee to authorize this proposal.
While firefighters represent the backbone of our wildfire
system, we also need active and aggressive land management to
confront the wildfire crisis. This budget invests $300 million
in hazardous fuels treatments. It supports execution of
wildfire crisis strategy. It targets investment in burned area
rehabilitation for $56 million to expedite recovery from
wildfire. It supports use of the latest research and grants to
universities to support educational and technical assistance
for innovative wood products.
The national forest and grasslands belongs to every
American. Every person should feel a personal invitation and a
connection to these lands. We remain committed to removing
barriers so all people can enjoy National Forest System lands
and services, particularly tribal and underserved communities.
We continue to focus policies, accountability, and training to
ensure an equitable, respectful, and harassment-free workforce
and work environment for all of our employees.
We know what is at stake if we don't address the effects of
climate change and the wildfire crisis: the health of our
forests and communities, clean water, a vibrant wood products
industry, and jobs and resources that Americans depend on. We
need to act now if we are going to meet these challenges. So,
thank you, and I am grateful for your support, and I welcome
any questions that you may have.

[The prepared statement of Mr. Moore follows:]
Prepared Statement of Randy Moore, Chief, USDA Forest Service
Chair Tiffany, Ranking Member Neguse, and members of the
Subcommittee, thank you for inviting me here today to testify on the
President's fiscal year (FY) 2024 Budget request for the U.S.
Department of Agriculture (USDA), Forest Service.
The fiscal year 2024 President's Budget for the USDA Forest Service
discretionary appropriations totals $7.4 billion for base programs and
$2.3 billion for the wildfire suppression cap adjustment (in the
Wildfire Suppression Operations Reserve Fund). The fiscal year 2024
request focuses on three primary areas: modernizing the wildland fire
management system; confronting the wildfire crisis; and ensuring
equitable access to and benefits from the National Forest System.
The investments highlighted below reflect services the Forest
Service delivers through work on National Forests, partnerships with
State, Private, and Tribal landowners, and our Research and Development
mission area. These investments enable the Forest Service to restore
long-term forest health and resiliency across landscapes the American
people rely-on while ensuring equitable access to the resources on
National Forest lands. Alongside our partners, the Forest Service will
continue to reduce the risk of catastrophic wildfires to communities in
FY 2024 through investments in the highest priority landscapes
identified within the Wildfire Crisis Strategy. The Forest Service will
maximize every dollar invested into our agency, making every dollar
work for the American people. The people we serve deserve nothing less
than to see the value of their money at work for their benefit.
The President's FY 2024 Budget Request for Specific Priorities to
Support Focal Areas

The following investments align with and enhance the agency's
efforts to modernize the wildland fire management system:

$1.4 billion for Wildland Fire Management Salaries and
Expenses: Investing in our wildland firefighting workforce
is a matter of national security as critical
infrastructure, homes, communities, structures, and natural
resources are at grave and growing risk of catastrophic
wildfire. The FY 2024 budget funds a permanent increase in
pay for the wildland firefighter workforce, providing a
more livable wage, enhancing recruitment, and supporting
retention. Specifically, this request includes:

-- $180 million for increasing base pay for federal
wildland firefighters to ensure that this crucial workforce
does not face a pay cliff at the end of this year;

-- $69 million to support cost of living increases for FY
2024;

-- $259 million for increasing federal firefighting
capacity (an estimated 970 additional federal firefighters and
personnel) to expand our ability to address the wildfire crisis
and reduce the strain on our current workforce;

-- $10 million for vital health and well-being assistance
to more comprehensively support our wildfire firefighter
workforce;

-- $50 million to address the urgent need for wildland
firefighter housing through necessary maintenance and repairs
of Forest Service housing units that will support our
recruitment, hiring, and retention efforts.

$323 million for Hazardous Fuels Reduction: To mitigate
wildfire risk on 4.2 million acres in high priority and
high-risk firesheds, building on hazardous fuels funding
from the Bipartisan Infrastructure Law and Inflation
Reduction Act and aligned with the agency's 10-Year
Wildfire Crisis Strategy.

The following investments ensure that national forests and
grasslands continue to provide experiences, services, and products to
the American public by focusing on the restoration, enhancement, and
resilience of the Nation's forests and grasslands:

$56 million for the Burned Area Rehabilitation: to build
on capacity created with the $65 million per year seed
money from the Bipartisan Infrastructure Law to
rehabilitate burned areas and free up existing funding for
more proactive forest health work.

$94 million for Recreation, Heritage, and Wilderness: to
increase support of critical recreation operations,
planning, services, and improvements, with particular
emphasis on creating welcoming, sustainable, and equitable
recreation opportunities for all Americans with a focus
toward underserved and Tribal communities.

$50.5 million for Vegetation and Watershed Management: to
support healthy and resilient watersheds and landscapes,
sustain the production of clean and abundant air and water,
assist with meeting the Administration's climate goals, and
contribute to healthy and productive communities and Tribal
Nations.

$45 million for Minerals and Geology Management: to locate
and prioritize orphaned oil and gas wells for remediation
and the inventory, environmental analysis, and clean-up of
mine reclamation sites.

$7.8 million for Grazing Management: to support post-fire
restoration, provide for strategic incentives to grazing
permittees, and build vibrant rural economies.

$55 million for Forest Health Management: to ensure
healthy forests and functional landscapes on federal and
non-federal lands in support of the conservation priorities
of the Administration.

$80 million for Collaborative Forest Landscape Restoration
Program: to invest in communities and regions with a
collaborative, common purpose in reducing wildfire risk and
improving forest health and resiliency.

$1.7 billion for National Forest System Salaries and
Expenses: to support the agency's 10-Year Wildfire Crisis
Strategy as well as critical non-fire programs, which have
decreased in funding over time as wildland fire response
needs escalated.

Further investments ensure that the Forest Service relies on the
latest science and technology to deliver results on the ground and for
the people:

$502 million for Information Technology Capabilities: to
continue modernization of our Information Technology
systems that allow the public to better access our
services, sustain emergency communication systems, and
provide our workforce the tools they need to carry out our
conservation mission safely and efficiently.

$72 million for Zero Emissions Vehicles: included across
several program funding requests to invest in replacing
vehicles within the agency fleet and to provide for
employees and visitors with charging infrastructure.

$349 million for Forest and Rangeland Research: to
continue investments in research priorities, with a focus
on climate change-related research including reforestation,
carbon accounting, and fire and fuels research.

$6 million for USDA Climate Hubs: to accelerate science
production and technology transfer that will aid management
agencies, private landowners, and agricultural producers
adopt scientifically sound climate adaptation practices.

Confronting the Wildfire Crisis

The Forest Service's paramount focus continues to be combatting the
threat and impact of destructive wildfire to our nation's communities,
critical infrastructure, forests, rangelands, water supplies, and
wildlife. Changing environmental conditions have lengthened fire
seasons into fire years and worsened wildfires across the West.
Expanding development into the wildland/urban interface (WUI)
increasingly puts more homes into fire-prone landscapes and increases
the challenge and complexity of wildfire suppression and fuels
reduction work. Most wildfires that cause significant damage to a large
number of homes and other structures are human caused; 97% of wildfires
threaten homes; and almost one-third of American homes are within the
WUI.
The Forest Service has a historic opportunity now, between the
investments from the Bipartisan Infrastructure Law, the Inflation
Reduction Act, and our annual appropriations, to implement solutions at
a large scale. We are now entering our second year of carrying out our
10-Year Wildfire Crisis Strategy. The Wildfire Crisis Strategy aims to
increase science-based fuels treatments by up to four times previous
treatment levels, especially in those areas at highest risk. By working
in the right places at the right scale, our treatments can reduce
wildfire risk and better protect communities, infrastructure, and
natural resources while helping wildland firefighters respond to
wildfires safely and effectively.
The Forest Service cannot succeed in this alone. The highest risk
firesheds are typically in multiple landownerships. The Forest Service
will continue to strengthen our long-standing work and relationships
with Tribes, States, local communities, private landowners, and other
stakeholders to adapt lessons learned into a coordinated and effective
program of work as outlined in the 10-Year Wildfire Crisis Strategy.
Through government-to-government consultation with Tribes, expanded
partnerships and co-stewardship, and broader community support, the
Forest Service will increase the use of prescribed fire, fuel
treatments, and the management of unplanned ignitions to reduce long-
term wildfire risks. Fortunately, we have decades of experience working
through collaborative partnerships based on common values and shared
goals across shared landscapes as set out in the National Cohesive
Wildland Fire Management Strategy.
Ensuring Equitable Access to and Benefits from the National Forest
System

The Forest Service will continue to invest in actions that create
broad and efficient access to the vital resources our forests and
grasslands provide. This effort is twofold. First, we must ensure that
those who rely on these services and benefits can access those benefits
safely. Therefore, we are committed to improving the operation and
maintenance of our extensive infrastructure portfolio that includes
buildings, dams, communication sites, recreation sites, roads, trails,
and bridges. Second, to carry out this work effectively, the Forest
Service is committed to continued intentional internal and external
engagement with Tribal Nations whose ancestral homelands are within or
adjacent to federally managed public lands, and communities that live
by, visit, and depend on national forests. The Forest Service is
committed to identifying and removing barriers to access Forest Service
programs and services for historically underserved communities. This
will be done by integrating equity-centered criteria in the design,
funding, and prioritization of all policies, programs, and activities
to center equity considerations as part of the decision process. The
Forest Service will also work to advance mission critical work, remove
barriers and boost economic opportunities through improved access to
contracts, grants and agreements, and permits.
Leveraging Additional Funding Authorities

Along with the tools and investments proposed in the FY 2024
Presidents Budget, the Forest Service will leverage funding within the
Bipartisan Infrastructure Law (BIL) and the Inflation Reduction Act
(IRA) to confront the wildfire crisis, create new markets and
technology for wood products, promote economic development, and restore
forest health and resiliency through partnerships and collaboration
across landscapes.
Through the Bipartisan Infrastructure Law (BIL), Congress provided
a $1.4 billion down payment that greatly assists in putting our
Wildfire Crisis Strategy into action with investments on ten landscapes
in eight Western States (Arizona, California, Colorado, Idaho, Montana,
New Mexico, Oregon, and Washington). Through work on these landscapes
and others, we completed treatments on 3.2 million acres nationally in
2022. We also accomplished these treatments in 118 of the 250 high-risk
firesheds identified in the Wildfire Crisis Strategy. This work was
accomplished despite numerous challenges including workforce capacity
and high post-fire workloads from historic wildfire activity across the
country the past several years. The work on these acres directly
reduced risk to communities, infrastructure, and critical watersheds.
The Inflation Reduction Act provides the Forest Service an
additional $1.8 billion for hazardous fuels funding in the WUI. With
IRA funding, we recently selected 11 additional landscapes for
treatment in seven Western States (Arizona, California, Idaho, Nevada,
Oregon, Utah, and Washington). Combined with the initial BIL investment
landscapes, our actions will span nearly 45 million acres across 134 of
the 250 high-risk firesheds in the western U.S., with a total
investment to date of $930 million on 21 landscapes in 2023. These
investments will help reduce the risk of wildfire to at-risk
communities, Tribal lands, critical infrastructure, utility corridors,
and public water sources. We listened to our partners, the public we
serve, Tribes and many others regarding what mattered most to them,
where opportunity is, and where challenges remain. Their feedback and
our experience on these landscapes helped us identify both challenges
to implementation and enabling conditions for future success.
Through Great American Outdoors Act (GAOA) (P.L. 116-152) funding
for the National Parks and Public Land Legacy Restoration Fund, the
Forest Service continues to repair and upgrade vital infrastructure and
facilities in the national forests and grasslands. The GAOA also
permanently funds the Land and Water Conservation Fund (LWCF), with
which the Forest Service invests in conservation and recreation
opportunities in public and private lands through the Forest Legacy
Program and Federal Land Acquisition.
Forest Service projects will support about 3,500 jobs and
contribute $350 million to the GDP on an average annual basis over the
5-year authorization of the GAOA National Parks and Public Land Legacy
Restoration Fund. In FY 2024, the Forest Service proposes $94.3 million
for the Forest Legacy Program, $123.9 million for Federal Land
Acquisition, and $285 million for the National Parks and Public Land
Legacy Restoration Fund. The FY 2024 project lists are included in the
FY 2024 Budget request.
In closing, the President's FY 2024 Budget request for the Forest
Service proposes a landmark investment in wildland fire, establishes
funding priorities for risk-based wildfire reduction, and improves
overall access and utilization of our National Forests System. The FY
2024 Budget request underscores our commitment to long-overdue
investments in our wildland firefighter workforce to provide them with
the compensation that they deserve, along with critical investments to
support health and wellbeing, and expanded options for housing. The FY
2024 Budget also highlights the importance of restoring and creating
resilient landscapes, improving infrastructure, and removing barriers
to access. We look forward to working with this Subcommittee to fulfill
the President's goals and our key responsibilities for the long-term
benefit of the Nation's forests and grasslands, and for all Americans.
I will be glad to answer your questions.

______

Questions Submitted for the Record to Randy Moore, Chief, United States
Forest Service

Mr. Moore did not submit responses to the Committee by the appropriate
deadline for inclusion in the printed record.

Questions Submitted by Representative Westerman

Forest Management

Question 1. During the hearing, you mentioned that the Forest
Service is using categorical exclusions for roughly 85 percent of the
forest management work being done, which you said was roughly 4,000
categorical exclusions. Can you please provide statistics that shows
which categorical exclusions are being used, and how many times each
categorical exclusion has been used in the last 5 years?

Question 2. How much of the direct work at the national forest
level is planning and assessment to include the preparation of
environmental review documents under NEPA?

Question 3. How much did the Forest Service spend last year on
planning or environmental review costs for meeting the requirements of
applicable laws generally? How much did the agency spend on direct work
at the national forest level?

Question 4. How many staff hours did the Forest Service spend last
year on planning or environmental review costs for meeting the
requirements of applicable laws? How many staff hours did the agency
spend on direct work at the national forest level?

Question 5. The persistent drought, particularly out West, has only
exacerbated the wildfire crisis. How does the ongoing drought and
current drought mitigation efforts impact forest management and
hazardous fuel reduction?

Question 6. There are many federally funded data and analytic tools
to determine how drought and other climate-related factors can be
mitigated. Drought mitigation can help reduce the severity and
frequency of catastrophic wildfires.

6a) How is the Forest Service utilizing tools such as the U.S.
Drought Monitor and other products produced by the National Drought
Mitigation Center (NDMC)?

6b) Are there additional data products federal partners could
provide to help the Forest Service proactively deploy drought
mitigation planning efforts?

Question 7. Last fiscal year, despite historic investments, the
Forest Service sold roughly 2.9 billion board feet of timber, which is
down over 10 percent compared to pre-pandemic levels.

7a) What steps is your agency taking to increase the amount of
timber harvested on Forest Service lands so that we can return to pre-
pandemic levels?

7b) If wildfires are the issue is reaching pre-pandemic levels of
timber harvesting, how quickly is the Forest Service converting those
timber sales to salvage sales? Are you re-doing completed NEPA work to
convert these sales post-wildfire?

Question 8. What effect are litigation and threats of litigation
having on the Forest Service's ability to combat wildfires and improve
the health of our forests?

Question 9. The Forest Service's budget justification states the
agency is aiming to treat 4.2 million acres, which is only a 10 percent
increase compared to last year's target. The ``Confronting the Wildfire
Strategy'' calls for treating two to four times the amount of acres the
agency currently treats, which far exceeds this 10 percent increase.

9a) What are the barriers that are preventing the Forest Service
from scaling up its hazardous fuels treatments?

9b) Is the Forest Service on track to meet its goal of treating 20
million additional acres, as outlined in the 10-year strategy?

9c) How many acres should the Forest Service be treating this year
to be on track to meet the target of 20 million additional acres
treated?

Question 10. Chief Moore's testimony states several times that
engagement with Tribal nations and reducing hazardous fuels on a
landscape scale are a ``paramount focus''. However, the FY 2024 budget
includes a $3 million cut to Landscape Scale Restoration projects.
Regarding the $3 million cut, your own budget justification states, and
I quote: ``This decrease would reduce the number of projects with
Tribes, States, and other eligible partners by 12 projects and result
in reduced land treatment and restoration activities on non-Federal
lands, based on prior year performance data. It would reduce planned
funding for Tribes by $1 million, which is one of ten key priorities
identified in the USDA Equity Action Plan. Past performance of projects
supported by the Landscape Scale Restoration program have demonstrated
success in reducing wildland fire risk, improving forest conditions,
and mitigating impacts from insects and disease and leveraging public
and private resources.''

10a) How does the Forest Service reconcile its apparent commitment
to Tribal nations with budget cuts that directly support tribal work?

10b) How is this cut consistent with the ``Confronting the Wildfire
Strategy'', which states that the agency must increase its landscape-
scale work by four times?

10c) Does this cut represent a trend to the Forest Service using
mandatory funding to supplant, not supplement, discretionary funding?

Question 11. Why is the Forest Service requiring approval for
proposals to use ``Emergency Action'' authority from the Bipartisan
Infrastructure Law from the National Office, USDA, and the White House?
Is this consistent with approvals that are granted during wildfires to
use emergency actions?

Question 12. During the hearing, Chairman Tiffany brought up
discrepancies in the Forest Service's reports for hazardous fuels
reduction treatments between regional and national Forest Service
reports. For example, the Forest Service's initial landscape
investments progress summary reported that 132,423 acres had been
treated in the 4FRI priority landscape in Arizona last year. However,
according to the regional Forest Service's reports on 4FRI (four fry),
only 88,634 acres were treated last year.

12a) How does the Forest Service account for this discrepancy of
over 43,000 acres?

12b) This discrepancy between the Forest Service's own published
documents suggests the agency is inflating progress toward the 10-year
strategy by nearly half. Is the Forest Service aware of other
discrepancies in priority landscapes between the numbers being reported
at the regional level versus the national level?

12c) What methodology is the Forest Service using to ensure acres
are being reported accurately to track progress in the 10-year
strategy?

12d) When measuring progress toward the 10-year strategy, is the
Forest Service recording any acres more than once if multiple
treatments are conducted on the same parcel of land?

12e) If the Forest Service were to only record each acre once,
regardless of how many treatments were completed on that acre, how
would the reporting for each of the initial landscape investments
differ from what the Forest Service published last year?

2023 Wildfire Year

Question 13. Our forests are worse off today than they ever have
been. In the last 5 years alone, we have lost over 38 million acres to
wildfires, roughly 14 million of which were a part of the National
Forest System. The long-term wildfire outlook remains bleak, with
roughly 89 percent of all Forest Service land identified as having the
potential for wildfires to ignite and spread to communities.

13a) How has the recent flooding in the West has affected National
Forest System lands?

13b) What is the Forest Service's outlook on what we should expect
from the 2023 wildfire season?

13c) Can the Forest Service provide an update on the number of
wildland firefighters the agency predicts it will need for the 2023
wildfire year?

Technology

Question 14. Chief Moore, the Forest Service is advancing forest
management actions using innovative financing, new technology detection
systems, and even software programs for NEPA compilation. Please share
what you are doing to support these important steps to modernize your
work in the woods.

Question 15. Advanced camera systems connected to artificial
intelligence are now being used on a few forests to better detect
wildfires and monitor controlled burns. This technology promises to
better protect communities, conserve our forests, and reduce the cost
of wildfire suppression. What are you doing to deploy this technology
on National Forests this year and beyond?

Question 16. Can you please provide an update on the Request for
Information/Sources Sought Notice entitled ``Interagency Wildland Fire
Personnel and Asset Tracking for Increased Situational Awareness'' that
was released in November 2022?

``Old Growth and Mature Forests''

Question 17. In light of the new inventory of mature and old-growth
forests, can you please provide information about how many acres of NFS
land that meet your new mature and old-growth definition framework have
burned in wildfires in the last 10 years?

Question 18. Why was the inventory of mature and old-growth forests
limited to Bureau of Land Management and Forest Service forests, and
not to the other federal agencies that manage forests like the National
Park Service and the Fish and Wildlife Service?

Question 19. How much Forest Service staff time was used to develop
the mature and old-growth inventory?

Question 20. Why is it important to manage forests to have a
diversity of age classes?

Question 21. Can you please explain the importance of early
successional forests?

Question 22. Is the term ``mature forest'' a recognized term in the
scientific practice of forestry?

Question 23. Why is the Forest Service moving forward with and
Advanced Notice of Public Rulemaking for mature forests when your
report on old growth acknowledges that there is no scientific
definition or consensus regarding what a mature forest is?

Question 24. Following up on a statement I made during the hearing,
in the Forest Service's report on old growth, the report states that
``narrative frameworks'' are going to inform the ``policy and practice
of forest management'' for old growth. The report also includes the
following quote:

``The role of place attachment or identity, meaning ``the
symbolic importance of a place as a repository for emotions and
relationships that give meaning and purpose to life'' may also
be particularly relevant in our understanding of how people
relate to and value old-growth forests.''

Is the Forest Service planning to manage old growth forests based
on vague concepts like ``place identity'' instead of scientific forest
management practices?

Great American Outdoors Act

Question 25. Since the passage of the Great American Outdoors Act,
the Forest Service has received $235 million per year in National Parks
and Public Lands Legacy Restoration Funds to address the deferred
maintenance backlog. Yet in that amount of time, the Forest Service
backlog has actually risen by roughly $2.4 billion dollars. What do you
attribute this sharp increase in your maintenance backlog to?

Question 26. How have inflation and supply chain issues impacted
your ability to complete deferred maintenance projects on budget and on
time?

Question 27. The Park Service has shared that they were previously
using a methodology to calculate deferred maintenance and repairs that
did not align with industry standards. Does the Forest Service's
methodology to calculate deferred maintenance align with industry
standards?

Question 28. Does the Forest Service have any plans to update its
methodology for tracking deferred maintenance?

Question 29. What are the Forest Service's projections for what the
total deferred maintenance backlog will be at the end of FY2023? Is the
agency projecting it will increase or decrease from the current $7.6
billion?

Question 30. How is the Forest Service defining ``equitable
access''?

Question 31. We've heard concerns that the Forest Service is not
using deferred maintenance funding provided under GAOA to upgrade
buildings that could be used as housing for firefighters because of
internal guidance that GAOA funding only be used on recreation.

31a) Why isn't the Forest Service using GAOA funding to address
deferred maintenance that could improve housing options for
firefighters?

31b) Has the Forest Service conducted an inventory of existing
structures that could be converted into firefighter housing if deferred
maintenance was addressed? If not, does the Forest Service plan to
conduct such inventory?

31c) How many existing structures could be used as housing for
firefighters if deferred maintenance needs were addressed? What would
be the total cost?

Wood Products Utilization

Question 32. This budget highlights that Forest Service Research
and Development arm has studied the ``effects of management actions and
wildfire on the accumulation and loss of soil carbon, and the carbon
storage effects of augmenting soil carbon with biochar.'' Can you share
more about the research the Forest Service has conducted on biochar?

Question 33. Do you believe biochar and similar technologies could
help the Forest Service remove more excess fuels?

Question 34. What can Congress do to incentivize the use of
adoption of mass timber from materials on National Forest System lands?

Southern Border

Question 35. How much of the southern border is Forest Service
land?

Question 36. In the Department of the Interior's FY 2024 budget
justification, they identified illegal methamphetamine production as an
issue on Federal lands.

36a) Has the Forest Service also identified illegal methamphetamine
production on its lands?

36b) If yes, how much methamphetamine is being illegally produced
on NFS lands and what environmental and safety impact is this having on
NFS lands?

36c) If yes, what is the Forest Service doing to eradicate illegal
methamphetamine production?

Question 37. Approximately how many wildland fires are ignited each
year due to activities associated with illegal border crossers?

Energy Development

Question 38. A private company has been working for over a decade
in my district to develop the work plan and secure required federal and
state permits for an underground mining operation adjacent to the
Ouachita National Forest. Most of surface infrastructure will be
located on privately held land. This project will provide jobs, spur
economic development, provide a domestic resource for steel production,
and have minimal surface disturbance. The draft Environmental
Assessment (EA) is currently under review by the United States Forest
Service (USFS) and the Bureau of Land Management (BLM). I am concerned
with how long the review process is taking. The draft EA was first
submitted to the USFS, BLM, and Office of Surface Mining Reclamation
and Enforcement (OSMRE) in April 2021. I understand the Forest Service
is currently deciding if a Forest Plan Amendment is the next step.

38a) When will you have a decision?

38b) Will you please provide an update on where the process
currently stands?

38c) Will you commit to providing the necessary USFS personnel and
resources to meet timelines to review this permitting application?

Wildland Firefighters

Question 39. On March 30, the United States Department of
Agriculture, along with Department of Interior and Office of Personnel
Management, transmitted to Congress its federal wildland firefighter
management legislative proposal.

39a) How much does the Forest Service believe the proposal will
cost in its first year, presumably fiscal year 2024, and over 10 years?

39b) How much is specifically for firefighter pay in the first
year, presumably fiscal year 2024, and over 10 years?

39c) Did the Forest Service conduct an analysis to compare the
proposed federal new pay table to western states' firefighter pay? Will
the new proposed pay for federal firefighters exceed state pay? Please
provide a state-by-state breakdown of this data.

39d) In my district in Arkansas, many Forest Service employees are
deployed out West during wildfire season. They are often referred to as
militia members. These temporary assignments of employees are crucial
to supporting the operations of the Forest Service. Does this proposal
include pay increases for so called `militia members?'

Question 40. The Bipartisan Infrastructure Law (BIL, P.L. 117-58)
provided funding for wildland firefighter mental wellbeing and directed
the Secretary of Agriculture, with the Secretary of the Interior, to
establish programs for wildland firefighters ``to recognize and address
mental health needs.'' Current updates to committee staff indicate a
comprehensive plan for this funding has yet to be established.

40a) When will you have a public plan for the BIL funding for
firefighter mental wellbeing?

40b) How are you engaging current and past wildland firefighters in
developing tools, resources, and programs?

40c) The President's Budget asks for an additional $10 million for
firefighter health and well-being. Why is additional funding being
requested? What will this money be used for that the first round of
funding has yet to cover?

Telework Policies

Question 41. On April 10, 2023, President Biden signed Dr. Gosar's
bill into law ending the COVID-19 public health emergency and the
Office of Management and Budget released guidance to Departments to
bring employees back into the office. Have you issued guidance
directing Forest Service employees to return to the office?

41a) Will you commit to issuing guidance to Forest Service
employees to return full-time to in-person work? If yes, when will you
issue this guidance?

41b) Please tell the Committee how many Forest Service employees
worked in person at the Forest Service on April 26, 2023 and what
percentage worked virtually from home.

Question 42. Your budget requests a $52 million increase in your
Information Technology budget to support Forest Service employees
working from home. During the Senate Energy and Natural Resources
hearing of the Forest Service Budget Request, you indicated that this
line item would likely need to be addressed in light of the Office of
Management and Budget's guidance to ``substantially increase in-person
in the office.'' Should we expect to see an updated Budget Request that
excludes this request for additional telework IT funding?

Fire Suppression Policies

Question 43. The Forest Service Budget is seeking a $854 million
increase for wildland fire management for this year, which would be a
40 percent increase from last year. How would this funding level be
impacted if you were to lose the ability to use fire retardant?

Question 44. The contracting process from the US Forest Service for
aviation firefighting vendors is more challenging than ever, with
current contracts expiring early in the 2nd quarter of 2023, and new
contracts under heavy protests and status of their awards unknown. Can
you speak to this growing concern of no coverage secured for 2023 and
what the USFS intends to do to solve this urgent matter?

Question 45. In recent years the US Forest Service has adapted the
Lowest Price Technically Acceptable award methodology, or LPTA for
bidding vendors. This process takes no consideration or weight for
historical performance, industry experience, references, equipment
quality/modernity, or safety record. On the contrary, forthcoming USFS
contract requirements are requiring vendors to invest more in upgrades
to their aircraft than ever with no certainty of any revenue, amidst
the battle to win in the LPTA format. How can the USFS continue to ask
for such advancements in aircraft, experience, and equipment but
restricted their awards to be weighted solely on price in an extremely
challenging economy?

Questions Submitted by Representative LaMalfa

Question 1. What steps is USFS taking to address the ever-
increasing presence of illegal marijuana grow sites on federal lands?

Question 2. Does Director Moore agree that illegal marijuana
cultivation and smuggling pose huge health and safety risks for both
the environment and the public?

Question 3. Is the USFS currently undergoing any remediation or
cleanup efforts at marijuana grow sites? If so, where are those actions
taking place?

Question 4. Is the USFS studying or tracking the environmental
harms of illegal marijuana grow sites and in particular on the
pesticides used? To what extent have illegal pesticides been found at
these grow sites?

Question 5. My colleague Rep McClintock and I sent a letter to you
last year urging you to end the Let Burn policies. Is the USFS now
implementing aggressive, initial attack strategies to extinguish
wildfires detected on National Forest System lands not later than 24
hours after such a wildfire is detected in a way that is demonstrably
different than previous years?

Question 6. Can you, as chief of the US Forest Service, commit to
returning to the original language and intent of SRS Titles II and III
(15% of annual SRS payments) regarding county allocations? This would
allow counties and school systems that are locked into allocations
based on 2011 or older SRS funding levels, to update their SRS
allocation formulas to better meet their funding needs.

Question 7. Do you believe the increase in funds for staffing is
sufficient, and what is your plan to scale up staffing levels to meet
the goal of treating 20 million acres in 10 years?

Question 8. To address staffing shortage concerns, to what extent
is the USFS looking outward to expanding volunteer engagement? Are
there certain tasks that the USFS could rely more heavily on volunteer
groups and other partners to complete?

Questions Submitted by Representative Leger Fernandez

Question 1. This year New Mexico was blessed with snow that will
help us address the drought. But those in the Hermit's Peak/Calf Canyon
Fire burn scar are scared of the subsequent floods and debris flow that
will wipe out more roads, destroy more pasture, and flood more homes. I
understand the Forest Service has begun seeding and mulching work on
the Forest Service land in the burn scar.

Chief Moore, what is the Forest Service doing to coordinate with
other agencies to make sure all lands--including private lands that the
forest burnt--are rehabilitated to protect homes and property from the
flooding we know is coming this spring?

Question 2. I appreciated Secretary Vilsack's response to my recent
letter on the need for sustained funding solutions for Taos Pueblo's
management of the Blue Lake Wilderness.

In the letter, the Secretary notes the USFS' work with the Pueblo
through the Tribal Forest Protection Act program and on the Pueblo
Ridge Project as part of the Bureau of Indian Affairs Reserved Treaty
Rights Lands program.

From your perspective, what other USFS programs could potentially
support Taos Pueblo's work to effectively manage the Blue Lake
Wilderness and its other lands, more broadly?

Question 3. Chief Moore, thank you for your response to the letter
I signed last year with my colleagues in the New Mexico Congressional
Delegation on the need to protect the Upper Pecos Watershed. In your
response, you state the Southwestern Region is evaluating the potential
risk of mineral development in the Upper Pecos Watershed and whether
our current laws and regulations are adequate for its protection.

Would you please describe the steps involved in said evaluation,
its proposed timeline, and the entities involved?

In evaluating the risks to the Upper Pecos Watershed, I urge you to
engage with all local stakeholders, including relevant tribes, local
governments, acequias, land-grant mercedes, and landowners and users,
such as farmers, ranchers, hunters, and anglers.

Question 4. Given the Congress' current work on the Farm Bill,
would you please provide any legislative recommendations the USFS has
to better serve tribes, such as improvements to the Tribal Forest
Protection Act?

Question 5. How is the USFS' FY24 budget request addressing the
reforestation needs of burned areas, which in New Mexico increased by
nearly 1 million acres last year alone?

Question 6. How does the USFS' FY24 budget address the need for
treatments on the private lands that are embedded within or surrounding
National Forests in the very same places identified as top priority in
the Wildfire Crisis Strategy?

Question 7. In light of the Hermit's Peak Calf/Canyon Fire, please
describe how USFS protocols for informing and engaging with the public
about proposed or planned burns have changed? Do you plan to continue
those updated protocols indefinitely? Is the USFS only using these
updated protocols in New Mexico, or nationwide?

______

Mr. Tiffany. Thank you for that opening statement, Chief
Moore.
The Chair will now recognize Members for 5 minutes for
their questions, and I would like to start with a few questions
here.
Chief Moore, the Forest Service's Fiscal Year 2024 budget
includes a $3 million cut to landscape-scale restoration
projects, while increasing electric vehicle charging
infrastructure by over $60 million.
Regarding the $3 million cut, your own budget justification
states, and I will quote here, ``This decrease would reduce the
number of projects with tribes, states, and other eligible
partners by 12 projects, and result in reduced land treatment
and restoration activities on non-Federal lands, based on
prior-year performance data. It would reduce planned funding
for tribes by $1 million, which is one of 10 key priorities
identified in the USDA Equity Action Plan. Past performance of
projects supported by the Landscape Scale Restoration Program
have demonstrated success in reducing wildland fire risk,
improving forest conditions, and mitigating impacts from
insects and disease, and leveraging public and private
resources.''
Why is the Forest Service prioritizing funding for electric
vehicles over wildfire mitigation efforts for tribes?
Mr. Moore. Congressman, I am not sure that we are
prioritizing the use of electric vehicles over any other part
of our programs. I think what we are trying to recognize is a
growing trend that we are seeing across America, and that
growing trend, based on visitors that we are seeing coming to
national forests, is that more of our visitors are having
electric vehicles, and this is an opportunity to provide them
the ability to plug in when they visit, particularly our more
popular sites. So, it is a small opportunity to try to address
all people's connection to the land, which I mentioned in my
opening statement.
Mr. Tiffany. But, Chief, wouldn't you say you can tell a
person's priorities by how they spend their money?
You are spending 20 times as much on electric vehicle
charging infrastructure, which is basically a gas pump. And we
normally have businesses purchase their own gas pumps, and here
we are going to spend this on the electric vehicle gas pump,
and reduce the amount of spending for landscape restoration
projects, including for tribal entities, which I thought was a
priority.
Mr. Moore. It is a priority. And Congressman, you mentioned
in your opening statement that hazardous fuel reduction is less
than last year. But last year, our enacted amount was about
$207 million, and this year it is really at $322 million. So,
we are not seeing a reduction in hazardous fuel treatments, we
are seeing an increase in our opportunities to treat more of
these acres on the landscape.
Because we have all recognized that we have an emergency
situation out there, and we need to be doing more work rather
than less work, so our efforts are really aimed at increasing
the amount of work that we are doing on these landscapes.
Mr. Tiffany. When we met recently, we talked about a bill
called the ACRES Act, where we want to get an accurate amount
of what hazardous fuels reduction is going on by the Forest
Service. And I will give you a quick example.
The Forest Service's Initial Landscape Investments Progress
Summary reported 132,000 acres have been treated in 4FRI
priority landscape in Arizona last year. However, the regional
Forest Service reports only 88,000 acres were treated last
year. How do you account for the discrepancy of over 43,000
acres in that situation? Where you are counting the higher
number, the regional people are sending a lower number.
Mr. Moore. The data I have, Congressman, is that we are
actually treating almost 4 million acres per year. In fact,
last year we treated about 3.7 million acres. When I look at
what our plans are this year that we are in, and I have met
with all the regional foresters, we are planning to treat about
4 million acres this year. And we meet monthly. In fact, as
soon as this meeting is over, I am going to be going to
Colorado to meet with all of the regional foresters and my
deputy chief to look at our ability to treat more of these
acres. But so far, they have projected to be at 4 million acres
treated this year.
Mr. Tiffany. If I could ask one more question before my
time is up, it is really concerning that the agency is
inflating progress here when you see these discrepancies. Last
fiscal year, the Forest Service sold roughly 2.9 billion board
feet of timber, which is down over 10 percent compared to pre-
pandemic levels. What steps are you taking to increase the
amount of timber harvested on Forest Service lands?
First of all, is it acceptable to continue to see this
decrease to you?
Mr. Moore. Am I allowed to answer? We ran out of time.
Mr. Tiffany. You go ahead and answer it, sir.
Mr. Moore. So, for context, over the last 3 years we have
been right at about 3 million board feet a year. In 2022, we
were at about 2.8 million. We increased that last year to about
2.9. This year, we are looking to be somewhere around 3.4
billion board feet. Our goal is to get at 4 billion board feet
by 2027, I believe.
So, we are on an increase in the amount of timber that we
are planning to produce, and that is a part of what I was
mentioning earlier. We have added accountability in the system,
and that is one of the reasons I meet with all of the senior
line officers in the agency on a monthly basis to look at what
those challenges are, and what is it that we need to do to
eliminate those challenges.
Mr. Tiffany. Is the reduction acceptable?
Mr. Moore. No, and I am not seeing a reduction.
Mr. Tiffany. Yes, OK. We will do some follow-up questions.
Mr. Moore. May I follow up, Congressman?
There are many things that get in the way of what we are
able to do. Fires sometimes burn through areas where we have
already gone out and did sale prep. Litigation is another one
of those areas that sometimes limits our ability to accomplish
what our targets and goals are. So, there are other things that
get in the way of us accomplishing that. But the work on the
ground is occurring, but there are other things that get in the
way of actually getting to the bottom line.
Mr. Tiffany. I recognize the Ranking Member for 5 minutes.
Mr. Levin.
Mr. Levin. I am not Mr. Neguse.
Mr. Tiffany. Welcome.
Mr. Levin. It is good to be with you. Thank you, Chairman
Tiffany.
Before diving into my questions, I wanted to note something
exceptional that happened in last night's Rules Committee
meeting that you may have missed. After promising repeatedly
that he wouldn't change the Default on America Act, as we are
calling it, before it hit the Floor, Speaker McCarthy did make
concessions and ended up altering the underlying bill. But
notably for our Committee's work, there is now a proposal to
strike the $200 million that Congress passed in the Inflation
Reduction Act to carry out deferred maintenance projects at the
National Park Service.
This change is particularly hypocritical to me, given the
Committee hearing that we had here last week with NPS Director
Sams, where the Majority highlighted the need to address NPS's
deferred maintenance backlog, something that I agree with. And
I think if we are all serious about protecting our public
lands, we should be investing in addressing the maintenance
backlog, as well as other key priorities of our land management
agencies, not rolling back the funding that we have already
provided to maintain our public lands.
So, I urge everybody interested in this, let's push back
against those funding cuts. Let's make sure that that doesn't
wind up in any final package here. With that, let me turn to a
question of wildfires.
Chief Moore, I want to thank you for your testimony today.
I think you know that California over the last 5 years has
suffered from seven of the largest fires in our state's
history, including the August Complex Fire, Dixie Fire,
Monument Fire, Caldor Fire, Beckwourth Complex Fire. They
collectively burned over 2.5 million acres, destroyed or
damaged over 30,000 structures. And we know that we are not
just preparing for a fire season, but for fires year-round.
This risk is only going to continue to increase. The U.N.
Environment Program recently found the likelihood of extreme
wildfires is expected to increase up to 14 percent by 2030 and
up to 50 percent by 2100 as a result of both climate change and
changes in land use. And due to this ever-increasing risk,
Federal land management agencies such as the U.S. Forest
Service have had to spend significantly larger portions of
their budgets on fire suppression, which can limit their
ability to fund critical restoration and management activities
that can improve ecosystem health and resilience.
I am very pleased to see the Forest Service has taken a
comprehensive approach to wildfire management through this 10-
year wildfire crisis strategy. And based on the historic
investments in the Inflation Reduction Act, I am glad that your
Fiscal Year 2024 budget request seeks an additional $2.97
billion for wildland fire management, an operational increase
of $674 million, including by boosting funding for restoration
and management activities. I am very grateful for your
continued prioritization of wildland fire management funding,
as we know that an ounce of prevention can be worth a pound of
cure.
Chief Moore, recognizing that wildfire risk continues to
grow, how is the Forest Service working with partners,
particularly the scientific community, to define project goals
and track outcomes for its wildfire crisis strategy in a way
that we can clearly communicate to the public?
Mr. Moore. Thank you for the comments, Congressman. If I
can try to kind of describe the situation we find ourselves in,
you had mentioned as you closed your question there about
outcomes. We are reporting outputs, and we are looking at acres
achieved, amount of timber cut.
And I think perhaps it may be time to look at a different
way of reporting, because we are trying to be transparent. We
want to be transparent to Congress. And there is a question on
the table that basically says you are double-counting and
triple-counting some of the same acres treated, and that is not
our intent. So, I would submit perhaps it is time for us to
look at a different way of reporting in terms of outcomes on
the landscape and communities protected as a potential outcome
of our treatments.
We have also indicated that there is a lot of value in
these public lands, and there is a lot at risk right now
between an explosion of homes in the wildland urban interface.
There is climate change. Depending on where you are on this
issue, it is taking place. We have disease and insects that are
affecting our forests. And we have an infrastructure that is
based on the 100 years of how we have operated and how we have
utilized some of the material off national forests.
So, our job is not to take away from that traditional
infrastructure, but how do we add to this existing
infrastructure to utilize the material that we have to really
get at mitigating the fires that are taking place on the
landscape?
For instance, wood innovations, how do we bring in things
like cross-laminated timber, biochar as opportunities to use
small-diameter, low-value material, which now, by and large, we
pile it and burn it? We want to introduce wood innovations into
the system so that we can help create jobs in our small rural
communities, and provide another economic stimulus, if you
will, into these communities.
It is very important that we remove a lot of vegetation off
the landscape, because it is a major contributor to fires,
disease, and insects. But we have to have markets, and we have
to take advantage, from an economic standpoint, to incentivize
not only the industry, but new people to move in and utilize
this type of material.
Mr. Levin. Thank you. I am out of time, but thank you for
your answer. Thank you for your service.
And I will yield back.
Mr. Tiffany. The gentleman yields. I would like to
recognize the Chairman of the Natural Resources Committee, Mr.
Westerman, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Westerman. Thank you, Chairman Tiffany, and thank you,
Chief, for being here today and for your testimony. I know you
and I have a lot of common interests. You mentioned markets for
wood products. I think that is extremely important. And I think
there are a lot of areas we can work together on to make our
Federal lands more productive, make our forests more healthy,
which will be beneficial all the way around.
But as we are here to talk about your budget today, one
item I saw in there was that the Forest Service budget proposes
taking $1.6 million from hazardous fuels reduction and $6
million from wildfire preparedness for electric vehicles, which
is a total of nearly $8 million. Chief, was that your decision,
or did that come from above?
Mr. Moore. So, maybe I can talk about the thinking behind
that decision.
Mr. Westerman. I have to move quickly. I just need to know,
was that your decision or did somebody else----
Mr. Moore. Well, Congressman, I support that decision.
Mr. Westerman. OK. I am going to just move on, then.
There has been some recent research showing how much carbon
catastrophic wildfires are emitting into the atmosphere. Are
you familiar with the amount of carbon that was emitted during
California's record-breaking 2020 wildfire season?
Mr. Moore. Not confidently that I would want to testify
here today, but I am familiar with it in general.
Mr. Westerman. It is roughly 127 million metric tons.
Do you know how many EVs the Forest Service would need to
buy in order to offset 127 million metric tons of carbon
emissions?
Mr. Moore. How much?
Mr. Westerman. Well, based on the back-of-the-napkin or
back-of-the-envelope calculations I did, and some data from MIT
that, Mr. Chairman, I ask to submit this report to the record--
--
Mr. Tiffany. So ordered.

[The information follows:]

ARE ELECTRIC VEHICLES DEFINITELY BETTER FOR THE CLIMATE THAN GAS-
POWERED CARS?

Yes: although electric cars' batteries make them more carbon-intensive
to manufacture than gas cars, they more than make up for it by driving
much cleaner under nearly any conditions.

MIT Climate Portal, October 13, 2022 by Andrew Moseman, MIT Climate
Portal Writing Team

https://climate.mit.edu/ask-mit/are-electric-vehicles-definitely-
better-climate-gas-powered-cars

*****

Although many fully electric vehicles (EVs) carry ``zero emissions''
badges, this claim is not quite true. Battery-electric cars may not
emit greenhouse gases from their tailpipes, but some emissions are
created in the process of building and charging the
vehicles.Nevertheless, says Sergey Paltsev, Deputy Director of the MIT
Joint Program on the Science and Policy of Global Change, electric
vehicles are clearly a lower-emissions option than cars with internal
combustion engines. Over the course of their driving lifetimes, EVs
will create fewer carbon emissions than gasoline-burning cars under
nearly any conditions.

``We shouldn't claim victory that with this switch to electric cars,
problem solved, we are going to have zero emissions,'' he says. ``No,
that's not the case. But electric cars are actually much, much better
in terms of the impact on the climate in comparison to internal
combustion vehicles. And in time, that comparative advantage of
electric cars is going to grow.''

One source of EV emissions is the creation of their large lithium-ion
batteries. The use of minerals including lithium, cobalt, and nickel,
which are crucial for modern EV batteries, requires using fossil fuels
to mine those materials and heat them to high temperatures. As a
result, building the 80 kWh lithium-ion battery found in a Tesla Model
3 creates between 2.5 and 16 metric tons of CO
2
(exactly how
much depends greatly on what energy source is used to do the
heating).
1
This intensive battery manufacturing means that
building a new EV can produce around 80% more emissions than building a
comparable gas-powered car.
2

But just like with gasoline cars, most emissions from today's EVs come
after they roll off the production floor.
3
The major source
of EV emissions is the energy used to charge their batteries. These
emissions, says Paltsev, vary enormously based on where the car is
driven and what kind of energy is used there. The best case scenario
looks like what's happening today in Norway, Europe's largest EV
market: the nation draws most of its energy from hydropower, giving all
those EVs a minuscule carbon footprint. In countries that get most of
their energy from burning dirty coal, the emissions numbers for EVs
don't look nearly as good--but they're still on par with or better than
burning gasoline.

To illustrate how EVs create fewer emissions than their counterparts,
Paltsev points to MIT's Insights Into Future Mobility study from
2019.
4
This study looked at comparable vehicles like the
Toyota Camry and Honda Clarity across their gasoline, hybrid, plug-in
hybrid, battery electric, and hydrogen fuel cell configurations. The
researchers found that, on average, gasoline cars emit more than 350
grams of CO
2
per mile driven over their lifetimes. The
hybrid and plug-in hybrid versions, meanwhile, scored at around 260
grams per mile of carbon dioxide, while the fully battery-electric
vehicle created just 200 grams. Stats from the U.S. Department of
Energy tell a similar story: Using the nationwide average of different
energy sources, DOE found that EVs create 3,932 lbs. of CO
2

equivalent per year, compared to 5,772 lbs. for plug-in hybrids, 6,258
lbs. for typical hybrids, and 11,435 lbs. for gasoline
vehicles.
5

MIT's report shows how much these stats can swing based on a few key
factors. For example, when the researchers used the average carbon
intensity of America's power grid, they found that a fully electric
vehicle emits about 25 percent less carbon than a comparable hybrid
car. But if they ran the numbers assuming the EV would charge up in
hydropower-heavy Washington State, they found it would emit 61 percent
less carbon than the hybrid. When they did the math for coal-heavy West
Virginia, the EV actually created more carbon emissions than the
hybrid, but still less than the gasoline car.

In fact, Paltsev says, it's difficult to find a comparison in which EVs
fare worse than internal combustion. If electric vehicles had a shorter
life span than gas cars, that would hurt their numbers because they
would have fewer low-emissions miles on the road to make up for the
carbon-intensive manufacture of their batteries. Yet when the MIT study
calculated a comparison in which EVs lasted only 90,000 miles on the
road rather than 180,000 miles, they remained 15 percent better than a
hybrid and far better than a gas car.

And while internal combustion engines are getting more efficient, EVs
are poised to become greener by leaps and bounds as more countries add
more clean energy to their mix. MIT's report sees gasoline cars
dropping from more than 350 grams of CO
2
per mile to around
225 grams by the year 2050. In that same span, however, battery EVs
could drop to around 125 grams, and perhaps even down to 50 grams if
the price of renewable energy were to drop significantly.

``Once we decarbonize the electric grid--once we get more and more
clean sources to the grid--the comparison is getting better and
better,'' Paltsev says.

***

Footnotes

1
These figures are derived from comparison of three recent
reports that conducted broad literature reviews of studies attempting
to quantify battery manufacturing emissions across different countries,
energy mixes, and time periods from the early 2010s to the present. We
discard one outlier study from 2016 whose model suggested emissions
from manufacturing the battery in our example could total as high as
almost 40 metric tons. The lowest estimates typically come from studies
of U.S. and European battery manufacturing, while the highest come from
studies of Chinese and other East Asian battery manufacturing--which is
consistent with the different energy mixes in these regions.

2
This estimate comes from Argonne National Laboratory's
GREET (Greenhouse gases, Regulated Emissions, and Energy use in
Technologies) Model, sponsored by the U.S. Department of Energy. It
assumes comparable models of EV and gas-powered car, and that the EV
has a battery with a range of 300 miles, similar to a Tesla Model 3.
Different assumptions about battery manufacture would offer different
comparisons; in this model, the battery of the EV entails close to 12
metric tons of CO
2
emissions.

3
Using the same GREET figures as above, manufacturing and
end-of-life disposal account for around 9% of a gas car's emissions,
and around 29% of an EV's (more than half of which comes from the
battery alone). A plug-in hybrid EV is in the middle at around 17%.
This analysis assumes the EV is charged with the average emissions
intensity of the U.S. electric grid; that all cars drive around 173,000
miles in their lifetime; and that the gas car gets 30.7 miles to the
gallon.

4
MIT Energy Initiative: Insights Into Future Mobility,
November 2019.

5
U.S. Department of Energy Alternative Fuels Data Center:
Emissions from Electric Vehicles. Accessed October 13, 2022.

______

Mr. Westerman [continuing]. And the Federal Highway
Administration, the number comes up to 62.8 million EVs to
offset 127 million metric tons of carbon that would otherwise
be emitted from internal combustion engine cars.
Do you know the size of the entire Forest Service vehicle
fleet?
[No response.]
Mr. Westerman. It is 18,284 vehicles. I did a lot of
research for you here.
Given the fact that the Forest Service would need to
purchase almost 3,500 times more the amount of vehicles it
currently owns in order to offset emissions from one state in
one year, from a carbon perspective, does it make sense to you
that the Forest Service is taking money away from preventing
megafires, instead of directing that money toward purchasing
EVs?
Mr. Moore. I am sorry, I missed the----
Mr. Westerman. Does it make sense to purchase EVs instead
of doing forest management when you look at the big climate
picture?
Mr. Moore. I think the whole picture is a bit more complex,
Congressman, because it is not to replace all of our vehicles
with electric vehicles. It is really looking at what portion
that we may be able to replace because, as you know, depending
on where you are and the type of landscapes that we drive our
vehicles, electric vehicles probably will not work in all of
our locations.
Mr. Westerman. I get all of that. I just think diverting $8
million from catastrophic wildfire to electric vehicles is a
waste of taxpayer money. And it is more of a messaging than it
is actually doing something to help the forest.
Also, you all put a report out last week that talked a lot
about mature and old-growth forest. I went to forestry school,
and I don't remember any definition of mature or old-growth
forest, yet the Forest Service is trying to define that now.
Can you tell me, briefly, what a mature or an old-growth forest
is?
Mr. Moore. When we looked at defining, from a definition
standpoint, what old growth is, as you know, it depends on the
species in terms of what defines an old growth. But if we could
just talk plain here for a moment, it is those older trees and,
like I say, depending on the species, but you are looking at
trees 80 years or older in many of the species.
Now, the report that was put out had to do with mature and
old growth. And we were required under executive order to do an
inventory.
Mr. Westerman. So, it was an executive order that required
you to inventory something that science hasn't really been able
to define. And I am sorry to cut you off, but in that report on
old growth it states that ``narrative frameworks are going to
inform the policy and practice of forest management for old
growth.''
The report also includes the following: ``The role of
place, attachment, or identity, meaning the symbolic importance
of a place as a repository for emotions and relationships that
give meaning and purpose to life, may also be particularly
relevant in our understanding of how people relate to and value
old-growth forest.'' If that didn't make any sense, I read it
over and over and over last night, and it still doesn't make
any sense to me.
Chief, I know your heart is in the right place, and you
want to do the right thing. Let's just get busy managing our
forests, making them more fire resilient like I know you want
to, getting those markets out there so that we can do
management. And I will support you any way I can in that.
And, again, thank you for your testimony, and I look
forward to working with you going forward.
Mr. Moore. Thank you, Congressman.
Mr. Tiffany. The Chairman yields. Next, I would like to
recognize the gentlewoman from New Mexico, Ms. Leger Fernandez.
You have 5 minutes.
Ms. Leger Fernandez. Thank you so much, Chairman.
Chief Moore, one year ago, the Forest Service started not
one, but two fires in my district in the beautiful forest and
watersheds of my home in the old-growth forest that meant so
much to us. Families lost their homes, their ranches, their
livelihoods. Congress passed my Hermits Peak Canyon Fire Act to
provide nearly $4 billion to help New Mexicans recover. But the
pain of losing so much, it is not going to go away.
Chief Moore, victims in New Mexico are watching us today.
What do you have to say to them?
Mr. Moore. Congresswoman, I want to acknowledge right up
front the extraordinary impacts that these events have had on
the people and on the different communities there in New
Mexico. And really, being a professional for so many years
working for the Forest Service and seeing this happen time and
time again, my heart really bleeds for the communities to see
what is taking place on our different landscapes.
So, just know that I and our employees within the agency
are committed to doing community protection. We are committed
to trying to reduce the amount of hazardous fuel that we have
on those landscapes because we have seen the impact that it
has. In fact, a lot of our employees live in these same
communities.
So, what I want you to know is that we care. We have
committed a life to trying to protect these areas. But the
conditions on the ground----
Ms. Leger Fernandez. So, thank you. I mean, I think a good
apology would be a nice place to start.
But you also reviewed the New Mexico fires and acknowledged
you did not use the resources needed to monitor your prescribed
burns. We were using resources to fight fires, but not
resources when you start the fires, which doesn't make sense.
You left the Calf Canyon fire smoldering for months. Everyone
who has been camping knows you never leave the fire until it is
out. And we left the fire. You acknowledge that use of
technologies like infrared drones could have stopped this from
happening. However, my constituents have been told on the
ground from Forest Service personnel that we will use those
drones until they are needed elsewhere.
Chief Moore, there is no room for error. Will you commit to
me that you are going to use all the resources needed at
prescribed burns, including drones, to make sure the fire is
out?
Mr. Moore. Yes, Congresswoman, I will certainly commit
myself and the agency to that. But keep in mind that that
particular fire had snow on it. It had rain on it a couple of
times, and we did think that it was out.
Ms. Leger Fernandez. But when it started up again, you went
to the fire, and it was monitored, and then they left before it
had been extinguished. And it was the conflagration of the two
fires which destroyed thousands and thousands of acres, the
largest wildfire we have ever seen.
I secured an outside independent investigation through GAO
on the use of prescribed burns. Chief Moore, yes or no, when
the GAO report is released, can we count on you to work with my
office and the GAO to implement its recommendations to improve
our policies for prescribed burns?
Because I wanted to make sure we had an outside look in. I
know you have done some work, but will you commit to working
with us to implement those?
Mr. Moore. Congresswoman, I will always commit to working
with you.
Ms. Leger Fernandez. So, I was at the Rules Committee until
3 a.m. last night, together, how is it that we ended up having
two from Resources of the four Democrats on Rules. We were
there until 3 a.m. We were fighting Republicans' plan to
default on America, to hold our country hostage until we agreed
to a 22 percent cut from the agencies. Those cuts are going to
be disastrous, disastrous for people at USDA, cutting rural
programs, throwing families out of their homes, tossing them
out of Medicaid and nutrition programs.
But they are going to really do a lot of harm, a lot of
harm to your agency. What would that reduction do to your
ability to pay firefighters and to respond to the wildfires
that we all know are going to erupt? They are going to erupt
not because of prescribed burns, but because we are in a
historic drought caused by climate crisis. Tell us what it
would do.
Mr. Moore. Let me first say that whatever Congress decides
to pass, we are going to do our best to meet its intent.
Secondly, if there are reductions from where we are now,
what you will see is a continuation of us losing firefighters.
You will see a continued reduction in our ability to reduce the
potential for catastrophic wildfires out on the landscape. But
if that is Congress' decision, then we are going to do
everything we can to meet its intent.
Ms. Leger Fernandez. Chief Moore, I have run out of time,
but I will submit a written question and ask that you respond
to how we are going to be dealing with the burn scar. We know
that you are working on seeding and reforestation, because we
are going to have horrible flooding, right?
We saw it last time. We have snow and we have fast
snowmelt. I want you to respond to how you are going to be
working with all the Federal agencies on a coordinated basis
for the private lands, as well as the Federal.
Thank you. My time is up.
Mr. Moore. Thank you, Congresswoman.
Mr. Lamborn [presiding]. Thank you.
Chief Moore, it is great to have you here. Thanks for your
testimony and for coming before the Committee. It is great to
have Chairman Westerman here today. He has forgotten more about
forestry than most of us will ever know, yourself excluded in
that, of course.
I am going to ask a background question, Chief, and then a
legal question that I am very interested in.
First of all, though, while I appreciate the attention paid
to wildfire in the budget, I am concerned that this money won't
translate to reduced fires for reasons I will get into in a
minute. The Pike and San Isabel National Forests in or near my
district have a tree stand density of 250 to 300 trees per
acre. A healthy forest should have roughly 50 to 80 trees per
acre.
In the fall 2020, Colorado saw the two largest wildfires in
state history: the Cameron Peak Fire and the East Troublesome
Fire. Despite robust Federal funding, fuel material continues
to pile up on Federal lands. So, Chief, what methodology does
the Forest Service use to decide the appropriate level of fuel
material and tree stand density on any given land?
Mr. Moore. What we are trying to mimic, Congressman, and by
the way, thanks for that question, it is very informed.
And in many places outside of Colorado, we have even more
trees per acre than what you mentioned is 300. In fact, we have
600-plus in some of our locations across the West. And if we
want to mimic conditions in the past, where we want to get down
to somewhere between 40 and 80 trees per acre, that is a
dilemma, but it is also an opportunity for us, working with the
communities and our state partners, to say, ``How do we come up
with a plan, collectively, collaterally, and how do we take
advantage of the opportunities we have now?''
If you look at the Fiscal Year 2024 budget, we have a lot
of opportunities there, and it is a great opportunity for us to
engage with our community leaders, state, tribal, and other
Federal partners to look at what do we do here.
And I mentioned earlier in my opening statement about wood
innovations, and it is an opportunity there to create new
economic opportunities in many of our small, rural communities.
But we want to do that with our communities, and we want to be
able to sit down with them, so it is not the Forest Service
dictating or deciding what we do and how we provide these
opportunities, but it is us sitting around the table with
others to say, OK, here is our challenge, let's pursue
opportunities together.
Mr. Lamborn. OK, thank you. And I wish you all the success
on that.
Now to the legal issue that I think is a major obstacle to
achieving this goal. The President's budget requests hundreds
of millions of dollars for wildfire treatment, despite the fact
that both the Bipartisan Infrastructure Law and Infrastructure
and Jobs Act each gave Federal agencies billions of dollars for
wildfire management. Despite clear congressional authority to
remove this fuel, agencies refuse to do it for fear of
lawsuits.
In the 2018 farm bill, categorical exclusions were signed
into law that would allow all Federal agencies to remove dead
and dying trees without an Environmental Impact Statement or
assessment. This opened up hundreds of millions of acres to
wildfire fuel reduction, but only a few hundred thousand acres
have been treated.
A copy of the Forest Service Handbook specifically states
that the Forest Service will not use fuel-related categorical
exclusions because of the 2007 appellate court case Sierra Club
v. Bosworth, a 9th Circuit decision in which Sierra Club sued
the Federal Service for trying to remove dead trees, even after
they had been burned in a wildfire.
And I would like to submit this handbook language into the
record.
Without objection, so ordered.

[The information follows:]

NEPA Handbook--Chapter 30--Categorical Exclusion from Documentation
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Lamborn. So, Chief Moore, is the Forest Service still
prevented from carrying out fuel removal using categorical
exclusions because of the appellate Bosworth decision?
Mr. Moore. Yes. Congressman, litigation is what it is, and
it is a part of our society. So, let me say what we are doing,
if I can.
Mr. Lamborn. No, no. Talk about the Bosworth decision, if
you would.
Mr. Moore. Well, what I want to talk about, though, is to
answer that by letting you know what we have been doing, and
how we have adjusted, based on litigation.
Right now, 85 percent of our environmental assessments are
done through categorical exclusions, and that is about 4,000 on
an annual basis. So, we are using categorical exclusion to the
tune of about 85 percent of our NEPA documentation. That is
what I was talking about, streamlining or finding new
efficiencies, regardless of litigation. We are working with our
communities and partners to streamline this.
One other piece I might add here is that the Secretary has
given us emergency authorities to use, particularly in the
wildfire crisis strategy, on 28 million acres that is
considered in these landscapes, these fire sheds. To date, we
have had eight requests to come in to use this authority. We
have approved six of them. So, we are moving out on trying to
create lots of opportunities to remove a lot of that vegetation
using our partners, both at the state, Federal, tribal, and
non-profit level.
Mr. Lamborn. Well, Chief, I am glad that you are using some
of those various tools. I wish that you had the opportunity to
use even more.
I question whether Bosworth at the 9th Circuit should be
applied in a state like Colorado, which is in the 10th Circuit.
But beyond that, in the 2018 farm bill, Congress and the
President passed legislation saying use it in this context. And
the Forest Service is specifically saying, because of a
previous case predating the legislation in 2018, we are not
going to even touch it, we are not going to even go there. So,
I really question that approach, Chief, and I wish you would
look into that, and hopefully change that.
Mr. Moore. Yes, thank you, Congressman.
May I just say, too, though, that, based on my experiences,
I have found that when we debate and argue over litigation, we
paralyze ourselves from action. And my intent is to not allow
the agency to get paralyzed over talking about things that they
have no control over.
What we are going to do is look at the writing on the wall,
if you will, and how do we need to strategize to still be
effective, in spite of the challenges that we have. And that is
where we are today, and that is why I built a lot of
accountability in our system, and that is why I am meeting with
all of the regional forests' deputy chiefs on a monthly basis
to look at what are those challenges and what are we going to
do to mitigate those challenges.
Mr. Lamborn. Thank you. The gentlelady, Ranking Member, is
recognized.
Ms. Kamlager-Dove. Thank you, and thank you, Chief Moore,
for attending this Committee hearing and answering some
questions.
I come from California. I feel like we are the wildfire
capital of the United States. And part of fire risk management,
I believe, is personnel and having enough folks to fight the
fires. As a State Senator, I actually worked with the Fire and
Forestry Restoration Program, which pipelines men and women who
worked under Cal Fire while they were in prison into permanent
firefighter positions.
And I would love it if you could speak to the need to
appropriately fund permanent firefighter positions, so that we
have the kind of personnel that we need on an ongoing annual
basis, year-round to fight these fires.
Mr. Moore. Yes, Congresswoman. In fact, in the Fiscal Year
2024 budget there is a request in there to hire about 970
additional firefighters for that reason. We are also looking at
converting some of our seasonals or temporaries into permanent,
full-time.
Our plan is to have about 11,300 firefighters on board. As
of this morning, as I was looking at what we currently have
staffed, I think we have about 7,900, and that is the most that
we have had at this time of the year since about 2018. And a
part of that is because of what Congress has provided so far,
and that is a temporary salary bump that our firefighters have
received. So, we have less attrition in our firefighter ranks
because of that temporary fix.
But now, if this fix is not permanent, we will see a
continuation of what we were seeing in the past because when
you compare what a wildland firefighter gets in the Federal
Service, it is two times, sometimes three times less than what
some states and some county and local fire departments get for
the same work.
Ms. Kamlager-Dove. Thank you for that. I also represent Los
Angeles. We don't have many, if any, forests in Los Angeles,
although we do have some beautiful ones across my state. Can
you talk about the work that you are doing to introduce
forestry into urban areas, especially into urban communities
that might not have the access that some communities might that
are more rural?
Mr. Moore. Yes. In fact, as you look at our urban forest
program and how we are trying to connect within these urban
areas, we have about $1 billion to look at urban forestry kinds
of things.
A part of that is to look at how do we go into these urban
areas and talk about the value of planting trees. What is the
value of trees, and what impact or effect does it have on your
utility bill? What is the impact that you have in some of our
communities in our urban areas, where you don't have many
trees? And where we have explored that with some of our non-
profit partners, we have seen a huge difference.
In the Los Angeles area, as a matter of fact, where we have
put in what we call pocket parks or alleyways, green alleyways,
and where you bring birds back into the communities, and what a
spiritual well-being that is for the communities. So, we have
seen that with partners before with few dollars, and now that
we have a few extra dollars, our intent is to introduce more of
that.
But it is also the land stewards in the area. Everyone is
not going to come out to the national forests, so how can you
appreciate land steward ethics, and how do you improve your
land ethics from where you are, no matter where that is,
whether it is in the rural areas or in our populated urban
areas?
Ms. Kamlager-Dove. Thank you so much for that. I just have
to say that I also have the Baldwin Hills Conservancy in my
district. We have Kenny Hahn Park. It is a county park. But we
have been doing a lot of work to connect trails to one another,
to focus on watershed projects, to look at water harvesting and
conservation, to look at the protection and the expansion of
those lands, to look at connectivity between them and the urban
communities that surround them, and expand them in smaller
ways, but still meaningful ways across the county because you
can be in an urban center and still care about the environment.
I want to say to folks who are in rural communities that
these issues are also important to folks that live in the big
city.
Mr. Moore. Yes, you are absolutely right, Congresswoman. As
a matter of fact, down in the Los Angeles area, the San
Bernardino area, we are looking at planning, regional planning.
So, regardless of the landownership boundaries or
jurisdictional boundaries, how do we give the public a complete
experience?
So, rather than the county or city planning a trail and it
stops at Forest Service boundary, how do we include the Forest
Service and look at that complete experience and a better
experience by doing planning for that region, regardless of
jurisdiction boundaries. We are moving in that direction now to
really get at improving the experience that our publics have
with the outdoors, period.
Ms. Kamlager-Dove. Great, thank you, and I yield back.
Mr. Tiffany [presiding]. The gentlelady yields. I would
like to recognize the gentleman from Utah, Mr. Curtis, for 5
minutes.
[Laughter.]
Mr. Curtis. OK, Mr. Chairman, I will be the one person
today that sticks to my time.
[Laughter.]
Mr. Curtis. Chief Moore, so pleased to have you here. My
compliments to you in your demeanor and the way you have
handled this. I appreciate your professionalism.
As opposed to the gentlelady from Los Angeles, I represent
the 3rd Congressional District of Utah, where, as a state, 67
percent of our land is owned by the Federal Government. In my
district, a number of counties are 90 percent federally owned.
My district spans 400 miles top to bottom.
So, our relationship with you is just critical. And I am
pleased to report that city, county, state leaders would have
me thank you particularly for your men and women on the ground
and our relationship with the Forest Service. You can imagine
in my state how critical that relationship is, and I just want
you to know we feel very good about the relationship, and a
high compliment to your men and women in Utah who actually are
boots on the ground and doing a great job. So, thank you very
much for that.
Along that line, you have just rolled out the mature and
old-growth forest initiative. Maybe you could comment just
specifically how you see states and your agency interacting to
both identify and then manage these areas.
Mr. Curtis. Yes. So, Congressman, under the executive order
we were required to do a few things. And I will just mention
one was to do an inventory. We have to know what is out there.
The next step is really to do an assessment of the risk
associated with that. And then the third step of that, in order
to make that happen, is really engage our publics and our
friends into this process, so that it is not something that we
are doing without public involvement and public input. And that
is where we are now.
And I don't know if there is a full understanding of what
this actually says, but it does allow management in these
areas. It doesn't preclude that, because we all know that where
we are not doing management----
Mr. Curtis. Just for the sake of time, I am just going to
leave that footnote with you that, of course, the state of Utah
would love to be deeply involved in both identifying and
managing those areas.
Let's talk about fire suppression. Obviously, a big topic
today. The way a lot of these areas have been managed over the
years has left a lot of undergrowth in the understudy. And, I
think, traditionally, a lot of that in Utah has been, well, we
need to have people come in and harvest this wood, and we
would, of course, encourage that.
But I am also aware of efforts in Summit County to do a
biomass biochar project, and would just love to draw your
attention to that, and ask you to maybe look into that. That is
not something we have done much of in Utah, and I think
particularly in that county they would like to explore that and
see if that can be part of the answer, as well.
Mr. Moore. I would love to have the opportunity to visit
with you on that, and the community there. And, in fact, the
same thing and the same commitment I made to Congressman
Westerman.
Mr. Curtis. Great, excellent. Let me touch on the roadless
rule.
There are lots of reasons why this is good, but then also
has the ability to limit your ability to reach if you think
about specifically my district, where we have just thousands
and thousands of acres. Is there anything in your wildfire
crisis strategy that looks at the roadless rule, and how to
deal and access with these hard-to-reach areas?
Mr. Moore. Yes, I am not familiar on the extent across the
country, but I do think that we have opportunities to manage a
lot of these lands in some of these roadless areas.
We already have some roads in roadless areas, and if we are
going to treat some of these lands we have to have access in
and out. So, we are trying to see what are our opportunities in
this designation.
Mr. Curtis. I am going to make you a proposal that we would
love to host you in Utah. As I have alluded to, our state is
very different, right, than a lot of these areas. And to the
extent your travel plans ever find you in Utah, we would love
to host you and actually take you on the ground and see some of
the difficulties that are unique to Utah in managing these
forests. And we, you and I, could use that opportunity to also
continue to foster the relationship between your agency and my
state and local agencies.
Mr. Moore. Congressman, during a meeting, I did commit to a
lot of the county sups, county commissioners there to visit
Utah. So, I am looking forward to it.
Mr. Curtis. Good. Please coordinate with us. There are
things we would love to show you while you are there. Thank
you, Mr. Chief.
Mr. Moore. Absolutely.
Mr. Curtis. And Mr. Chairman, with 28 seconds left, I yield
my time because I am sure there are other Members who would
love to abuse the time.
Mr. Tiffany. The gentleman yields. And since I used more
than 28 seconds over my 5 minutes, we will count it toward that
deficit.
[Laughter.]
Mr. Curtis. OK.
Mr. Tiffany. Next, I would like to recognize the gentleman
from Oregon, Mr. Bentz.
Mr. Bentz, you have 5 minutes.
Mr. Bentz. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
And thank you, Chief Moore, for being here today. Sadly, I
don't have enough time to talk about all the issues. I will
list the ones I am not going to talk about.
I won't be talking about the need to use our forests better
for water retention.
I won't be talking about the First Peoples' opportunities
to access the forest, because they can, and I hope we use more
stewardship programs with them.
The years-long homeless problem around Bend, Oregon, where
dozens, if not hundreds, of people have moved into Forest
Service lands and won't leave.
The lack of proper notice to neighbors along Lemon Gulch in
and around Prineville, Oregon.
The embarrassingly low amount of the timber harvest in the
Western United States, and it is falling instead of going up.
The cost of treatment of land, which appears to be $700 to
$2,000 per acre, which puts in perspective perhaps the millions
that were mentioned earlier about treating our forests. And, of
course, there are 90-some-odd million acres of forests in the
Western United States that need help. So, you might want to add
some scale to some of those things that you are mentioning
today.
The one question I am going to ask before I go into an
example of what I do want to talk about, which is
accountability and respect for private property, which is not
apparent in many of the firefighting operations that your
agency either is in charge of or conducts, I will get to that
in a second. But I would like you to tell us what it costs the
Forest Service to fight fire per acre.
The number I have is $914, which is about six times what is
normal. Is that right? For putting a fire out, is that the cost
per acre to put a fire out by your agency, $914?
Mr. Moore. I would like to see what all you are putting
into that cost before I can commit on whether I think that is
appropriate or not.
Mr. Bentz. Yes, well, forget my number. What is yours?
Mr. Moore. I don't really have a number on what it takes. I
can tell you, generally, based on how we are funded and what it
takes. But we have been spending $2 billion on fire suppression
alone.
Mr. Bentz. I know you have been spending it. I want to know
how you are spending it. In fact, that is what we are here for
today. So, I will just ask you if you would please provide this
Committee with the cost per acre for the Forest Service to put
out a fire. The normal phrase is the Forest Service puts out
fires by dumping money on them, and they continue to dump money
on them until it rains or snows. Now, that is what is generally
said. I hope it is not true, but I need the number.
I want to talk about October 19 of last year, up near
Seneca, Oregon. That happens to be in my district. That
actually is adjacent to one of my brother's ranching
operations. And on that day, there was a prescribed burn
started by your teams. Now, they gave, basically, a several-
hours' notice to the permittee, who had cattle on that exact
space, not giving them time to get the cattle out. In fact,
they could see cattle from the road where the fire was started.
So, notice was an issue.
And there was also what I would call cheating on the
humidity test. And the way you do this, if the humidity is too
low in the space you are going to do the fire, you go somewhere
else and you take a test some distance away, and that is how
you get around it. And the rumor was heard over the radio that
that is what was going on.
When the fire was started, there ensued a debate, shall we
say, that is a nice word for it, between the property owners
who saw that a week earlier when they had been in the same
place, started the same fire, it had passed over a county
highway, paved road, cars going back and forth, and started
another bunch of fires. So, the question was, why in the world
were they doing the same thing again, when nothing had changed?
It was just as dry.
So, there ensued a rather heated discussion, so to speak,
between the landowner and the Forest Service folks that were
starting the fire and then controlling it. The sheriff arrived
and put your Forest Service person under arrest, and took him
away so that things did not escalate.
I saw your memos, and, Mr. Chair, I would like to offer
them for the record, two of them, that you gave to your
employees, saying how the employees were going to be supported,
no matter what. Yet, we have videos, the sheriff does, and
other recordings of what actually went on. Maybe you have seen
them.
But my point here is there wasn't one word in your
statements to your employees about the importance of being nice
to the people adjacent to your land. And that lack of respect
is reprehensible. It needs to change.
I am a total supporter of proper prescribed burns. That is
the only way we are going to get rid of this huge amount of
fuel. But you can't do it without proper respect. And when you
are going to burn up fences and burn up other people's trees,
about 100,000 board feet, they think, of the neighbor's
property burned up, not a word said about how to pay for it,
and immediately adjacent burning up fences between the cattle
and roads, that can't happen.
I am sorry to have to go on. I am going to stop right now,
Mr. Chair, because I don't want to further intrude upon time.
But I must say this is extraordinarily important. I look
forward to seeing the cost per acre.
Thank you, Chief Moore.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I yield back.
Mr. Tiffany. Per your request, we will enter that into the
record. I see no objections.

[The information follows:]

NATIONAL FEDERATION OF FEDERAL EMPLOYEES

NFFE NEWS RELEASE

November 2, 2022

Union Condemns Wrongful Arrest of U.S. Forest Service Employee

for ``Simply Doing His Job''

https://nffe.org/wp-content/uploads/2022/11/2022-11-2-PR-Snodgrass-
Arrest-final.pdf

*****

Today, the National Federation of Federal Employees (NFFE) strongly
condemns the wrongful arrest of Rick Snodgrass, a U.S. Forest Service
(USFS) wildland firefighter who was working as an active ``burn boss''
when taken into sheriff's custody on October 19, 2022. At the time of
his arrest, Firefighter Snodgrass, an Assistant Fire Management
Officer, was working as the incident commander overseeing fire
operations and containment efforts during a prescribed burn on the
Malheur National Forest in Grant County, Oregon. Grant County Sheriff
Todd McKinley arrested Firefighter Snodgrass during the burn operation
after the fire unexpectedly jumped a roadway when the wind picked up,
causing the fire to burn several acres of grasslands on private
property.

NFFE National President Randy Erwin released the following statement
after the arrest of USFS Firefighter Snodgrass:

``It is unconscionable that a local sheriff would arrest a working
wildland firefighter during an active fire operation. Not only did the
sheriff exceed his authority in detaining Firefighter Snodgrass, in
doing so, the sheriff put everyone and everything in danger by removing
a working fire commander during a dangerous incident. Firefighter
Snodgrass was arrested for simply doing his job.

``We applaud all of the wildland firefighters on the line that day who
held their focus despite the Sheriff's interference. Undeterred, they
worked together to contain the blaze and finish the job. Our
firefighters who conduct and lead prescribed burns, like Firefighter
Snodgrass, are highly trained professionals. They know how to manage
the most dangerous situations. Prescribed burns are essential to
keeping communities across this country safe from wildfires. When
dealing with unpredictable environmental conditions, it is always
possible that a prescribed burn could spill over into an untargeted
area. Normally when this happens, the government will address any
damages to affected parties as appropriate. It is not normal for a
local sheriff to arrest a working fire commander during an incident. In
doing so, the sheriff may have violated federal law that makes it a
felony to interfere with a federal employee during their official
duties, and the sheriff may have opened the county to massive liability
for a civil rights violation for unlawfully detaining and removing
Firefighter Snodgrass.

``Firefighter Snodgrass has the full, unconditional support of your
union, as does every federal wildland firefighter across this country.
NFFE is calling on state and federal authorities to investigate the
reckless actions of Sheriff McKinley to pursue any violation of civil
and criminal law. This incident will not be swept under the rug. There
must be consequences for this unprecedented abuse of power and
incredibly dangerous disruption to the critical work of the Forest
Service.

``We applaud the USDA and the USFS for expressing their full support of
Firefighter Snodgrass in the performance of his official duties. NFFE
will continue to follow this investigation and provide support to
Firefighter Snodgrass to ensure that rogue sheriffs or any other person
who threatens or impedes public servants answer for their actions.''

______

U.S. DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE

Forest Service

Chief Randy Moore

November 28, 2022

Update: Prescribed fire incident in Region 6

https://www.fs.usda.gov/inside-fs/leadership/update-prescribed-fire-
incident-region-6

*****

On October 21st I shared my thoughts with you about a concerning matter
where one of our burn bosses was arrested while conducting official
work duties. You may be seeing media coverage as this continues to
unfold, and I want to be sure you are hearing directly from me.

First and foremost, we are doing everything we can to support our burn
boss, Ricky Snodgrass. The matter is still under investigation by local
authorities, and an attorney chosen by Ricky, with the help of the
Department of Justice, will be representing him. One of our Code and
Commitments is that we protect one another, and we will continue to do
that here to ensure that Ricky is supported in every way and defended
vigorously in court.

As you all know, this is an unprecedented situation. As it continues to
play out, I want to personally assure you that Forest Service and USDA
leaders are tracking it closely and staying engaged. To that end, I
have appointed a Washington Office Fire and Aviation Management leader
to act as liaison to guide and support Ricky through this difficult
period. I want to reiterate what I said in my message a couple of weeks
ago--you will always have my support when you are performing duties
within the scope of your employment as a federal employee, and you can
expect the same support from your regional and local leadership.

We know prescribed fire is an essential tool in our toolbox for
reducing wildfire risk and protecting communities. I want to thank all
of you who have worked so hard to get your unit's programs back online
so we can begin prescribed burning at a time of year when we have some
of our best windows. You are making a difference by doing the work
that's needed right now--the right work in the right way.

______

Mr. Tiffany. The gentleman yields back. Next, I recognize
the gentleman from Montana, Mr. Rosendale, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Rosendale. Thank you very much, Mr. Chair.
Chief Moore, thank you so much for joining us today. I am
very concerned about forest management. It impacts air quality,
water quality, the economy, and our way of life in Montana and
throughout the country.
In 2022, more than 66,000 fires and more than 7 million
acres burned across the country. In Montana alone, 125,000
acres burned in 2022. We need to do all that we can to combat
wildfires out West. We have seen that, as timber sales at the
Forest Service lands go down, the severity of the wildfires on
those same lands increases. Throwing money at wildfire crisis
alone is not going to solve the problem.
I just did a little bit of research, and according to the
records, the National Forest Service budget in 1977 was $2.2
billion. The revenue was $2 billion. And we did not have nearly
the amount of acres being burned in wildfires as we do today.
It is incredible, the cause and effect that takes place. We
were harvesting more timber. We were generating more revenue.
It nearly covered the Forest Service budget. It was a true win-
win scenario, and there is a definite cause and effect that
takes place.
Now, clearly, this is your problem to help us solve, but it
is not a problem that was caused by you, and I do understand
that. But you are the guy who happens to be here answering the
questions today. And one of the things that you said earlier, I
was sitting here listening, and you said litigation keeps you
from meeting your goals. And I do believe that. I do believe
that. As Chairman Westerman said, you have the best interests
of the Forest Service at hand, and the forest.
I continue to be very concerned about the 2015 Cottonwood
decision, particularly as the partial fix expired last month.
As you know, the decision makes it so that if any new species
are listed under the Endangered Species Act, a new critical
habitat is designated, or more information becomes known about
a species previously listed, the U.S. Forest Service must
restore an already onerous consultation process with the U.S.
Fish and Wildlife Service about how the information will impact
both the forest plan and specific restoration projects.
Also, the Forest Service must follow different procedures,
depending on where you actually operate.
So, my first question is how does it impact the Forest
Service operations to have different requirements based on what
Federal Circuit Court jurisdiction you operate in?
Mr. Moore. Congressman, let me say first right off the bat
that we do agree that the Cottonwood decision would be an
impact on the agency. So, we really look forward to working
with you on how to address this issue.
But if I was to look at right now, that decision basically
says that we would have to reconsult on endangered species
issue at the plan level. We feel that that is unnecessary,
because we do that already at the site-specific project level.
And to do that at the planning level is not necessary. And if
we are required to do reconsultation at the planning level, I
can tell you it is going to take over 10 years and tens of
millions of dollars to do that. And we want to do that at a
time where we are really trying to reduce the hazardous
potential out there on the ground.
Mr. Rosendale. OK. We are limited on our time. I want to
get a couple more questions in.
So, if that would extend this consultation another 10
years, how long, on average, do the consultations take now with
the Forest Service and U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service?
Mr. Moore. It takes a long time, and it depends on the
project, and it depends on the issues that we are trying to
address.
Mr. Rosendale. A long time being 1 year, 2 years, 5 years?
Mr. Moore. It could take all of that.
Mr. Rosendale. OK.
Mr. Moore. Or less.
Mr. Rosendale. OK. Since the Cottonwood decision, do you
know how many forest projects have been contested in Montana
and/or the 9th Circuit?
Mr. Moore. We just had a decision this week, I believe. OK,
so we are not sure if they are Cottonwood or not, but we just
had a decision this week that we are looking into.
Mr. Rosendale. OK. The last count that I was able to get my
hands on showed that we have 28 timber sales covering nearly
30,000 acres that are tied up right now being litigated in
Montana. And, clearly, that is forest land that is not going to
be managed properly and timber that is not going to be
harvested. So, that is why we are trying to resolve this issue.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I am right down to it. I will yield
back, thank you.
Mr. Tiffany. The gentleman yields. Next, I would like to
recognize the gentleman from Arizona, Mr. Gosar.
Dr. Gosar. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Just last week, the
Biden administration published a new executive order called,
``Revitalizing Our Nation's Commitment to Environmental Justice
for All.'' While this Administration is spending copious
amounts of time creating useless studies, new environmental
justice scorecards that will, of course, end up with more
regulatory burden and, of course, unfunded task forces and
offices, real Americans continue to suffer. That is the actual
injustice.
I recently had a chance to meet with the ranchers from my
district and around the state. They work daily to bring us not
only food to the table across the state and the country, but
they also do something that is less talked about that I think
is more important. They are true conservationists. Their work
helps to improve the soil, the health of the rangeland, even
working to manage wildlife and wildfire.
So, I do have a question for you, Chief Moore. In your role
as Chief, yes or no, do you support the Rangeland Management
Program?
Mr. Moore. Of course I do.
Dr. Gosar. So, if you support the Rangeland Management
Program area, why is that support not translating into the
investment of funds and resources?
Mr. Moore. So, Congressman, we have lost over the years,
and I am talking about 20 years that has really had an impact
on where we are with any of our resources today. In fact, I
have testified before that we have lost about 8,000 non-fire
positions over the last 20 years. A lot of those positions
include a lot of these critical resource areas that we depend
on to manage that landscape.
Range cons, range conservationist, a range specialist, is
one of those resources that we have lost quite a bit of. And we
know that we have a lot of rangeland, particularly across the
West, but across the United States.
Dr. Gosar. Now, I regularly hear from ranchers in my
district that they are hearing that the agency says there is no
money for key projects, despite nearly every other program area
seeing significant increases in this budget. The fact that
nearly half of the agency's portfolio are rangelands, how do
you explain the lack of the parity for those 96 million acres
of rangeland under the Forest Service management?
Mr. Moore. Congressman, we are trying to show that
rangelands are really critical, they are important. In fact, in
the Fiscal Year 2024 budget, we have a plus million-and-a-half
bucks to go toward range management. So, we are trying to
recognize that in the budgeting process.
Dr. Gosar. Got you. According to the last report available,
which was for the year 2020, the National Forest Service
authorized a total of 871,152 animal unit months, also known as
AUMs, in the state of Arizona. Only 2,330 AUMs were on private
land.
I say this to illustrate the point that the Forest Service
and the decisions that they make in terms of management play an
outsized role in my district and the state at large in this
industry. Since you have been Chief, have you had a chance to
visit any of the permittees in Arizona?
Mr. Moore. Well, when we made the announcement on the
wildfire crisis strategy, I met with some of the ranchers at
that point.
Dr. Gosar. There or here?
Mr. Moore. In Arizona, where we made the announcement, we
made the first announcement with the Secretary.
Dr. Gosar. So, now we are also currently experiencing some
ongoing issues in the state, including conflicts between
different types of users, which I would love to work out with
you. Can I get a commitment from you to come visit us in the
near future?
Mr. Moore. Sure. In fact, I am sorry I didn't have a chance
to visit you before, but I have been there quite a bit. But I
am willing to always come back and visit, particularly with a
personal invitation by you.
Dr. Gosar. Well, I will tell you, Arizona is very
interesting.
Mr. Moore. Yes.
Dr. Gosar. And I think we could have solved a lot of our
problems with our catastrophic wildfires if we would have just
come through with the projects of the good stewardship aspect,
and got contracts out at appropriate times. Do you see any of
that moving forward?
Mr. Moore. I am not sure I am familiar with the information
that you are referring to, but I would be happy to follow up
with you to look into what you are seeing as a concern to see
how we might be able to address that.
Dr. Gosar. Part of the problem around particularly
Flagstaff is that you are working with a volcanic cone that is
very steep. So, you ought to be taking care of what the
mountain does first, but then go around.
But it would sure be nice to see you out there and have
that conversation, because the tools that are being used are
being misused. What the Forest Service on the ground are saying
doesn't equate to the way the tool was meant to be utilized for
these animal units. Thank you.
I yield.
Mr. Tiffany. The gentleman yields. Next, I would like to
recognize the gentleman from Idaho, Mr. Fulcher.
Mr. Fulcher. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Moore, thank you for being here. It is good to see you
again. Thank you for your testimony.
And I know you touched on this, but for the sake of our
dialogue, how is it going with the hiring of, first of all, for
seasonal firefighters, how is that challenge going right now?
Mr. Moore. That is an interesting question. Because on the
one hand, I would say it is going very well. As a matter of
fact, last year we hired about 3,400 new employees into the
Forest Service. The problem with that, though, is that we lost
2,600 people through attrition. So, we are trying to----
Mr. Fulcher. Now, is that a total number, or just----
Mr. Moore. Total number.
Mr. Fulcher. OK, all right.
Mr. Moore. Total numbers. And remember, before I have said
that of the 8,000 that we lost, we want to replace 4,000 of
them. And then we wanted to leverage the other positions
through partnerships. So, we had moved out to hire about 3,400
last year, which we did. So, we do have 3,400 new employees
into the agency, but we lost 2,600 during that same amount of
time.
So, when you look at increasing capacity, we have only
netted about 800 new positions into the agency.
Mr. Fulcher. So, how many openings? Since you are looking
at the overall number, how many openings do you have right now?
In a perfect world, if you could fill the----
Mr. Moore. Well, our plan is to hire 2,500 this year, and
we will be looking at probably even doing more of that, because
we know that if we look at our annual attrition rate it is at
about 1,800 per year. So, we know that we have to exceed the
potential attrition rate if we are going to really look at
increasing capacity. But we are moving to increase capacity. We
are making a lot of good progress.
Now we need to look at what is preventing the retention
concern that we have across the board. Part of it, and a large
part of it, had to do with our firefighters that were leaving
because of the issues that we had around pay, around housing,
around physical and mental care. So, we are addressing that on
a temporary basis, and we are seeing the results change to date
just based on this temporary fix.
Now, we will see that continue to go down, the attrition
continue to go down if this is made permanent.
Mr. Fulcher. You did mention partnerships.
Mr. Moore. Yes.
Mr. Fulcher. And the scenario with labor and the open
positions, it looks like that would be an important component.
With that, just shift gears a little bit. Talk about one of
those partnerships that is prevalent in my state, Good Neighbor
Authority. What is your view of that, and how is that going,
from your vantage point?
Mr. Moore. Yes, so the Good Neighbor Authority has been
just a wonderful tool for us. In fact, when you look at how we
are working with states, counties, tribes, it has really
magnified what we are able to do. And it has really brought in
a different type of collaboration that we are having with our
partners.
The other thing that we are doing in terms of partnership,
not necessarily through GNA, Good Neighbor Authority, but one
pilot we have now is moving timber out of Northern California
into Wyoming and South Dakota to really help support the wood
industry infrastructure. We are doing some of those types of
things, trying to maintain the existing infrastructure we have
to keep any more mills from closing or shutting down.
And now, what we want to do is introduce the new technology
or the new innovations into this process. So, we are working
with industry and others to kind of help us decide how we might
want to do that.
Mr. Fulcher. And that makes sense. And as you are probably
aware, we are attempting to expand that Good Neighbor Authority
so that tribes and counties can participate in the revenue-
sharing component, and that is not the case. So, is it fair to
say that you support that?
Mr. Moore. Yes. In fact, when I look at the difference
between us and the states in the GNA, and when we look at
tribes and counties, there is a big difference because of how
you can or cannot spend the revenue.
I think if there was a change in the new farm bill that
would allow that same way to operate with counties and tribes,
you would see a much bigger use of GNA across the country. And
I will say that GNA has really brought the community of people
together looking at trying to address the issues we have on our
landscapes.
Mr. Fulcher. Thank you for that.
Mr. Chairman, just for the record, I want to point out that
this GNA program has been good, and we have such a backlog of
work that needs to be done. Obviously, there are shortages with
staffing.
And just for the record, in 2022, there were 10 timber sale
contracts that were awarded that were worth approximately $3.4
million, and that also equated to 18.5 million board feet of
timber that were processed through that program. And that is
just one of the tools that I hope that we can expand and
include tribes and counties in.
With that, I yield back.
Mrs. Boebert [presiding]. The gentleman's time is expired.
The Chair recognizes Ranking Member Mr. Neguse.
Mr. Neguse. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Chief Moore, good to see you. As I mentioned in my opening
statement, we are very grateful for the work that you are doing
at the Forest Service and on a number of different policy areas
that are deeply important to the people of Colorado and folks
in my district.
I want to talk a bit about, first, some of the landscape
work and the fuels reduction. I am very grateful for the
investments that the Forest Service has made thus far as part
of the agency's Priority Landscapes rollout last year. And as I
mentioned, we were grateful to welcome you to Colorado in the
Arapahoe Roosevelt National Forest for the $33 million
appropriation or allocation that the Forest Service had made
with respect to that particular forest.
But I also represent, or my district, rather, includes many
other national forests. As you know, Colorado is home to 12,
and that includes the White River National Forest, which has
not received any funding through the 10-year strategy and the
Bipartisan Infrastructure Law, but faces grave threats from
wildfires, including threats to critical watersheds and water
supplies.
So, I guess what I would like to ask, Mr. Moore, is if you
could just explain how the Forest Service intends to designate
additional projects past the initial landscape investments that
have been made, and what the criteria will be for those
additional designations. And I just wonder how you are taking
into account the combined watershed and water supply ecosystem
and recreation conditions within those different landscapes,
which, ultimately, I think, would, in the case of the White
River National Forest, certainly move it up the list with
respect to the next phase, next tranche of landscape projects
that you all announced, as well as the Routt National Forest
and others in Colorado.
Mr. Moore. Yes. So, let me say up front and let me
recognize here that every place that doesn't currently have a
landscape can justify that they should have one. And I think
what it does is underscores the critical need to do a lot of
work, particularly across the West, when you are talking about
haz [hazardous] fuel reduction, when you talk about really
trying to be responsive to the fires that we see all across the
country because it has an impact on so many areas.
Colorado, for example, with the type of, what we call it,
the material there in relation to soil, we know that erosion
can occur quickly, and that erosion goes right into the bodies
of water. We know that it is critically important. You also
have a lot of really threatened and endangered species there,
as well, that are really important. And you have communities
like the White River area.
So, we are looking at combining not just the bill and IRA
funding and the GAO funding, but also the regular appropriated
dollars. And what we have done and what we are doing in a lot
of our communities is building collaboratives, and those are
community-led collaboratives, where we are sitting down with
them to help decide what are those priorities in those
different communities. And we are seeing a lot of payoff in
terms of building partnerships and relationships into these
communities that we serve that we don't typically have. And now
that we have some dollars, we want to make sure that we are
working with communities to help us prioritize where that work
is at.
Now, I can't tell you that the White River doesn't deserve
more. It does. It also underscores the importance of the Fiscal
Year 2024 budget, because it does address a lot of those types
of concerns. And I would just say, one, particularly in your
district, since you asked the question, the White River has a
pilot that we are looking at nationally, and it really gets at
this housing issue for firefighters, but also all of our
employees, because, like the White River, it is very expensive
to live in many places there.
So, our employees, while we are serving those communities,
we cannot afford to live in those communities. So, what we want
to do is look at different types of ways that we can address
this housing crisis that we have in many of our employees. The
White River National Forest is looking at working with the
county to look at a long-term lease to build housing that will
be affordable housing for our employees and others, as well, in
the community.
Mr. Neguse. And we are very excited. Thank you, Mr. Moore.
Thank you, Chief Moore, very excited about that particular
project. Of course, well aware, and working with Summit County
and the folks there to make sure that that comes to fruition.
I am grateful to hear about the holistic way, I think, in
which the Forest Service is going to approach the landscape
identification process moving forward.
A lot of my colleagues may not know, who aren't from
Colorado, that White River National Forest is the most visited
national forest in the United States of America, in my
district. So, I am very grateful that you have recognized that.
I also would just have to, in my final one second, simply
say we have to do more on firefighter pay. And I know we have
made great strides on that front through changes that we made
in the law that I championed with my colleagues. But I am
looking forward to working with you to ensure that those pay
increases are permanent. We cannot allow those to lapse.
With that, thank you for the indulgence and I yield back.
Mrs. Boebert. The gentleman's time has expired. The Chair
recognizes Mr. LaMalfa for 5 minutes.
Mr. LaMalfa. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Chief Moore, good to see you. Welcome here today. There was
some talk earlier in this Committee because not all the
Republicans supported a $1.6 billion allocation for the Forest
Service of a giant, over a trillion-dollar bill, which would
be, I think, a tenth of a percent, if I am thinking correctly,
that we are somehow not in favor of your mission and
firefighting and forest management, which a lot of us are not
going to support trillion-dollar bills to get a little bitty
goodie in there, and whether it is in the infrastructure bill
or the so-called inflation reduction bill. So, know that we are
here to help, and do it through a good appropriation process,
and give you the tools you need.
Let me jump over to the important aspect we are facing
right now, and I have a series of questions, so I am going to
ask you to be real, real concise. Do you agree that fire
retardant is a critical tool, especially with the aircraft, and
what we are using via aircraft, what we are facing in the West
with giant wildfire?
Mr. Moore. Do I----
Mr. LaMalfa. Do you agree that it is a critical tool?
Mr. Moore. Oh, yes.
Mr. LaMalfa. OK, thank you. All right. So, I was pretty
bummed out here recently in Committee that the Forest Service
testified against my bipartisan legislation to protect the
continued use of fire retardant from frivolous litigation that
is seeking to ban its use. And if they are successful, it will
take EPA up to 3 years to re-approve this material for fighting
wildfire. Why would the Forest Service be against legislation
to keep what we have?
Mr. Moore. Well, I don't know that we are against the use
of retardant. In fact, we think it is a critical and necessary
way. Not only is it a safety issue for our firefighters, but it
is also an issue for protecting communities.
Mr. LaMalfa. Well, we agree on that. So, we had legislation
to put a stop to a frivolous lawsuit trying to get rid of the
material that will take 3 years to re-approve a permit to
continue using the same stuff we have been using successfully.
It has a record of only a tiny, tiny percent accidentally
getting into a waterway, and it showed no ill effect. They do a
great job of keeping it out of, there is a 300-foot buffer
between the fire zone and the actual waterways. So, 99.9
percent of that doesn't even get beyond the 300-foot buffer.
So, why would we not fight to keep this material, especially
since we have wildfire every year and have that taken away from
us for 3 years?
Mr. Moore. Yes. You know, Congressman, you are right there.
There is probably less than 1 percent of retardant that
actually gets into streams. And we are really concerned that,
if that is taken away from us, then it is going to create a
real big problem for us.
Mr. LaMalfa. Well, I mean, this helps make your life easier
for the men and women on the line there. So, I think we have--
--
Mr. Moore. I am consistent in what I am saying, though.
Mr. LaMalfa. What is that?
Mr. Moore. I mean, the way I just approached that. I have
said this all along, that use of retardant is critical for our
needs.
Mr. LaMalfa. Thank you. All right. Well, then please find a
way to support my bill, should it come to be really needed in
the interim, because I don't know what we will do in the next 2
or 3 years without it.
Mr. McClintock and myself, we had sent a letter to you last
year on the ``let-burn policies'' that you promised that we
were going to implement aggressive strategies to extinguish
wildfires within the first 24 hours after one is detected. Is
that demonstrably different than previous years in utilizing
that?
Mr. Moore. Congressman, I know you have a lot of questions,
but this takes a little bit of time to explain because I do
think this is an area----
Mr. LaMalfa. Well, I mean, they only give me 5 minutes
around here. So, do you think more or less that we have seen a
measurable, positive success in stopping the let-burn?
[No response.]
Mr. LaMalfa. Measurable.
Mr. Moore. Well, I guess where I am going is that the
interpretation of let it burn differs between what the agency
is saying and how some people in the communities are viewing
that.
Mr. LaMalfa. Yes. Do you think it has made a difference,
though, in more aggressive, early attack?
Mr. Moore. Do I think let it burn has made a difference?
Mr. LaMalfa. No, us asking for us to, whatever you want to
call the let-burn.
Mr. Moore. I am not sure I understand.
Mr. LaMalfa. Let me talk about Secure Rural Schools real
quick. Under Title II and III of Secure Rural Schools, would
you commit to returning to the original language intent of SRS
Titles II and III, so that they have the flexibility locally to
move the money as they see fit?
When they have lost that flexibility, they are kind of
stuck with how they can use that money.
Mr. Moore. Yes, I understand the need to want to do that,
but I am not sure that the Administration has taken a position
on that yet, Congressman.
Mr. LaMalfa. Well, they are telling me they have lost the
ability under the Title II and III part of Secure Rural Schools
to have the flexibility, so we need to return to having those
Title II and III tools----
Mrs. Boebert. The gentleman's time has expired.
Mr. LaMalfa. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Mrs. Boebert. Thank you. The Chair recognizes Mr. Stauber
for 5 minutes.
Mr. Stauber. Thank you, Madam Chair.
And Chief Moore, great to see you. Thanks for joining us
today. I have a host of topics I would like to cover, so just
please bear with me.
First off, I reintroduced the Lake Winnibigoshish Land
Exchange Act this year. Local support has been quickly and
strongly building, and I understand that Chippewa National
Forest staff has been enthusiastically engaging on the bill and
the concurrent administrative exchange. As the bill moves
through this body, can you please commit to working with us
until it becomes law?
Mr. Moore. Yes, I would be happy to work with you,
Congressman.
Mr. Stauber. Great. Thank you very much. Now I would like
to focus on recreational topics that have impacted the Superior
National Forest in particular.
In January 2022, the U.S. Forest Service cut 13 percent of
permits into the Boundary Waters Canoe Area Wilderness,
justifying the cut in permits due to more folks enjoying the
outdoors due to COVID.
Next, Wilderness Watch is again suing you over towboat
usage, despite a 2015 settlement. For those that don't know the
context, in brief, the 1978 Act allows for towboat usage so
folks can have a recognized outfitter motor them to a different
entry point, which limits crowding and makes the wilderness
more accessible. The clear goal of this misguided, anti-use
lawyer group is to end the ability of, in my opinion, anybody
to enjoy the wilderness. It is clear that these groups don't
like or don't appreciate our seniors who have a need and want
and desire to be in the boundary waters or those with a
disability to have access and to enjoy our public lands.
And third, Lutsen Mountains needs a special use permit to
expand their ski resort. Otherwise, they won't be able to
compete with the larger resorts in the West. The opposition is
refusing to meet with them, and the ball is now in your and the
Forest's court.
Mr. Moore, I appreciate our working relationship, and I
expect it to continue, but please see these individual issues
for what they are: in my opinion, a clear, targeted action
that, at best, make access harder to the Superior National
Forest or, at worst, end it altogether.
So, Chief Moore, on canoe permits, tow boats, or Lutsen,
will you please commit to actions that will expand access to
the Superior National Forest, and not limit it?
Mr. Moore. Yes, Congressman. Let me say that I think having
access to these public lands is really important, and so is
managing access to these same public lands. And there is kind
of a delicate balance where, no matter which way we go, we have
a large share of our public just unhappy with whatever that
decision is.
In terms of Lutsen Mountain, we are looking to finish up
that EIS, the final EIS, and hoping to have a decision this
summer.
Mr. Stauber. Chief, this summer, can you give us an idea?
Just a rough ballpark.
Mr. Moore. I don't, because I wouldn't want you to hold me
to something that I haven't had discussions with the local
folks----
Mr. Stauber. Remember, in jest, our summers are shorter in
Minnesota.
Mr. Moore. I know.
Mr. Stauber. It is a time frame.
[Laughter.]
Mr. Stauber. OK. If you are unable to fix any of these
issues administratively, I expect your agency's assistance in
legislation that will rectify these problems in statute.
And lastly, I do want to thank you for the Chippewa and
Superior continuing to produce timber. However, our work is not
done. Our counties manage a lot of checkerboard land. Will the
Administration support counties retaining receipts from the
good neighbor management?
Mr. Moore. I believe we would. Because we think that that
is a way to increase the amount of use for GNA, and not only
for counties but for tribes, as well.
Mr. Stauber. Right. And I think that putting forth a Good
Neighbor Authority, good neighbor management, is important to
also recognize the cost to the counties to do so. There has to
be that reimbursement back, so they can cover their costs.
Chief Moore, I appreciate you being here today, and I look
forward to continued conversations to protect the opportunity
for us all to enjoy our national forests. Thank you very much.
Mr. Moore. Thank you.
Mrs. Boebert. Thank you. The gentleman yields and the Chair
recognizes the gentlewoman from Wyoming, Ms. Hageman.
Ms. Hageman. Thank you.
Those who cannot remember the past are condemned to repeat
it, and government is always trying to fix its last solution.
And I would say that those two sentences for me epitomize the
failures of the regulatory over-reach that we see quite often
with the management of the national forests.
In 2001, the USDA U.S. Forest Service promulgated the
roadless rule, which prohibited timber harvesting and road
construction on 58.5 million acres of National Forest Service
lands, or approximately one-third of the entirety of our
national forests in the United States, including 3.2 million
acres in the state of Wyoming. Despite the GAO report stating
that such an action would limit the Forest Service from safely
thinning dense forests or improving resistance to insects and
diseases that otherwise kill trees, thereby adding to fuel
loads, the agency moved forward with the rule.
I have the GAO report. It was issued in November 2000, and
there was very important information included in there,
including the fact that the Forest Service recognized at the
time that, should the rule be adopted, it would prohibit the
construction of roads, even if such a road would help the
agency to restore and maintain desired ecological conditions.
The rule also would not authorize road construction or
reconstruction in inventoried roadless areas to restore and
maintain ecological sustainability. And national forests could
generally not construct a road to thin stands of trees and
mechanically remove underbrush and dead vegetation to reduce
the risk of uncontrollable and potentially catastrophic fire,
or to improve the forest resistance to insects and disease that
otherwise could kill trees and add to fuel loads.
There were numerous national forests throughout the country
that were extremely concerned and opposed the roadless rule
because they recognized what it would do. And, in fact, we now
know what it has done, which it is responsible for the
catastrophic forest fires we have seen, and it is also
responsible for the pine beetle outbreak that we have suffered
in the interior West.
According to this report, officials on several national
forests included in our review voiced concerns about the long-
term impacts of the roadless rule. For example, officials on
the Routt National Forest anticipated an outbreak of beetles
resulting from a catastrophic windstorm in 1997 that felled
13,000 acres of trees in or adjacent to roadless areas on the
forest. They believed that the preferred alternative, the
roadless rule, would not allow them to construct the roads
necessary to remove trees in roadless areas that in the future
may become infected by beetles currently living within this
deadfall. And, in fact, Chief Moore, that is exactly what has
happened, hasn't it?
Mr. Moore. I think you very eloquently described some of
the challenges that we have with the roadless rule.
Ms. Hageman. Yes. The roadless rule failed us in terms of
being able to manage our national forests. Wouldn't that be
fair to say?
Mr. Moore. Well, it has certainly presented some challenges
to us, which we are realizing now.
Ms. Hageman. But you knew back in 2000, not you, but the
Forest Service was warned way back in 2000--and there were many
people, including Forest Service personnel from all over the
United States, who actually begged the National Forest Service,
I have the letters, to please not adopt the roadless rule
because it was going to result in exactly what has happened,
which is catastrophic forest fire and pine beetle outbreak and
devastation throughout the interior West. Correct?
Mr. Moore. I am not sure what you have read, but I stand by
the statement I made just now.
Ms. Hageman. OK. What is your plan to increase access to
roadless areas so that you can monitor, detect, and treat bark
beetle infestations in the future?
Mr. Moore. Well, I think that is part of anytime these
bills have been passed, Congresswoman, is that we need to sit
down----
Ms. Hageman. That wasn't a bill, that was a regulation.
Mr. Moore. Well, any time even that regulations are there,
we need to sit down and really look at the implications of that
regulation.
Ms. Hageman. So, in fact, you haven't been doing that in
your position as forest chief up to this point, recognizing, to
use your terminology, that the roadless rule created very
serious challenges for the National Forest Service?
Mr. Moore. Well, I am recognizing that we do have
challenges with the roadless rule.
And no, I have not, because I have only been in the job for
a little while, and that has not been my focus.
Ms. Hageman. OK. Even though it affects one-third of our
national forests.
Mr. Moore. We have gone on record saying that our forests
need to be managed, the vegetation needs to be removed because
it contributes to disease and insect outbreak, as well as
wildfires.
Ms. Hageman. On a related note, yes or no, is it a priority
for you to ensure that Western states that are vulnerable to
extreme wildfires have streamlined tools to increase the pace
of wildfire risk protection?
Mr. Moore. Yes, all forests.
Ms. Hageman. And is Wyoming a Western state?
Mr. Moore. Yes.
Ms. Hageman. The Wyoming delegation sent you a letter on
March 15, 2023, asking as to why we were excluded from the
management commission and the 10-year strategy that you have
put together. Will you add Wyoming to the Wildland Fire
Mitigation Management Commission and 10-year strategy?
Mr. Moore. We are always looking for ways to improve what
we are doing, Congresswoman, but let me, if I could, just
address Wyoming. Even though Wyoming does not have one of the
21 priority landscapes yet, we are putting $10 million in this
year's budget toward Wyoming, trying to protect some of those
areas.
Ms. Hageman. $10 million for 9.2 million acres of land?
Mrs. Boebert. The gentlewoman's time has expired. The
gentleman may answer the question.
Mr. Moore. Yes, but keep in mind we are doing other
treatments in Wyoming, as well. I had mentioned one of the
pilot projects we have, where we are taking timber out of
California and moving it into Hulett, Wyoming to help really
stabilize the wood industry. So, that is having a positive
impact not only in Wyoming, but also South Dakota, as well, on
the Black Hills.
So, we are recognizing the need to do a lot more than what
we are currently doing all across the West----
Ms. Hageman. But that isn't treating our national forests.
Mrs. Boebert. The gentlewoman's time has expired.
Ms. Hageman. I would ask that you respond to our letter in
writing, please.
Mr. Moore. Sure, yes.
Mrs. Boebert. Thank you. And as the Chair, I recognize
myself for 5 minutes.
I want to thank you so much, Chief Moore, for being here.
The Forest Service estimates 63 million acres are currently
at risk of catastrophic wildfire, and each year nearly 10
million acres in the United States catch on fire. Instead of
engaging in active management to reduce the size and number of
wildfires, this Administration chose to spend billions on the
back end, putting out wildfires.
From 2015 to 2020, $14.1 billion of taxpayer money was
spent just extinguishing fires. This is the result of poor
forest management, frivolous lawsuits filed by radical
environmentalists, unnecessary red tape from the Federal
bureaucracy, and policies that prioritize funding for
suppression as opposed to active management. The last 2 years
under Democrat control have left my district on fire,
literally.
Chief Moore, as you know, wildfires continue to deliver
historic devastations to our Western states. In my home state
of Colorado, four of the five worst wildfires in state history
have all occurred since 2018, and the problem is only getting
worse. Colorado is ranked third worst in the country for
properties at high extreme risk of wildfire damage. The need
for more active forest management in Colorado could not be more
apparent.
Despite the clear need, last year the Forest Service Rocky
Mountain Region saw a decrease of nearly 20 percent in timber
output from the previous year's amount. Chief Moore, what is
being done to ensure that the level of timber output and active
forest management actually increases in Colorado and the Rocky
Mountain Region?
Mr. Moore. Thank you, Congresswoman. Let me start by saying
that the forests have not been poorly managed. I think there
has been a lack of management taking place, and a lot of that--
--
Mrs. Boebert. I could agree with that.
Mr. Moore [continuing]. Is due directly to the resources
that we have not been able to get until recently. So, what you
see us trying to do now is build the infrastructure so that we
can be more effective in how much we are able to provide by
treating the landscape.
And this past year, between BIL and IRA funding, we have
tried to build a foundation of the structure to be more
successful in some of the outputs that we are looking at. We
are looking at hiring more people. We have looked at creating
more collaboratives to work with the communities. And now that
we have done a lot of that, now it is really about hitting the
ground.
Mrs. Boebert. Thank you.
Mr. Moore. This year you will see us hitting the ground,
and you will see much more coming out in terms of productivity.
Mrs. Boebert. Thank you, Chief Moore. I would agree that
there is a lack of forest management, but that also includes
not just infrastructure, but just the red tape from the Federal
bureaucracy, the frivolous lawsuits that have taken place, the
designations that prevent us from managing our forests.
Chief Moore, diminishing timber sales allotted by the
Forest Service have led to mill closures across the country in
recent years, including in my district. There are legitimate
infrastructure concerns throughout the West as sawmills that
need reliable Federal timber continue to shutter as the Forest
Service fails to deliver. What is the Forest Service's plan to
turn around the trend of mill closures in the West?
Mr. Moore. Well, I just mentioned earlier to the
Congresswoman from Wyoming on what we are trying to do with the
industry to try to maintain the existing infrastructure and
yet, at the same time, introducing new opportunities through
cross-laminated timber, also biochar opportunities, which
creates jobs.
The other part of the bill that is allowing us to support
the existing infrastructure is to look at mill modifications,
modernizing. We have spent quite a few dollars on some of the
facilities, modernizing them to use the type of material,
basically, low-value, small-diameter-type material.
Mrs. Boebert. Thank you. And since our time is short, what
is the Forest Service's plan to process hazardous fuels
necessary to meet your wildfire strategy goals without more
mill infrastructure?
Mr. Moore. Yes, and it goes back to my earlier statement.
We do not have the infrastructure in place, looking at the
traditional infrastructure, and that is why we are looking at
wood innovations to bring in new ways to utilize this material
that we really have. Colorado would be one of those states that
has this type of material, because, as you know, you have lost
the infrastructure there, by and large.
Mrs. Boebert. Right. Thank you, Chief Moore.
I think it is clear House Republicans have real solutions
to prevent catastrophic wildfires and protect our local
communities and improve the health of our nation's forests, all
while saving taxpayer money. This budget fails to accomplish
any of these goals.
And I yield back, and Chief Moore, I want to thank you so
much for your valuable testimony, and the Members for their
questions. Thank you so much for your time for being here with
us. I know you are headed to Colorado. If I am in the area, I
would love to meet up with you there, as well. But, hopefully,
we can have representation if I am not. So, thank you for going
in person to Colorado for those meetings with our foresters.
Members of the Committee may have some additional questions
for our witness today, and we will ask that he respond to these
in writing. Under Committee Rule 3, members of the Committee
must submit questions to the Subcommittee Clerk by 5 p.m. on
Monday, May 1, 2023. The hearing record will be open for 10
business days for these responses.
If there is no further business, without objection, the
Subcommittee stands adjourned.

[Whereupon, at 12:03 p.m., the Subcommittee was adjourned.]

[all]
