- OVERSIGHT HEARING ON REPORTING FOR DUTY: EXAMINING THE IMPACTS OF THE DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR'S REMOTE AND TELEWORK POLICIES

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

REPORTING FOR DUTY: EXAMINING
THE IMPACTS OF THE
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR'S
REMOTE AND TELEWORK POLICIES

=======================================================================

OVERSIGHT HEARING

before the

SUBCOMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT AND
INVESTIGATIONS

of the

COMMITTEE ON NATURAL RESOURCES
U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION
__________

Thursday, January 18, 2024
__________

Serial No. 118-90
__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Natural Resources

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.govinfo.gov
or
Committee address: http://naturalresources.house.gov
______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

54-613 PDF               WASHINGTON : 2024

COMMITTEE ON NATURAL RESOURCES

BRUCE WESTERMAN, AR, Chairman
DOUG LAMBORN, CO, Vice Chairman
RAUL M. GRIJALVA, AZ, Ranking Member

Doug Lamborn, CO                     Grace F. Napolitano, CA
Robert J. Wittman, VA                Gregorio Kilili Camacho Sablan, CNMI
Tom McClintock, CA                   Jared Huffman, CA
Paul Gosar, AZ                       Ruben Gallego, AZ
Garret Graves, LA                    Joe Neguse, CO
Aumua Amata C. Radewagen, AS         Mike Levin, CA
Doug LaMalfa, CA                     Katie Porter, CA
Daniel Webster, FL                   Teresa Leger Fernandez, NM
Jenniffer Gonzalez-Colon, PR         Melanie A. Stansbury, NM
Russ Fulcher, ID                     Mary Sattler Peltola, AK
Pete Stauber, MN                     Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez, NY
John R. Curtis, UT                   Kevin Mullin, CA
Tom Tiffany, WI                      Val T. Hoyle, OR
Jerry Carl, AL                       Sydney Kamlager-Dove, CA
Matt Rosendale, MT                   Seth Magaziner, RI
Lauren Boebert, CO                   Nydia M. Velazquez, NY
Cliff Bentz, OR                      Ed Case, HI
Jen Kiggans, VA                      Debbie Dingell, MI
Jim Moylan, GU                       Susie Lee, NV
Wesley P. Hunt, TX
Mike Collins, GA
Anna Paulina Luna, FL
John Duarte, CA
Harriet M. Hageman, WY

Vivian Moeglein, Staff Director
Tom Connally, Chief Counsel
Lora Snyder, Democratic Staff Director
http://naturalresources.house.gov

------

SUBCOMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT AND INVESTIGATIONS

PAUL GOSAR, AZ, Chairman
MIKE COLLINS, GA, Vice Chair
MELANIE A. STANSBURY, NM, Ranking Member

Matt Rosendale, MT                   Ed Case, HI
Wesley P. Hunt, TX                   Ruben Gallego, AZ
Mike Collins, GA                     Susie Lee, NV
Anna Paulina Luna, FL                Raul M. Grijalva, AZ, ex officio
Bruce Westerman, AR, ex officio

------

CONTENTS

----------
Page

Hearing held on Thursday, January 18, 2024.......................     1

Statement of Members:

Gosar, Hon. Paul, a Representative in Congress from the State
of Arizona.................................................     1
Kamlager-Dove, Hon. Sydney, a Representative in Congress from
the State of California....................................     3

Statement of Witnesses:

Locke, Dawn G., Director, Strategic Issues, U.S. Government
Accountability Office, Washington, DC......................     4
Prepared statement of....................................     6
Questions submitted for the record.......................    13
Green, Mark D., Deputy Assistant Secretary, Human Capital and
Diversity, Chief Human Capital Officer, U.S. Department of
the Interior, Washington, DC...............................    14
Prepared statement of....................................    16
Questions submitted for the record.......................    18

OVERSIGHT HEARING ON REPORTING FOR
DUTY: EXAMINING THE IMPACTS OF THE
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR'S REMOTE
AND TELEWORK POLICIES

----------

Thursday, January 18, 2024

U.S. House of Representatives

Subcommittee on Oversight and Investigations

Committee on Natural Resources

Washington, DC

----------

The Subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:17 a.m. in
Room 1334, Longworth House Office Building, Hon. Paul Gosar
[Chairman of the Subcommittee] presiding.
Present: Representatives Gosar, Collins; and Stansbury.
Also present: Representative Kamlager-Dove.
Dr. Gosar. The Subcommittee on Oversight and Investigations
will come to order.
Without objection, the Chair is authorized to declare a
recess of the Subcommittee at any time.
The Subcommittee is meeting today to hear the testimony on
the impacts of the Department of the Interior's remote and
telework policies.
The gentlewoman from California, Ms. Kamlager-Dove, asks to
sit in and, without objection, so ordered.
Under Committee Rule 4(f), any oral opening statements at
hearings are limited to the Chairman and the Ranking Minority
Member. I therefore ask unanimous consent that all other
Members' statements be made part of the hearing record if they
are submitted in accordance with the Committee Rule 3(o).
Without objection, so ordered.
I now recognize myself for my opening statement.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. PAUL GOSAR, A REPRESENTATIVE
IN CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF ARIZONA

Dr. Gosar. Good morning, everyone, and thank you to our
witnesses for joining us today.
To start out, I want to point out that both the Office of
Personnel Management, OPM, and the Office of Management and
Budget, OMB, declined to testify today, or even send written
testimony, despite their deep level of involvement in crafting
the remote and telework policies for the Federal Government and
related data collection capabilities for each agency.
Despite their unwillingness to generally speak to the
telework policies of the Biden administration, I must say I am
not surprised, as it seems to repeat an ongoing pattern of the
Biden administration witnesses unwilling to participate in
congressional hearings.
With that said, I am excited for the witnesses we do have
today. We will examine the Department of the Interior's
telework and remote work policies and their effect on the
delivery of services to Americans.
And to be clear, I recognize that telework and remote work
can be useful in limited and well-defined circumstances.
However, DOI has abused their excessive telework and remote
work policies for employees at a time when even President Joe
Biden is calling for a return to the office.
The COVID-19 pandemic is long over, and the effects of the
pandemic subsided years ago. As a result, last April, the Biden
administration made the long-overdue decision to sign my bill
into law, H.J. Resolution 7, terminating the COVID National
Emergency Act declaration. Shortly thereafter, OPM announced
the removal of the COVID-19 nationwide operating status for
Federal agencies.
Then, in August, White House Chief of Staff Zients sent an
e-mail around to the cabinet member officials urging Federal
agencies to return to in-person work in order to ``deliver
better results for the American people.'' Clearly, even the
White House is concerned about the excessive current levels of
telework and remote work leading to a lack of productivity
among Federal agencies, and the inability of agencies like DOI
to meet their mission and provide core services to Americans.
However, despite the direction to return to in-person work, DOI
has only made minimal changes to their telework policy.
The reality remains that DOI allows their telework-eligible
employees to only report to the office twice every 2 weeks. DOI
has so far been unable to produce any meaningful data for
tracking their telework and remote work rates among employees,
so it is unclear how much progress the Department of the
Interior has made towards returning to in-person work.
Here we are in 2024, and DOI remains mired in irrelevant
and ineffective COVID-19 telework policies. The Department of
the Interior's agencies are less productive and continue to
fall behind on outstanding work affecting the delivery of
services to all Americans. For example, last fall GAO released
two reports detailing the numerous delays and deficiencies at
the Bureau of Indian Affairs, including their ongoing struggles
to process applications on time for providing real estate
services to the tribes and tribal citizens, and to close out
agreements issued under the Indian Self-Determination and
Education Assistance Act. The reports also identified serious
health and safety issues at Indian schools and detention
facilities, and glaring deficiencies with national data
regarding missing Indigenous women.
Additionally, our national parks are in a state of
disrepair. Critical deferred maintenance projects are dragging
our parks down, as the National Park Service has yet to make
any significant progress on their massive backlog of properties
and projects, even those that address immediate danger to the
life, health, and property, or the infrastructure.
GAO also identified that the National Park Service is
currently ``unable to effectively identify and manage its
deferred maintenance due to inaccurate and unreliable data.''
Now, I expect my friends on the other side of the aisle to
argue once again that if only Congress provided more funding,
DOI could solve its many problems. However, I urge my
colleagues to break free from this DC swamp mired virus so we
can address the larger problems within our Federal agencies. I
disagree. After years of additional funding, literally, it
seems like funding has grown on trees around here, nothing has
changed. In all honesty, things have gotten worse.
Sometimes money isn't the issue. Perhaps it is really poor
management. And that often starts at the top, with bad
policies. As a result, it is the responsibility of the Interior
agencies to find ways to become more productive and efficient
in the resources management already at their disposal. It is
time for the DOI to return to more appropriate pre-pandemic
levels of telework and remote work so that staff will establish
a stronger workplace culture for working in person.
House Republicans have put forth a solution to the in-
person absenteeism of Federal employees. The Show Up Act, which
would return Federal agencies to pre-pandemic levels of
telework and require Federal agencies to submit studies to
Congress detailing how increased telework levels during the
pandemic impacted their missions. I urge the Senate to take up
this legislation so we can get back to business here in DC.
Thank you to our witnesses for being here today.
I now recognize the Ranking Member, Ms. Kamlager-Dove.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. SYDNEY KAMLAGER-DOVE, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA

Ms. Kamlager-Dove. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Let's be clear. Telework and remote work works. Workers
want it because it makes them more productive and reduces
stress by avoiding commutes. It has been life-changing for
parents, military spouses, people with disabilities, and others
who have access to more job opportunities and better work-life
balance. Employers want it because it helps attract the best
talent. New mothers want it because it helps them manage
postpartum depression, motherhood, and life, and getting to
Congress.
My colleagues have cherry-picked the evidence to support
their claim that we need to return to pre-pandemic telework
postures. But most of the research shows that telework
flexibility is a net positive for employers and employees
alike. That is probably why a 2023 survey of House employees
shows Republicans use it for their own staff.
COVID opened our eyes to the advantages of telework. We
can't and shouldn't ignore those lessons. And it is not so much
about government agencies being unproductive; it is about being
under-resourced but also overwhelmed by Republican hearing
committee gotcha agendas that refocus their energies on showing
up and performing here, rather than doing the work for the
American people.
So, let's continue to put this into perspective. We know
now that 2023 was the hottest year on record by a wide margin,
and the rate of warming over the past century has no precedent.
We also had record-breaking temperatures in our oceans, with
marine heatwaves occurring all over the globe. Concentrations
of carbon dioxide and methane, two major greenhouse gases, also
hit new highs, and the consequences are all around us: extreme
weather, floods, droughts, wildfires, new disease outbreaks. It
is getting worse, and addressing it will require resources,
coordination, and commitment on an unprecedented scale.
Seventy-two percent of the American people know that
climate change is happening every day, not four times a year.
But what are we here to do today? We are micromanaging where
people's duty stations are and how often they have to commute.
Luckily, Democrats and the Biden administration are pulling
our weight. Under Democratic leadership we passed the Inflation
Reduction Act and the Bipartisan Infrastructure Law, which had
historic investments for addressing the climate crisis. Now,
the Department of the Interior is working diligently and
effectively to implement them both.
In my home state of California, Interior recently awarded
about $295 million to protect the Colorado River Basin,
enabling us to conserve up to 643,000 acre-feet of water
through next year to better protect constituents against the
impacts of historic droughts and the climate crisis. That kind
of commitment is what it will take, and this type of action is
what my colleagues on the other side oppose. The Biden-Harris
administration is getting the work done remotely, hybrid, and
in person.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and thank you to the witnesses for
being here.
I yield back.
Dr. Gosar. I thank the gentlelady from California. I am now
going to introduce our witnesses.
First, we have Ms. Dawn Locke, Director of Strategic
Issues, U.S. Government Accountability Office, and Mr. Mark
Green, Deputy Assistant Secretary for Human Capital and
Diversity and the Chief Human Capital Officer, U.S. Department
of the Interior.
Let me remind you that our lights are very key here. We
have 5 minutes for the statement. The light will start off as
green. When you start to see the yellow, that means start
summing it up, we just have a minute left. And when you see
red, wrap it up.
To begin your testimony, please push the ``on'' button to
make sure that the microphone is on so everybody can hear you.
We will start with you, Ms. Dawn Locke.

STATEMENT OF DAWN G. LOCKE, DIRECTOR, STRATEGIC ISSUES, U.S.
GOVERNMENT ACCOUNTABILITY OFFICE, WASHINGTON, DC

Ms. Locke. Thank you, Chairman Gosar and members of the
Subcommittee.
I am pleased to be here today to discuss telework and the
Department of the Interior.
GAO's work highlights some of the benefits and challenges
of telework, as well as key practices for successful telework
programs. As telework continues to evolve, it is important to
have a clear understanding of how telework can help or hinder
mission performance so agencies can make necessary adjustments.
To start with benefits, they include a reduced need for
office space, which can result in cost savings. Telework can
also help agencies' organizational health, such as employee
engagement, or resiliency to ensure missions continue during
periods of disruption like what we have seen during this week's
snowstorm.
In addition, human capital officers have reported that
telework can address skills gaps similar to those faced by the
Interior because, if used effectively, telework can help
recruit and retain the best possible workforce. This issue
related to human capital management has remained on GAO's high
risk list since 2001 because these skills gaps undermine
agencies' abilities to meet their missions. Again, effective
telework implementation can help agencies address these gaps.
While there are benefits to telework, it is important that
we mitigate the challenges to fully realize these benefits.
Challenges we see thus far include managing Federal space,
issues with technology and data reliability. Allow me to unpack
those a bit.
When it comes to Federal space, agencies have long
struggled to determine how much office space they need to
fulfill their missions. Retaining excess space is another area
that has been on GAO's high-risk list since 2003. And as you
are aware, Interior struggles with these very issues. We found
that leveraging benchmarks established by OMB could help
Federal officials better assess workspace needs and potentially
reduce costs.
For telework challenges related to technology, we have
identified equipment shortages, lack of training on the
technology, and limited network capacity at various agencies.
We have also found challenges with telework data, particularly
data maintained in OPM's human resource database system. Please
note improving the reliability of these data can better help
agencies and all of you make informed decisions about telework.
What I want to make very clear regarding these challenges
is that they could be mitigated if agencies followed key
practices that provide a roadmap for successfully implementing
telework programs. These practices consist of steps like having
a dedicated telework office to provide oversight, ensuring
appropriate technology for those working from home, and having
evaluation plans to make course corrections where needed.
Federal telework programs faced an intense stress test
beginning in March 2020. This experience enhanced our
understanding of what telework can do for the Federal
Government. When used effectively, it could be quite
beneficial, but only if we address the challenges. That is,
only if we implement key practices and have the data needed to
make informed decisions to ensure this workforce flexibility is
meeting mission and customer needs.
Bottom line, we must continue to provide oversight of
telework and hold agencies accountable for meeting their goals
whether their employees are sitting in a cubicle, working in
the field, or connecting virtually from home.
I look forward to your questions.

[The prepared statement of Ms. Locke follows:]
Prepared Statement of Dawn G. Locke, Director, Strategic Issues, U.S.
Government Accountability Office

Chairman Gosar, Ranking Member Stansbury, and Members of the
Subcommittee: I am pleased to be here today to discuss telework and the
Department of the Interior.
Federal agencies use telework to help accomplish their missions and
maintain operations, especially during emergencies, such as the COVID-
19 pandemic. In March 2020, the Office of Management and Budget (OMB)
instructed agencies to maximize the use of telework to allow federal
employees to remain safe while working from alternative locations and
maintaining mission critical workforce needs.
Prior to this abrupt and unprecedented change in agencies'
operating postures, Congress had encouraged federal agencies to expand
participation in telework, including by passing the Telework
Enhancement Act of 2010 (the act).\1\ The act, among other things,
established requirements for executive agencies' telework policies and
programs.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Pub. L. No. 111-292, 124 Stat. 3165 (2010), codified primarily
at chapter 65 of title 5, United States Code. The act defined telework
as a work flexibility arrangement under which an employee performs the
duties and responsibilities of such employee's position, and other
authorized activities, from an approved worksite other than the
location from which the employee would otherwise work. Prior to this
act, the most significant congressional action related to telework was
included in a fiscal year 2001 appropriations provision. This provision
required agencies to establish policies under which eligible employees
could participate in telework to the maximum extent possible without
diminished employee performance. The Office of Personnel Management was
tasked with ensuring application of this requirement to an increasing
percentage of the federal workforce over time. Department of
Transportation and Related Agencies Appropriations, 2001, Pub. L. No.
106-346, app., tit. III, Sec. 359, 114 Stat. 1356, 1356A-36 (2000).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Agencies have continued to adapt their operating postures since the
onset of the pandemic. These adaptations vary widely in response to the
multitude of federal agency mission areas, including Interior's
management of America's natural and cultural resources. Federal
employees' job functions also vary widely and can include common core
office functions such as budget, human capital, and information
technology; and, for Interior, the numerous other functions specific to
its 11 bureaus.
Interior's personnel must sometimes be present on-site to perform
their work. For example, the visitor experience at national parks is
shaped, in part, by direct visitor services activities such as ranger
interpretive programs, guided tours, and educational programs at
visitor centers. National Park Service staff also perform basic
custodial duties and provide law enforcement operations.
In August 2023, the Interior Secretary's Tribal Advisory Committee
reported that Interior needs to reopen Bureau of Indian Affairs (BIA)
Regional Offices for in-person services because Tribes and their
citizens are not getting proper services from BIA teleworkers.\2\ The
report stated that in-person access to officials to ask questions is
particularly important for elderly members and those without Internet
or reliable Internet.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ U.S. Department of the Interior Secretary's Tribal Advisory
Committee, Policy Recommendations (Washington, D.C. Aug. 2023).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
In April 2023, OMB instructed federal agencies, including Interior,
to increase meaningful in-person work--particularly at agency
headquarters--while still using flexible operational policies such as
telework to enhance employee recruitment and retention.\3\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ Office of Management and Budget, Measuring, Monitoring, and
Improving Organizational Health and Organizational Performance in the
Context of Evolving Agency Work Environments, OMB M-23-15 (Washington,
D.C.: Apr. 13, 2023).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Interior, similar to other federal agencies, will continue to face
challenges in capitalizing on the lessons learned during the pandemic
and finding the right balance of telework, remote work, and in-person
work to accomplish its mission. As agencies consider their future of
work in a rapidly changing environment, it is important that they
follow key practices for implementing an effective telework program.
My statement discusses several of our previously issued reports
that have highlighted (1) the potential benefits of telework, (2) the
challenges of telework, and (3) leading telework practices agencies
should follow as they continue to adapt their operating postures. In
developing this testimony, we reviewed our previously issued reports
and testimony on our body of work on federal telework at Interior and
other federal agencies as well as reports on and recommendations to
Interior.\4\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\ GAO, Federal Real Property: Agencies Need New Benchmarks to
Measure and Shed Underutilized Space, GAO-24-107006 (Washington, D.C.:
Oct. 26, 2023); Tribal Issues: Bureau of Indian Affairs Should Take
Additional Steps to Improve Timely Delivery of Real Estate Services,
GAO-24-105875 (Washington D.C.: Oct. 26, 2023, reissued with revisions
on Nov. 6, 2023); Telework: Growth Supported Economic Activity during
the Pandemic, but Future Impacts are Uncertain, GAO-23-105999
(Washington, D.C.: July 26, 2023); Tribal Programs: Actions Needed to
Improve Interior's Management of Trust Services, GAO-23-105356
(Washington, D.C.: Apr. 27, 2023); COVID-19: Federal Telework Increased
during the Pandemic, but More Reliable Data Are Needed to Support
Oversight, GAO-22-104282 (Washington, D.C.: Feb. 8, 2022); Bureau of
Land Management: Better Workforce Planning and Data Would Help Mitigate
the Effects of Recent Staff Vacancies, GAO-22-104247 (Washington, D.C.:
Nov. 16, 2021); COVID-19: Selected Agencies Overcame Technology
Challenges to Support Telework but Need to Fully Assess Security
Controls, GAO-21-583 (Washington, D.C.: Sept. 30, 2021); Federal
Telework: Key Practices That Can Help Ensure the Success of Telework
Programs, GAO-21-238T (Washington, D.C.: Nov. 18, 2020); Federal
Telework: Additional Controls Could Strengthen Telework Program
Compliance and Data Reporting, GAO-17-247 (Washington, D.C.: Feb. 17,
2017); Federal Human Resources Data, OPM Should Improve the
Availability and Reliability of Payroll Data to Support Accountability
and Workforce Analytics, GAO-17-127 (Washington, D.C.: Oct. 7, 2016);
Federal Telework: Better Guidance Could Help Agencies Calculate
Benefits and Costs, GAO-16-551 (Washington, D.C.: July 15, 2016);
Federal Telework: Program Measurement Continues to Confront Data
Reliability Issues, GAO-12-519 (Washington, D.C.: Apr. 19, 2012); and
Human Capital: Further Guidance, Assistance, and Coordination Can
Improve Federal Telework Efforts, GAO-03-679 (Washington, D.C.: July
18, 2003).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
We have ongoing work reviewing the implications of telework use at
federal agencies. Specifically, we are examining how the use of
telework has contributed to ongoing changes among selected agencies'
customer service delivery, organizational performance, worker
productivity and performance, and operations. This statement reflects
some of the recent policies and guidance issued by OMB and the Office
of Personnel Management (OPM) that we reviewed as part of that work.
We conducted the work on which this testimony is based in
accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards. Those
standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain
sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our
findings and conclusions based on audit objectives. We believe the
evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and
conclusions based on our audit objectives.
Potential Benefits

Telework offers potential benefits to federal agencies as well as
to the federal workforce. These benefits include improving recruitment
and retention of employees, reducing the need for costly office space,
and creating an opportunity to better balance work and family demands.
In addition, telework is a tool that agencies can use to help
accomplish their missions during periods of disruption.
Last July, we reported on the impact of telework, both as it
pertains to the workforce and various sectors of the economy. Studies
we reviewed found that, while telework generally had a positive impact
on worker productivity and firm performance in certain sectors,
methodological issues complicate efforts to estimate its long-term
impacts.\5\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\ GAO-23-105999.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Federal human capital officers have identified telework as a
workforce flexibility that can help address skills gaps by helping to
attract, recruit, and retain the best possible workforce. For agencies
to leverage telework to recruit and retain employees to close skills
gaps in their workforce, they must ensure their telework policies,
procedures, and other controls are appropriately implemented. Agencies
must also ensure that the technology needed for employees to telework
functions as it should.
Since 2001, we have included strategic human capital management in
GAO's High-Risk List. This is partially because of the need to address
current and emerging skills gaps that are undermining agencies'
abilities to meet their missions.\6\ Last April, we reported that any
progress to close mission-critical skills gaps will require
demonstrated improvements in agencies' capacity to perform workforce
planning, foster employee engagement, train staff effectively, and
recruit and retain the appropriate number of staff with the necessary
skills. We found that agencies face challenges in these areas of human
capital management.\7\ Effective implementation of telework policies
and procedures could help improve talent management shortfalls, which
is often how agencies experience skills gaps.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\6\ GAO, High-Risk Series: An Update, GAO-01-263 (Washington, D.C.:
January 2001).
\7\ See GAO, High-Risk Series: Efforts Made to Achieve Progress
Need to Be Maintained and Expanded to Fully Address All Areas, GAO-23-
106203 (Washington, D.C.: Apr. 20, 2023).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
We have previously reported areas where Interior faces challenges
in meeting its mission due to skills gaps. For example:

In October 2023, we reported that the Bureau of Indian
Affairs (BIA) identified staff shortages as a factor
affecting its processing times for real estate services.\8\
We recommended, among other things, that BIA develop a plan
to address factors affecting its processing times for
delivering real estate services, including staff shortages.
BIA agreed with these recommendations and stated it would
develop a plan for overseeing the entry of real estate
data, among other things.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\8\ GAO-24-105875.

In April 2023, we found that the Bureau of Trust Funds
Administration (BTFA) within BIA lacked a strategic
workforce plan that would help Interior better understand
the resources it needs to manage trust funds, especially as
demand for beneficiary services continues to increase.\9\
We recommended that Interior develop a strategic workforce
plan for carrying out trust functions and update agency
collaboration guidance for trust operations and services.
Interior generally agreed with our recommendations. As of
October 2023, BTFA continues to finalize a statement of
work to hire a contractor to assist with the development of
a workforce plan. BTFA anticipates awarding the contract
during the second quarter of fiscal year 2024 and
completing the strategic workforce plan during the second
quarter of fiscal year 2025.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\9\ GAO-23-105356.

In November 2021, we found that the Bureau of Land
Management (BLM) made substantial changes to its
organizational structure without a strategic workforce plan
that addressed the two critical needs that define strategic
workforce planning: (1) aligning the agency's human capital
program with emerging mission goals, and (2) developing
long-term strategies for acquiring, developing, and
retaining staff to achieve programmatic goals.\10\ We
recommended that BLM (1) track data on vacancies and
details for all offices, and (2) develop an agency-wide
strategic workforce plan that aligns its human capital
program with emerging mission goals and includes long-term
staffing strategies. Interior agreed with our
recommendations. As of February 2023, BLM said it had hired
a contractor to develop a strategic workforce plan and made
some progress, but had not yet finalized such a plan. By
implementing our priority recommendation in this area, BLM
will better ensure it has the workforce it needs to achieve
its mission and goals.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\10\ GAO-22-104247.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Challenges

Our prior work has identified a number of challenges related to
telework. These challenges include:

Measuring and shedding underutilized federal space. Federal
agencies have long struggled to determine how much office space they
need to fulfill their missions. Retaining excess and underutilized
space is one of the main reasons that federal real property management
has remained on our High-Risk List since 2003. In a report we issued
last October, we found that agency officials identified challenges to
increasing utilization, including a lack of benchmarks for full
utilization that accounts for increased telework.\11\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\11\ GAO-24-107006.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Differences in agencies' measures, calculations, and benchmarks can
also contribute to differences in capacity and utilization measures
across the government. A benchmark for measuring utilization that
accounts for higher levels of telework could help the federal
government more consistently identify underutilized space within and
across agencies. This information could support better alignment of the
federal real property portfolio with future needs and cost reductions
from releasing unneeded space. We recommended that the Director of OMB
should ensure that the Deputy Director of OMB, as Chair of the Federal
Real Property Council, leads the development and use of benchmarks for
measuring building utilization that account for greater levels of
telework. OMB agreed with our recommendation.
In our October 2023 report, we reviewed the agencies' use of their
headquarters buildings at 24 federal agencies--including Interior--for
three selected weeks during January, February, and March 2023. We found
that Interior's headquarters utilization was in the third quartile of
the 24 agencies. The six agencies in the quartile used 23 percent of
their headquarters buildings' capacity on average over our sample
period (see figure 1).

Figure 1: Estimated Weekly Averages of Utilization of Federal
Headquarters Buildings across a 3-Week Sample

(One Week in Each of January, February, and March 2023), by Quartile

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

.epsNote: Utilization is a ratio of a building's capacity and the
extent to which an agency uses that capacity. Utilization differs from
attendance because a building's capacity is based on the size of the
building, not the number of people assigned to it. All assigned staff
could go to a building, and it could still be underutilized if the
building has more space than it needs. The quartile percentage
represents a weekly average, but percentage ranges of space utilization
vary by federal agency. In addition, daily in-person attendance rates
generally varied throughout the work week. The Department of Defense
provided us data on attendance in a government facility (Mark Center)
located in Alexandria, Virginia, which we had identified as its
administrative headquarters. The Office of Personnel Management
indicated that additional non-agency staff occupy space in its
headquarters building, and its numbers include those workspaces and
attendance. Department of Housing and Urban Development and Small
Business Administration officials noted that their headquarters
buildings were undergoing renovation during the data collection period,
contributing to a decrease in attendance. The Department of Energy
headquarters includes the Forrestal, Germantown, and Portals locations.
See GAO-24-107006 for information on how we calculated the extent to
which the agencies are using the buildings.

Reliability of telework data. In 2012, we reported that OPM had
been concerned about the reliability of telework data it received from
executive agencies through its annual data call over the prior
decade.\12\ OPM also maintains data on telework use in its Enterprise
Human Resources Integration (EHRI) system.\13\ In 2016, we found that
several issues affected the reliability of the EHRI payroll system,
including the telework variables within the database. We made five
recommendations, including four to improve data reliability.\14\ In
2019, OPM implemented one recommendation by updating its EHRI database
payroll data standards to include data on the number and instances of
telework use by federal employees and the number of hours of telework
used.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\12\ GAO-12-519.
\13\ EHRI is OPM's primary warehouse for data about federal
employees. OPM designed EHRI to leverage its existing IT
infrastructure, staff, and tools to integrate federal personnel,
payroll, training, and retirement databases. EHRI was developed
following the electronic government initiative in 2001. This initiative
was aimed at using IT to enhance the access to and delivery of
government information and service to citizens, business partners, and
employees. It also was designed to improve the internal efficiency and
effectiveness of the federal government.
\14\ GAO-17-127. The four recommendations to improve data
reliability were for OPM to (1) update EHRI payroll database
documentation to be consistent with current field definitions and
requirements, including the Guide to Human Resources Reporting and the
Guide to Data Standards, Part B; (2) consistently monitor system-
generated error and edit check reports and ensure that timely action is
taken to address identified issues; (3) develop a schedule for
executing plans to integrate the payroll data into the larger suite of
EHRI databases; and (4) evaluate existing internal control activities
and develop new control activities for EHRI payroll data, such as
implementing transactional edit checks that leverage the information in
the other EHRI datasets. OPM concurred with our four recommendations
and implemented two of them. As of January 2024, one remains open, and
one remains open and partially addressed.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
In 2023, OPM officials told us they implemented another
recommendation by developing a process to monitor system generated
error reports in EHRI. However, it still needs to close two other
recommendations to improve data reliability. Specifically, OPM needs to
finish updating control activities to further leverage EHRI datasets
and data quality. It also needs to develop a schedule for integrating
payroll data into a larger suite of EHRI databases.\15\ OPM officials
agreed that payroll data in EHRI could eventually be substituted for
OPM's current telework data calls but to do so would first require
implementation of the above actions.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\15\ In addition to the four recommendations to improve data
reliability, we also recommended that OMB improve the availability of
EHRI payroll data--for example, by preparing the data for analytics,
making them available through online tools such as FedScope, and
including them among the EHRI data sources on the OPM website and
Data.gov. As of January 2024, the recommendation remains open.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Until OPM develops a plan to fully implement all our
recommendations to improve data reliability issues with its EHRI
payroll data, it will continue to be unable to precisely assess
telework usage across agencies and provide a full and accurate picture
to Congress to support oversight. In February 2022, we recommended that
Congress consider requiring OPM to develop an implementation plan to
improve the reliability of information in EHRI, including telework
information.\16\ In doing so, Congress should consider providing OPM a
deadline for completing the plan.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\16\ GAO-22-104282.

IT. Agency officials reported a variety of IT challenges at the
onset of the pandemic and took steps to try to mitigate these
issues.\17\ These challenges included equipment shortages, lack of
training, and limited network capacity. Agencies told us they needed to
ensure that teleworkers had the right technology to perform their
duties successfully. Other areas of importance to agencies included
assessing organizational and teleworker technology needs, addressing
access and security issues related to telework, and providing technical
support when needed.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\17\ We previously reported on (1) selected agencies' initial
experiences in providing the IT needed to support remote access for
maximum telework, and (2) the extent to which selected agencies
followed federal information security guidance for their IT systems
that provide remote access. See GAO-21-583.

Work portability and replicating on-site work process. Several
agencies reported that some positions and procedures were not portable.
They added that they needed additional time at the outset of the
pandemic to revise guidance and policies to accommodate full-time
telework for eligible employees occupying those positions. Agencies
also experienced challenges replicating the office environment and some
processes in a remote setting. These included challenges with hiring,
security checks and fingerprinting new employees, mail delivery and
processing, and accessing office supplies and equipment.
Implementation of Key Practices Can Help Ensure the Success of Federal
Agencies' Telework Programs

In our prior work, we have also identified key practices for
federal agencies to implement with their telework programs. These key
practices can be grouped under seven categories: (1) program planning,
(2) telework policies, (3) performance management, (4) managerial
support, (5) training and publicizing, (6) technology, and (7) program
evaluation.\18\ These telework key practices--several of which are
required by statute--provide a roadmap for federal agencies to
successfully implement their telework program.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\18\ GAO-21-238T and GAO-03-679.

Program planning. The Telework Enhancement Act of 2010 (the act)
required agencies to designate a telework managing officer (TMO).\19\
Establishing such a leadership position is consistent with the key
practices we identified. The TMO is the primary agency official devoted
to the development and implementation of the agency's telework program
and facilitates its compliance with the act. Agencies may also
designate other officials to implement the day-to-day operations of the
telework program.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\19\ Prior to the act, some agencies designated telework
coordinators to be responsible for overseeing the implementation of
telework programs and reported on the status of these programs. See,
for example, Consolidated Appropriations Act, 2004, Pub. L. No. 108-
199, div. B, tit. VI, Sec. 627, 118 Stat. 3, 99 (2004).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Other key practices we identified related to program planning
include establishing a cross-functional project team, establishing
measurable telework program goals, developing an implementation plan
for the telework program, developing a business case for implementing a
telework program, providing funding to meet the needs of the telework
program, and establishing a pilot program when initiating telework
efforts.

Telework policies. Agencies should establish telework policies and
guidance to ensure that their workforce is telework ready.\20\ Another
key practice to facilitate telework is to establish telework agreements
for use between teleworkers and managers. Agencies are required to have
such agreements. The act requires agencies to ensure an employee enters
into a written agreement with an agency manager who outlines the
agreed-upon specific work arrangement between the manager and the
teleworking employee before the employee participates in telework.\21\
Our previous work found that telework agreements should establish job
duties and expectations, performance standards, measurable outcomes and
deliverables, and periodic review.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\20\ The act required agencies to establish a policy under which
eligible employees may be authorized to telework within 180 days after
enactment. 5 U.S.C. Sec. 6502(a)(1)(A).
\21\ 5 U.S.C. Sec. 6502(b).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Other key practices related to telework policies include
establishing eligibility criteria to ensure that teleworkers are
approved on an equitable basis using criteria such as suitability of
tasks and employee performance; establishing policies or requirements
to facilitate communication among teleworkers, managers, and coworkers;
and developing guidelines on workplace health and safety issues to
ensure that teleworkers have safe and adequate places to work offsite.

Performance management. Our past review of telework-related
literature found that agencies should ensure that the same performance
standards are used to evaluate both teleworkers and nonteleworkers. In
addition, agencies need to establish guidelines to minimize any adverse
impacts that telework could have on nonteleworkers before employees
begin to work at alternate worksites. Following these practices can
help eliminate any perceived unfairness and reduce potential sources of
tension between teleworkers and nonteleworkers.
The act makes performance a criterion for continued program
participation and states that telework policies should ensure that
telework does not diminish employee performance or agency
operations.\22\ It also requires agencies to ensure that teleworkers
and nonteleworkers are treated the same for the purposes of performance
appraisals, among other management activities.\23\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\22\ 5 U.S.C. Sec. 6502(b)(1) and (3).
\23\ 5 U.S.C. Sec. 6503(a)(3).

Managerial support. Our previous review of telework-related
literature found that, to establish an effective telework program, it
is critical to obtain support from top management and address
managerial resistance to telework. Managers may resist telework in part
because the change requires them to shift from managing by observation
to managing by results. Managers' acceptance of telework is highly
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
dependent on top management's commitment to those changes.

Training and publicizing. Telework involves different ways of
working, as well as supervising employees. A key practice we identified
from telework-related literature is that both employees and supervisors
should receive training to ensure a common understanding of the
program. Telework training should include two key components: it should
(1) address policy issues and include general information, such as
policy updates and an orientation to telework; and (2) focus on
telework program activities, including such topics as IT applications,
performance management, and time management.\24\ It is also important
to inform the workforce about the telework program.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\24\ GAO-03-679.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The act requires agencies to provide an interactive telework
training program to telework-eligible employees and to managers of
teleworkers.\25\ The act further requires that employees successfully
complete the training before entering into a telework agreement.\26\
OPM guidance also recommends managers complete telework training prior
to approving telework agreements.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\25\ 5 U.S.C. Sec. 6503(a)(1).
\26\ 5 U.S.C. Sec. 6503(a)(2).

Technology. Our prior review of telework-related literature found
that agencies should assess teleworker and organization technology
needs; develop guidelines about whether the organization or employee
will provide necessary technology, equipment, and supplies for
telework; provide technical support for teleworkers; address access and
security issues related to telework; and establish standards for
equipment in the telework environment. Agencies must also have an
appropriate IT infrastructure in place that allows large numbers of
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
employees to telework simultaneously.

Program evaluation. Telework-related literature we previously
reviewed recommends that agencies develop program evaluation tools and
use them from the very inception of the program to identify any
problems or issues with the program, and develop an action plan to
guide any necessary changes for telework or the organization. The
literature also emphasized the need for tracking systems that can help
accurately ascertain the status of telework implementation in the
agencies and, subsequently, the federal government. Such a tracking
system should include a formal head count of regular and episodic
teleworkers, as well as nonteleworkers.
The act requires OPM to report annually on an assessment of the
progress each agency has made in meeting agency participation rate
goals, and other agency goals relating to telework, such as the impact
of telework on energy use, performance, and productivity.\27\ To assist
in meeting this requirement, OPM collects data on telework via an
annual data call to all executive branch agencies.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\27\ 5 U.S.C. Sec. 6506(b)(2)(F).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Assessments that include information on benefits, net cost savings,
and costs can help decision makers determine the overall effects of
their telework programs and the progress achieved.
According to OPM, since its 2017 telework data call, agencies have
improved in their ability to track cost savings but not all agencies
reported information on cost savings.
In conclusion, telework is a tool that allows agencies to provide
employees flexibilities on where they work as they fulfill agency
missions. The use of telework also allows the government to maintain
operations during periods of emergency, as evidenced by large increases
in telework during the COVID-19 pandemic. However, agencies such as
Interior can take steps to enhance telework implementation and better
manage available resources. For example, using benchmarks that account
for higher levels of telework can help agency officials better manage
federal space and reduce costs. Improving the reliability of telework
data can help agencies make more informed management decisions about
investing resources, planning for continuity of operations events,
assessing compliance with the act, and managing physical space needs.
In addition, following telework key practices--several of which are
required by statute--provides a roadmap for federal agencies such as
Interior to successfully implement their telework programs.
Chairman Gosar, Ranking Member Stansbury, and Members of the
Subcommittee, this completes my prepared statement. I would be pleased
to respond to any questions that you may have at this time.

*****

This testimony was submitted as an official GAO Report, titled
``FEDERAL TELEWORK--Interior Can Benefit from Strategic Workforce
Planning and Following Key Practices.'' The original document can be
found at:

https://www.gao.gov/assets/d24107162.pdf
______

Questions Submitted for the Record to Dawn G. Locke, Director,
Strategic Issues, Government Accountability Office

Questions Submitted by Representative Gosar

Question 1. A recent GAO report indicated that the Office of
Personnel Management does not have sufficient data on teleworking
across the Federal Government and that their data collection process is
insufficient.

1a) Can you explain the deficiencies that GAO identified, and how
the recommendation's issued by GAO will improve OPM's data collection
efforts?

Answer. OPM maintains data on telework use in its Enterprise Human
Resources Integration (EHRI) system, OPM's primary warehouse for data
about federal employees. In October 2016, we found that while OPM
internal controls provide some assurance of the reliability of EHRI
payroll data, weaknesses in the design or implementation of certain
control activities and monitoring controls for the EHRI payroll
database increase the risk of reliability issues that may limit OPM's
ability to fully leverage the data in support of its mission.
Specifically, (1) weaknesses in control activities have resulted in
limited quality checks and acceptance of unreliable data into the EHRI
payroll database; and (2) weaknesses in monitoring activities have
resulted in failure to address these reliability issues and increased
risk that these issues may compound over time.

In response, we made four recommendations to OPM to improve data
reliability, including (1) updating EHRI payroll database documentation
to be consistent with current field definitions and requirements,
including the Guide to Human Resources Reporting and the Guide to Data
Standards, Part B; (2) consistently monitoring system-generated error
and edit check reports and ensure that timely action is taken to
address identified issues; (3) developing a schedule for executing
plans to integrate the payroll data into the larger suite of EHRI
databases; and (4) evaluating existing internal control activities and
develop new control activities for EHRI payroll data, such as
implementing transactional edit checks that leverage the information in
the other EHRI datasets. Taking these steps will allow OPM to correct
internal control weaknesses such as risk of data errors, incomplete
data fields, and ineffective monitoring of EHRI payroll data. In turn,
OPM will be better able to leverage these data to meet its mission and
allow others to make full use of these data for their research needs.

In 2019, OPM implemented one recommendation by updating its EHRI
database payroll data standards to include data on the number and
instances of telework use by federal employees and the number of hours
of telework used. In 2023, OPM officials told us they implemented
another recommendation by developing a process to monitor system
generated error reports in EHRI. However, OPM still needs to close two
other recommendations to improve data reliability. Specifically, OPM
needs to finish updating control activities to further leverage EHRI
datasets and data quality. It also needs to develop a schedule for
integrating payroll data into a larger suite of EHRI databases.

In addition, we found there are continued inconsistencies and
limitations of agency and government-wide telework data outside of the
EHRI payroll system. In February 2017, we found that agencies may
report to OPM's annual telework data call using a variety of systems
that define and track telework measures differently. We recommended
that OPM should strengthen controls for reviewing, validating, and
reporting telework data in annual Status of Telework in the Federal
Government reports. Specifically, OPM should follow up with agency
officials on data outliers, including significant changes in year-to-
year data. OPM disagreed with our recommendation, saying its processes
provide agencies with opportunities to correct their own data. We
maintain that OPM should implement these actions.

Question 2. Your testimony stated that ``until OPM develops a plan
to fully implement all our recommendations to improve data reliability
issues . . . it will continue to be unable to precisely assess telework
usage across agencies and provide a full and accurate picture to
Congress to support oversight.''

2a) Can you elaborate on how OPM's failure to implement the GAO's
recommendations prevents Congress and the American public from
obtaining a more accurate picture of telework and remote work usage
across the Federal Government, including the Department of the
Interior?

Answer. Without available and reliable payroll data, Congress and
the American public must continue to rely on data that are more costly,
imprecise, or limited in scope--missing opportunities to leverage
centralized, standardized data that is essential for accountability and
well-informed policy decision-making.

2b) How do the shortcomings from OPM's data collection efforts
impact the GAO, OIG, and Congress from conducting more effective
oversight?

Answer. Without reliable telework data from EHRI, GAO, OIG, and
Congress must continue to rely on data that are more costly, imprecise,
or limited in scope, such as data OPM collects from its annual telework
data call. This complicates oversight efforts to ensure agencies comply
with the Telework Enhancement Act of 2010, are following the
Administration's guidance to increase meaningful in-person work, and
are following key practices for telework program implementation.

2c) Is there anything Congress should direct OPM to do regarding
telework data collection?

Answer. Congress should consider requiring OPM to develop an
implementation plan to improve the reliability of information in EHRI,
including telework information. In doing so, Congress should consider
providing OPM a deadline for completing the plan.

______

Dr. Gosar. I thank the gentlelady, Ms. Locke, for her 5
minutes, and now I recognize Mr. Green for his 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF MARK D. GREEN, DEPUTY ASSISTANT SECRETARY, HUMAN
CAPITAL AND DIVERSITY, CHIEF HUMAN CAPITAL OFFICER, U.S.
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR, WASHINGTON, DC

Mr. Green. Chairman Gosar, Ranking Member Kamlager-Dove,
and members of the Subcommittee, thank you for the opportunity
to appear before you today to discuss the Department of the
Interior's long-standing telework and remote work policies.
I am Mark Green, Chief Human Capital Officer at the
Department. After my 24-year career in the United States Army,
I worked for the U.S. Forest Service, and I have been in my
current position for about a year.
Since Congress enacted the Telework Enhancement Act of
2010, the Department has supported the telework program that
allows agency employees, with the agreement and approval of
their supervisor, to engage in appropriate telework and remote
work opportunities.
Telework may be authorized only to the extent that an
approved telework agreement does not diminish employee or
organizational performance, and any agreement must be reviewed
by the employee's supervisor to ensure that it does not impede
the Department's mission.
The Department continues to refine our telework program by
implementing government-wide best practices, providing training
to supervisors and employees, and improving our information
technology infrastructure. These refinements and investments in
our telework program enabled the Department to quickly move to
maximum telework posture while maintaining mission-critical
functions during the COVID-19 pandemic. These actions complied
with the Office of Management and Budget's guidance related to
that emergency.
Throughout the pandemic, the Department's workforce of
approximately 70,000 dedicated employees across 2,400 different
geographic locations continued to deliver the Department's
mission. Our dedicated employees remained resilient throughout
a very difficult time, managing and maintaining over 400
national park units, 550 national wildlife refuges, 475
critical infrastructure dams, and 480 million acres of public
lands for the American people. Over 5,600 wildland fire
personnel continue to fight fires on our lands and in our
parks. The Department's more than 7,000 law enforcement
officers and park rangers served and protected over 500 million
visitors to the lands and the waters under the Department's
stewardship in 2020 and 2021. Our scientists and field
technicians continued to gather data and work in their
laboratories.
Simply put, the Department's employees continued their
important work under very challenging and unprecedented
conditions, and for doing so we are very proud of them.
The Department's workforce is made up of employees
performing almost every job in the Federal Government, and we
have a substantial number of people who work in person, on the
ground, or at Department facilities every day. About 55 percent
of our workforce consists of customer-facing employees who
provide core mission delivery functions within our public
lands, recreation areas, parks, and wildlife refuges. Because
of the type of work they do, these employees are generally not
eligible for regular telework. A smaller portion of our
workforce performs mission support roles that are not public
facing, and are often able to be performed in a telework and
remote posture.
Our enhanced information technology infrastructure has
provided the capability for our mission support employees to
effectively communicate and interact in a secure environment.
These employees and occupations such as information technology,
human resources, acquisitions management, financial management,
and other similar support jobs possess highly portable skills
that are in very high demand in both the public and private
sectors. This group of employees is generally eligible for
regular telework, and in some cases remote work.
Over the past several months, the Department has been re-
evaluating our work environment posture in response to OMB Memo
23-15 and the conclusion of the public health emergency to
ensure our decisions regarding work environments continue to
improve our organizational health and performance.
In September, we implemented the requirement for
teleworking managers and supervisors in the National Capital
Region to begin working at least 50 percent of their time in
the office. In mid-December, we expanded this requirement and
notified all non-bargaining unit employees in the National
Capital Region that they will begin reporting to the office at
least 50 percent of their time beginning February 11. Taking
these steps will ensure that over 70 percent of the employees
in the National Capital Region will be working in person at
greater rates.
Nationally, according to our latest payroll data,
Interior's workforce is performing work in person 65 percent of
our work hours. The Department has also partnered with the
General Services Administration to work to maximize efficient
use of both Department-owned and GSA-provided spaces. In the
past year, the Department developed a future of workspace
strategy, and in partnership with GSA chartered multiple
implementation teams at high-priority locations that are tasked
in identifying space reduction targets in administrative
facilities.
As we can continue to work with OMB, the Office of
Personnel Management, GSA, and other agencies we continue to
seek opportunities to update our policies as appropriate. We
expect the Department's future of work policies, along with our
use of telework and remote work flexibilities, will continue to
evolve over time in response to market trends and mission
needs.
Based on our experience before, during, and following the
COVID-19 pandemic, we believe the hybrid workforce model that
we are operating in now is one that works for the Department.
In fact, for the Department to remain competitive for the
talent we need in the future, especially in mission support
occupations, we believe it is essential that we continue to
offer workplace flexibility, such as telework and remote work.
We recognize that our current hybrid workforce model may need
periodic course adjustments and that Department senior leaders
remain committed to finding effective ways to enhance our
ability to continually monitor, measure, and evaluate agency
performance.
While the Department's mission always comes first, we can't
make it happen and deliver for the American people without our
amazing and dedicated workforce. It is because of our employees
and the passion and commitment they show for their work every
day that the Department was recognized in 2022 among the top
large agencies in best places to work in the Federal
Government.
I look forward to discussing this important matter with
this Subcommittee, and I am pleased to answer any questions
that you have today.

[The prepared statement of Mr. Green follows:]
Prepared Statement of Mark D. Green, Deputy Assistant Secretary, Human
Capital and Diversity,
and Chief Human Capital Officer, U.S. Department of the Interior

Chairman Gosar, Ranking Member Stansbury, and members of the
Subcommittee, thank you for the opportunity to appear before you today
to discuss the Department of the Interior's long-standing telework and
remote work policies. I am Mark Green, Deputy Assistant Secretary,
Human Capital and Diversity and Chief Human Capital Officer at the
Department. After my 24-year career at the United States Army, I worked
for the U.S. Forest Service and have been in my current position for
the last year.
Since Congress enacted the Telework Enhancement Act in 2010, the
Department has supported a telework program across our bureaus and
offices that allows agency employees, with the agreement and approval
of their supervisors, to engage in appropriate telework and remote work
opportunities. Briefly, telework may be authorized only to the extent
that an approved telework arrangement does not diminish employee or
organizational performance, and any agreement must be reviewed by the
employee's first-line supervisor to determine whether the proposed
agreement is in the best interest of the Department's mission.
The Department continues to refine this telework program by
implementing government-wide best practices, providing training to
supervisors and employees, and improving our information technology
infrastructure.
These refinements and investments in our telework programs enabled
the Department to quickly move our workforce to a maximum telework
posture, while maintaining mission-critical functions, to minimize
face-to-face interactions in March 2020, at the outset of the COVID-19
Pandemic. These actions complied with the Office of Management and
Budget's (OMB's) guidance related to that emergency, including OMB M-
20-13, OMB M-20-15, OMB M-20-16 among others.
Throughout the Pandemic, the Department's workforce of
approximately 70,000 dedicated employees across 2,400 different
geographic locations continued to deliver the Department's mission to
protect and manage the Nation's natural resources and cultural
heritage; provide scientific and other information about those
resources; and honor its trust responsibilities or special commitments
to American Indians, Alaska Natives, Native Hawaiians, and Affiliated
Island Communities.
The Department's dedicated employees remained resilient throughout
a very difficult time, managing and maintaining more than 400 national
park units, 550 national wildlife refuges, 475 critical infrastructure
dams providing water to farmers and drought-stricken areas, and 480
million acres of public lands for the American people. Over 5,600
wildland fire personnel continued to fight fires on our lands and in
our parks and the Department's more than 7,000 law enforcement officers
and park rangers served and protected over 500 million visitors to the
lands and waters under the Department's stewardship in 2020 and 2021.
Scientists and field technicians also continued to gather data, and
work in their laboratories. The Department's employees continued their
important work under very challenging and unprecedented conditions,
and, for doing so, we are, and should be, very proud of them.
The Department's workforce is made up of employees performing
almost every type of job in the Federal government, and we have a
substantial number of people who work in-person, on the ground or at
Department facilities, every day. About 55 percent of our workforce
consists of customer-facing employees who provide core, mission
delivery functions within our public lands, recreation areas, parks,
and wildlife refuges. These employees are generally not eligible for
regular telework and are not eligible for remote work because their
jobs require them to be onsite for face-to-face interactions with the
public and for work which must be performed on-site by its nature.
A smaller portion of our workforce performs mission support roles
that are not public facing and are often able to perform their duties
in a telework or remote posture. These mission support employees, in
occupations such as information technology, human resources,
acquisitions, financial management, and other similar support jobs,
possess highly portable skills and are in very high demand in both the
public and private sectors. This group of employees is generally
eligible for regular telework and in some cases remote work. The
enhanced information technology infrastructure of the Department has
allowed for us to effectively communicate and interact in a secure
environment.
Over the past several months, the Department has been re-evaluating
our work environment posture in response to the OMB Memo 23-15 and the
conclusion of the public health emergency to ensure that our decisions
regarding work environments continue to improve organizational health
and organizational performance. In September, we implemented the
requirement for all teleworking managers and supervisors in the
National Capital Region to work in the office at least 50% of their
time. In mid-December, we expanded this requirement and notified all
non-bargaining unit employees in the National Capital Region that they
will begin reporting to the office at least 50% of their time on
February 11, 2024, ensuring that over 70% of employees in the National
Capital Region will be working in person at greater rates. Nationally,
according to the latest payroll data, Interior's workforce is
performing work in-person 65% of their regular work hours.
As the Department looks to the future of work, the Department has
also partnered with the General Services Administration (GSA) to work
to maximize the efficient use of both Department-owned and GSA-provided
spaces by various strategies. In the past year, the Department
developed a Future of Workspace Strategy and, in partnership with GSA,
chartered multiple implementation teams at high-priority locations that
are tasked with identifying space reduction targets in administrative
facilities.
As we work with OMB, the Office of Personnel Management (OPM), GSA
and other agencies, we continue to seek opportunities and to update our
policies as appropriate. As noted above, the Department's current
telework policy, Personnel Bulletin 21-07 (PB 21-07), establishes
criteria and procedures under which eligible employees may be
authorized to telework and emphasizes that approved telework
arrangements cannot diminish employee or organizational performance or
impede mission delivery, consistent with the Telework Enhancement Act
of 2010 and OPM Guidelines. A copy of this policy is available on the
Department's website at https://www.doi.gov/sites/doi.gov/files/elips/
documents/pb-21-07-telework-program-final-7.23. 2021_0.pdf.
We expect that the Department's future work environment policies,
along with our use of telework and remote work flexibilities, will
continue to evolve over time in response to job market trends and
mission needs. Based on our experience before, during, and following
the COVID-19 pandemic, we believe the hybrid workforce model can be one
that works for the Department in the appropriate cases. In fact, for
the Department to remain competitive for the talent we need in the
future, especially in our mission support occupations, we believe it is
essential that we continue to offer workforce flexibilities such as
telework and remote work.
We recognize that our current hybrid workforce model may need
periodic course adjustments and the Department's senior leaders remain
committed to finding effective ways to enhance our ability to
continually monitor, measure, and evaluate agency performance. While
the Department's mission always comes first, we cannot make it happen
and deliver for the American people without our amazing and dedicated
workforce. It is because of our employees, and the passion and
commitment they show for their work every day, that the Department was
recognized in 2022 as among the top 10 large agencies in the Best
Places to Work in the Federal government.
I look forward to discussing this important matter with this
Committee and other stakeholders in Congress and I would be pleased to
answer any questions you may have today.

______

Questions Submitted for the Record to Mr. Mark Green, Deputy Assistant
Secretary for Human Capital and Diversity,
and Chief Human Capital Officer, Department of the Interior

Mr. Green did not submit responses to the Committee by the appropriate
deadline for inclusion in the printed record.

Questions Submitted by Representative Gosar

Question 1. According to reports from GAO and OPM, DOI has been
unable to provide any meaningful data relating to their telework and
remote work policies. Please explain why DOI could not provide data to
GAO for their report titled, Federal Telework Increased during the
Pandemic, but More Reliable Data Are Needed to Support Oversight.

1a) Can you describe the progress that DOI has made since this
report on internal data collection on telework and remote work?

Question 2. Last August, the White House Chief of Staff sent an
email to President Biden's cabinet officials directing agencies to
``aggressively'' implement ``increases in the amount of in-person
work'' and that it was a ``priority for the President'' for federal
workers to shift towards more in-person work.

2a) How did DOI comply with this directive from the White House?
Specifically, can you please describe how DOI ``aggressively'' executed
the directive from the White House to implement ``increases in the
amount of in-person work''?

Question 3. Your testimony discussed DOI's requirements to get DOI
employees, namely in the North Capital Region, ``to work in the office
at least 50% of the time'' and plans next month to expand that
directive to ensure that over 70% of employees in the National Capital
Region'' work in the office 50% of the time. You also said that
``nationally, according to the latest payroll data, Interior's
workforce is performing work in-person 65% of their regular work
hours.''

3a) What percentage of your time do you spend in the office at DOI
headquarters?

i. What about your immediate direct reports?

3b) Why was it even necessary to tell DOI's employees that they
need to come into the office ``at least 50% of their time?'' Is in-
person absenteeism so bad at DOI that folks who should be in the office
don't do so even half the time?

i. How did DOI settle on the requirement that folks need to
come into the office ``50% of the time''? Why isn't it more?

ii. Are there plans to increase the requirements to ensure
that DOI's workforce is performing more work in-person compared to the
current requirements and rates?

3c) At this point in time, January 2024, what percentage of total
employees at DOI's headquarters (meaning National Capital Region) work
in the office at least 90% of the time?

Question 4. Are there any specified ``work from the office days''
where everyone at DOI has to come into the office? Or can folks pick
and choose what days in the office?

4a) If not, wouldn't it be good for everyone to be in the office at
the same time on the same days?

Questions Submitted by Representative Stansbury

Question 1. Is there any evidence that the Federal Government's
telework and remote work policies that were in place before the SARS-
CoV-2-driven pandemic began represented the most efficient and
effective use of telework and remote work?

On January 10, 2024, the Committee held an oversight hearing on the
National Park Service (NPS) deferred maintenance backlog, during which
testimony from the Department of the Interior's Office of the Inspector
General (OIG) and the Government Accountability Office (GAO) helped
clarify why deferred maintenance has seemingly increased in recent
years.

We learned that NPS is using more thorough accounting methods and
that many critical projects are lined up for completion in the next
couple years thanks to historic funding in the Great American Outdoors
Act. However, at no point were remote work or telework mentioned by the
OIG or GAO witnesses as factors for increased deferred maintenance,
despite claims from Republicans that it's partly to blame. Is there any
evidence to support that claim?

______

Dr. Gosar. Thank you, Mr. Green. I am now going to
recognize the gentleman from Georgia for his 5 minutes of
questions.

Mr. Collins. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Green, I appreciate your service. Let's see, Deputy
Assistant Secretary for Human Capital and Diversity, Chief
Human Capital Officer, Department of the Interior. Man, is your
business card like the size of legal paper? That is a title. In
your role as Deputy Assistant Secretary for Human Capital and
Diversity, Chief Human Capital Officer, Department of the
Interior, you don't only oversee telework, but you also oversee
diversity, equity, and inclusion, correct?
Mr. Green. My role is really over the telework policies and
remote work policies, human capital-related things, but not
necessarily the equity.
Mr. Collins. Diversity, equity, and inclusion is included
in that.
Mr. Green. That is included in my title due to the fact of
our candidate pools for hiring.
Mr. Collins. What I want to get to real quick because 5
minutes flies, in a memo to the Fish and Wildlife Service
employees, Martha Williams who is the Director, wrote that
diversity, equity, and inclusion work was her No. 1 priority.
Mr. Green, can you please explain why the Fish and Wildlife
Service is prioritizing DEI initiatives ahead of the Service's
stated mission, which is to conserve, protect, enhance fish,
wildlife, plants, and their habitats?
Mr. Green. The Department and the Administration prioritize
diversity, equity, inclusion, and it is an important aspect of
all we do.
Mr. Collins. So, that is their No. 1 priority.
Mr. Green. But for Fish and Wildlife, I cannot answer
specifically why she----
Mr. Collins. Well, let's talk in general terms, then. Do
you think the Fish and Wildlife Service should prioritize DEI
initiatives over conserving, protecting fish, wildlife, and
their habitats?
Mr. Green. I think it should be a priority that supports
that mission.
Mr. Collins. Also in March of last year, the Fish and
Wildlife Service, they excluded participation in DEI groups
from their service caps, which allows about 2 hours for
employees to use during work hours for resources and employee
organization-type meetings. So, as a result, Fish and Wildlife
Service employees, they can spend as much time as they want on
DEI initiatives instead of working in their official on-duty
duties. Can you explain why participation in DEI employee
organizations are excluded from the service cap?
Mr. Green. No, I cannot. I will have to take that question
back, and we could get you an answer for that.
Mr. Collins. How does unlimited participation in DEI groups
serve the American taxpayer who pays Service employees to
protect fish, wildlife, and habitats?
Mr. Green. Our mission delivery to the American public is
the No. 1 priority. And DEI is an Administration priority that
fits into all that we do on that mission.
Mr. Collins. You give them unlimited on DEI, but it is
capped at 2 hours on what their mission is.
Mr. Green, I am sure you would agree with me that since
humans are part of the animal kingdom, correct, and you and the
Fish and Wildlife Service are focused hard on DEI, so I am
going to ask you, have you seen any evidence of lack of
diversity, equity, and inclusion in other animals in the animal
kingdom? Say, like maybe the rainbow trout, horny toad, the
red-cockaded woodpecker?
Mr. Green. I am not an expert on all of those things, so I
wouldn't be able to answer that question.
Mr. Collins. That is what I thought.
Mr. Chairman, I would have asked about the common
cockchafer, but his Department doesn't have any jurisdiction
over them since they live in England. With that, I am going to
yield back the balance of my time.
Dr. Gosar. I thank the gentleman. Now, the gentlelady who
just got here from New Mexico, Ms. Stansbury, the Ranking
Member, is recognized.
Ms. Stansbury. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Well, I heard today's hearing was about telework, so I
thought I would give it a try. Just kidding.
[Laughter.]
Ms. Stansbury. I appreciate the opportunity to come and
speak to our experts and to have the Department of the Interior
and GAO here. Thank you all for being here today.
I think it is clear that our entire economy and workforce
has been transformed since the pandemic. Millions of people all
around the world have changed the ways in which they are
working, and we actually see increased productivity and
effectiveness in people's jobs when they have more flexibility
around how they manage their own days.
So, let's be clear. Telework and remote policy actually
works, and it works well. Workers want it because it helps
reduce stress, it helps to avoid commutes, it gives them more
time on the job. It has been life-changing for parents,
military spouses. Employers like to use it because it helps
them recruit new talent, especially in the younger generations,
as much of our Federal workforce is in the retirement phase of
their lives. And it is clear that this has become a talking
point here in this Congress.
I was thinking about this as I walked over here this
morning. I mean, this is one of literally dozens of hearings we
have had this Congress about telework policies. And I find it
strange that we are obsessing over this while we are on the
brink of a government shutdown and haven't been able to fund a
foreign aid package. I mean, we have real serious issues right
now that our country is facing. So, to be spending this time
doing hearings on telework policies seems a bit bizarre to me.
We are facing real challenges in this country, and the
Department of the Interior, of course, employs tens of
thousands of people, and they are all over this continent. They
are doing everything from managing fish and wildlife to our
national parks to serving the 570-plus Tribal Nations that are
part of the great fabric of this nation, and trying to fight
climate change. In this last year, we know that we saw the
hottest year ever on record. So, I think that it is clear that
it has not impeded the ability of the Department to deliver on
its productivity.
I also do want to just take a moment to address the
comments of the previous speaker in the dais here. The reason
why we value diversity in the workforce is because our society
is diverse. And for far too long we have had exclusionary
policies and practices that did not allow people of color,
women, like me, to serve in positions, and that is reflected
across our Federal workforce. So, we are trying to make sure
that we have a Federal workforce that is reflective of our
society, that there is opportunity for every single person to
participate and to serve our nation. And that is why we value
diversity. And I think that is really reflected in not only the
priorities of the Biden administration, but the fact that right
now we have the very first Cabinet Secretary ever in our
nation's history who is an Indigenous person. That is
extraordinary. It is historic and it is important. So, I do
want to just lift that up for a moment.
But Ms. Locke, I know you are here to talk about your work
and analysis looking at telework policies. And I want to ask
actually about GAO, which, of course, is an affiliate of our
work here. Does GAO allow its employees to work remotely?
Ms. Locke. We can work remotely or do telework.
Ms. Stansbury. And have you personally found and members of
your staff found that it affects your ability to perform good
or bad?
Ms. Locke. We assess the suitability of each position at
GAO to determine if those positions could telework. So, those
that were suitable for telework, they have no impact on our
performance. And in fact, in 2023 we exceeded our savings by
$20 billion in a telework status.
Ms. Stansbury. Which is another reason that both the
private and the public sector are seeking to increase
opportunities for telework. It is not just that flexibility for
employees, but it saves money for employers, as well.
And Mr. Green, you oversee the human capital enterprise for
the 70,000-plus direct employees of the Department of the
Interior. How have you seen telework affect the productivity of
the Department?
Mr. Green. We have a very unique mission set in that many
of our employees are public-facing, so 55 percent of them are
already working in person every day. According to our payroll
data, 65 percent of our employees are working in person every
day. And we measure our organizational performance by the
measures in our strategic plan. And my understanding of that is
that we have actually increased in many areas in performance
with telework, and we are also seeing higher levels of
retention of our employees and better scores on our Federal
Employee Viewpoint Surveys around employee engagement.
The tools that we have now, the technology, allows for
managers and employees to stay connected and work together, so
job satisfaction is actually even higher, according to the
Federal Employee Viewpoint Survey.
Ms. Stansbury. Thank you, Mr. Green. I think that is a
really interesting point for folks who don't work in the
Federal Government. They may not be familiar with the Federal
Employee Viewpoint.
I am a former Fed myself, I used to work at OMB in the
Interior branch, actually. And one of the things that you see
is that year to year, as these surveys are done, they are
really a barometer of the health and well-being of our Federal
workforce which encompasses millions of Americans, of course,
and workplace satisfaction is not just a matter of people being
happy in their jobs, but it is a matter of national security,
it is a matter of the Federal Government being able to carry
out its mission, and it is the ability to actually serve the
public in all of the different things that the Department does.
I want to emphasize what you just said, Mr. Green. You are
saying that, as a result of the changes in HR policies and the
increased flexibility, you have actually seen an improvement in
overall workplace satisfaction and recruitment and retention?
Mr. Green. That is correct.
Ms. Stansbury. I don't think I have any other questions.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Dr. Gosar. You are certainly welcome, thank you.
Mr. Green, in regards to the public face of these agencies,
and that public face being in person like at the BIA, not
everybody can just interact with an e-mail or telework, can
they?
Mr. Green. Like the GAO, Ms. Locke, had stated, we go
through an evaluation process. It is mainly mission support,
non-public-facing folks that have jobs that don't require them
to come into a facility to do many of the duties that they are
assigned that can telework. Most of our employees are public-
facing. They have to come to do work on the land and engage
with the public every day.
Dr. Gosar. OK, so the next question is for both of you. In
the past, we have held hearings in regards to Department of the
Interior's security codes and their passwords. How has that
issue been affected during this time of telework and remote
learning?
Ms. Locke, would you want to go first on that?
Ms. Locke. We have not looked into their security codes,
but I can tell you that during the peak of the pandemic, when
we were all in telework status, there were cybersecurity issues
that popped. And, fortunately, entities like OMB and DHS and
NIST put out practices to help keep agencies safe. And in
addition, the security officers were working remote so they
could address those security threats and put out advisories
about them.
But I do not have an answer regarding the----
Dr. Gosar. Well, to your point there, I think you alluded
to the problem as being that it is much more diffuse. If people
are reporting for duty here in Washington DC, they are more
located in one area, making it easier for the security
evaluations and upkeep, would it not?
Ms. Locke. That is not my area of expertise, so I can't
respond to that.
Dr. Gosar. OK. Mr. Green, would you like to respond to
that?
Mr. Green. That is not my area of expertise, either, but I
can tell you that there have been major strides made with our
CIO, our Chief Information Office, with leveraging new, secure
technology.
To get a specific answer to a specific question, I would
have to refer back to our experts back at the Department to get
you an answer on that.
Dr. Gosar. Once again to Mr. Green, if you are encouraging
full-time use, what percentage of DOI is full-time job
participation, in face?
Mr. Green. All of our employees, whether they are
teleworking or not, are working every day to deliver for the
American people. I would say that again 55 percent of our
workforce is public-facing, and they have to come to the land
every day to do their work. The balance of the folks are
allowed to telework, either at an ad hoc basis periodically,
based on situation, or have regular schedules where they can
telework from 1 up to 8 days per pay period of telework.
Dr. Gosar. In your evaluation, has there been any area of
expertise within DOI that has been shortchanged with this, or
that doesn't like this type of application?
Mr. Green. Looking at our individual employee performance
management system, we are not seeing any individual employee
performance issues.
And then again, as we evaluate the Department on our
performance as a whole, we look at our strategic plan and we
are actually seeing increases there. And we are actually seeing
better results on our Federal Employee Viewpoint Survey around
employee engagement, how connected they feel to the mission of
the agency, how they feel connected to each other. These tools
are vastly different than what we have had in the past, even 5
years ago, the tools were not available for employees to engage
at the level that they are able to now.
Dr. Gosar. Well, it is amazing what technology will do. I
mean, you and I can be on different sides of the continent and
we can definitely see each other, talk to each other, see our
expressions, all sorts of things that we couldn't have done
before.
I want to come back to the Native Americans. Are there
shortcomings in some of these aspects with Native Americans? I
can think of a few, because if you are going out there and they
don't have Internet, it makes it really, really tough to have
application in that aspect. Would you agree? Could you kind of
comment on those?
Mr. Green. There have always been challenges where Internet
is available. But again, as to a specific circumstance, I would
have to know a little bit more. I could take it back and get an
answer about that.
But I would just say that, as a whole, even the Bureau of
Indian Affairs, they are one of our bureaus that actually has a
higher percentage of in-person work than many of our other
bureaus. They are up in about the 79, 80 percent range, last I
checked on in-person work. So, we haven't seen telework as
being a challenge related to that, or the technology, because
the vast majority of our work is done in person.
Dr. Gosar. But I guess, you kind of made my point to a
certain degree in that most of your Native Americans or your
Indian Affairs folks are in person because I think they need a
lot more help and kind of follow-through and guidance in
regards to Federal registry. Right?
Mr. Green. I think you would see that out in all rural
areas, because we have folks in 2,400 different locations
providing service to the American public, and I think you would
see that same dynamic, because we don't have a large
concentration of mission support people in those locations.
Those are locations where those folks are delivering services
directly, so you would see a higher percentage of in-person
work there because their jobs just don't lend themselves to
telework or remote work.
Dr. Gosar. And even in Alaska, you would see a higher
percentage of those, as well, and you would see a better
performance, or about the same performance.
Mr. Green. I think in most rural areas you would see that.
I can't speak to Alaska specifically, as far as that particular
data point. I would have to get that. But I would say I think
that you would see that in most rural areas.
Anywhere where you would see a headquarters kind of
concentration, like the National Capital Region, that is where
you are going to see a concentration of most of these mission
support roles, and those just happen to be the ones that the
work that they perform, they perform work here for folks all
the way across the country, and they are able to do it because
of the secure technology. And those are the folks that are able
to telework. And in some cases, there are remote work
opportunities there, as well.
Dr. Gosar. Ms. Locke, have you seen any changes? I would
like to get your input on those same things in regards to
Native Americans from that standpoint.
Ms. Locke. What I will say is I just visited the
territories on another congressional request, and DOI was part
of that review. And in talking with them, we did ask about
telework. And in particular, Fish and Wildlife officials, as
well as National Park Service officials stated that since they
started offering telework, their pool of applicants opened,
they had a larger geographic area to choose from and more skill
sets to choose from.
With that being said, they also acknowledged that while
recruitment and retention had improved, that not every position
was suitable for telework because they had to be in person. But
they said even if they offered 1 day a pay period to telework,
when those individuals who normally have to be in person just
had to do administrative stuff behind the computer, that was
beneficial to them.
Dr. Gosar. Well, I find this very interesting that we
stumbled, I mean kind of blindly in regards to the COVID
national emergency, that we stumbled onto this, and we are
seeing some results in regards to that. I find it very
interesting that we have gone down that road.
Do you have any questions? No more?
Well, I just want to thank you, Ms. Locke and Mr. Green,
for your indulgence today. We appreciate you. I wish that some
of the other agencies would come forward. We would certainly
appreciate them doing that.
I thank the witnesses for their testimony. The members of
the Committee may have some additional questions for you, for
the witnesses, and we ask that you respond to these in writing.
Under Committee Rule 3, members of the Committee must submit
the questions to the Subcommittee Clerk by 5 p.m. on January
23. The hearing record will be held open for 10 business days
for your responses.
If there is no further business, the Committee is
adjourned.

[Whereupon, at 11:01 a.m., the Subcommittee was adjourned.]

[all]
