- LEGISLATIVE HEARING ON H.R. 1437, TO AUTHORIZE LIVESTOCK PRODUCERS AND THEIR EMPLOYEES TO TAKE BLACK VULTURES IN ORDER TO PREVENT DEATH, INJURY, OR DESTRUCTION TO LIVESTOCK, AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES, "BLACK VULTURE RELIEF ACT OF 2023"; H.R. 1792, TO AMEND THE SOUTH PACIFIC TUNA ACT OF 1988, AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES, "SOUTH PACIFIC TUNA TREATY ACT OF 2023"; H.R. 2950, TO AUTHORIZE THE SECRETARY OF THE INTERIOR, THROUGH THE COASTAL PROGRAM OF THE UNITED STATES FISH AND WILDLIFE SERVICE, TO WORK WITH WILLING PARTNERS AND PROVIDE SUPPORT TO EFFORTS TO ASSESS, PROTECT, RESTORE, AND ENHANCE IMPORTANT COASTAL LANDSCAPES THAT PROVIDE FISH AND WILDLIFE HABITAT ON WHICH CERTAIN FEDERAL TRUST SPECIES DEPEND, AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES, "COASTAL HABITAT CONSERVATION ACT OF 2023"; H.R. 2982, TO ESTABLISH THE NEW YORK-NEW JERSEY WATERSHED RESTORATION PROGRAM, AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES, "NEW YORK-NEW JERSEY WATERSHED PROTECTION ACT"; H.R. 4051, TO DIRECT THE SECRETARY OF COMMERCE TO ESTABLISH A TASK FORCE REGARDING SHARK DEPREDATION, AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES, "SUPPORTING THE HEALTH OF AQUATIC SYSTEMS THROUGH RESEARCH KNOWLEDGE AND ENHANCED DIALOGUE ACT (SHARKED) ACT"; H.R. 4094, TO AMEND THE CENTRAL UTAH PROJECT COMPLETION ACT TO AUTHORIZE EXPENDITURES FOR THE CONDUCT OF CERTAIN WATER CONSERVATION MEASURES IN THE GREAT SALT LAKE BASIN, AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES, "GREAT SALT LAKE STEWARDSHIP ACT"; H.R. 4587, TO PROVIDE THAT THE ADMINISTRATOR OF THE NATIONAL OCEANIC AND ATMOSPHERIC ADMINISTRATION SHALL NOT ISSUE AN INTERIM OR FINAL RULE THAT INCLUDES AN AREA CLOSURE IN THE SOUTH ATLANTIC FOR SPECIES MANAGED UNDER THE SNAPPER-GROUPER FISHERY MANAGEMENT PLAN UNTIL THE SOUTH ATLANTIC GREAT RED SNAPPER COUNT STUDY IS COMPLETE AND THE DATA RELATED TO THAT STUDY IS INTEGRATED INTO THE STOCK ASSESSMENT, "RED SNAPPER ACT"; AND H.R. 4596, TO REAUTHORIZE THE BUREAU OF RECLAMATION TO PROVIDE COST-SHARED FUNDING TO IMPLEMENT THE ENDANGERED AND THREATENED FISH RECOVERY PROGRAMS FOR THE UPPER COLORADO AND SAN JUAN RIVER BASINS, "UPPER COLORADO AND SAN JUAN RIVER BASINS ENDANGERED FISH RECOVERY PROGRAMS REAUTHORIZATION ACT OF 2023"

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

H.R. 1437, H.R. 1792, H.R. 2950,
H.R. 2982, H.R. 4051, H.R. 4094,
H.R. 4587, AND H.R. 4596

=======================================================================

LEGISLATIVE HEARING

before the

SUBCOMMITTEE ON WATER, WILDLIFE AND FISHERIES

of the

COMMITTEE ON NATURAL RESOURCES
U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

Thursday, July 27, 2023

__________

Serial No. 118-55

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Natural Resources

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.govinfo.gov
or
Committee address: http://naturalresources.house.gov

______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

53-096 PDF                WASHINGTON : 2024

COMMITTEE ON NATURAL RESOURCES

BRUCE WESTERMAN, AR, Chairman
DOUG LAMBORN, CO, Vice Chairman
RAUL M. GRIJALVA, AZ, Ranking Member

Doug Lamborn, CO      Grace F. Napolitano, CA
Robert J. Wittman, VA      Gregorio Kilili Camacho Sablan,
Tom McClintock, CA          CNMI
Paul Gosar, AZ      Jared Huffman, CA
Garret Graves, LA      Ruben Gallego, AZ
Aumua Amata C. Radewagen, AS      Joe Neguse, CO
Doug LaMalfa, CA      Mike Levin, CA
Daniel Webster, FL      Katie Porter, CA
Jenniffer Gonzalez-Colon, PR      Teresa Leger Fernandez, NM
Russ Fulcher, ID      Melanie A. Stansbury, NM
Pete Stauber, MN      Mary Sattler Peltola, AK
John R. Curtis, UT      Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez, NY
Tom Tiffany, WI      Kevin Mullin, CA
Jerry Carl, AL      Val T. Hoyle, OR
Matt Rosendale, MT      Sydney Kamlager-Dove, CA
Lauren Boebert, CO      Seth Magaziner, RI
Cliff Bentz, OR      Nydia M. Velazquez, NY
Jen Kiggans, VA      Ed Case, HI
Jim Moylan, GU      Debbie Dingell, MI
Wesley P. Hunt, TX      Susie Lee, NV
Mike Collins, GA
Anna Paulina Luna, FL
John Duarte, CA
Harriet M. Hageman, WY

Vivian Moeglein, Staff Director
Tom Connally, Chief Counsel
Lora Snyder, Democratic Staff Director
http://naturalresources.house.gov

------

SUBCOMMITTEE ON WATER, WILDLIFE AND FISHERIES

CLIFF BENTZ, OR, Chairman
JEN KIGGANS, VA, Vice Chair
JARED HUFFMAN, CA, Ranking Member

Robert J. Wittman, VA                Grace F. Napolitano, CA
Tom McClintock, CA                   Mike Levin, CA
Garret Graves, LA                    Mary Sattler Peltola, AK
Aumua Amata C. Radewagen, AS         Kevin Mullin, CA
Doug LaMalfa, CA                     Val T. Hoyle, OR
Daniel Webster, FL                   Seth Magaziner, RI
Jenniffer Gonzalez-Colon, PR         Debbie Dingell, MI
Jerry Carl, AL                       Ruben Gallego, AZ
Lauren Boebert, CO                   Joe Neguse, CO
Jen Kiggans, VA                      Katie Porter, CA
Anna Paulina Luna, FL                Ed Case, HI
John Duarte, CA                      Raul M. Grijalva, AZ, ex officio
Harriet M. Hageman, WY
Bruce Westerman, AR, ex officio

------

CONTENTS

----------
Page

Hearing held on Thursday, July 27, 2023..........................     1

Statement of Members:

Bentz, Hon. Cliff, a Representative in Congress from the
State of Oregon............................................     2

Panel I:

Wittman, Hon. Robert J., a Representative in Congress from
the Commonwealth of Virginia...............................     3
Boebert, Hon. Lauren, a Representative in Congress from the
State of Colorado..........................................    11
Rutherford, Hon. John H., a Representative in Congress from
the State of Florida.......................................    12

Statement of Witnesses:

Panel II:

Kryc, Kelly, Deputy Assistant Secretary for International
Fisheries, National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration,
Washington, DC.............................................    14
Prepared statement of....................................    15
Guertin, Stephen, Deputy Director for Program Management and
Policy, U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, Washington, DC.....    18
Prepared statement of....................................    19

Panel III:

Besher, Charlie, Property Rights and Environmental Management
Committee Chair, National Cattlemen's Beef Association,
Patton, Missouri...........................................    40
Prepared statement of....................................    41
Wolff, Steve, General Manager, Southwestern Water
Conservation District, Durango, Colorado...................    44
Prepared statement of....................................    45
Shawcroft, Gene, General Manager, Central Utah Water
Conservancy District, Orem, Utah...........................    49
Prepared statement of....................................    51
Supplemental documents submitted with testimony..........    52
Gibbons-Fly, William, Executive Director, American Tunaboat
Association, San Diego, California.........................    60
Prepared statement of....................................    61
Genest, Genevieve, Donor Relations Manager, Galveston Bay
Foundation, Kemah, Texas...................................    67
Prepared statement of....................................    69

Atkinson, Seth, Quillback Consulting, Santa Cruz, California.    71
Prepared statement of....................................    73
Graham, Jack, Captain, Afishianado Charters, Nags Head, North
Carolina...................................................    77
Prepared statement of....................................    79
McCawley, Jessica, Director, Division of Marine Fisheries
Management, Florida Fish and Wildlife Conservation
Commission, Tallahassee, Florida...........................    81
Prepared statement of....................................    82

Additional Materials Submitted for the Record:

Department of the Interior, Statement for the Record on H.R.
4094.......................................................   111

U.S. Bureau of Reclamation, Statement for the Record on H.R.
4596.......................................................   112

Submissions for the Record by Representative Wittman

Dive In with NOAA Fisheries, ``Atlantic Sharks: 30 Years
of Successes and Lessons,'' July 13, 2023..............     4

Dewey Hemilright, Commercial Fisherman, Letter to the
Committee on H.R. 4051, dated July 24, 2023............     8

Submissions for the Record by Representative Radewagen

Various fishermen from the U.S. South Pacific tuna fleet,
Letter to the Committee on H.R. 1792, dated July 27,
2023...................................................    90

Submissions for the Record by Representative Rutherford

NOAA Fisheries SERO, Snapper-Grouper Committee, September
13, 2022, ``South Atlantic Snapper''...................    97

Submissions for the Record by Representative Grijalva

Oceana, Letter to the Committee on H.R. 4051, dated
August 4, 2023.........................................   113

National Audubon Society, Letter to Utah Congressional
Delegation on H.R. 4094, dated July 26, 2023...........   117

Various Stakeholders, Letter to the Committee on H.R.
2982, dated August 2, 2023.............................   118

Representative Paul Tonko, Statement for the Record......   120

LEGISLATIVE HEARING ON H.R. 1437, TO AUTHORIZE LIVESTOCK
PRODUCERS AND THEIR EMPLOYEES TO TAKE BLACK VULTURES IN ORDER
TO PREVENT DEATH, INJURY, OR DESTRUCTION TO LIVESTOCK, AND FOR
OTHER PURPOSES, ``BLACK VULTURE RELIEF ACT OF 2023''; H.R.
1792, TO AMEND THE SOUTH PACIFIC TUNA ACT OF 1988, AND FOR
OTHER PURPOSES, ``SOUTH PACIFIC TUNA TREATY ACT OF 2023''; H.R.
2950, TO AUTHORIZE THE SECRETARY OF THE INTERIOR, THROUGH THE
COASTAL PROGRAM OF THE UNITED STATES FISH AND WILDLIFE SERVICE,
TO WORK WITH WILLING PARTNERS AND PROVIDE SUPPORT TO EFFORTS TO
ASSESS, PROTECT, RESTORE, AND ENHANCE IMPORTANT COASTAL
LANDSCAPES THAT PROVIDE FISH AND WILDLIFE HABITAT ON WHICH
CERTAIN FEDERAL TRUST SPECIES DEPEND, AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES,
``COASTAL HABITAT CONSERVATION ACT OF 2023''; H.R. 2982, TO
ESTABLISH THE NEW YORK-NEW JERSEY WATERSHED RESTORATION
PROGRAM, AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES, ``NEW YORK-NEW JERSEY
WATERSHED PROTECTION ACT''; H.R. 4051, TO DIRECT THE SECRETARY
OF COMMERCE TO ESTABLISH A TASK FORCE REGARDING SHARK
DEPREDATION, AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES, ``SUPPORTING THE HEALTH OF
AQUATIC SYSTEMS THROUGH RESEARCH KNOWLEDGE AND ENHANCED
DIALOGUE ACT (SHARKED) ACT''; H.R. 4094, TO AMEND THE CENTRAL
UTAH PROJECT COMPLETION ACT TO AUTHORIZE EXPENDITURES FOR THE
CONDUCT OF CERTAIN WATER CONSERVATION MEASURES IN THE GREAT
SALT LAKE BASIN, AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES, ``GREAT SALT LAKE
STEWARDSHIP ACT''; H.R. 4587, TO PROVIDE THAT THE ADMINISTRATOR
OF THE NATIONAL OCEANIC AND ATMOSPHERIC ADMINISTRATION SHALL
NOT ISSUE AN INTERIM OR FINAL RULE THAT INCLUDES AN AREA
CLOSURE IN THE SOUTH ATLANTIC FOR SPECIES MANAGED UNDER THE
SNAPPER-GROUPER FISHERY MANAGEMENT PLAN UNTIL THE SOUTH
ATLANTIC GREAT RED SNAPPER COUNT STUDY IS COMPLETE AND THE DATA
RELATED TO THAT STUDY IS INTEGRATED INTO THE STOCK ASSESSMENT,
``RED SNAPPER ACT''; AND H.R. 4596, TO REAUTHORIZE THE BUREAU
OF RECLAMATION TO PROVIDE COST-SHARED FUNDING TO IMPLEMENT THE
ENDANGERED AND THREATENED FISH RECOVERY PROGRAMS FOR THE UPPER
COLORADO AND SAN JUAN RIVER BASINS, ``UPPER COLORADO AND SAN
JUAN RIVER BASINS ENDANGERED FISH RECOVERY PROGRAMS
REAUTHORIZATION ACT OF 2023''

----------

Thursday, July 27, 2023

U.S. House of Representatives

Subcommittee on Water, Wildlife and Fisheries

Committee on Natural Resources

Washington, DC

----------

The Subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:16 a.m., in
Room 1334, Longworth House Office Building, Hon. Cliff Bentz
[Chairman of the Subcommittee] presiding.
Present: Representatives Bentz, Wittman, Graves, Radewagen,
LaMalfa, Carl, Boebert, Luna, Hageman; Peltola, Hoyle,
Magaziner, Neguse, Porter, and Case.
Also present: Representatives Carter, Lawler, Rose, and
Rutherford.

Mr. Bentz. The Subcommittee on Water, Wildlife and
Fisheries will come to order.
Good morning, everyone. I want to welcome Members,
witnesses, and our guests in the audience to today's hearing.
Without objection, the Chair is authorized to declare a
recess of the Subcommittee at any time.
Under Committee Rule 4(f), any opening statements at the
hearing are limited to the Chairman and the Ranking Member. I
therefore ask unanimous consent that all other Members' opening
statements be made part of the hearing record if they are
submitted in accordance with Committee Rule 3(o).
Without objection, so ordered.
I also ask unanimous consent that the gentleman from Utah,
Mr. Curtis; the gentleman from Florida, Mr. Rutherford; the
gentleman from New York, Mr. Lawler; the gentleman from
Tennessee, Mr. Rose; and the gentleman from Georgia, Mr.
Carter, be allowed to participate in today's hearing.
Without objection, so ordered.
We are here today to consider eight legislative measures:
H.R. 1437, the Black Vulture Relief Act of 2023, sponsored by
Representative Rose of Tennessee; H.R. 1792, the South Pacific
Tuna Treaty Act of 2023, sponsored by Representative Radewagen
of American Samoa; H.R. 2950, Coastal Habitat Conservation Act
of 2023, sponsored by Representative Huffman of California;
H.R. 2982, the New York-New Jersey Watershed Protection Act,
sponsored by Representative Tonko of New York; H.R. 4051, the
SHARKED Act, sponsored by Representative Wittman of Virginia;
H.R. 4094, the Great Salt Lake Stewardship Act, sponsored by
Representative Curtis of Utah; H.R. 4587, the Red Snapper Act,
sponsored by Representative Rutherford of Florida; and H.R.
4596, the Western Water Accelerated Revenue Repayment Act,
sponsored by Representative Boebert of Colorado.
I now recognize myself for a 5-minute opening statement.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. CLIFF BENTZ, A REPRESENTATIVE IN CONGRESS
FROM THE STATE OF OREGON

Mr. Bentz. Today, we are meeting to discuss eight bills
that address a variety of regional issues.
Mr. Wittman's legislation, H.R. 4051, creates a task force
to address increasing shark depredation.
H.R. 1792, sponsored by Mrs. Radewagen, would implement
amendments to the South Pacific Tuna Treaty that were adopted
back in 2016. I will note that, as written, the bill will need
modifications to meet House protocols.
Mr. Rutherford's legislation, H.R. 4587, prevents NOAA from
implementing draconian fishing closures in the South Atlantic
until the South Atlantic Great Red Snapper Count Study is
completed and the findings are integrated into the Fisheries
Stock Assessment.
Mr. Rose's legislation, H.R. 1437, gives ranchers and
cattlemen more options to address the devastating impacts of
black vulture predation by allowing them to take a black
vulture that is causing death, injury, or destruction to
livestock. Black vultures are not endangered, but are protected
under the Migratory Bird Treaty Act, which means they cannot be
taken without a permit from U.S. Fish and Wildlife.
H.R. 4094, introduced by Mr. Curtis, gives the Department
of the Interior more flexibility in addressing issues
surrounding the Great Salt Lake and the Salt Lake Basin.
H.R. 4596, sponsored by Mrs. Boebert, authorizes two
successful fish recovery programs that provide Endangered
Species Act compliance for more than 2,500 Federal and non-
Federal water projects, depleting approximately 3.7 million
acre-feet per year in the Upper Colorado River and San Juan
River basins.
Additionally, we have two bills sponsored by our colleagues
across the aisle.
Mr. Huffman's bill would legislatively authorize the
program of Fish and Wildlife Service, which was
administratively created and has been running since 1984.
Lastly, Mr. Tonko's bill would create a new program
specifically for what it defines as the New York-New Jersey
Watershed. As written, both of these bills need to be amended
to meet House Floor protocols.
With that, I look forward to hearing from our Members and
witnesses with us today.
I note that our Subcommittee Ranking Member is ill, and we
wish him a full recovery.
I will now introduce our first panel. As is typical with
legislative hearings, the bills' sponsors are recognized for 5
minutes each to discuss their bills. With us today are
Congressman Rob Wittman; Congresswoman Radewagen, right on
time; Congresswoman Lauren Boebert; Congressman Paul Tonko;
Congressman John Rutherford; and Congressman John Rose.
I now recognize Mr. Wittman for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. ROBERT J. WITTMAN, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE COMMONWEALTH OF VIRGINIA

Mr. Wittman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would like to begin
by asking unanimous consent to enter into the record the NOAA
Fisheries Report, ``Atlantic Sharks: 30 Years of Successes and
Lessons,'' and then also the written testimony of Mr. Dewey
Hemilright, a commercial fisherman from Wanchese, North
Carolina.
Mr. Bentz. So ordered.

[The information follows:]
Atlantic Sharks: 30 Years of Successes and Lessons
Dive In with NOAA Fisheries
New England/Mid-Atlantic
July 13, 2023, Southeast Audio file

NOAA Fisheries has successfully managed Atlantic highly migratory
sharks for 30 years. Learn about some of the challenges of assessing
shark stocks and combatting misinformation about sharks.

0:00:00.0 John Sheehan: Sharks inspire strong, even visceral reactions
in people. They're beloved, feared, revered and reviled and hold a
distinct place in our imaginations and culture.

0:13.4 S2: There is a creature.

0:14.4 S3: This shark, swallow you whole.

0:16.9 S4: To kill, it's a man-eater.

0:17.9 S5: You're gonna need a bigger boat.

0:22.5 JS: By the way, I don't invoke jaws lightly here. The 1975
Spielberg film actually contributed to conditions that led the federal
government to create an Atlantic shark management plan in 1993. And in
the intervening decades, sharks have grown no less popular or
polarizing, in the words of one of my guests.

0:41.5 Karyl Brewster-Geisz: Everybody has a strong opinion about
sharks.

0:44.2 JS: And as is often the case, when strong emotions are involved,
the conversation about how sharks are handled and managed can itself
get pretty muddled. This is Dive In With NOAA Fisheries. I'm John
Sheehan, and today we're discussing sharks, specifically Atlantic
highly migratory sharks managed by NOAA Fisheries, which has been doing
so successfully for 30 years. We'll discuss the challenges to assessing
shark stocks and combating the constant misinformation about sharks
leading to lasting misconceptions and some of those strong public
feelings that I mentioned earlier. My guests are Karyl Brewster-Geisz,
branch chief for regulations of the Atlantic HMS Management Division.

0:01:26.9 KB: We manage the shark, swordfish, tuna and bill fish
fisheries throughout the Atlantic, from the state of Maine through the
Gulf of Mexico to the state of Texas. And we also include the
Caribbean.

0:01:39.6 JS: And Dr. Enric Cortes, a senior scientist at the Southeast
Fisheries Science Center.

0:01:45.1 Dr. Enric Cortes: My role has been essentially to do shark
stock assessments. So I work on the population dynamics, life history
issues, etcetera.

0:01:53.9 JS: And what kinds of sharks are we talking about?

0:01:55.9 KB: Oh, all sorts of sharks. Some of our more coastal ranging
species such as lemon sharks or black tip sharks. And then you have
sharks that go all the way across the ocean, like blue sharks or
Shortfin mako. We manage about 40 different species of sharks.

0:02:12.4 JS: Now, before we get to recent history, I think it's
helpful to start with a brief look at shark fisheries over the last
century or so.

0:02:20.6 DC: Sharks have been caught recreationally in the US since at
least the 19th century, if not before. Sharks were not commercially
caught in any significance until approximately the 1920s, when this
company called the Ocean Leather Company, started catching sharks for
their skin to make leather and also collecting some fins. From
approximately 1935 to 1950 on the Atlantic Coast, on the east coast of
Florida, there was a dedicated shark fishery for liver oil, because
that's where Vitamin A was extracted from. But in 1950, vitamin A was
synthesized and so there was no longer a need to get it from the liver
oil of sharks. So shark fisheries went down considerably. Fast
forwarding now to approximately the early 1970s, shark meat consumption
in the US started to take off and concomitant with that was the opening
of the Asian shark fin market to the US. And then in the mid 1970s
there was the release of the book and the movie, Jaws, which led to a
big increase in recreational fishing.

0:03:39.1 JS: See, Jaws. And this brings us to more recent decades.
Here's Karyl Brewster-Geisz.

0:03:45.7 KB: In the late 1980s, the five fishery management councils
along the Atlantic coast were really concerned about the status of
sharks and how much fishing pressure was going on in those species.
They figured out they would have a really hard time managing these
species because it encompassed the full range of all five councils. So
they asked the Secretary of Commerce to manage sharks, and in 1992 the
science center produced a stock assessment final report that showed
that a number of shark species were over fished. And that triggered a
1993 fishery management plan, which was the first federal fishery
management plan for sharks. And that's what we're celebrating.

0:04:35.3 JS: Wow. So because sharks had so much pressure on them, it
just needed to have an overarching body specifically devoted to sharks.

0:04:43.0 KB: Specifically devoted to sharks. Yes. A lot of fishermen
back then used different gear types than they use now. And for sharks
in particular, they would catch the sharks. And at the time they
weren't . . . Not all the sharks, they knew how to process well enough
to eat the meat. So they would keep the fins and dispose of the
carcass. And that's where fining comes from. Because the fins were
worth a lot of money. It wouldn't disrupt what else was in the hold?
Like the swordfish or the tunas that they caught, 'cause they could
just dry the fins out on deck.

0:05:18.9 JS: Yes, and that has been a very controversial practice and
has been the subject of a lot of sort of uproar.

0:05:25.9 KB: Yes. Yes, it has. Yes, we banned finning back in that
1993 fishery management plan. So it has not been a problem in the
United States essentially since then. We've done a lot since that time
to help close any loopholes. Most importantly, in 2008 we actually
implemented what we call, fins naturally attached. So all commercial
fishermen and recreational fishermen are required to land the sharks
with the fins naturally attached to the body, so they can't remove the
fins and then staple a whole bunch to this body, which has happened
elsewhere. They actually have to keep the fin attached with skin to the
shark.

0:06:08.7 JS: Since we're talking about sort of some of these
milestones over the last 30 years, what have been some others?

0:06:14.0 KB: There have been huge improvements in terms of the data
that's available. So that has improved all of our stock assessments. In
1999, we implemented what we call limited access, which means for the
commercial fishery, there's only a limited number of permits. So not
anyone can go out and fish commercially for sharks. You need to have a
special permit and you need to basically buy a permit from somebody
who's leaving before you can enter. In 2008, in addition to requiring
fins naturally attached, we also started what we call a shark research
fishery. And this is a cooperative fishery where we work with specific
fishermen to collect data. And it has been instrumental in all the
things we've been doing, including the science, the underlying science
we use for the management, along with helping us figure out more about
what we should be doing for management. We have had a number of species
be either rebuilt or well on their way to rebuilding. So an example of
that will be the black tip shark, which back in 1998 we thought was on
the way to extinction and now it's fully rebuilt and could withstand a
lot more fishing pressure than we allow it at the moment.

0:07:28.6 KB: Other species would be like the sandbar shark, which was
historically the major shark species is now under a rebuilding plan and
is ahead of the rebuilding time period for that. In addition, we've
added some species to our fishery management unit that we did not have
in 1993. So an example of that is Smooth Dogfish or Gulf smooth-hounds
and all of the smooth-hound complex. We added them to our management
unit in 2015.

0:08:00.5 JS: Can we talk about some misconceptions? I think, shark
finning is an example of something that I think a lot of people knew
about, and maybe aren't aware that it's banned and that it's something
that doesn't happen in the United States anymore. What other
misconceptions kind of exist?

0:08:15.5 KB: Yes, there are a lot of misconceptions. People go online
and they Google sharks and they immediately see all sharks are
endangered and that is actually a big problem for us. And the finning
issue that you mentioned. So a lot of people tend to group all sharks
together as though sharks is just like one big species when it's not.
There are hundreds of species of sharks and they are all so different
and so diverse, and we do have some species of sharks that for a shark
is relatively slow-growing and takes a while to have pups. So an
example of that would be the dusky shark. It has been prohibited for
over 20 years now, still over-fished still experiencing overfishing,
but then you have other shark species that are relatively fast growing
for a shark, like the blacktip and it's fully rebuilt now. The idea
about finning, there's a couple of misperceptions there. One is, a lot
of people tend to be surprised that we even allow a commercial shark
fishery. And then the other one is surprised that commercial shark
fishermen are still allowed to land fins. Commercial fishermen actually
abhor wasting any fish. They wanna use the whole shark, they don't
wanna just land the fins, so they use the meat, they use the skin, they
use the teeth. Some parts of the shark are even used medically. So
sharks are really good for us overall, not just in the water, but also
as a resource to eat.

0:10:05.8 JS: And just to reiterate here, not only has shark finning
been illegal in the United States. In late 2022, president Biden signed
the Shark Fin Sales Elimination Act. It's part of the National Defense
Authorization Act. Under that act, shark fins, except for those of
smooth and spiny dogfish, but all others cannot enter into commerce and
fishermen are still required to land the fins naturally attached to the
shark. You mentioned sort of public surprise at some aspects of shark,
such as that there is a commercial shark fishery. How else have you
seen the public swing in their perceptions? Because, sharks are . . .
They're both beloved and feared and in popular culture sharks are . . .
They're iconic and people are very, very interested in them. How have
you seen sort of the public's swing of emotions regarding sharks?

0:11:01.3 KB: Yes. Everybody has a strong opinion about sharks and if
could ask somebody on the street and they would tell me what they think
about sharks and it has swung a lot over the years. So when I first
started, primarily people thought of them as dangerous and they were
afraid to go in the water. And this was . . . It was still about 20
years after Jaws, and yet Jaws really did have an impact on what people
thought about sharks. At the same time, there were still a lot of
people who saw sharks as a challenging sport fish, something to go
after. And you think of shortfin mako or spinner sharks that actually
jump out of the water and spin when they're caught. A lot of people
really thought of them either as dangerous or as let's go catch them.
Now, a lot of people wanna just save sharks.

0:11:55.8 KB: Sharks are important and they wanna save sharks. And that
was virtually unheard of when I started. There seems to be a swing now
toward a whole different issue where sharks are becoming, for lack of
another word, pests, where recreational and commercial fishermen are
constantly fighting against the sharks in order to land other species.
So they might be fishing for snapper or grouper or Yellowfin tuna, and
before they can get the fish into the boat, the sharks come and eat
them. And that's called depredation. Similarly, they might be out there
enjoying a nice day recreational fishing, they catch whatever it is
they wanna catch, say a snapper or a king mackerel. And then they
release that back into the water and a shark eats it. And that's called
scavenging. It's similar to the depredation. And so a lot of commercial
and recreational fishermen throughout the region, for the entire
Atlantic and the Caribbean are really coming to see sharks as pests.

0:13:00.5 JS: What's the management response to that? How do you deal
with that?

0:13:03.7 KB: That is what we are still coming to terms with. We are
trying to work with a lot of the fishermen. A lot of the scientists
have been working with fishermen, trying to get a sense of how you can
mitigate that. We're not gonna change the fact that sharks are
predators. So we need to really work with the fishermen to come up with
a proper response. One of our main concerns is that fishermen will
become so upset over this, that they will start intentionally killing
the sharks. And that of course, we wanna avoid at all costs. We don't
wanna end up back where we were when the fishery management plant
started in 1993.

0:13:46.1 JS: A few weeks ago, an example of this issue of shark
depredation played out publicly. A fishing crew participating in the
Big Rock Blue Marlin Tournament in North Carolina lost out on a three
and a half million dollar prize. When it was determined their catch had
been mutilated and therefore were disqualified.

0:14:03.8 S8: It would appear that this fish has been bitten by a
shark.

0:14:08.7 JS: You can bet that crew has feelings about depredation. Of
course, it's also a sign that the management efforts of the last 30
years, efforts to stabilize and protect shark populations are working.
Here's Dr. Enric Cortes.

0:14:23.9 DC: It's related to the boom and bust cycle of shark
fisheries in my opinion. There is a short period of very intense
exploitation, the boom, which is followed by a bust, so a drastic
declining catches. We had a really large increase in catches in the mid
1980s to early 1990s, and since then we've had increasingly restricting
regulations. So to me, that shows the recovery period. That can explain
why we are now seeing a lot of the populations that are increasing and
it's manifested by the depredation.

0:15:02.4 JS: Yes. Is over-exploitation still a threat to sharks? And I
mean, if not, what are the threats to sharks?

0:15:11.3 DC: Yes. So traditionally and historically fisheries have
been the main threat to sharks. One issue with sharks is that even if
you control the targeted fisheries, sharks are caught in a large amount
of fisheries and gears. So that's what we call bycatch or incidental
catch. And that makes managing shark fisheries very difficult. Also
assessing them, because we have to account for the sharks that are
caught in all these fisheries, which oftentimes we don't have a good
handle on because those have to be estimated, they have to be
observations, reports, etcetera. Another threat . . . The main one is
fisheries. But then you have habitat loss or habitat degradation. So
what happens, for example, with number of species of small and large
coastal sharks is that they give birth in very shallow coastal areas.
So with human construction and contamination, etcetera, that can pose
problems to the survivorship or those early life stages.

0:16:19.6 DC: Another re-merging problem is climate change. So climate
change, I just wanna make clear that we don't really know yet what the
effects of climate change are or will be, because in many cases we
don't have baseline data. So we cannot tell how things have changed
when we don't know the status quo. What we can say though is the risks
that are out there. So warming water temperatures that may change their
distribution, things like ocean acidification, increased uptake of CO2
can also affect their prey. I mean, there is a cascading effect, and so
it's a lot of potential risk of climate change, but we don't know yet
what those are.

0:17:01.9 JS: So what is it about sharks that makes them vulnerable,
either to exploitation or these changing conditions?

0:17:09.1 DC: So in general sharks, and not only sharks, but what we
call elasmobranchs, which are shark, skates and rays, they grow slowly.
They attain sexual maturity at a late age. And so they reproduce, their
first reproduction is very delayed. They live many years. They have low
fecundity. So only a certain number of pups that are born fully
developed. In general, there are different types of reproduction, but
in general, they're born fully developed mini replicas of the adults.
So they are ready to go, so to speak. They also have long gestation
periods and their breathing frequencies, so how often they made is very
long. So many species reproduce every year, but other species reproduce
every two or three years, maybe even more. So those are things that we
are . . . We have made a lot of progress on, but we still have a lot of
unknowns on. So that's a problem with sharks. So they have developed
this life history strategy over the course of approximately 400 million
years of evolution. So just having a few pups, a few offspring, makes
it OK for them to maintain their population levels because they have
few predators, probably larger sharks are their main predators. So
that's a problem with sharks. Their low reproductive potential is
essentially their Achilles heel.

0:18:42.0 JS: Yes, and that's all incredibly complicated. And it sounds
like contributing factors to what makes them so hard to predict and to
model. Could you tell us what it means to model shark populations? And
also what are the data that you need?

0:19:00.2 DC: Yes, good question. So the type of model that we use
depends on the data that we have. So there are four main types of data
that we need to assess the status of populations. So we have Catches.
Catches give us a sense of the scale of the population, how large the
population is based on how many are removed. We have indices of
relative abundance, what we call CPUE or catch per unit effort. That
informs us about the trend of the population, is it going down, is it
going up? Then we have the biology, or biology life history, same
thing. That tells us about the intrinsic vulnerability of that
population. How much can they take? How much exploitation can they
take? And then we also have, in some cases, length and/or age samples
that inform us about the segment of the population that's being
exploited, what age groups or length groups. However, that's in an
ideal scenario. For sharks, we often are in situations that we call
data poor or data limited. We seldom have all these pieces of
information. We have catches, yes, but there is uncertainty in the
catches because a lot of them are estimated. There is uncertainty in
some biological parameters as well.

0:20:24.9 DC: Sometimes we don't know how many years they live. We
don't know how often they reproduce. We are often in data poor or data
limited situations. Assessing shark populations is not easy because of
the oftentimes sketchy data, but also managing them is very difficult
because of bycatch in many different fisheries and trying to quantify
all those sources of mortality. It's not an easy task.

0:20:56.8 JS: Sure, and you've got the added pressure of public
scrutiny because sharks are, as you say, these charismatic species and
there's a lot of interest.

0:21:06.3 DC: That's a good point. This has increased a lot. Through my
career, I've seen the change in the level of scrutiny of, for example,
the assessments we do. And of course, the managers are very much
subjected to that scrutiny as well. So, in one way, things have become
better. Data have become better in general, but we're still a long way
from having really good data. There's been a lot of advances in the
modeling, but at the end of the day, we need the data to model these
populations.

0:21:43.4 JS: Dr. Enric Cortes is a senior scientist at the Southeast
Fisheries Science Center, though he has just begun a process of phased
retirement.

0:21:52.0 DC: I may continue trying to do some research just for fun,
to have some fun at the end of my career and see sharks in real life
again, not just through the computer end.

0:22:04.8 JS: Today, we've barely scratched the surface discussing many
of the issues surrounding sharks, but as Karyl Brewster-Geisz reminds
us, there are many ways to learn more and to make your voice heard if
these issues are important to you.

0:22:17.2 KB: The general public can comment on any of our proposed
rules or ongoing regulations. We have a lot of information available on
our webpage, and anyone can also go to regulations.gov to submit
written public comments. We do read every single comment we receive,
and we make a lot of changes as a result of those public comments.

0:22:41.5 JS: Karyl Brewster-Geisz is Branch Chief for Regulations of
the Atlantic, HMS Management Division. You can always find lots more
information at fisheries.noaa.gov. I'm John Sheehan, and this has been
Dive In with NOAA Fisheries.

______

Dewey Hemilright

Commercial Fisherman

Wanchese, North Carolina

July 24, 2023

Hon. Cliff Bentz, Chairman
Hon. Jared Huffman, Ranking Member
House Natural Resources Committee
Subcommittee on Water, Wildlife and Fisheries
Washington, DC 20515

Re: H.R. 4051, ``SHARKED ACT''

Good Afternoon Chairman and members of the Natural Resource
Subcommittee:

Hello, I'm Dewey Hemilright from North Carolina. I appreciate this
opportunity to provide written testimony concerning H.R. 4051. I've
been both actively involved around the table in the fisheries
management process and a Commercial fisherman for over 30 years. This
included serving actively since 1995 on the Shark operation team which
later became part of the Highly Migratory Species Advisory Panel (HMS
AP). In 2011, I was appointed to serve on the Mid-Atlantic Fishery
Management Council [MAFMC] for North Carolina until August 10, 2023
when I reached my term limit. During that time, I've been an active
Liaison to the HMS AP, the South Atlantic Fishery Management Council
(SAFMC), and was appointed to the U.S. ICCAT Advisory Committee (IAC)
along with serving on the US ICCAT delegation since 2019.
I have lived, worked and been actively involved in real time shark
fisheries management and also the lack thereof. This has allowed me to
be among the most experienced and qualified to testify on this bill
H.R. 4051 [Shark Act].
Prior to 1993, you could shark fish 365 days a year and there was
no trip limit. This wasn't sustainable, and so NMFS implemented a Shark
Fishery Management Plan (FMP) that set a quota of about 2500 metric
tons and a 4000 pound trip limit. That changed the landscape for the
better. Then, regrettably, NMFS cut the quota in half to 1250 metric
tons around 1996, and what that did was shorten the season to directly
harvest Large Coastal Sharks (LCS) with two seasons Jan-June then July-
Dec until the quota was caught during each period. A number of
fishermen quit shark fishing, and also during this time there were
States with hundreds of thousands of pounds of unclassified shark
landings, which wasn't good.
NMFS failed to manage the LCS throughout their range even though
they had the authority and mandate to do so. The NMFS stock assessments
were determined to be data poor and so basically they would assume or
supplement numbers into stock assessments as `best available science'.
With being a Commercial fisherman harvesting LCS from Dec 7, 1994
to the fall of 2006 traveling from Mayport, FL to Montauk, NY
throughout the year and with a seasonal quota and with 4,000 pound trip
limits of carcass weight harvest of LCSs.
After the Sandbar shark species stock assessment, which I focused
on catching, was deemed overfished and overfishing occurring, NMFS
stopped the directed harvest of Sandbar sharks. And then a limited
number of vessels applied to enter into the Shark Research Fishery
around 2008 and it basically gave a few qualified vessels about 200,000
pounds per year divided among less than 10 participants from Maine to
Texas. Yet the last 5-6 years of quota has gone unharvested.
Over the last 10 years, federally permitted active commercial shark
fishermen have decreased dramatically along with fishermen in other
fisheries that interact with sharks. One only has to look at the NMFS
quota monitoring website to see the directed shark fishery hasn't been
landing its sustainable quota over the last 5 years. The only bright
spot is Louisiana state water fisheries which continue to harvest a
majority of the Gulf of Mexico quota, and the reason is that they allow
fishermen to stack numerous shark, state permitted fishermen on one
vessel [example one vessel could have 4 limits if that number of
permitted fishermen were aboard].
NMFS management has not been flexible at all with its trip limit
where there is plenty of quota available. Instead they chose to keep
the trip limit the same, not increasing it when possible, which would
have helped with the harvest and the few fishermen that are left to
make money.
I can't remember the exact date, maybe it was in 2008, but another
regulation was implemented which required shark fins to be naturally
attached to the shark carcass when landed at the dock, which meant you
had to double process your shark carcass, not under the best conditions
at the dock and it was more time consuming. As a result, a few more
fishermen have dropped out after that which further decreased effort in
the fishery. The final nail in the coffin for the majority of the
sustainable directed shark fishing industry was the recent, ill-fated
domestic shark fin ban bill. This killed any chance of any of the
available sustainable harvest of LCS or Small Coastal Sharks (SCS).
There are now simply no fishermen left to work.
Everything that the States, NMFS, and Congress have done to date
has succeeded in destroying the domestic shark industry along with the
fishermen that lost their livelihood. So, for the purpose of this
hearing and the issues of depredation along with scavenging (which is a
shark eating a released fish), these problems are going to continue and
actually get worse simply because the management worked and now there
are a lot more sharks everywhere.
Given the millions of active recreational fishermen, both
depredation and scavenging will continually get worse and could likely
cause scientific uncertainty buffers to be placed in the Annual Catch
Limit (ACL) available from domestic stock assessments. And further
unknown factors if the Science and Statistical Committee (SSC) chooses.
Now here's how to fix it, but the effects won't be immediate--it
would take some time given the loss of fishermen, infrastructure and
markets. Congress should immediately introduce a bill called ``The
continued sustainable harvest of LCS and SCS species along with the
regulation that fins are naturally attached and allow sale of all body
parts ACT of 2023''. If you can't possess de-attached shark fins
fishermen should be allowed to discard them at sea with the entrails of
the shark harvested. This would send a very strong message to the rest
of the world of the USA's commitment to the sustainable harvest of
sharks.
But most of all this would send a strong signal to American
fishermen that Congress wants a US sustainable directed shark industry,
because we have the best sustainable managed shark fishery even with
its faults that could be worked on and be resolved in the near future.
Such an Act should also include a BAN of any seafood imports that don't
meet or exceed the U.S. regulations or gear used--that don't meet or
exceed the sustainable conservation standards by which USA fisherman
have to both harvest and report under. Such an Act would level the
playing field for the AMERICAN fishermen and AMERICAN consumers. As
well as send a message to the rest of the world that the US will not
allow its marketplace to be open to unsustainable fisheries practices.
If such major action does not happen immediately, two very
important U.S. fisheries that harvest sharks will be seriously damaged,
if not lost altogether, while the shrimp trawl fishery will suffer
major losses due to sharks tearing holes in their gear.
So what is it going to be?

I appreciate Rep. Wittman's invitation to submit my 35 years of
reality through my comments to this important issue and at the same
time offer help in resolving it.

Thank You,

Dewey Hemilright

______

Mr. Wittman. Mr. Chairman, thank you. I would like to thank
you and Ranking Member Grijalva for holding this hearing today.
I think it is incredibly important.
As we look at the balances that we see in our ecosystems,
what we have seen is a resurgence of shark populations, which
is good. But what we have also seen with that is shark
depredation, which is essentially a very, very high frequency
of the taking of fishermen's catch.
While we understand it is a natural part of predation, it
also is becoming a widespread issue in our waters, and has
increased rapidly in recent years. Our anglers are losing their
catch and tackle to sharks at alarming rates, and in some areas
it makes areas totally unfishable because you are not able to
compete with the sharks to actually bring your catch to the
boat.
I introduced the SHARKED Act to study this issue and to
look into ways to improve sport fishing conditions for anglers
while protecting sharks. And I think that we can do both. This
bill establishes a fisheries management task force to focus on
identifying research opportunities, recommending management
strategies, and developing educational materials for fishermen.
This legislation that I have before the Subcommittee today
helps fishermen understand which species of sharks have higher
rates of depredation. Essentially, depredation is the taking of
a recreational fisherman's catch. And in many instances, too,
commercial fishermen are having to deal with that also.
And where is the most likely situation where the species
are to intersect, where you have this depredation? This is
going to serve as the first major step in improving
communication and coordination among fisheries managers and
addressing shark depredation nationwide. And it is a nationwide
problem.
There are a number of organizations I want to thank that
have been part of this. The American Sport Fishing Association
has been incredibly important. We have other leaders, too, in
the conservation and recreational fishing field that have been
very, very supportive of this effort.
We want to get to a point of good public policy as it
relates to shark populations and our recreational fisheries. I
do think that there is a place where we can find a balance.
Again, Mr. Chairman, I want to thank you and the Ranking
Member for holding this hearing, and I yield back the balance
of my time.

Mr. Bentz. Thank you, Mr. Wittman.
Mrs. Boebert, you are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. LAUREN BOEBERT, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF COLORADO

Mrs. Boebert. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I am proud to
testify in support of H.R. 4596, my Upper Colorado and San Juan
River Basins Endangered Fish Recovery Programs Reauthorization
Act of 2023.
My bicameral and bipartisan bill provides a clean 7-year
reauthorization of the Upper Colorado and San Juan recovery
programs that protect four threatened and endangered native
fish species in the Upper Colorado and San Juan River basins by
extending conservation programs at current funding levels for 7
additional fiscal years.
These programs provide legal certainty for 2,500 water
projects, and ensure future water development in the Upper
Colorado River Basin. These projects, including 1,200 in
Colorado alone, provide water for local municipalities, tribes,
major reservoirs, agriculture, ski areas, power generation
facilities, and others that use more than 3.69 million acre-
feet of water per year.
The recovery programs also facilitate water delivery from
Navajo Flaming Gorge, which collectively can store more than
6.5 million acre-feet of water as part of the Colorado River
storage project.
The Upper Colorado and San Juan recovery programs were
established in 1988 to achieve full recovery of four federally
listed endangered fish species, including the humpback chub,
bonytail, Colorado pikeminnow, and razorback sucker. Those
designations led to the threat of significant water and power
use restrictions.
For over three decades, states, tribes, and local
communities, environmental groups, energy users, and water
users have partnered to help recover four threatened and
endangered fish species, while continuing water and power
facility development and operations in the Upper Colorado River
Basin and the San Juan River Basin.
Non-Federal partners contribute $11 million per year in
water contributions, plus another $750,000 in staffing and in-
kind contributions.
Participating states contribute $500,000 to base funding
each year in cash equivalents for recovery action, including
for fish hatcheries and non-native fish removal.
The Fish and Wildlife Service contributes $1.56 million per
year in base funding.
The Bureau of Reclamation provides cost shared
contributions to both base and capital funding. Reclamation's
capital funding supports major infrastructure projects at
reservoirs, diversion dams, canals, and floodplains across the
basin.
Without these programs, these 2,500 water and power users
would have to perform extremely burdensome section 7
consultations for all 2,500 individual projects. Because of the
success of these programs, the humpback chub and the razorback
sucker are success stories, with the chub downlisted from
endangered to threatened, and the razorback being recommended
for downlisting, as well.
Last Congress, I worked closely with the gentleman from
Colorado, Mr. Neguse, on a short-term extension to reauthorize
these programs until September 30, 2024. I am proud to report
that this bill today is the result of months of hard work with
local stakeholders, the Bureau of Reclamation, and Senators
Hickenlooper and Romney and others to provide a long-term
solution by reauthorizing these vital programs until 2031.
My bill has significant support from more than 30 Colorado
and Western stakeholder organizations, including Denver Water,
Pueblo Water, both of Colorado's Indian tribes, the Ute Water
Users Association, and more.
I am thrilled to see the Bureau of Reclamation also provide
testimony in strong support of my bill here today, and I urge
quick passage of this critical bipartisan legislation through
the Committee, the House, and into law.
And, Mr. Chair, I yield. Thank you.

Mr. Bentz. Thank you, Mrs. Boebert. I now recognize Mr.
Rutherford for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. JOHN H. RUTHERFORD, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF FLORIDA

Mr. Rutherford. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want to thank
you, Chairman Bentz and Ranking Member Huffman, for having this
important hearing today. I appreciate the opportunity to come
before you today to discuss my bill, the Red Snapper Act.
I represent northeast Florida and over 30 miles of pristine
coastline. And I can tell you northeast Florida's economy has
been shaped by our coastal resources, and our active fishing
community depends on access to our fisheries.
Our fishing economy is made up of more than just the
anglers that go out on the water. It is also the bait shops,
the marinas, the gear and boat manufacturers, and retailers,
restaurants, hotels, and many, many other downstream
businesses. And the way we manage our fisheries affects all of
these businesses.
And I know this Committee is no stranger to fishery
management challenges, especially when it comes to red snapper.
As you know, red snapper is a very prized fish for both
commercial and recreational anglers. And for the last 10 years,
stakeholders in the South Atlantic have been successfully
rebuilding the red snapper stock. According to the most recent
stock assessment, Atlantic red snapper is more abundant today
than anyone alive has ever seen.
However, instead of celebrating this success, we are here
because there have been draconian and punitive proposals made
in managing the stock. And the record number of red snapper on
the reefs are driving increased encounters, which then lead to
increased discards. And these discards, that data is then
driving the over-fishing assumptions, which has caused
extremely short red snapper seasons, and frustrated many of our
anglers.
In fact, this year, despite the growing stock, the
recreational red snapper season was 2 days, 2 days. And let me
say this, that creates a dangerous situation when you have a 2-
day season and you have thousands of boats trying to go out at
the same time. You wind up with fights at the dock, you wind up
with everybody running out of gear. That creates a problem in
itself.
But I was lucky enough this year to be able to go out on
one of those days, and we caught our limit in about 45 minutes.
There were five of us on the boat, which meant we got to catch
five, and took about 45 minutes. We spent twice as much time,
Mr. Chairman, going to and from our spot than we actually did
fishing.
And while short seasons are frustrating, they are not even
the most extreme management strategy that has been discussed in
the South Atlantic, and this is why we are really here.
Following the latest stock assessment, NOAA has proposed
area and time closures of bottom fishing to reduce out-of-
season red snapper catches. Bottom closures would have severe
and irreversible consequences. These closures threaten to
devastate the very same anglers that have worked in good faith
to rebuild the stock for the last 10 years. In fact, those
reefs that those fish are on, our American sport fishermen are
the ones who built those reefs. They weren't there before.
Now, fortunately, after significant pushback from the
fishing community, these closures were not included in the
amendment to the Council ultimately passing. However, closures
are still on the table as a long-term solution. That is why I
am here.
Over the last 4 years, Congress has appropriated, in a
bipartisan fashion, $5 million for an independent study of red
snapper stock in the South Atlantic.
Moving straight to closures before we get the results from
the South Atlantic Red Snapper Count defies common sense. If
closures are implemented, northeast Florida would surely take
the brunt of the impact.
Mr. Chairman, all my bill says is don't close the bottoms
until we get this count in, and it is used in the determination
of the red snapper stock that is down there. If these closures
are implemented, it is going to be very difficult in my
district.
The reefs off northeast Florida are home to a very large
population of these red snapper. In fact, I have had divers
tell me that the red snapper down there are so thick you can
walk across their backs.
Nobody wants to preserve the red snapper stock more than
these anglers. Instead of punishing them with bottom closures,
let's look at innovative management strategies like we have
seen in the Gulf of Mexico, and continue to improve our data
about this fish stock.
I appreciate the Committee's attention to this important
issue, and I look forward to continuing to work with you to
balance the protection of our fisheries with the access to this
important natural resource.
Thank you for having me here today, and I yield back.

Mr. Bentz. Thank you, Mr. Rutherford, and I want to thank
the Members for their testimony. I will now introduce our
second panel.
Dr. Kelly Kryc, Deputy Assistant Administrator for
International Fisheries with NOAA; and Mr. Stephen Guertin,
Deputy Director for Program Management and Policy with the U.S.
Fish and Wildlife Service.
As I know you know, but let me remind you, under Committee
Rules, you must limit your oral statements to 5 minutes, but
your entire statement will appear in the hearing record.
To begin your testimony, please press the ``talk'' button
on the microphone.
We use timing lights. When you begin, the light will turn
green. When you have 1 minute remaining, the light will turn
yellow. And at the end of 5 minutes, the light will turn red,
and I will ask you to please complete your statement.
I will also allow all witnesses to testify before Member
questioning.
I now recognize Dr. Kryc for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF KELLY KRYC, DEPUTY ASSISTANT SECRETARY FOR
INTERNATIONAL FISHERIES, NATIONAL OCEANIC AND ATMOSPHERIC
ADMINISTRATION, WASHINGTON, DC

Dr. Kryc. Chairman Bentz, Ranking Member Grijalva, and
members of the Subcommittee, thank you for the opportunity to
testify today. I am Kelly Kryc, and I serve as NOAA's Deputy
Assistant Secretary for International Fisheries. In this role,
I am responsible for representing U.S. interests in various
multilateral and bilateral fisheries fora. Today, I am here to
represent NOAA's views on three of the bills under
consideration, and I look forward to any questions and the
discussion that follows.
I will first address H.R. 1792, the South Pacific Tuna Act
of 2023. The South Pacific Tuna Treaty between the governments
of the United States and several Pacific Island States has
provided a solid foundation for a mutually beneficial strategic
relationship in the region for more than three decades. It is
viewed as a model of international and fishery cooperation, and
has helped establish fisheries observer and data reporting
requirements, as well as enforcement standards for the region's
fisheries.
NOAA supports H.R. 1792, which would amend the South
Pacific Tuna Act of 1988 to reflect the amendments to the
treaty agreed to in December 2016. These amendments provide
greater flexibility and maintain access for U.S. fishing
vessels operating in the region.
The South Pacific Tuna Act of 2023 provides necessary
changes to the existing law to allow NOAA to promulgate
regulations that fully implement the amendments made to the
treaty. NOAA appreciates the Committee's attention to this
topic.
Next, I will address H.R. 4587, the Red Snapper Act. Red
snapper is one of the most popular fish species in the
Southeast United States, as recognized by Congressman
Rutherford. And NOAA remains committed to ensuring the
successful implementation of the Red Snapper Management
Program.
The most recent stock assessment in 2021 indicated that
South Atlantic red snapper are undergoing over-fishing, are
over-fished, and are currently rebuilding. As noted in the
bill, red snapper over-fishing is primarily caused by discard
mortality associated with fishing snapper-grouper species
during the red snapper season closure. Therefore, lowering the
catch limits of red snapper alone without also addressing the
discard mortality issue associated with the snapper-grouper
fishery will not end over-fishing.
While time area closures can be a tool to manage over-
fishing, at this time the South Atlantic Fishery Management
Council is not recommending such an action. Therefore, it is
NOAA's position that this legislation is unnecessary.
In the interim, the Council and NOAA are looking at other
actions to manage the multi-species snapper-grouper fishery in
a more holistic manner, as well as testing innovative
strategies to reduce discard mortality. We are happy to speak
to the Committee further regarding ongoing science and
management actions.
Finally, regarding H.R. 4051, or the SHARKED Act, NOAA
recognizes the concerns associated with increased reports of
shark depredation. As you noted, Congressman, depredation is a
complex topic, and solving its many causes may be outside the
control of fisheries managers.
Further, completely eliminating depredation is neither
practicable nor feasible. Under the Magnuson-Stevens Fishery
Conservation and Management Act, NOAA is responsible for
ensuring that sharks are sustainably managed, both to prevent
over-fishing of sharks, and also to rebuild any stocks that
have been over-fished.
As shark populations rebuild, and climate change impacts
where sharks and their prey are located, shark depredation
events will likely continue. To address these issues, NOAA has
invested funding in a range of studies and research on
depredation, including through our bycatch reduction
engineering program, which are detailed more fully in our 2022
report to Congress on this subject.
We welcome the opportunity to work with Congress on H.R.
4051 and these important issues. NOAA is proud to lead the
world in conducting ocean science, serving the nation's coastal
communities and industry, and ensuring responsible stewardship
of our ocean and coastal resources.
Thank you for the opportunity to testify on these bills,
and I look forward to your questions.

[The prepared statement of Dr. Kryc follows:]
Prepared Statement of Kelly Kryc, Deputy Assistant Secretary, National
Marine Fisheries Service, National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration, U.S. Department of Commerce
on H.R. 1792, H.R. 4051, and H.R. 4587

Chair Bentz, Ranking Member Huffman, and Members of the
Subcommittee, thank you for the opportunity to testify today. NOAA is
responsible for the stewardship of the nation's living marine resources
and their habitat. We provide vital services for the nation:
sustainable and productive fisheries, safe sources of seafood, the
recovery and conservation of protected species, and healthy
ecosystems--all backed by sound science and an ecosystem-based approach
to management. The resilience of our marine ecosystems and coastal
communities depends on healthy marine species.
We offer the following comments on the bills under consideration
today and look forward to discussing our views with the Subcommittee.
H.R. 1792--South Pacific Tuna Act

NOAA supports H.R. 1792, the South Pacific Tuna Act of 2023 (SPTA).
This bill will update the existing South Pacific Tuna Act of 1988 with
conforming edits to reflect the recent amendments to the South Pacific
Tuna Treaty (the Treaty), a multilateral treaty between the governments
of the United States and several Pacific Islands, which were agreed by
the Parties in December 2016, and received advice and consent to
ratification from the Senate in July 2022. The primary goal of the
Treaty amendments is to provide greater flexibility for both U.S.
vessels and the Pacific Island parties (PIPs) to negotiate levels of
access for U.S. vessels to PIPs' waters, while maintaining a reasonably
certain operating environment for U.S. vessels. The amendments to the
SPTA will allow NOAA to efficiently implement annual access and fee
agreements and new operational requirements, allowing the United States
and its vessels operating under the Treaty to benefit. The amendments
to the SPTA are necessary for the United States to ratify the amended
Treaty.
The Treaty, which entered into force in 1988, provides fishing
access for U.S. purse seine vessels to the exclusive economic zones
(EEZs) of 16 members of the Pacific Islands Forum Fisheries Agency
(FFA)--Australia, Cook Islands, Federated States of Micronesia, Fiji,
Republic of Kiribati, Republic of the Marshall Islands, Republic of
Nauru, New Zealand, Niue, Republic of Palau, Papua New Guinea, Samoa,
Solomon Islands, Kingdom of Tonga, Tuvalu, and Republic of Vanuatu--and
promotes broader cooperation between the parties and relevant
stakeholders.
The Treaty has provided a solid foundation for a mutually
beneficial strategic and economic relationship between the United
States and the PIPs for more than three decades. It is viewed as a
model of international and fishery cooperation and has helped establish
fisheries observer and data reporting requirements, as well as
monitoring, control and surveillance standards for the region's
fisheries, all of which are vital to deterring illegal, unreported, and
unregulated fishing. It serves U.S. economic interests by providing
predictable and advantageous access to the world's most lucrative tuna
fishing grounds and also serves as an important vehicle for public and
private-sector cooperation with the Pacific Islands region on issues
ranging from maritime security to capacity building and economic
assistance. Beyond its specific provisions, the Treaty has symbolic
importance as a long-standing component of the political and economic
relationship between the United States and Pacific Island countries.
NOAA is responsible for implementing the Treaty, and, on behalf of
the Secretary of Commerce, is responsible for issuing the domestic
regulations needed to carry out the terms of the Treaty and the
objectives of the SPTA. These amendments to the SPTA are necessary in
order to allow NOAA to promulgate regulations to fully implement the
amendments to the Treaty. Regulations issued under the SPTA are
applicable to all U.S. purse seine vessels operating under the Treaty,
and include requirements related to vessel licensing under the Treaty,
reporting on fishing activities, carrying vessel observers, and
operating transmitters used as part of the satellite-based vessel
monitoring systems, and more.
In order to continue its leadership role in regional fisheries
conservation and management, it is important for NOAA to have a strong
and productive U.S. purse seine fishery in the region. NOAA appreciates
the Committee's attention to this topic.
H.R. 4587--Red Snapper Act

NOAA would oppose legislation which removes one of the most common
management tools that the Councils and NOAA use around the country to
achieve Congressionally mandated objectives to end overfishing and
rebuild stocks. This bill would provide that the Administrator of NOAA
not issue an interim or final rule that includes an area closure in the
South Atlantic for species managed under the Snapper-Grouper Fishery
Management Plan until the South Atlantic Red Snapper Count Research
Program \1\ (otherwise referred to as the South Atlantic Great Red
Snapper Count) is complete and the data related to that study is
integrated into the stock assessment.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ The South Atlantic Great Red Snapper Count is an effort
financially supported by NOAA's National Sea Grant College program and
overseen by the Sea Grant programs of Florida, Georgia, South Carolina
and North Carolina with scientific oversight from NOAA Fisheries.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Currently, the Council is not proposing, in its advisory capacity,
that NOAA Fisheries develop a South Atlantic Red Snapper closed area.
Were the Council to do so, it is unlikely that NOAA's regulatory
process would conclude prior to the completion of the South Atlantic
Great Red Snapper Count. As such, the legislation is likely
unnecessary.
A 2021 stock assessment indicated that South Atlantic red snapper
are undergoing overfishing (too many fish being caught), are overfished
(the stock size is too low), and are currently rebuilding. Red snapper
overfishing is primarily caused by discard mortality incurred when the
red snapper season is closed and fishermen are targeting snapper-
grouper species that co-occur with red snapper. Therefore, reducing the
harvest of red snapper alone (i.e., lowering the catch limits) will
have minimal impact toward ending overfishing. The vast majority of
discard mortality for red snapper (99% of dead discards in numbers of
fish from 2017-2019) occur in the recreational sector (private and for-
hire). In response to the stock assessment, the South Atlantic Fishery
Management Council (Council) developed a regulatory amendment that, if
implemented by NOAA, would reduce the catch levels and implement gear
requirements for harvest of snapper-grouper species.
The Council originally proposed analyzing time/area closures at
their June 2022 meeting but ultimately did not consider time-area
closures in their regulatory amendment. The Council approved this
regulatory amendment for proposal to NOAA in the Council's advisory
capacity at their March 2023 meeting. However, this amendment, if
implemented, would not have ended overfishing, which is required by the
Magnuson-Stevens Fishery Conservation and Management Act (Magnuson-
Stevens Act). Once NOAA receives the regulatory amendment from the
Council, it will initiate an evaluation to determine if the amendment
is consistent with the Magnuson-Stevens Act and other applicable laws.
If it is consistent with Federal law, NOAA will proceed with
rulemaking.
The South Atlantic Great Red Snapper Count will provide an estimate
of abundance for the South Atlantic red snapper population and is
expected to be available in 2025, at which time it will be incorporated
into the upcoming stock assessment. Following this count, NOAA will
perform its stock assessment between 2024 and 2026, and in 2027, it
will operationalize the stock assessment by incorporating it into the
science and management of the stock. Meanwhile, the Council is
conducting a Management Strategy Evaluation of the snapper-grouper
fishery to provide information to manage the multi-species snapper-
grouper fishery in a more holistic manner. The Council and NOAA are
also considering Exempted Fishing Permitted projects to test innovative
management strategies to reduce effort and dead discards of red snapper
and other snapper-grouper species.
H.R. 4051--Supporting the Health of Aquatic Systems Through Research,
Knowledge, and Enhanced Dialogue (SHARKED) Act

Regarding H.R. 4051, or the Supporting the Health of Aquatic
systems through Research, Knowledge, and Enhanced Dialogue (SHARKED)
Act, NOAA recognizes the concerns regarding shark depredation and are
working to find ways to mitigate any impacts to the extent practicable.
Depredation is a complex topic with multiple facets, including some
that are beyond the control of fisheries managers. It is worth noting
that sharks are not the only species that are involved in depredation
events. For example, in the Gulf of Mexico, dolphins and large groupers
are also common culprits of depredation, while in Alaska and on the
West Coast, orcas and sperm whales often engage in depredation. NOAA
has invested funding in a range of studies and research on depredation,
including through our Bycatch Reduction Engineering Program. The
results of some of these studies and the overarching need for research
were outlined in the Report to Congress that we provided last year per
the Joint Explanatory Statement accompanying the Consolidated
Appropriations Act, 2021. NOAA does not have resources to implement
this bill should it become law.
Eliminating depredation is neither practicable nor feasible. As
required by the Magnuson-Stevens Fishery Conservation and Management
Act, NOAA has successfully rebuilt stocks and continues to work to
prevent overfishing of and rebuild overfished shark stocks. As shark
populations rebuild and climate impacts the location of sharks and
prey, shark depredation events will likely continue. Given the
complexities involved, NOAA aims to identify ways to mitigate the
impact of depredation on fisheries and the fishing community. To do
that, we need better data on the extent of depredation and the species
involved (both those being depredated upon and those doing the
depredating) and we need to continue investing in efforts to mitigate
and/or deter interactions. We are working to include depredation in
various reporting mechanisms used by commercial and recreational
fishers and, as described above, are already investing in mitigation
and deterrence efforts. We welcome the opportunity to work with
Congress on H.R. 4051 and these important issues.
Conclusion

NOAA is proud to continue to lead the world in conducting ocean
science, serving the nation's coastal communities and industries, and
ensuring responsible stewardship of our ocean and coastal resources. We
value the opportunity to continue working with this Subcommittee on
these important issues. Thank you and your staff for your work to
support NOAA's mission.

______

Mr. Bentz. Thank you, Dr. Kryc. I now recognize Mr. Guertin
for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF STEPHEN GUERTIN, DEPUTY DIRECTOR FOR PROGRAM
MANAGEMENT AND POLICY, U.S. FISH AND WILDLIFE SERVICE,
WASHINGTON, DC

Mr. Guertin. Good morning, Chairman Bentz, Ranking Member
Grijalva, and members of the Subcommittee. Thank you for the
opportunity to testify today on three bills regarding the
management of black vultures, conservation of coastal habitats,
and collaborative conservation in the New York-New Jersey
Watershed.
H.R. 1437 would authorize individual livestock producers to
take black vultures without a depredation permit. We recognize
that black vultures target livestock, especially animals that
are newly born or weak, and these depredations can cause
undesirable losses to agricultural producers. We work with
USDA's Wildlife Services to manage vultures causing these
impacts.
Our partnership with USDA brings a wealth of experience and
expertise to working with landowners on the best solution for
depredation caused by black vultures, which are a protected
species under the Migratory Bird Treaty Act. Non-lethal
management can be particularly important in prime roosting
habitat, where the species will repeatedly return over time. If
non-lethal techniques are expected to prove ineffective, we can
then issue a Federal depredation permit.
In the past, these permits were handled on a case-by-case
basis. However, beginning in 2017, we initiated a pilot program
that allowed the Service to issue these Federal depredation
permits to state agencies or farm bureaus, who then issue sub-
permits to individual producers. This program is now available
to every state east of the Mississippi, across the range of the
black vulture population.
We want to emphasize this: for states participating in the
program, requests for depredation sub-permits are well below
maximum levels. We can issue a lot more take of black vultures.
If there are challenges to getting these permits to producers,
we are interested in working to address those challenges within
the existing legal framework.
However, we oppose H.R. 1437, as written, because entirely
eliminating a permit impairs our ability to pursue first non-
lethal management measures, and in our view, annual reporting
requirements are insufficient to provide up-to-date information
to ensure takings are at a sustainable level.
The Service has demonstrated a willingness to engage with
Congress and the agriculture community to improve management of
black vultures, and would welcome continued collaboration to
ensure that ranchers and farmers have the flexibility they need
to protect livestock from black vulture depredations while
ensuring sustainable take.
H.R. 2950 would codify the Service's coastal program and
authorize $20 million in annual appropriations, increasing to
$25 million by Fiscal Year 2028. We support this legislation,
which would strengthen our ability to carry out this successful
partnership program.
Coastal Program is our premier voluntary, locally-based
habitat conservation and restoration program. It provides
technical and financial assistance to willing partners who are
interested in conserving or restoring coastal habitat on public
and private lands. We have field staff in 24 priority coastal
areas, and they collaborate on projects with a wide variety of
partners.
Since it was established in 1985, the Coastal Program has
collaborated with more than 8,200 partners to protect 2.3
million acres of habitat, restore more than 600,000 acres of
habitat, and restore 2,800 stream miles in coastal watersheds.
The program leverages partner contributions at a remarkable
five-to-one ratio or greater, amplifying its impact and making
it a successful, efficient use of conservation funding. And
codifying the program and authorizing appropriations would
ensure the Coastal Program can continue to support
collaborative coastal conservation projects that benefit
wildlife and fisheries.
And last, H.R. 2982 would establish a non-regulatory New
York-New Jersey Watershed Restoration Program, directing the
Service to consult with the state and partners in the Watershed
to develop a watershed-wide restoration strategy.
Further, it would authorize funding for the Service to
provide competitive matching grants and technical assistance to
support restoration activities.
We support this legislation, but we want to note a general
concern about the cumulative impact of regional grant projects
on our ability to prioritize conservation resources at a
national level. We have a long history of collaborative
conservation work in the New York-New Jersey watershed,
including at three National Wildlife Refuges, two Urban
Wildlife Partnerships and work through our Partners for Fish
and Wildlife and Highlands Conservation Act programs. Formal
authorization for a unified watershed restoration Framework
would echo similar programs we have in the Delaware River Basin
and Chesapeake Watershed.
Thank you again for the opportunity to testify today. We
appreciate the Subcommittee's interest in migratory bird
management, coastal restoration, and watershed conservation. I
would be pleased to answer any questions that you may have.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

[The prepared statement of Mr. Guertin follows:]
Prepared Statement of Stephen Guertin, Deputy Director for Policy, U.S.
Fish and Wildlife Service, Department of the Interior
on H.R. 1437, H.R. 2950, and H.R. 2982

Introduction

Good morning, Chairman Bentz, Ranking Member Huffman, and Members
of the Subcommittee. I am Stephen Guertin, Deputy Director for Policy
for the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service (Service) within the Department
of the Interior (Department). I appreciate the opportunity to testify
before you today on three bills regarding the management of migratory
birds, collaborative conservation of coastal resources and habitats,
and the protection of our nation's watersheds.
Consistent with the principles underlying the Biden-Harris
Administration's America the Beautiful initiative, the Service takes a
collaborative and inclusive approach to conservation. The mission of
the Service is working with others to conserve, protect, and enhance
fish, wildlife, plants, and their habitats for the continuing benefit
of the American people. The collaborative nature of our conservation
mission is more important than ever as we address complex conservation
challenges that cut across jurisdictions and boundaries. For instance,
protecting migratory birds and other wide-ranging species necessitates
close coordination of conservation and management actions with local,
state, and international partners. Similarly, protecting and restoring
sensitive wildlife habitats like salt marshes requires collaboration
with the wide array of partners and communities who value and rely on
these important coastal ecosystems.
The Service achieves strong conservation outcomes by working at
large scales and implementing programs hand-in-hand with private
landowners, state agencies, Tribes, non-governmental organizations, and
other partners. Our Migratory Birds Program works together with farmers
and ranchers to develop new initiatives that protect migratory birds
and support livelihoods. The Service's Coastal Program has worked with
thousands of partners since 1985 to successfully protect and restore
priority habitats in coastal watersheds across the country for the
benefit of wildlife and communities. Additionally, the Service's
Science Applications program identifies shared conservation priorities
and delivers the scientific information and tools that partnerships
need to achieve conservation goals across the landscape. These are just
a few of many collaborative conservation examples that characterize the
Service's work.
Several of the bills under consideration today seek to expand or
modify how the Service works with others in achieving our conservation
mission. We offer the following comments on three bills under
consideration today and look forward to discussing our views with the
Subcommittee.
H.R. 1437, Black Vulture Relief Act of 2023

H.R. 1437 would authorize livestock producers and their employees
to take black vultures (Coragyps atratus) with a reasonable belief the
birds will cause death, injury, or destruction of livestock.
Individuals who take a black vulture would be required to report take
on an annual basis to the Service.
Black vultures are large, scavenging birds that are present
throughout the mid-Atlantic and southeastern United States, as well as
less frequently in the Southwest. Black vultures migrate from summer
habitat in the northeast to wintering habitat in Central and South
America and are protected under the Migratory Bird Treaty Act (MBTA).
Under the MBTA, the Service is responsible for implementing the
four bilateral treaties entered into with Canada, Mexico, Japan, and
Russia to conserve covered species and protect birds from unauthorized
take. The Service is the lead federal agency for the conservation of
migratory birds and the enforcement of the MBTA, which includes close
to 1,100 species. The Service conducts surveys and monitoring to
determine the status of populations, coordinates public and private
partnerships, provides grants through programs that conserve millions
of acres of habitat such as the North American Wetlands Conservation
Act and Neotropical Migratory Bird Conservation Act, and administers
the Migratory Bird Hunting and Conservation Stamp, also known as the
Federal Duck Stamp. The Service maintains regulations for the take and
research of migratory birds, including depredation and scientific
collection, and makes permits available to be issued as appropriate.
Increasing human populations, development, and land use changes,
coupled with recovering bird populations have resulted in increased
black vulture-human conflicts. Black vultures are known to target
livestock, especially animals that are newly born or weak, which can
cause losses for livestock producers. The Service works cooperatively
with the U.S. Department of Agriculture's Animal and Plant Health
Inspection Service, Wildlife Services (Wildlife Services) to
cooperatively manage depredating black vultures. The Service's
preferred method of control is to use non-lethal techniques such as
bothering the bird (i.e. hazing) to get it to leave and find a new
place to roost. If non-lethal techniques are ineffective, the Service
can issue a federal depredation permit with documentation from Wildlife
Services outlining the damage being caused by black vultures and
including recommendations to alleviate the problem.
Previously, these depredation permits were handled on a case-by-
case basis. In 2015, based on feedback from the agriculture industry
and landowners, the Service began working with the Farm Bureaus of
Kentucky and Tennessee on a pilot program to issue a depredation permit
to the State Farm Bureaus, which could then more efficiently issue sub-
permits to individual producers. During the duration of the pilot
program from 2017 to 2019, depredation permits for a total of 3,950
birds were authorized. As the original pilot program concluded in 2019,
the Service was authorizing the average annual take of 32,167 vultures
nationally, which is significantly under the annual maximum take the
population could sustain. The amount of that authorized take actually
utilized is well below the allowable limit that was set by the Service,
based on an environmental assessment and population data, to ensure
sustainable levels of take. The pilot was so successful that in 2021,
the Service extended the program across the full range of black vulture
populations, and it is now available to every State east of the
Mississippi River. In States that choose to participate in the program,
the Service can partner with Farm Bureaus, State Departments of
Agriculture, and other entities that are issued a state-wide permit.
These entities can then offer sub-permits to individual livestock
producers and centralize the required reporting. Individuals who suffer
property damage of any other kind or who live in States that choose not
to participate in the program must seek individual permits from the
Service.
The Service understands that depredating black vultures continue to
present challenges for livestock producers, and we are committed to
improving black vulture management. However, the Service is opposed to
H.R. 1437. As currently written, the bill would remove important
accountability measures and reporting that ensure the sustainable
management of black vulture populations and timely monitoring of take.
The annual reporting requirement in the bill is not sufficient for the
Service to monitor black vulture populations. Knowing when and where
black vultures are taken is important to ensuring total take remains
under the annual maximum take levels set by the Service. H.R. 1437 only
addresses one reason for black vulture take in livestock depredation,
so having accurate and timely accountability is important to manage the
permitting for producers in conjunction with take permits issued for
aviation safety and property damage. Additionally, by authorizing take
for individual producers without a permit, H.R. 1437 would also limit
the opportunity for the Service to recommend other mitigation methods,
which may be more effective in addressing and removing depredating
vultures. This is particularly important in cases where lethal take is
proving ineffective due to the species' continual return to prime
roosting habitat. Lastly, in States participating in the program,
requests for black vulture take have remained below maximum allowable
levels. As such, the Service believes there is opportunity for
producers in need of permits or increased levels of take to protect
their resources under the current program.
The Service would welcome the opportunity to work with the bill
sponsor and the Subcommittee to learn more about the concerns of
constituents and work together to ensure producers have assistance in
preventing and mitigating black vulture depredations, as well as access
to sufficient permits when appropriate, while ensuring that the proper
data is collected for implementation and enforcement of the MBTA.
H.R. 2950, Coastal Habitat Conservation Act of 2023

H.R. 2950 would codify the Service's Coastal Program and authorize
appropriations for the program that would begin at $20 million for
Fiscal Year (FY) 2024 and increase over time to $25 million for FY
2028. The Service supports H.R. 2950, which would strengthen our
authorities to continue this successful program.
The Service's Coastal Program is a successful, voluntary, locally
based habitat conservation and restoration program. The program
provides technical and financial assistance to willing partners,
including State and Tribal agencies, coastal communities, conservation
organizations, and other federal partners to protect, restore, and
enhance priority habitats that benefit fish, wildlife, and people on
public and private lands. The program is a catalyst that leverages
considerable non-federal participation and funding for coastal
conservation.
Coastal Program projects build coastal resilience to the impacts of
climate change by improving the health of coastal ecosystems. They
support the conservation of federal trust species and have contributed
to the recovery and downlisting of 15 species listed under the
Endangered Species Act. The program also supports natural and nature-
based infrastructure by restoring saltmarsh and streams in coastal
watersheds, coastal barrier islands, seagrass beds, and mangrove
forests.
These projects provide lasting benefits to coastal communities by
employing contractors and stimulating local economies, restoring
coastal wetlands that support commercial and recreational fisheries,
improving water quality, and increasing opportunities for hunting,
fishing, and wildlife observation.
Since 1985, the Coastal Program has collaborated with more than
8,200 partners to protect more than 2.3 million acres of habitat and
restore more than 600,000 acres of habitat and 2,800 stream miles in
coastal watersheds. Through these partnerships, the program leverages
partner contributions at a ratio of 5:1 or greater, significantly
increasing the positive impact and reach of the program.
The Service supports H.R. 2950, which would codify the Coastal
Program's approach to voluntary, collaborative conservation--a proven
and effective strategy to achieve shared conservation goals.
Authorizing this program would reaffirm that protecting and restoring
coastal habitats is an important role for the Service. It would ensure
that the program is secure and continues to be a versatile tool in the
Service's conservation toolkit. In addition, H.R. 2950 would establish
a strong benchmark for annual appropriations and increase Congressional
engagement in and oversight of the program, ensuring that the Coastal
Program has the necessary capacity to serve priority coastal areas.
H.R. 2982, New York-New Jersey Watershed Protection Act

The Service supports H.R. 2982, which would direct the Secretary of
the Interior (Secretary), working through the Director of the Service,
to establish a non-regulatory New York-New Jersey Watershed Restoration
Program (Program). In carrying out the Program, the Service would
consult with the States of New York and New Jersey, other Federal
agencies, and partners in the New York-New Jersey Watershed (Watershed)
to identify, prioritize, and implement restoration and protection
efforts and adopt a Watershed-wide strategy.
H.R. 2982 would also establish the New York-New Jersey Watershed
Restoration Grant Program, a voluntary program that would provide
competitive matching grants and technical assistance to eligible
entities to carry out coordinated restoration and protection activities
in the Watershed. The Secretary would be authorized to increase the
Federal cost share of an activity for certain communities and to enter
into an agreement for grant management. H.R. 2982 would authorize $20
million annually for these programs for FY 2024 through 2029.
The Service has a long history of working collaboratively with
partners to conserve lands and waters in the Watershed for the benefit
of people and wildlife. The Service engages a diverse public in fish
and wildlife-associated recreational and educational activities at the
Watershed's three national wildlife refuges. Two Urban Wildlife
Partnerships in the region foster connections between residents--
especially youth--and natural areas. Our Partners for Fish and Wildlife
Program provides technical assistance to private landowners in the area
who are interested in conserving and restoring habitat on their lands.
In addition, the Service and the U.S. Forest Service work together
through the Highlands Conservation Act to help the Highland States of
Connecticut, Pennsylvania, New York, and New Jersey, local governments,
nonprofits, and farm and forest landowners conserve the land and
resources of the Highland region, which includes the Watershed and
waters downstream.
Collaborative, landscape-scale conservation efforts like the one
proposed by this bill are a cornerstone of the Service's mission and
are among the most effective approaches to tackling 21st century
environmental challenges like climate change, habitat degradation, and
biodiversity loss. In our experience administering similar programs,
such as the Delaware River Basin Restoration Program (DRBRP) and
Chesapeake Watershed Investments for Landscape Defense (WILD), we see
how partner-driven, non-regulatory, collaborative efforts result in
significant conservation gains. Through the DRBRP, the Service has
partnered with the National Fish and Wildlife Foundation to award $40.4
million to 123 projects in the Delaware River Basin, which generated
$59.7 million in matching funds for a total conservation impact of
$100.1 million. We believe H.R. 2982's proposed program and targeted
investment would deliver similar benefits. Additionally, by providing
the Secretary authority to increase the federal share of restoration
and protection costs, we believe this legislation would enable the
Program to reduce the burden and increase accessibility for small,
rural, and disadvantaged communities previously unable to access
similar funding.
Although the Service supports this bill, and we agree that it would
be a significant benefit to facilitating partnerships, and designing
and implementing conservation and restoration projects in an important
watershed, we have some concerns. The Service is concerned about the
cumulative effect of this bill and other similar regional grant
projects, like those referenced above, on the Service's overall budget
and ability to prioritize conservation of resources for the Nation. The
Service would welcome the opportunity to discuss this concern with the
sponsor and Subcommittee. We would also welcome the opportunity to work
with the sponsor and Subcommittee to ensure such a program is
adequately supported to carry out authorized functions. This grant
program places an emphasis on technical assistance provided by the
Service, which would help increase public access to the Program,
improve application quality, and ensure that funded projects have the
resources to be successful. In addition, the Service would work to
build a coalition of partners in the Watershed and form foundational
relationships that advance the responsibilities and priorities of the
Program. For these reasons, we would welcome the opportunity to work
with Congress to ensure appropriate flexibility to cover administrative
costs and ensure that the New York-New Jersey Watershed Restoration
Program complements ongoing work in the Watershed and other areas.
Conclusion
We appreciate the Subcommittee's interest in community-based,
collaborative conservation and in migratory bird and coastal
conservation. We look forward to working with you on these and future
legislative efforts.

______

Mr. Bentz. Thank you, Mr. Guertin. I thank the witnesses
for their testimony. I will now recognize Members for 5 minutes
each for questions.
Mr. Wittman, you are recognized for 5 minutes.

Mr. Wittman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Dr. Kryc, I would like to get your perspective on where we
are with stock assessments for sharks. I know they all fall
into different categories: large coastals, pelagics. Can you
give us a current status of where those stock assessments are,
when the latest stock assessment was done for large coastals,
for pelagics?
There has recently been a cessation or a ban on catching
mako sharks, specifically longfin and shortfin makos. Can you
give us an update on where we are with current stock
assessments?
Dr. Kryc. Thank you, Congressman, for the question.
NOAA manages approximately 63 shark stocks. I don't have
the specific numbers regarding where the stock assessments are
for each of those. I can speak a little bit to the mako issue
as a resolution or a measure that was agreed to in an
international forum in the ICCAT fora that bans retention of
shortfin mako in the North Atlantic.
Mr. Wittman. I will let you get to that question, but I
want to drill down a little bit further on stock assessments,
because stock assessments really get to the earlier regulatory
action taken on essentially stopping any sort of viable catch
of large coastals. And the idea was that those stocks needed to
recover. And because sharks have long gestation times, the
thought was, well, we have to have much longer periods when
these closures exist.
The challenge with that is you also have to have stock
assessments to determine where the recovery is, and we have not
had a recent stock assessment. I would love for you to get that
information to the Committee. I think that is incredibly
important.
One thing, too, I asked you to comment on is we know that
sharks are different than other fish. Sharks are livebearers.
They don't spawn, so it is not like you have to have eggs that
are out there to be fertilized by sperm, and you have lots of
little larvae, and they swim around, you have all kinds of
plankton eaters that eat them so you have to have millions of
eggs in order to get a handful of fish. Sharks are livebearers,
which means their survivability of their young is much, much
greater. So, I was going to ask several things.
Has NMFS looked at fecundity of sharks in relation to
mortality, and have you looked at survival rates based on them
being livebearers, and how the stocks are managed, and where
the stocks are today currently?
And if you haven't done a recent stock assessment,
shouldn't that inform where we are today in looking at
population recoveries?
And I would like to hear your perspective on ICCAT's
determination and stoppage of catch of shortfin mako here in
the Atlantic.
Dr. Kryc. Thank you for that question, Congressman. Again,
I don't have the specifics on the status of the stock
assessments for all of the species, but would be very happy to
get you more information.
Mr. Wittman. Can you speak to any of the science behind how
those stock assessments are made, the nature of how sharks
reproduce, their fecundity, biomass as it relates to spawning,
biomass versus biomass that is reaching spawning age?
I mean, all those things are dynamics about how management
should happen under Magnuson-Stevens. I would expect that you
would know at least how the Agency has looked at that and where
you are today, assessing how you are managing that species,
which is a statutory requirement under Magnuson-Stevens for the
Agency.
Dr. Kryc. Thank you. I appreciate your question. And the
Agency is committed to using the best available----
Mr. Wittman. I understand. Listen, I don't question the
Agency's commitment.
What I want from you is an answer as to the science. You
say that you are an agency based on science. Based on the
statutes and Magnuson-Stevens, I would hope that you could
speak a little bit to that because the mechanics of how these
decisions are made and what decisions are made are critical to
not only the stock itself, but also to the current situation we
find ourselves in.
Dr. Kryc. I do appreciate your question. I am not familiar
with the specifics of how the stock assessments are conducted
with respect to the shark species, but we can get that
information to you.
Mr. Wittman. Can you speak then to the shortfin mako ban?
Dr. Kryc. I can speak to the shortfin mako ban. There has
been an issue with the stock recovery associated with shortfin
mako, and the United States has taken extraordinary efforts
over the past many years to reduce our mortality of the species
by implementing circle hooks, and improving all sorts of our
fisheries management.
Unfortunately, based on the efforts by the United States
alone, the global stock status of shortfin mako in the Atlantic
continued to suffer. Therefore, actions were taken
internationally to ensure that the stock could rebuild.
Mr. Wittman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.

Mr. Bentz. Thank you, Mr. Wittman.
Mrs. Radewagen, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
Mrs. Radewagen. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Talofa, good
morning. Thank you for testifying today.
Dr. Kryc, can you describe the challenges NOAA has had
since the treaty has been renegotiated but not implemented in
the U.S. code?
Dr. Kryc. Thank you, Congresswoman Radewagen, and talofa.
Thank you for your question.
I would like to first thank you and Representative Case for
your leadership in championing this legislation. NOAA sees it
as imperative for our ability to implement the amendments to
the treaty. This treaty provides access to the most lucrative
tuna fishing grounds in the world for the U.S. fleet, and is a
model for cooperation between the United States and the Pacific
Island States.
In the absence of finalizing the implementing legislation,
NOAA has been challenged in being able to fully implement the
amendments to the favorable outcome of our industry. And while
we are operating under a Memorandum of Understanding,
finalizing this legislation will enable us to fully implement
the amendments, again, to the benefit of our industry. Thank
you.
Mrs. Radewagen. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back the
balance of my time.

Mr. Bentz. Thank you, Mrs. Radewagen. The Chair recognizes
Mr. Case for 5 minutes.
Mr. Case. Thank you, Mr. Chair. I am going to address the
tuna treaty bill, as well, Dr. Kryc. I am very happy to co-
sponsor this with my colleague, Mrs. Radewagen.
Just to follow up on her questions, first of all, I totally
support the bill, obviously. I am a co-sponsor, a co-introducer
of it. We want this treaty to succeed. We want the regulations
to adjust to the treaty. We are all trying to do the same
thing, which is to preserve the American purse seine fleet, and
allow them to compete fairly out there in the Pacific.
But as you take a look at the catch statistics over the
last couple of years, it does show a decline in catch in both
the high seas and also in the EEZs themselves, which I guess is
puzzling to me, given the treaty. I think I can explain the
decline somewhat on the basis that we have seen the fleet
itself decline fairly precipitously in the last 3 years. In
fact, if you look at Mr. Gibbons-Fly's testimony, I think he
has it down from 34 to 14 vessels in the last 3 years. So,
that, obviously, would have something to do with your catch.
But besides just the decline in the fleet, which is
alarming, are there further issues with our access to other
countries' EEZs that are being solved by this treaty and by
this particular legislation, and/or that we have not covered
yet that we need to go back and cover?
Do we have full access? His testimony is to the effect that
especially the American Samoa fleet still faces some unusual
and administrative barriers in other countries' EEZs, which I
thought the treaty was trying to solve for. So, I am a little
puzzled by the decline in catch, even though we have,
obviously, seen the fleet decline.
Dr. Kryc. Thank you, Congressman Case, for your question. I
appreciate your concern for our U.S. fleet operating in the
Western Central Pacific, and acknowledge the change in our
fleet over the past several years.
With respect to the decline in catch in the most recent
past, I am not quite sure which time range you are speaking to.
But, of course, we also had the confounding impacts of the
global pandemic which caused some fishing declines globally.
Mr. Case. Yes, my stats are from you guys through 2022.
Dr. Kryc. OK. We acknowledge, yes, the change in the fleet
from 40 at its maximum to 13 at this time.
The treaty ensures access for our fleet to the Exclusive
Economic Zones of the Pacific Island parties, as negotiated,
which expands the opportunities for our fleet to operate both
in our own EEZs and also on the high seas. And all of those
provide the opportunity to maximize opportunity for the fleet,
and maximize the landings that then come to American Samoa and
support the cannery there.
Mr. Case. OK. I guess I will follow up with Mr. Gibbons-
Fly. My question is to follow up on the comment that, even with
the treaty, we are still facing barriers to entry in the EEZs
of our partner countries. So, that is of concern.
And then, correct me if I am wrong, but as I understand it,
one of the areas that is the most important in this bill and in
the treaty renegotiations themselves is that we have been
subject to a license regime on the high seas, as opposed to
other countries, which, obviously, disadvantages us. Are we
going to be on the same level playing field after this bill, as
any other country on the high seas themselves?
Dr. Kryc. Yes, Congressman, and thank you for raising that
important issue. This is one of the primary reasons to move
this legislation is to ensure that access to the high seas for
our fleet.
Mr. Case. OK. And then finally, clearly, whether we have
treaties or not, we are all facing IUU fishing everywhere,
especially by some of the other countries in the Pacific Rim.
What does the treaty say, if anything, directly or indirectly,
about curbing IUU fishing?
Are there understandings between us and our partner
countries that we will cooperate in terms of a more forceful
action on IUU fishing in the EEZs of these countries?
Dr. Kryc. I will keep this brief. The United States has a
highly managed fleet, and we raise the standards of everyone
around us when we are operating. And because we are so well
managed, we are able to use that to help raise those standards
in international negotiations, and that helps to address the
IUU fishing issue.
Mr. Case. OK. Thank you very much.

Mr. Bentz. Thank you. The Chair recognizes Mr. Rutherford
for 5 minutes.
Mr. Rutherford. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I have to tell
you, our anglers back home, their main lament right now is,
NOAA closed our seasons because there weren't enough fish. Now,
they are closing our season because there are too many fish
being caught and discarded.
So, one of the things that I would like to go to, Doctor,
is in your own report on stock assessment, page 5, it says this
is all about, and this goes back to Mr. Wittman's point,
scientific uncertainty. In fact, the data uncertainty that is
highlighted here is the exact reason that we are restricting
red snapper, and that is commercial discards and recreational
discards. That is the data uncertainty in your biomass
determination.
And then, of course, population dynamic uncertainty under
sources of recruitment and environmental changes.
In light of all that, I want to ask you this question. Does
my bill stop the implementation of anything in the Council's
recommendation to stop NOAA's perceived over-fishing? Is there
anything in my bill that stops you from going forward with what
the Council already passed?
Dr. Kryc. Thank you for that question, Congressman. NOAA
recognizes the issues associated with the discards.
Mr. Rutherford. I only have 5 minutes. Is there anything in
my bill that stops the Council from going forward with the
recommendations to stop over-fishing that you have already
implemented?
Dr. Kryc. NOAA will be taking the recommendations from the
Council meeting, and looking at those to make sure that they
are consistent with Magnuson-Stevens, and then moving forward.
Mr. Rutherford. The answer is no. There is nothing in my
bill that will stop you from moving forward with those Council
recommendations.
Now, let me ask you, you have not recommended closing the
bottom. Closures are not the recommendation right now, is that
correct?
Dr. Kryc. That is correct. The Council has not
recommended----
Mr. Rutherford. OK, but can you tell me why?
Dr. Kryc. I think that they took the best scientific advice
and at this time decided not to proceed with a time area
closure as part of the management tools available to them.
Mr. Rutherford. OK, looking at your biomass calculations
and the uncertainty that is built into that that you recognize,
it is in your own report on page 5, do you think that NOAA's
abundance data is reliable?
Dr. Kryc. Thank you, Congressman. I am not familiar with
the exact report you are referring to, so I can't address that
specific question at this time.
Mr. Rutherford. OK. Well, I will show it to you.
Let me ask you this. Do you think that NOAA's data on
recreational discards is reliable?
Dr. Kryc. Thank you, Congressman. I think this is an issue
that we continue to need more information on, and I think the--
--
Mr. Rutherford. I am going to stop you there because you
just said exactly what this bill is all about, getting you more
data, getting you good data, reliable data so that when you
make these assumptions about biomass, we can be much closer to
the truth.
And, Mr. Chairman, that is what this bill is all about. It
simply says don't close the bottom until this Great Red Snapper
Count is completed, which we have funded in a very bipartisan
way, $5 million over the last 4 years to have this third-party,
independent study. All it says is don't close the bottom until
we get that information in, and you can then add that into your
data.
Look, I believe if you have good data you can make better
decisions. And that is all I want to do is help you make better
decisions with good data, not the data that you recognize is
not data uncertainty, commercial discards, recreational
discards, population dynamic uncertainty. You have a lot of
uncertainties built into your models, and I understand that. It
is not an easy issue. That is why this count is so important.
And I think some other things can be done, as well, but
that is why this bill needs to pass. And I thank you for your
time.
Mr. Bentz. Thank you, Mr. Rutherford. The Chair recognizes
Mr. Carl for 5 minutes.
Mr. Carl. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Real quickly, is it Guertin? Did I pronounce that
correctly?
Mr. Guertin. Guertin, sir.
Mr. Carl. Guertin, OK. Well, I am from the South, so we
butcher everything, so I am told.
On the black vulture, I have talked to a lot of ranchers,
especially out West obviously, we don't have them in south
Alabama that I am familiar with. But ranchers lose a lot of
their livestock calving to these vultures. Has any thought been
given to reimbursing these ranchers for their losses?
Mr. Guertin. Thank you for your question, Congressman. At
this point, the legislation does not address any type of
depredation compensation program. That is certainly something
the author of the bill could look at, and there are similar
programs for wolf depredation and other things that have been
enacted into law.
Mr. Carl. These ranchers make a living every year from a
breeding stock that keeps moving up. So, I would suggest we
look at something like that. If we are going to tell them they
can't protect their livestock, we ought to at least try to
help.
Ms. Kryc, the Great Red Snapper Count that was done in the
Gulf, do you know what year that was actually done?
Dr. Kryc. In the Gulf? Yes, that just concluded. And the
results of the Gulf Great Red Snapper Count were integrated
into management decisions this year.
Mr. Carl. OK. Did they pull a net on that count, or did
they actually count bottom fish?
Dr. Kryc. It was a very comprehensive study. I can't speak
to the specific methodology there, but it did reveal a great
deal about the status of red snapper in the Gulf.
Mr. Carl. OK. Let me share a little bit of my sarcasm with
you. I come from a private business background, and we don't
make money unless we can figure out ways to save money and
expand our market. Government doesn't work that way. Government
doesn't care about cheap. They don't care about making a
profit. They focus on trying to expand their apartments. So,
when these studies come up and you ask for another $5 million
to do a study, in my mind I get sarcastic and want to push back
on it, because you have created another problem that may or may
not exist.
How did we use the snapper count that we did 4 or 5 years
ago? Why did we not use it in the first 2 years? Because it was
finished in the first 2 years, but we drug it out for 3 more
years and we didn't use it. Why?
Dr. Kryc. Thank you. I think this is a really beautiful
case of how the science informed a management decision to
result in an increase in the quota. The Council made the
decision to extend the timeline of how to use that data based
on how they were analyzing that data, and the need to then make
decisions on that----
Mr. Carl. We issued a second set of money for that,
correct?
Dr. Kryc. That I will have to get back to you on.
Mr. Carl. I believe we did. To my knowledge, these tests
were ran by pulling nets over the top of reefs. These are reef
fish that are not going to be floating around, getting exposed
very much.
When the University of South Alabama did their test, the
Alabama Department of Wildlife put in their own software. I
know Louisiana--Garret is here--Louisiana has their own. We did
our own count, too, and we came up with much, much more, a
higher count, a better count than what you have. But the two
have come together, and yet you have cut back on the fish. So,
we are proving we have more. You are using your numbers. You
think we would match somewhere in between. But in reality, you
cut back even further.
Tell me the law that tells you that you have the right to
tell people what they can catch and not catch?
Dr. Kryc. Thank you, Congressman, for that question and for
recognizing the state's role in managing red snapper.
The difference in methodologies is being calibrated and
will be reflected in decisions regarding the quota later this
year. And that does recognize, as you said, the difference
between----
Mr. Carl. I am sorry, I am running out of time. But we
impose the shark, you can't catch a snapper now for the sharks
taking them off your hooks. That is the problem we are having
in the Gulf all of a sudden.
So, I would propose that NOAA let nature be nature, and
let--hey, Sheriff, move your head, move your head.
[Laughter.]
Mr. Carl. I would propose that NOAA actually invite the
fishermen and the people that do it on a daily basis versus
just your professionals that do these counts from systems that
are outdated and long gone. Thank you for your service, though.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Bentz. Thank you, Mr. Carl. The Chair recognizes Mr.
Neguse for 5 minutes.
Mr. Neguse. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, I appreciate it. Thank
you for holding this hearing.
And I know we are all thinking of our friend, Ranking
Member Huffman, who is dealing with an illness, but I am
certainly glad to have the opportunity to talk today about an
issue that I have been working on for several years, and that
is the Upper Colorado and San Juan River Basin recovery
programs.
These programs are a model of successful partnership and
collaboration across agencies, states, and with both Federal
and non-Federal partners in my state of Colorado, in addition
to Utah, Wyoming, and New Mexico. They work to recover and
protect four species of endangered and threatened fish while
also providing Endangered Species Act compliance for 2,500
water projects. They are a model for successful Endangered
Species Act conservation efforts using the best available
science.
And, in fact, two of these species have even been
downlisted to threatened status as a result of the work
completed by the programs. It is why I have been a champion on
this effort for some time. In the last Congress, the 117th
Congress, I introduced bipartisan legislation along with
Senator John Hickenlooper in the U.S. Senate to reauthorize and
continue Federal funding for this these critical programs.
And these critical programs in particular, that legislation
was marked up, it was heard in this Committee, it was marked up
by the Full Committee, sent to the House Floor, and ultimately
passed the House, the Senate, signed by President Biden.
We have reintroduced legislation that would again
reauthorize this critical program for a longer period of time,
and also addresses the funding needs. Because the reality is we
have heard from a variety of stakeholders at the local level
that more funding is needed to ensure that this program
operates successfully. There are, of course, both Federal
appropriations and non-Federal contributions, but the Federal
appropriations piece is crucial.
And what I would say, Mr. Chairman, is I hope that he will
consider marking up my legislation to reauthorize this program,
the companion legislation to Senator Hickenlooper and Senator
Romney's legislation in the U.S. Senate, because, absent that
increased funding level, I fear that this program will not
operate as successfully as it has in the past.
Now, I will note with some irony that, unfortunately, I
think some of the folks who are championing the particular
measure that we are considering today, which is emulated after
the bill, as I said, that I introduced in the last Congress and
that I have also introduced in this Congress, are the same
individuals fighting to pursue CRAs on the ESA, literally, as
we speak, as we consider those measures on the Floor and, I
might add, also advocating for deep cuts to the Department of
the Interior's appropriation bill for this next fiscal year. It
is ironic and, in my view, hypocritical to seek to reauthorize
a program because, of course, that is what we are talking about
in this instance, while simultaneously seeking to defund it on
the appropriations side.
If you care about reauthorizing this critical program, the
Upper Colorado and San Juan River Basin recovery programs, and
I certainly care and, on a bipartisan basis, many of my
constituents care, then you ought to also care about ensuring
that the appropriation is there, as well. And I would implore
my colleagues who support this program to support the
appropriation behind it, as well.
And I think it is a fair question for any citizen of my
great state of Colorado, and certainly of the press to ask of
any Member who purports to support reauthorization of the Upper
Colorado and San Juan River Recovery Programs if they are
willing to stand up and support the corresponding
appropriation. And I suspect they will find that, while I
certainly support that, that many others do not.
In any event, I am grateful for, of course, the
Administration witnesses that are here today. I have no
questions for either of you. I appreciate your service to the
country, and I know we have a number of local stakeholders who
have made the journey to Washington, DC, and I am grateful for
them coming here, to our nation's capital, to testify on this
important program.
Again, I would urge the Chairman to consider a hearing on
the legislation that I have introduced with Senator
Hickenlooper. And with that, Mr. Chairman, I will yield back
the balance of my time.
Mr. Bentz. Thank you, Mr. Neguse.
Mr. Graves, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Graves. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate you all
having this hearing today, and I want to thank the witnesses
for being here.
Dr. Kryc, I want to thank you for responding to Mr. Carl's
questions related to the Great Red Snapper Count. And I
appreciate you, I guess, respecting the integrity of that
analysis. I think that I agree with Congressman Carl in that
that was a very thorough exercise that was done by some
impressive academics that really went to great lengths to
ensure the accuracy of the analysis. So, I do appreciate you
respecting that.
I do have concerns, similar to Congressman Carl, in that
there seems to be disparity between the findings of the Great
Red Snapper Count and the allocation that National Marine
Fisheries has allowed for the Gulf States. And it is
frustrating because we are in a scenario where they effectively
said there are triple the red snapper, yet we had, as I recall,
about a 10 percent increase in allocation, which I am not
saying we need to triple the allocation, but it seems like 10
percent is significantly below what it should be.
Look, that analysis was the most thorough analysis that was
ever done. And Congressman Carl correctly noted that the states
are investing millions of dollars in improved data collection,
trying to get this right because we want to sustainably manage
these fisheries. I am just wondering if you could shed any
light on the disparity between the findings of the Great Red
Snapper Count and the increase in allocation that was allowed
for fishers to harvest.
Dr. Kryc. Thank you, Congressman Graves. Yes, the Great Red
Snapper Count in the Gulf did reveal higher numbers, but it
also revealed that the productivity of the red snapper is less.
So, there was a dichotomy.
And the most recent data coming out of the collections is
bearing the science true in that the increase that was approved
is probably the limit at which it should be to continue
maintaining a sustainable fishery there. The science will
continue to inform those decisions and management practices
with the goal of ultimately increasing that over time.
Mr. Graves. I am struggling with this a little bit. So,
population was triple. Unless red snapper have discovered birth
control technology, I am having a tough time understanding how
you could have that many more fish, but then productivity would
be that much lower. That seems, again, contrary to what common
sense would indicate. Could you shed any light on that?
Dr. Kryc. Thank you. My understanding is that it is to do
with the age range of the fish. So, until they reach full
maturity, they are not able to be as productive.
Mr. Graves. All right. If you could provide some additional
information on that, I sure would appreciate it.
Again, it just seems contrary to common sense there. I
understand the age issue, but I am not sure that that is what
the Great Red Snapper Count found in regard to the additional
fish.
Another issue I want to quickly bring up is I appreciate
Congressman Wittman's leadership efforts on the depredation
issue related to sharks. I want to ask a quick question.
Doesn't Magnuson-Stevens, isn't it designed to ensure the
sustainability of fisheries?
I mean, that is sort of the objective. That is a
fundamental of the Magnuson-Stevens Act, is that accurate?
Dr. Kryc. Congressman, thank you, yes, based on the best
available science.
Mr. Graves. Is there anything in Congressman Wittman's
legislation that would undermine that fundamental objective of
Magnuson?
Dr. Kryc. Congressman, the Agency continues to pursue the
best available science to address the issues associated with
shark depredation. So, what we see between the bill that
Congressman Wittman introduced is just a great deal of overlap
with the work that we are already doing.
Mr. Graves. I want to highlight that: overlap that you are
already doing, rather than, as some allegations were raised
today, that his bill would result in killing a bunch of sharks
and undermine the survivability of the species or
sustainability, because that allegation was lodged earlier. And
I just want to be crystal clear that is not correct, that the
fundamentals of Magnuson would still apply. Congressman
Wittman's bill does not undermine that. What it does is it is
designed to ensure greater ecosystem management.
Last thing on this, Mr. Chairman, I just want to make note
that one of the most frustrating things in the world is when I
bring a fish up, and I know it is going to be much bigger than
the fish that Congressman Carl caught, but the bottom half of
the fish is missing because the shark got it. It is still
bigger than Jerry's fish, but can you just imagine how much
bigger it would be if I had the whole fish, as opposed to that
shark taking the bottom off?
And I know that you are with me on this, so you don't need
to respond. But I did want to just highlight that, and this
issue does need to be addressed.
I yield back.

Mr. Bentz. Thank you, Mr. Graves.
Mr. Magaziner, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Magaziner. Thank you, Chairman. I come from Rhode
Island, and for generations Rhode Island has been known for our
coastline, our abundant fishing, and our strong maritime
economy. Now, climate change is impacting our state's natural
habitats, leaving our coasts more vulnerable to natural
disasters, and contributing to significant biodiversity loss
that is impacting our commercial fishing industry.
As sea levels rise and beaches erode, we risk losing even
more valuable habitats, homes, and businesses, and people's
livelihoods. So, we have to redouble our efforts to preserve
and restore coastal habitats so that future generations can
enjoy the same benefits that Rhode Islanders have for
centuries. The Fish and Wildlife Service has been doing this
work, and I thank you for it, through the Coastal Program, a
unique partnership between Federal officials and local
communities to voluntarily restore protected habitats.
The Fish and Wildlife Service, in just the last 12 years,
has conducted more than 4,900 conservation projects, including
51 in Rhode Island, my home state, and restored more than
600,000 acres of habitat across the country, including 417
acres in Rhode Island. This has supported the full recovery and
downlisting of at least 15 species nationwide, and prevented
at-risk species that call Rhode Island home, such as the New
England cottontail and the saltmarsh sparrow, from becoming
endangered.
The program's success is in large part thanks to the Fish
and Wildlife Service's ability to work closely with local
partners on the ground. In my district, for every $1 put in by
the Coastal Program, the Fish and Wildlife Service attracted an
additional $73 in investment from local partners. I will say
that again, because you don't hear that kind of a ratio very
often: $1 put in for the Fish and Wildlife Service draws an
additional $73 in investments from local partners.
The Coastal Program's approach is evident on the ground in
its collaboration with local partners. Fish and Wildlife
personnel have worked closely with organizations like Save the
Bay, the Town of Charlestown, the town of Westerly, and others
to restore the Ninigret saltmarsh. Salt marshes, by the way,
shield and protect coastal areas from storm surges, and 70
percent of all commercial fish depend on them for at least part
of their lives.
Climate change and habitat restoration are complex, long-
term challenges, so codifying the Coastal Program will ensure
that the Fish and Wildlife Service can provide sustained and
proactive attention to these issues, and help protect coastal
ecosystems for decades to come.
Mr. Guertin, can you just talk a little bit about the
flexibilities in the Coastal Program that allow Fish and
Wildlife Service to meet the specific needs of each community?
Because, obviously, a community in Rhode Island might have very
different needs than in Maine, or in Oregon, or in Michigan.
So, how do you work with local partners to tailor the approach
in an appropriate way?
Mr. Guertin. Thank you for your question, Congressman.
Sure, the Coastal Program is one of our flagship programs.
It promotes a vision for collaborative, non-regulatory,
voluntary partnership work throughout the coastal regions of
the United States. We partner with state fish and game
agencies, tribal partners, private landowners, other entities.
You mentioned the incredible leveraging opportunities we can
put on the ground with that, and certainly in Rhode Island that
incredible work at Ninigret saltmarsh important to the
saltmarsh sparrow is a very key species for us in that ecotype
up there.
But this is all about developing a shared vision for the
landscape, bringing the partners together, leveraging each
other's resources, and using the best available science to help
us tackle sea level rise, provide additional access for
recreation and commercial fishers, and do a better job of
sustaining that coastline for future generations.
Mr. Magaziner. Thank you. And one other aspect of the
program that I want to make sure we highlight here and that we
support is, you are not just providing financial assistance,
you are also providing technical support and capacity building
for these local partners on the ground so that they can
continue to maintain this work going forward. Can you talk a
little bit more about how the technical assistance side of the
program works?
Mr. Guertin. Sure. We can provide the geospatial mapping
tools. We can provide biologists to help partners develop some
of these projects. We can provide the horsepower to get those
projects permitted and stood up and implemented on the ground.
And we can provide a lot of training and technical assistance
to state employees, private landowners, and others.
And then we can also tap into the wealth of expertise from
the other Federal and state agencies to bring capacity in as
needed.
Mr. Magaziner. Thank you. Terrific program, and I hope that
we will all continue to support it on a bipartisan basis.
I yield back.
Mr. Bentz. Thank you, Mr. Magaziner.
Mr. Rose, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Rose. Thank you, Chairman Bentz, Ranking Member
Huffman, and thank you for the opportunity to address the
Committee. I have a few statements I want to make about H.R.
1437, the Black Vulture Relief Act of 2023.
I was proud to introduce the Black Vulture Relief Act of
2023 with my friend from Florida, Representative Darren Soto,
and I applaud the Subcommittee for attaching my bill to today's
hearing.
This bill would allow farmers and ranchers to lethally take
black vultures without a sub-permit. This is a common-sense
measure that responds to robust black vulture population
numbers and rising rates of depredation on livestock.
Because the black vulture is currently listed under the
Migratory Bird Treaty Act, the Federal permit is required to
engage in lethal take of the bird. Permits are issued by the
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service to states, and states issue sub-
permits to producers. Sub-permits allow for three takes, with
the option to go up to five in some states. This is not
adequate, given the sheer numbers of threats that producers
face from this abundant species.
This bill would remove the requirement for a sub-permit,
allowing farmers and ranchers to take black vultures as needed.
This bill preserves the requirement for reporting of incidental
take on the back end, and allowing wildlife agencies to
continue to monitor the species numbers.
I am pleased to report that numerous groups are supporting
this legislation, including the Tennessee Farm Bureau
Federation, the National Cattlemen's Beef Association, the
Tennessee Cattlemen's Association, the Florida Cattlemen's
Association, and the Oklahoma Cattlemen's Association.
I would particularly like to draw the Committee's attention
to a letter I received from the Tennessee Farm Bureau in
support of H.R. 1437. In the letter, the Tennessee Farm Bureau
Federation stated that, ``It should be a fundamental right for
farmers to protect their livestock when threatened by predatory
actions of black vultures, and we believe this legislation
takes a vital step in the right direction.'' I wholeheartedly
agree that it should be a right for farmers to be able to
protect their livestock when threatened by black vultures with
a requirement for reporting, as my bill requires.
I have heard numerous horror stories from my constituents
about how black vultures injure and kill pregnant cows and
their calves in the most barbaric and gruesome ways. Indeed, I
have experienced that on my own beef cow-calf operation.
In addition to the unnecessary and cruel suffering
livestock endure at the hands of black vultures, there is also
a major financial impact to producers who suffer from black
vulture depredation. My bill helps to stem those financial
losses.
I also want to address some of the concerns of the U.S.
Fish and Wildlife Service. I have reviewed the written
testimony of Mr. Stephen Guertin, the Deputy Director for
Policy at the Fish and Wildlife Service, and I was profoundly
disappointed to learn that Fish and Wildlife is opposed to this
bipartisan legislation. While I disagree with much of Mr.
Guertin's written testimony, I want to focus on a couple of
specific points I particularly disagree with.
The Fish and Wildlife Service argues that annual reporting
requirement is not sufficient. I have heard time and time again
about increasing numbers of black vultures, and I firmly
believe that a once-a-year reporting requirement is sufficient
for monitoring population management while also balancing
against overly burdensome reporting requirements for producers.
Additionally, Mr. Guertin's written testimony states that,
``By authorizing take for individual producers without a
permit, H.R. 1437 would also limit the opportunity for the
Service to recommend other mitigation methods which may be more
effective in addressing and removing depredating vultures.''
I want to be clear on this point. There is absolutely
nothing in my bill that limits the ability for the Fish and
Wildlife Service to make recommendations regarding other
mitigation methods for those affected by black vultures.
I will, however, note that Mr. Guertin's testimony states
that the Fish and Wildlife Service is open to working with me
on this issue. I appreciate this offer, and look forward to
engaging with Fish and Wildlife on this important issue.
In closing, I greatly appreciate this Committee's
leadership on the issue of black vulture depredation, and I
yield back the balance of the time.
Mr. Bentz. Thank you. The Chair recognizes himself for 5
minutes.
Dr. Kryc, I am most interested in the approach NOAA uses on
a bill such as H.R. 4051, because it is an appointment of a
task force to look into an issue that you indicated overlaps
substantially with NOAA's jurisdiction.
So, I guess my first question would be, why do you think
that this task force is necessary? Doesn't it reflect a
shortcoming on NOAA's part?
And if not, then why are you not objecting strenuously to
the bill if it is not necessary?
Dr. Kryc. Chairman Bentz, thank you for your question. I
appreciate that.
As I think is stated in our testimony, we are willing to
work with the Committee and the Members on this bill. We did
just want to register our concerns that we, through a number of
mechanisms, are taking a deep look at depredation, and just see
a number of overlaps, and wanted to make sure that those were
addressed.
Mr. Bentz. Let's go back to your phrase, the ``deep look.''
Tell me what that means. Define it for me.
Dr. Kryc. Yes. We are looking through a number of different
mechanisms, including the bycatch reduction engineering
program. We are using genetic sources of scientific
information, looking at new engineering technologies, a broad
spectrum of ways to understand depredation.
To date, we don't have enough information about who is
eating who, who is participating in this to make solid
management decisions that would allow a reduction in
depredation. What we do know is that for solutions that are
effective in the short term, that the animals are capable of
adapting and acclimatizing and adjusting to those technologies.
So, it remains confounding, and requires a great deal more
research to understand how to minimize and mitigate the impacts
of depredation.
Mr. Bentz. Right, and I have seen that your agency is
challenged with any number of difficult scientific issues. And
this is evident in my discussions with your agency regarding
studies being done in the Pacific concerning the survival or
not of salmon species that come down various rivers on the West
Coast.
And my question to you is, based on what we are looking at
when it comes to these two shark populations, first of all, how
do you decide how you are going to focus on these problems?
And then secondly, how do you tell the interested parties,
such as those here today, when you are going to finish these
studies?
Or is this a kind of an ongoing, forever sort of a study
that never quite gets done because of all kinds of explanations
such as the ones you just provided?
In other words, when will we have an answer from you as to
the sharks?
Also, and this is off today's agenda, but I would like to
have the same answers regarding the Pacific. But today, we are
talking about sharks. So, when will we have an answer?
Dr. Kryc. Thank you, Congressman. I appreciate that
question. As a scientist myself, I will share that often the
information we gain as we look into things introduces new
questions that then we continue to follow.
Mr. Bentz. And that process could go on for a very long
time. So, just, please, 1 year, 2 years, 10 years? When?
Dr. Kryc. For a specific depredation?
Mr. Bentz. Yes,
Dr. Kryc. I cannot give you a specific time frame for when
we would have a definitive answer on that.
Mr. Bentz. I am not surprised, but thank you for being here
today, and I appreciate your work. It is a challenging job.
Mr. Guertin, how much is the cost of a permit for the
rancher if they want to take advantage of your program to kill
these black vultures?
Mr. Guertin. It was $100 before we did the sub-permits to
the entities in each state. And then there is a various cost
structure in each state, as well.
Mr. Bentz. It has been suggested that your system doesn't
work well, that the computer program is very, very difficult to
use. Is that true?
Mr. Guertin. I admit, sir, it has been clunky at times. We
are investing a lot in our new e-permit system, which is
streamlining a lot of that.
But in any case, we are giving these block permits to each
entity in the state. They are then administering the actual
allocation of the take to the individual producers. So, that
would be perhaps more of a question for us to work on with our
state partners.

Mr. Bentz. Thank you. My time is expired.
Ms. Porter, you recognized for 5 minutes.
Ms. Porter. Thank you.
Dr. Kryc, can you share why it is important for Fishery
Management Councils and the National Marine Fisheries Service
to base regulations and management decisions on the best
available science, not delaying actions for years until new
data becomes available, which to me, seems an awful lot like an
effort to just delay new regulations?
Dr. Kryc. Thank you, Congresswoman.
I think the tenant of using the best available science for
decision-making has ensured that the Magnuson-Stevens Act has
achieved many of the objectives it set forth to do and achieve
in rebuilding stocks and assuring the sustainable management of
our fisheries, which has made our fishery sector successful and
something that we can maintain in the long term.
Ms. Porter. When new data, Dr. Kryc, from the Great Red
Snapper Count is available, will that be used in NOAA's
fisheries management decisions?
Dr. Kryc. Thank you, Congresswoman. Yes, the intent for the
South Atlantic Great Red Snapper Count is to use the
information, similarly as was done in the Gulf, to inform
management decisions regarding the red snapper in the South
Atlantic.
Ms. Porter. OK, moving on to the SHARKED Act, this bill
duplicates an existing report that NOAA already submitted to
Congress. It also adds a section on shark depredation research
projects into the Magnuson-Stevens Fishery Conservation and
Management Act without authorizing additional funding. This
means funding for stock assessments, bycatch regulation,
habitat conservation will be redirected toward the niche issue
of shark depredation.
Is it realistic to expect NOAA to complete these research
projects without additional funding?
Dr. Kryc. Thank you, Congresswoman. It is true that, should
this legislation move forward, NOAA does not currently have the
resources available to implement it. And as I have stated,
since we are already doing so much on depredation at this time,
we just see a lot of overlap. So, we have the funding we need
for the studies we are currently doing, so thank you for
recognizing----
Ms. Porter. So, we don't need this bill. It will be
difficult to actually deliver on because of the funding
restrictions.
So, House Republicans made the rules, and now it is up to
you to figure out how to balance constituent needs with your
own bad politics.
I yield back.
Mr. Bentz. Thank you, Ms. Porter.
Mr. Lawler, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Lawler. Thank you, Mr. Chairman and esteemed members of
the Committee. I am glad to be here with you today to advocate
for the passage of the New York-New Jersey Watershed Protection
Act, a vital piece of legislation that aims to safeguard one of
the most densely populated and yet habitually under-funded
watersheds in the United States.
As one of a number of representatives from New York and New
Jersey signed onto this legislation, I can say firsthand that
the New York-New Jersey watershed faces a myriad of challenges,
from legacy pollutants caused by old manufacturing plants to
ongoing and escalating flood risks in river villages and towns
to a lack of public access for many, our Hudson Valley
watershed and, indeed, the entire New York and New Jersey
watershed needs attention and assistance.
In the 17th district, replicating the successful model
already deployed across Federal watersheds nationwide, we could
see significant improvement of water quality for communities
all along the Hudson River, from Piermont and Tarrytown to
Peekskill, Cold Spring, and Haverstraw, among others.
The New York-New Jersey Watershed Protection Act would
streamline and finance local restoration initiatives in my
district and all along the Hudson, with the goal of improving
water quality, preserving wildlife and their habitats,
augmenting public access, and bolstering recreational
industries along the Hudson and other waterways.
Last year, we saw this same piece of legislation pass the
House as part of the National Defense Authorization Act. This
year, with the support of a bipartisan coalition of 14 co-
sponsors, all 4 New York and New Jersey Senators, and over 50
local organizations, we aim to push it across the finish line
through the Senate and to the President's desk.
This Act is not just about protecting a watershed. It is
about securing our future, improving our communities'
resilience, and preserving our ecosystems for generations to
come. It is a testament to our commitment to environmental
stewardship, and I look forward to its passage.
Mr. Guertin, in your role at the U.S. Fish and Wildlife
Service, could you provide insights into how your agency's
expertise and experience in managing Federal watersheds will
contribute to the success of the restoration program proposed
in the New York-New Jersey Watershed Protection Act?
Mr. Guertin. Thank you for your question, Congressman. We
are a Wildlife and Fisheries Management Agency, so the
expertise we would bring would revolve around many of the
wildlife and fisheries species that depend on the watershed.
We do a lot of habitat restoration work, a lot of outdoor
recreation planning. We can support a very vibrant outdoor
recreation economy with that kind of work. Hunters and angling
opportunities. We do environmental education, and we have a lot
of programs already operating in the watershed, including three
National Wildlife Refuge units, two urban partnerships. Our
Partners for Fish and Wildlife Program works with private
landowners, as well as the Hudson Highlands Conservation Act we
implement with the Forest Service.
So, we would focus on outdoor recreation, environmental
education, habitat restoration. A lot of the work around our
trust species, striped bass, sturgeon, waterfowl, and other
animals like that.
Thank you for your question, sir.
Mr. Lawler. As you know, in the Hudson we have had a lot of
legacy pollutants. What work can you do to help remediate
existing pollutants while preventing further contamination to
our wildlife?
Mr. Guertin. Our mission would revolve around habitat
restoration projects, watersheds, headwater streams. This
watershed extends from the Mohawk River up into the
Adirondacks. It reaches everything from saltwater fish to brook
trout in the headwaters. So, we would do habitat restoration
work, all with a focus of healthy, sustaining populations of
wildlife and fisheries resources.
Mr. Lawler. With a budget allocation of about $20 million
annually for the watershed restoration, how would you be able
to use those funds effectively?
Mr. Guertin. If enacted and appropriated, Congressman, we
would use this funding to bring in additional private land
biologists to work on voluntary conservation purposes. We could
leverage our ability with large landowners, other agencies, the
state to bring in technical assistance. We can do mapping and
modeling for key species' needs.
We can also do a lot of our work that we have done in
similar watersheds, like the Delaware and Chesapeake Bay, to
connect with urban populations, environmental education. We can
do a lot of outdoor recreation opportunities for kids, things
like that, and a lot of just partnership building with the
people in the watershed who are interested in this conservation
project.
Mr. Lawler. I appreciate it. And thank you, Mr. Chairman,
for allowing me to waive on, and I encourage all my colleagues
to support this important legislation.
Mr. Bentz. Thank you, Mr. Lawler, and I want to thank the
witnesses for their valuable testimony and the Members for
their questions.
Members may have some additional questions for the
witnesses, and I ask that you respond to these in writing. This
panel is now dismissed. Thank you.
And I will recognize our third panel as they move up.
I think we are ready to start. Let me recognize our third
panel: Mr. Charlie Besher, Chair of the Property Rights and
Environmental Management Committee with the National
Cattlemen's Beef Association in Patton, Missouri; Mr. Steve
Wolff, General Manager of the Southwestern Water Conservation
District in Durango, Colorado; Mr. Gene Shawcroft, General
Manager of the Central Utah Water Conservancy District in Orem,
Utah; Mr. William Gibbons-Fly, Executive Director of the
American Tuna Boat Association in San Diego, California; Ms.
Genevieve Genest, Donor Relations Manager for the Galveston Bay
Foundation in Kemah, Texas; Mr. Seth Atkinson, Attorney for the
Quillback Consulting in Santa Cruz, California; Mr. Jack
Graham, Captain of Afishianado Charters in Kill Devil Hills,
North Carolina; Ms. Jessica McCawley, Division Director of the
Division of Marine Fisheries Management with the Florida Fish
and Wildlife Conservation Commission in Tallahassee, Florida.
Let me remind the witnesses that under Committee Rules,
they must limit their oral statements to 5 minutes, but their
entire statement will appear in the record.
To begin your testimony, please press the ``talk'' button,
and please move close to your microphone. In this hearing room
it is hard to hear if you are more than about 3 inches from it.
We use timing lights. When you begin, the light will turn
green. When you have 1 minute remaining, the light will turn
yellow. And at the end of 5 minutes, the light will turn red,
and I will ask you to please complete your statement.
I will allow all witnesses to testify before Member
questioning.
With that I now recognize Mr. Besher for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF CHARLIE BESHER, PROPERTY RIGHTS AND ENVIRONMENTAL
MANAGEMENT COMMITTEE CHAIR, NATIONAL CATTLEMEN'S BEEF
ASSOCIATION, PATTON, MISSOURI

Mr. Besher. Thank you, Chairman Bentz, Ranking Member
Huffman, and members of the Subcommittee for inviting me to
speak today on the impact of the black-headed vultures on
family-owned cattle operations like mine.
My name is Charlie Besher. My wife Donna and I are a cow-
calf operator based in Bollinger County, Missouri. We raise
registered Hereford cattle in the foothills of the Ozarks. We
have grown our operation over the years with a priority on soil
health, water quality, rotational grazing through sound
environmental stewardship. I want to be able to give my
grandchildren what my grandpa left to me.
A half a century ago, black-headed vultures were declining
due to decades of trapping and exposures to DDT. They were
federally listed and take was prohibited. Today, the bird has
rebounded and become an abundant species across the country.
Their population has steadily grown by 3 percent every year
from 1966 to 2019. The black-headed vultures globally breeding
population is 190 million strong, prompting partners in flight
to downgrade the species to low conservation concern.
As their population grows, so does the species' harmful
impact on cattle production. Death loss of cattle due to birds
has been confirmed in 18 states across the South and the
Midwest. From 2015 to 2019, requests to the Fish and Wildlife
Service for depredation permits to help control the black-
headed buzzards have increased by 26 percent. Last year alone,
USDA APHIS was called upon to disperse 84,000 black-headed
vultures and euthanize 13,000 across 22 states. Because
producers are not permitted to take enough of the birds on
their own, the Agency is forced to deal with this, and with a
lack of staff to do so at that scale.
Black-headed vultures are opportunistic predators. They
target calves, particularly when they are partially emerged
from the birth canal. Even for the most experienced farmer,
these kills are a very gruesome way to see an animal go,
especially a baby calf. The birds take an average of 3\1/2\
hours to actually kill their prey. They kill a calf by first
puncturing and consuming its soft tissues, the eyeballs and the
anus. Next, they often start on the rear flank, akin to the
groin of a human, in order to get easy access to the calves
organs.
Not only is this gruesome, but it is also financially
costly to producers. There is an immediate financial loss of
the calf's death, and ongoing financial loss due to stress,
reduced weight gain, and injuries to the mother cow.
The Black Vulture Relief Act is bipartisan and soon to be
bicameral. It does not amend the Migratory Bird Treaty Act.
Rather, it is a stand-alone bill that will allow producers to
lethally take birds without a sub-permit when there is an
immediate threat to livestock.
That is an important note. We are not seeking to eradicate
the species. They play a vulnerable role in the ecosystem, but
they are over-populated. And where this is a threat of calf
loss, we need to be able to act.
Permits are issued through Fish and Wildlife Services to
states. States, in turn, issue sub-permits to producers. Sub-
permits only allow for three takes a year, with the option to
go up to five in select states. Producers are regularly seeing
these birds descend in flocks of as many as 50. Taking three
birds one time per year is not efficient to deter depredation.
The bill preserves the requirement for reporting of take to
allow wildlife officials to continue to monitor the strength of
the population. Even in good years, this is a business of daily
challenges and slim margins.
The majority of NCBA members run family-owned operations
with a herd size of 100 or fewer. For them, one persistent
issue like the black-headed vultures can make or break the
bottom line.
Congress can address this without threatening the long-term
viability of the species. There is no longer any need for such
strict protections for these birds. That makes about as much
sense as threatening rats as endangered animals in Washington,
DC.
I urge you to pass the Black Vulture Relief Act of 2023,
and I thank you for your time this morning. I look forward to
answering your questions.

[The prepared statement of Mr. Besher follows:]
Prepared Statement of Charlie Besher, Property Rights & Environmental
Management Committee Chair, National Cattlemen's Beef Association
on H.R. 1437

Chairman Bentz, Ranking Member Huffman, and Members of the
Subcommittee. On behalf of America's cattle producers, thank you for
inviting me to speak today on the impact that Black vulture predation
is having on family-owned operations like my own.
My name is Charlie Besher. My wife Donna and I are cow-calf
producers based in Bollinger County, Missouri, in the southeast corner
of the state. We raise registered Hereford cattle and seven grandkids
in the foothills of the Ozarks. I bought my first parcel of land at the
age of 24, and I have been working to grow the operation ever since,
with a prioritization on soil health, water quality, and rotational
grazing.
In addition to producing high-quality beef for our nation's food
supply chain, I am proud to promote environmental stewardship within
the industry at both the state and national level. I currently serve as
Chair of the National Cattlemen's Beef Association (NCBA) committee on
property rights & environmental management. I am also honored to serve
of President of the Missouri Forage and Grasslands Council, Secretary
of the Missouri Cattlemen's Association, and Vice Chair of the National
Grazing Lands Coalition. In recent years, I have also been active with
the U.S. Roundtable for Sustainable Beef.
I am testifying today on behalf of NCBA, the trusted leader and
definitive voice of the U.S. cattle and beef industry. Initiated in
1898, NCBA is the American cattle industry's oldest and largest
national trade association. In addition to our nearly 26,000 direct
members, NCBA represents 44 state cattle associations with collective
memberships numbering about 178,000 producers. It is important to note
that well over 90 percent of those members are, like myself, family-
owned businesses involved in the cow-calf, stocker/backgrounder, and
feeding sectors of the supply chain. The majority of NCBA members have
a herd size of 100 head or fewer. Each of our members has a voice in
our organization's century-old policymaking process, and it is from the
grassroots resolutions and policies resulting from this process that
NCBA takes positions on legislation.
An integral part of responsible stewardship of our working lands,
farms, and ranches is cultivating and maintaining the habitat to
support a diverse range of wildlife species. More than 93 percent of
the land in Missouri is privately owned, so by necessity, landowners
like cattle producers play a pivotal role in the success of species
conservation.\1\ In our state, cattle producers have participated in
numerous voluntary programs to safeguard habitat and actively manage
populations of elk, black bears, white-tailed deer, purple martins,
bald and golden eagles, and freshwater species like the pallid sturgeon
and paddlefish. On our own operation, we worked closely with Quail
Forever to establish native warm season grass, to the benefit of our
land and the birds. These kinds of collaborations are not unusual; in
everything we do to improve our operation, we also consider the
benefits for wildlife as a factor.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Hunting on Private Land. Missouri Department of Conservation.
Accessed July 21, 2023.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Missouri ranchers--like tens of thousands of other cattle producers
across the country--are not opposed to sound, science-drive wildlife
conservation. On the contrary, we are deeply invested in passing on
healthy, resilient, and balanced ecosystems to the next generation.
These are the grasslands and forests where we live, work, and raise our
families each day; we have no interest in eliminating the abundant
wildlife that is part of what makes our way of life so special. Because
we are so close to the land and so invested in its stewardship, we are
often some of the first people to raise the alarm when some aspect of
Mother Nature is out of balance. That is the alarm I want to raise with
the Subcommittee today.
Half a century ago, Black vultures were a species of concern in the
United States due to decades of lethal take, trapping, and exposure to
the eggshell-thinning effects of DDT. The species was listed under the
Migratory Bird Treaty Act and has been federally protected from take
ever since.\2\ However, since the 1970s, the bird has rebounded and
become a strong, abundant species across the country and indeed, across
North America. Black vulture population numbers have grown steadily by
approximately 3.4 percent every year from 1966 to 2019.\3\ The Black
vulture's global breeding population now numbers approximately 190
million strong, and the multinational conservation organization
Partners in Flight has rated the species a 4 out of 20 on their
Continental Concern Score, indicating that they are of low conservation
concern.\4\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ The Migratory Bird Treaty Act prohibits the take (defined as
killing, capturing, selling, trading, or transport) of listed species
without prior authorization by the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service.
\3\ The North American Breeding Bird Survey, Results and Analysis
1966-2019. USGS Patuxent Wildlife Research Center. Accessed July 21,
2023.
\4\ Avian Conservation Assessment Database Scores. Partners in
Flight. Accessed July 21, 2023.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
As their population grows, so does the species' harmful impact on
cattle producers. From 2015-2019, requests to the U.S. Fish and
Wildlife Service (USFWS) for depredation permits to help control Black
vultures increased by 26 percent.\5\ Depredation by the species on
cattle has been confirmed in 18 states, with attacks in other areas
likely going unrecorded.\6\ As far as the frequency of attacks, this
varies from state to state. In some areas, only 15 percent of producers
may experience Black vulture depredation. In the most heavily impacted
states, it can be much higher. For example, in Florida alone, more than
33 percent of all producers experience calf loss due to Black vulture
depredation each year.\7\ When you recall the average herd size of NCBA
membership is 100 head or fewer and the average herd size for all
cattle producers nationwide is even smaller, that constitutes a
significant portion. While we do not have extensive records of
frequency of attacks in every state across the Southeast and Midwest
regions--where Black vultures are most abundant--we can infer that
their impact is growing due to the increasing number of permits
requested of USFWS and the growing calls for assistance from the U.S.
Department of Agriculture (USDA) Animal and Plant Health Inspection
Service's (APHIS) Wildlife Services division. According to Wildlife
Services, the arm of USDA tasked with assisting cattle producers and
other industries with reducing human-wildlife conflict, the number of
Black vulture attacks on cattle and calves increased by nearly 25
percent from 2020 to 2022.\8\ In 2022 alone, Wildlife Services was
called upon to disperse 84,020 Black vultures and euthanize 13,195
across 22 states. Just last week, on my own operation, we discovered a
nest in our barn and at least one individual--but when we called USDA
for assistance, they were unable to come for another three days, and
when they arrived, they elected not to take the bird.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\ Black vulture conflict and management in the United States:
Damage trends, management overview, and research needs. USDA-APHIS,
University of Nebraska-Lincoln. Accessed July 21, 2023.
\6\ Spatial risk modeling of cattle depredation by black vultures
in the midwestern United States. Journal of Wildlife Management.
Accessed July 21, 2023.
\7\ Vulture-Cattle Interactions: A Survey of Florida Ranchers.
USDA-APHIS Wildlife Services. Accessed July 21, 2023.
\8\ Program Data Report G. USDA-APHIS Wildlife Services. Accessed
July 21, 2023.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Black vultures are opportunistic predators. They primarily attack
and feed on calves--particularly during parturition--because they are
weak, and their mothers are incapacitated and unable to defend
themselves during and immediately after giving birth. We are surrounded
by nature and by predator-prey relationships on the farm but even
still, the predation habits of Black vultures still stand out as
unusually harrowing. The birds take an average of 3.5 hours from start
of an attack to death of their prey.\9\ They kill a calf by first
puncturing and consuming its softest tissues; the eyeballs, the anus,
and the rear flank (akin to the groin of a human) that, when gouged,
gives the birds easy access to the calf's organs. Again--we are not
naive to the realities of nature around us. But even for the most
experienced farmer or rancher, these kills are a very gruesome way to
see an animal go, especially when it's a baby that you have long
awaited and invested in its health. Not only is Black vulture
depredation gruesome, but it is also financially costly to cattle
producers in a variety of ways. Each kill represents an immediate
financial loss due to livestock death; ongoing financial loss due to
stress, reduced weight gain, and/or injuries to mother cows; and
persistent disruption to operations due to livestock's hesitancy to
graze forage in pastures that are habitually frequented by Black
vultures. In a Florida study, researchers found that each instance of
Black vulture depredation cost the producer an average of $2,000.\10\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\9\ Black vulture conflict and management in the United States:
Damage trends, management overview, and research needs. USDA-APHIS,
University of Nebraska-Lincoln. Accessed July 21, 2023.
\10\ Vulture-Cattle Interactions: A Survey of Florida Ranchers.
USDA-APHIS Wildlife Services. Accessed July 21, 2023.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The bipartisan ``Black Vulture Relief Act of 2023'' would address
this growing challenge by allowing farmers and ranchers to lethally
take Black vultures without first acquiring a sub-permit. Due to the
bird's status under the Migratory Bird Treaty Act, a federal permit is
required to engage in lethal take of the bird. Permits are issued by
USFWS to the states, and states in turn issue sub-permits to producers.
Sub-permits only allow for three takes a year, with the option to go up
to five in select states. In my home state of Missouri, we are seeing
these birds descend on calving pastures in flocks are 40 to 50. Taking
three birds, one time per year, is not sufficient to deter depredation.
This legislation would remove the requirement for a sub-permit,
allowing farmers and ranchers to take Black vultures as needed, in the
moment, when the threat to livestock is greatest. The bill preserves
the requirement for reporting of take on the back end, consolidating
this information into a once-yearly report to the appropriate USFWS
Regional Office. This will allow USFWS and state wildlife officials to
continue to monitor the Black vulture population and uphold responsible
stewardship of the species.
Even in years of strong rainfall and strong markets, ranching is a
business of daily adversity and slim margins. The majority of cattle
producers in the United States are running small, family-owned
operations, not the large feeding operations or packing facilities
often focused on by the media. For these family farmers and ranchers,
one persistent issue like Black vulture depredation can make the
difference between making the numbers work for another year or being
forced to downscale or close operations.
The challenge of Black vultures is one that Congress has the ready
tools to address, and we can do so without eradicating the species or
threatening its long-term viability. There is no longer the need to
protect these birds as if any affirmative management could contribute
to their decline. To do so makes about as much sense as treating
squirrels or rats as endangered animals in Washington, DC. I urge you
to pass the ``Black Vulture Relief Act of 2023'' and equip producers
with the flexibility they need to protect their livestock against this
predator species.
Thank you for inviting me to testify on this critical issue and the
commonsense solution that has been put forward for the Subcommittee's
consideration. I look forward to answering any questions.

______

Mr. Bentz. Thank you. I now recognize Mr. Wolff for 5
minutes.

STATEMENT OF STEVE WOLFF, GENERAL MANAGER, SOUTHWESTERN WATER
CONSERVATION DISTRICT, DURANGO, COLORADO

Mr. Wolff. Chairman Bentz, Ranking Member Huffman, and
members of the Subcommittee, thank you for the opportunity to
testify regarding H.R. 4596. My name is Steve Wolff, and I
currently serve as General Manager of the Southwestern Water
Conservation District in Durango, Colorado.
The district was created by the Colorado General Assembly
in 1941 to protect, conserve, use, and develop the water
resources of the San Juan and Dolores River basins for the
welfare of all people in southwest Colorado.
I would like to thank Representative Boebert for
introducing this bill, and commend her staff for their efforts
to seek input from the participants in the two recovery
programs.
Southwestern has been a participant in San Juan recovery
program since its inception in 1992. I currently serve on two
subcommittees representing water users in the Upper Colorado
River program and in the San Juan program. Prior to my time in
Southwestern, I worked for the Wyoming State Engineer's office.
As part of my duties there I represented the State of Wyoming
on the Upper Colorado River Program Management Committee from
2013 to 2021, and served as Chair from 2016 to 2021. This
background has given me perspective on the benefits and the
needs of the programs that I would like to share with you
today.
The purpose of H.R. 4596 is to reauthorize the Bureau of
Reclamation to provide cost-shared funding to implement the
endangered and threatened fishery programs for the Upper
Colorado and San Juan River basins. The authorization for the
period of Fiscal Year 2024 through Fiscal Year 2031 is for $50
million for capital projects and $80 million for annual base
funding. These authorizations are adjusted annually for
inflation.
The Upper Colorado program was established in 1988. The San
Juan program was established in 1992. These programs were both
established with two principal goals in mind: the recovery of
four threatened and endangered fish species listed under the
Federal ESA, and to allow water development and water
management activities to proceed in a manner consistent with
state water law. These programs have been and continue to be
successful on both of these goals.
Reclamation, in cooperation with the four Upper Colorado
River Basin states and other partners, has been a participant
in the program since their inception. Reclamation funding,
along with the substantial funding and in-kind contributions by
non-Federal parties, is essential to the continued success of
the programs. For example, non-Federal water users have
provided 2.9 million acre-feet of contributed water to benefit
these endangered species and their habitats, with an estimated
value of $580 million.
As I stated earlier, these programs have the goal of
recovering four threatened endangered fish species listed under
ESA in a manner consistent with state and wildlife law,
Reclamation project authorizations, and interstate water
compacts adopted by Congress. The list of species are Colorado
pikeminnow, humpback chub, razorback sucker, and bonytail.
These species are native to and found only in the Colorado
River basin.
The programs have been implemented with cooperation and
participation of Federal agencies; the states of Colorado,
Utah, New Mexico, and Wyoming; water users; environmental
organizations; power customers; and Native American tribes.
These programs have been successful in preserving and moving
the listed species toward recovery.
Prior to the implementation of the programs, these species
were on the verge of extinction. The actions taken to preserve
and recover the species are considered by the U.S. Fish and
Wildlife Service in evaluating the impacts of water development
and management activities in the Upper Colorado River and San
Juan River basins on the four listed fish species as required
by the ESA.
To date, the Service has independently determined that the
actions taken by the two recovery programs provide ESA
compliance for 2,500 water projects in the four Upper Basin
states. These projects include every Reclamation project in the
basins upstream of Lake Powell.
The programs allow the United States to fulfill its trust
responsibilities to Native American tribes with respect to
water development and ESA compliance. Importantly, no lawsuits
have been filed on ESA compliance with these two programs
during the past 30 years.
Program participants are concerned that the $80 million
authorized for annual base funding in H.R. 4596 is below the
amount needed for the two recovery programs. However, we do
recognize that the rules of the House have kept this funding
flat, but we will seek ways to increase that funding to the $92
million that is in the Senate version of this bill.
In closing, I would like to emphasize that these programs
have been successful in the goals of preserving and moving
listed species toward recovery.
I urge you to approve this bill. I will be happy to take
any questions.

[The prepared statement of Mr. Wolff follows:]
Prepared Statement of Steve Wolff, General Manager, Southwestern Water
Conservation District
on H.R. 4596

Good morning, Chairman Bentz, Ranking Member Huffman, and Members
of the Subcommittee. Thank you for the opportunity to testify regarding
H.R. 4596.
My name is Steve Wolff and I currently serve as the General Manager
of the Southwestern Water Conservation District (Southwestern), in
Durango Colorado. The District was created by the Colorado General
Assembly in 1941 to protect, conserve, use, and develop the water
resources of the San Juan and Dolores River Basins for the welfare of
the people in southwest Colorado. Southwestern has been participating
in the San Juan Program since its inception. I would also like to thank
Representative Boebert for introducing this bill and commend her staff
for their efforts to seek input from the participants in the two
recovery programs on the bill.
I currently serve on two committees representing water users
participating in the Upper Colorado River Endangered Fish Recovery
Program and the San Juan River Recovery Implementation Program. Prior
to my current position, I was employed by the Wyoming State Engineer's
office for 15 years. As part of my duties there, I represented the
State of Wyoming on the Management Committee of the Upper Colorado
River Endangered Fish Recovery Program from 2013 to 2021, including
serving as Chair from 2016 to 2021. My background has given me a
perspective on the benefits and needs of these programs that I would
like to share with you today with respect to H.R. 4596.

Summary: The purpose of H.R. 4596 is to reauthorize the Bureau of
Reclamation (Reclamation) to provide cost-shared funding to implement
the endangered and threatened fish recovery programs for the Upper
Colorado and San Juan River basins. The authorization for the period of
FY 24 through FY 31 is for $50 million for capital projects and $80
million dollars for base (annual) funding. Funding authorizations are
adjusted annually for inflation.
The Upper Colorado Program was established in 1988. The San Juan
Program was established in 1992. These programs were established with
two principal goals; 1) the recovery of four threatened and endangered
fish species listed under the federal Endangered Species Act (ESA), and
2) allow water development and management activities to proceed in a
manner consistent with state water law. These programs have been and
continue to be successful in meeting both of those goals.
Reclamation, in cooperation with the four Upper Colorado River
basin states and other partners, has been a participant in the programs
since their inception. Reclamation funding, along with substantial
funding and in-kind contributions by non-federal parties, is essential
to the continued success of the programs. Non-federal water users have
provided 2.9 million acre-feet of water to benefit endangered species
and their habitats with an estimated value of at least $580 million.
As I stated earlier, these programs have the goal of recovering
four threatened and endangered fish species listed under the federal
Endangered Species Act (ESA) in a manner consistent with state water
and wildlife law, Reclamation project authorizations, and interstate
water compacts adopted by Congress. The listed species are the Colorado
pikeminnow, humpback chub, razorback sucker, and bonytail. The species
are native to and found only in the Colorado River basin.
The programs have been implemented with the cooperation and
participation of federal agencies, the states of Colorado, Utah, New
Mexico, and Wyoming, water users, environmental organizations, power
customers, and Native American tribes. These programs have been
successful in preserving and moving the listed species toward recovery.
Prior to the implementation of the programs, the species were on the
verge of extinction.
The actions taken to preserve and recover the species are
considered by U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service (Service) in evaluating
the impacts of water development and management activities in the Upper
Colorado River and San Juan River basins on the four listed fish
species as required by the ESA. To date, the Service has independently
determined that the actions taken by the recovery programs provide ESA
compliance for 2,500 water projects in Colorado, Utah, Wyoming, and New
Mexico. These projects include every Reclamation project in the basins
upstream of Lake Powell. The programs allow the United States to
fulfill its trust responsibilities to Native American tribes with
respect to water development and management activities compliance with
the Endangered Species Act. Importantly, no lawsuits have been filed on
ESA compliance provided by the recovery programs.
Program participants are concerned that the $80 million authorized
for annual base funding by Reclamation in H.R. 4596 is below the amount
needed by the two recovery programs. The participants identified a need
for $11.85 million in Reclamation funding for fiscal years 2024 through
2028 and $10.93 million for fiscal years 2029 through 2031, totaling
$92.04 million for the authorization period in H.R. 4596. These amounts
would also be adjusted for inflation.
The program participants are aware that the current rules of the
House of Representatives limit the amount to be authorized in
compliance with the `cut go' rule. We will continue looking for
opportunities to increase authorized base funding in compliance with
House rules.
The recovery programs have been successful in the goals of
preserving and moving listed species towards recovery and in providing
ESA compliance for 2,500 water projects in the Upper Colorado and San
Juan river basins. Cost-sharing funding authorized by H.R. 4596 is
essential for the continued success of the programs.

I will be happy to answer any questions from Subcommittee members.
If I cannot provide answers, I request your permission to provide
written responses subsequent to this hearing in a time frame specified
by the Subcommittee.

Cooperation and Collaboration: Participants in the two programs
include;

States of Colorado, Utah, New Mexico, and Wyoming,

Navajo Nation, Jicarilla Apache Nation, Ute Mountain Ute
Tribe, Southern Ute Tribe,

The Nature Conservancy, Western Resource Advocates,

Colorado River Energy Distributors Association,

U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, Bureau of Reclamation,
Western Area Power Administration, Bureau of Indian
Affairs, and Bureau of Land Management.

The program partners participate in management and technical
committees that determine actions and the priority of actions to be
taken by the recovery programs to benefit listed fish, the development
of annual work plans, and the development of long-range plans.

Recovery Program Activities to Benefit Threatened and Endangered
Fish: The programs provide ESA compliance for basin-wide water
development activities using an innovative structure to adaptively
manage on-the-ground recovery actions at a system-wide level rather
than project by project. This allows for more effective recovery
actions and more efficient use of resources. Ongoing research and
monitoring assure that recovery activities to benefit the species are
effective, efficiently implemented, scientifically based, and evaluated
through an adaptive management process. The components of the programs
are

instream flow identification and protection,

habitat restoration,

nonnative fish management,

outreach,

research and monitoring, and

program management.

Activities supported by base (annual) funding include operation and
maintenance of capital facilities, instream flow management, stocking
of endangered fish, nonnative fish management, research and monitoring,
and program management.
These capital and base-funded activities are vital to the
preservation and recovery of the species and to providing ESA
compliance for water development and management activities in the two
basins. These are the activities that are provided with continuing
cost-share funding authorized in H.R. 4596 and with substantial cash
and in-kind contributions by non-federal partners.

Status of the Endangered Fish: At the beginning of the recovery
programs, two of the listed species, Colorado pikeminnow, and humpback
chub were on the verge of extinction. The razorback sucker and bonytail
were found only in very low numbers. In 2021, the Service down listed
the humpback chub from endangered to threatened and proposed down
listing of the razorback sucker from endangered to threatened. The
programs have preserved populations of Colorado pikeminnow. The Upper
Colorado Program is stocking bonytail to restore populations in the
Upper Colorado River basin.

Funding Authorized by H.R. 4596: H.R. 4596 authorizes
appropriations to the Bureau of Reclamation (Reclamation) for capital
and base (annual) funding of the recovery programs. For the period of
FY 24 through FY 31 capital funding is authorized to $50 million and
base funding is authorized at $80 million, based on $10 million per
year. Both capital and base funding are adjusted for inflation each
year to ensure that funding is increased with the cost of construction
and personnel. The inflation adjustment is a critical component of both
programs' funding.
Recovery Program participants have identified capital funding needs
of $50 million over the authorization period. These needs include the
construction of fish passages, fish screens, hatcheries, and habitat
development and improvement. In addition, capital funding is used to
rehabilitate aging capital projects constructed over the last 30 years
and to make structural improvements to the project for more efficient
and effective operation. The capital projects provide the
infrastructure needed to preserve and recover the listed species. The
states will contribute capital funds on a project-by-project basis as
funds are available.
Activities supported by base funding include operation and
maintenance of capital facilities, instream flow management, stocking
of endangered fish, nonnative fish management, research and monitoring,
and program management. In addition to base funding provided by
Reclamation, direct cash funding is also provided by the states and
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service. The states provide $500,000 per year in
annual funding. U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service provides $1.5 million
per year. These are in addition to the substantial in-kind and cash
equivalent contributions discussed below.
Within the last year, participants in the programs conducted a
thorough assessment of future needs and costs to continue the
preservation and recovery of the listed species. Program participants
are concerned that the $80 million authorized for annual base funding
by Reclamation in H.R. 4596 is below the amount needed by the two
recovery programs. The participants identified a need for $11.85
million in Reclamation funding for fiscal years 2024 through 2028 and
$10.93 million for fiscal years 2029 through 2031, totaling $92.04
million for the authorization period in H.R. 4596. These amounts would
also be adjusted for inflation.
The program participants are aware that current rules of the House
of Representatives limit the amount to be authorized in compliance with
the `cut go' rule. We will continue looking for opportunities to
increase authorized base funding in compliance with House rules.

Cash and In-Kind Contributions by Non-Federal Participants: In-
kind, cash, cash equivalent, land, and water contributions to the
recovery programs have been made by non-federal participants in the
programs including states, tribes, power customers, water users, and
environmental organizations. These contributions have supported both
capital and annual activities. These contributions will continue to be
made through FY 31 and beyond. These contributions are in addition to
direct cash contributions by Reclamation and other parties.
In-kind funding and actions provided by non-federal participants in
the Upper Colorado and San Juan Programs are substantial and essential
for the preservation and recovery of the listed fishes. In-kind
contributions are essential for providing ESA compliance for over 2,500
federal, tribal, and non-federal water projects upstream of Lake
Powell.
It has been common for the states to contribute additional staffing
and funding to support the annual activities of the programs. Cash-
equivalent contributions that the states fund provide directly support
activities in the programs' annual workplans and reduce cash
expenditures by the programs. Examples of current cash-equivalent
actions include direct funding of stream gages utilized by the
programs, operation of a fish hatchery, water management by state water
agencies to assure protection and delivery of water to endanger fish
habitat, and non-native fish control activities by state wildlife
agencies.

Water for Endangered Fish: Under the recovery programs, water users
and the states have agreed to provide water to benefit the listed
species in accordance with state water law and interstate compacts
approved by Congress. Reclamation operates Reclamation projects in
accordance with congressional authorizations. There has been no taking
water from any water user or Reclamation contractor.
Water users and the recovery programs have cooperatively
implemented water efficiency projects that provide saved water to
benefit listed fish and their habitats. Water is also provided to
augment the spring peak and base flows through efficient operation of
federal and non-federal projects without diminishing the yields of
those projects.
From 1998 through 2022, non-federal water users have contributed
approximately 2.9 million acre-feet of water to benefit endangered
fish. The value of this water, if it had to be purchased at a nominal
low estimated cost of $200 per acre-foot, would be $590 million.
Without the provision of water to benefit endangered fish and the
management of water by states for delivery to the listed species'
habitat, the programs could not provide ESA compliance for federal,
tribal, or non-federal water projects.

Federal Native American Trust Responsibilities: Average annual
total depletions in the San Juan River basin are approximately 869,000
acre-feet per year. Tribal depletions and settlements account for
approximately 62% of the depletions totaling 540,000 acre-feet per
year. Tribal and non-tribal depletions are provided with ESA compliance
by the San Juan Recovery Program. The San Juan Recovery Program allows
the United States to carry out its trust responsibilities with respect
to tribal depletions and settlements in compliance with the ESA.

Endangered Species Act Compliance: The Endangered Species Act
requires federal agencies to consult with the U.S. Fish and Wildlife
Service on any action taken that may affect threatened or endangered
species. These actions include issuance/renewal of contracts for water
from Reclamation projects, permitting, and granting rights of way. The
Service has been required to identify reasonable and prudent
alternatives and measures to mitigate the impacts of those actions.
Almost all federal, tribal, and non-federal water projects are subject
to ESA compliance in the Upper Colorado River and San Juan River basins
due to impacts on the listed species.
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service has agreed to consider actions taken
by the recovery programs to determine if those actions provide
compliance with the Endangered Species Act for water projects. The
Service independently makes such a determination but is not obligated
to make a determination that Recovery Program actions provide ESA
compliance. The Service also conducts a biennial assessment of the
programs overall to determine if the programs are continuing to provide
ESA compliance for the water projects consulted on. In these
assessments, the Service may make recommendations to ensure that the
programs continue to provide ESA compliance. These recommendations are
incorporated into the recovery programs' annual work plans.
Since the inception of the San Juan and Upper Colorado programs in
1988 and 1992 respectively, the Service has found that the programs
provide ESA compliance for approximately 2,500 federal, tribal, and
non-federal water projects depleting approximately 3.8 million acre-
feet per year in Colorado, Wyoming, Utah, and New Mexico. These
projects include every Reclamation project in the two basins upstream
of Lake Powell. ESA compliance provided by the programs provides much
more efficient administration of and compliance with the ESA for water
users, federal agencies, and the Service. There have been no lawsuits
contesting ESA compliance provided by the recovery programs.

Conclusion: The recovery programs have been successful in achieving
the goals of preserving and moving listed species towards recovery and
in providing ESA compliance for 2,500 water projects in the Upper
Colorado and San Juan river basins. Cost-sharing funding authorized by
H.R. 4596 is essential for the continued success of the programs.

______

Mr. Bentz. Thank you.
Mrs. Boebert, you are recognized to tell us a little more
about the witness that we just heard.
Mrs. Boebert. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. It is my great honor
and pleasure to have with us today Steve Wolff, General Manager
of the Southwestern Water Conservation District.
Prior to this position, Steve served as the Interstate
Streams Division Administrator in the Wyoming State Engineer's
Office. Before his time at the Wyoming State Engineer's office,
Mr. Wolff worked for the Wyoming Game and Fish Department,
serving as Manager for the Aquatic Habitat and Water Management
Group.
I was absolutely thrilled to join Steve and other water
users at the Southwestern Water Conservation District's 39th
Southwest Water Seminar earlier this year that Steve organized
and led. It was a great program, and it was very well done,
very well attended. It is always a pleasure to have meetings
pertaining to such important issues in Colorado's 3rd District
like water. These are typically our top three issues that we
face in western Colorado: water, water, and water.
And I am also very excited to continue working with Mr.
Wolff on the passage of my bill, H.R. 4596, my Upper Colorado
and San Juan River Basins Endangered Fish Recovery Programs
Reauthorization Act of 2023.
Mr. Wolff, thank you so much for joining us here in this
Committee, and thanks for making the trip.
Mr. Chairman, I yield.
Mr. Bentz. Thank you, Mrs. Boebert. I now recognize Mr.
Shawcroft for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF GENE SHAWCROFT, GENERAL MANAGER, CENTRAL UTAH
WATER CONSERVANCY DISTRICT, OREM, UTAH

Mr. Shawcroft. Thank you, Chairman Bentz, Ranking Member
Huffman, Congressman Curtis, and members of the Subcommittee.
On behalf of the Central Utah Water Conservancy District, I
thank you for inviting me to speak in support of the Great Salt
Lake Stewardship Act, H.R. 4094.
This critically important bill amends the Central Utah
Project Completion Act or, as we affectionately call it, CUPCA,
to authorize the Secretary of the Interior to redirect
authorized and unexpended central Utah project funds toward new
conservation measures to help recover the Great Salt Lake,
Utah's most famous natural resource.
I especially want to thank my good friend, Congressman
Curtis, along with all of Utah's Congressional Delegation
members, for leading the introduction of H.R. 4094.
As both General Manager of the Central Utah Water
Conservancy District and Chair of Utah's Colorado River
Authority, I can say unequivocally that Utah has got the
message on the urgent need for water conservation. Water
conservation is now one of Utah's top priorities.
The existing congressionally authorized funding that is
being repurposed in this bill is being diverted from old CUPCA
priorities that were planned decades ago, increasing water flow
to the Great Salt Lake, which is now paramount. This year, the
Great Salt Lake experienced record low levels, causing
widespread concern about dust carrying airborne toxins, brine
shrimp, ecosystem health, and our ability to preserve fragile
migratory bird refuge habitat.
The state of Utah, Utah water users, and other stakeholders
have been working to find immediate and sustainable solutions
to support the Great Salt Lake. While this winter and spring
provided record-breaking snow and ideal runoff conditions,
water professionals know this granted only a temporary
reprieve. Extreme water conditions are now the norm, as
evidenced by this summer's heat. We have to adapt permanently.
H.R. 4094 will extend and expand the district's very
successful water conservation program authorized originally in
CUPCA. CUPCA was part of a monumental bipartisan omnibus bill,
P.L. 102-575, spearheaded and passed in 1992 by Senator Jake
Garn of Utah and Representative George Miller of California.
I want to emphasize that this bill does not require any new
spending authorization. Funding would come through the
programmatic funding Congress provided to the CUPCA program. We
estimate that as much as $100 million of already authorized
Central Utah project funds could be reprogrammed to fund water
conservation projects through the entire Great Salt Lake Basin.
Under section 207 in CUPCA, the district established a
water conservation credit program to distribute funds for water
conservation. Since the program's inception, we have received
132 applications; 45 projects have been selected and funded.
The highest weighted criteria for project funding is the amount
of water conserved.
Over $122 million in Federal funds have been distributed so
far, financing up to 65 percent of a conservation project's
total cost. To date, funded projects have conserved a combined
total of over 2.2 million acre-feet, with annual projections of
approximately 140,000 acre-feet. This Act would expand the
program to include any conservation project that provides
demonstratable water saving benefits in the Great Salt Lake
drainage basin.
To conclude, if enacted, the Great Salt Lake Stewardship
Act provides a mechanism for sustainable funding and support
for water conservation projects that will benefit the Salt Lake
Basin. H.R. 4094 has the capability to expand conservation
benefits without increasing Federal spending beyond what has
already been authorized by Congress for the CUPCA program. This
will provide a stable access to funding for those projects that
conserve water for the benefit of the Great Salt Lake.
Thank you, and I am happy to answer any questions.

[The prepared statement of Mr. Shawcroft follows:]
Prepared Statement of Gene Shawcroft, General Manager, Central Utah
Water Conservancy District
on H.R. 4094

Chairman Bentz, Ranking Member Huffman, Congressman Curtis and
members of the Subcommittee, on behalf of the Central Utah Water
Conservancy District, I thank you for inviting me to speak in support
of the Great Salt Lake Stewardship Act (H.R. 4094). This critically
important bill amends the Central Utah Project Completion Act or as we
affectionally call it, ``CUPCA'', to authorize the Secretary of the
Interior to redirect authorized and unexpended Central Utah Project
funds towards new water conservation measures to help recover the Great
Salt Lake--Utah's most famous natural resource! I especially want to
thank my good friend Congressman John Curtis along with all of Utah's
Congressional delegation members, for leading the introduction of H.R.
4094. As both General Manager of the Central Utah Water Conservancy
District (District) and Chair of Utah's Colorado River Authority, I can
say unequivocally that Utah has ``got the message'' on the urgent need
for water conservation. Water conservation is now one of the State's
top priorities.
The existing Congressionally authorized funding that is being
repurposed in this bill is being diverted from old CUPCA priorities
that were planned decades ago. Increasing water flow to the Great Salt
Lake basin is now more paramount. This year, the Great Salt Lake
experienced record low levels causing widespread concern about dust
carrying airborne toxins, Brine Shrimp ecosystem health, and our
ability to preserve fragile migratory bird refuge habitat. The State of
Utah, water users and other stakeholders have been working to find
immediate and sustainable solutions to support the Great Salt Lake.
While this winter and spring provided record breaking snow and ideal
runoff conditions, water professionals know this granted a temporary
reprieve. Extreme weather conditions are now the norm as evidenced by
this summer's record heat. We have to adapt, permanently.
Overview of the Great Salt Lake Stewardship Act--H.R. 4094

H.R. 4094 will extend and expand the District's very successful
water conservation program authorized originally in CUPCA. CUPCA was
part of a monumental bipartisan omnibus water bill, P.L. 102-575,
spearheaded and passed in 1992 by Senator Jake Garn (R-Utah) and Rep.
George Miller (D-CA).
I want to emphasize that this bill does not require any new
spending authorization. Funding would come through the programmatic
funding Congress provides to the CUPCA program within the Department of
Interior's budget each year. The federal funding that is allocated to
CUPCA is paid back to the U.S. Treasury over time, with interest.
Together with the Department of the Interior, the District estimates
that as much as $100 million of already authorized Central Utah Project
funds could be reprogrammed to fund water conservation projects
throughout the entire Great Salt Lake basin. The bill also would expand
the program from the existing 8 counties to include a total of 12
counties along the populous Wasatch front. This will assist efforts by
the State of Utah, local communities and water districts north of Salt
Lake County from which the Great Salt Lake receives most of its water.
These areas have also been hit by the state's worst drought conditions.
Section 207 of CUPCA

Under Section 207 in CUPCA, the District established a Water
Conservation Credit Program to distribute funds for water conservation.
Since the program's inception, we have received 132 applications from
diverse project sponsors that include agriculture, urban, cities, water
districts, and nonprofits. Under Section 207, even the State Director
of Natural Resources can propose a conservation project. All projects
are reviewed by the Utah Water Conservation Advisory Board consisting
of nine members. They provide recommendations of the projects that
should advance forward for funding. To date, 45 projects have been
selected and funded at various stages of implementation. The highest
weighted criteria for project funding is the amount of water conserved.
Many are large scale capital-intensive construction projects, such as
canal lining/enclosures, secondary water systems, irrigation
improvements and recently turf grass removal projects. Over $122
million in federal funds have been distributed so far, financing up to
65% of a conservation project's total cost.
In 2020 alone, the water savings from these projects were enough to
nearly fill Deer Creek Reservoir, which has a capacity of 152,000 acre-
feet. To date, funded projects have conserved a combined total of
2,242,450-acre feet \1\ with annual projections of approximately
140,000-acre feet of conserved water moving forward. The results of
these projects have continued to exceed projections and established
goals.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Section 207 Water Conservation Credit Program 2022 Annual
Report.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Until this bill, all conservation projects had to be within the
footprint of the Central Utah Project service area, which includes the
Uinta basin. The Great Salt Lake Stewardship Act would expand the
program to include any conservation project that provides demonstrable
water saving benefits in the Great Salt Lake drainage basin.
Conclusion

If enacted, the Great Salt Lake Stewardship Act provides a
mechanism for sustainable funding and support for water conservation
projects that will benefit the Salt Lake basin. H.R. 4094 has the
capability to expand conservation benefits without increasing federal
spending beyond what has been already authorized by Congress for the
CUPCA program. This will provide a stable access to funding for those
projects that conserve water for the benefit of the Great Salt Lake.

______

The following documents were submitted as supplements to Ms.
Shawcroft's testimony.

STATE OF UTAH

Department of Natural Resources

July 25, 2023

Hon. Mike Lee                 Hon. Mitt Romney
U.S. Senate                   U.S. Senate
Russell Senate Office Bldg    Russell Senate Office Bldg
Washington, DC 20510          Washington, DC 20510

Hon. John Curtis              Hon. Chris Stewart
U.S. House of
Representatives               U.S. House of Representatives
Rayburn House Office Bldg     Cannon House Office Bldg
Washington, DC 20515          Washington, DC 20515

Hon. Burgess Owens            Hon. Blake Moore
U.S. House of
Representatives               U.S. House of Representatives
Cannon House Office Bldg      Longworth House Office Bldg
Washington, DC 20515          Washington, DC 20515

Re: Support for the Great Salt Lake Stewardship Act (H.R. 4094/S. 1955)

Dear Utah Congressional Delegation:

I express my full support for the Great Salt Lake Stewardship Act.
The Division of Water Resources' mission is to plan, conserve, develop
and protect Utah's water resources. Great Salt Lake--the largest
terminal lake in the Western Hemisphere--is facing significant threats
as prolonged drought and increased demand for water plague the West.
The state of Utah is confident that we can ameliorate the drought-
stricken challenges within the Great Salt Lake watershed and the lake
will continue to be a globally significant resource for tens of
millions of migratory birds and support industries critical to the U.S.
manufacturing, defense and farming. Federal funding to support these
efforts is crucial as the task before us is challenging. We have
prioritized three project areas to bring water to Great Salt Lake:
water supply enhancement, water conservation and wetland ecosystem
restoration.
This legislation provides access to additional funding to increase
water conservation efforts and augment water flows into the Great Salt
Lake basin. Water conservation is a top priority, and this bill
recognizes the importance of advancing projects that will help to
replenish the Great Salt Lake.
The Great Salt Lake Stewardship Act will enhance access to federal
funding for water conservation projects by adding a new provision to
the Central Utah Project Completion Act (CUPCA--Public Law 102-575).
This change allows the Secretary of Interior to reallocate unspent
budget authorities within Title II of CUPCA and to put funds towards
water conservation activities. Also, the bill expands the scope of the
CUPCA water conservation program to include the Great Salt Lake basin,
which will significantly benefit the lake. Finally, the CUPCA program
enjoys annual funding support from Congress, providing a stable source
of future funding for water conservation initiatives.
Thank you for introducing Great Salt Lake Stewardship Act and for
your work in advancing it through the legislative process.

Sincerely,

Candice A. Hasenyager,
Director

______

STATE OF UTAH

Department of Natural Resources

July 20, 2023

Hon. Mike Lee                 Hon. Mitt Romney
U.S. Senate                   U.S. Senate
Russell Senate Office Bldg    Russell Senate Office Bldg
Washington, DC 20510          Washington, DC 20510

Hon. John Curtis              Hon. Chris Stewart
U.S. House of
Representatives               U.S. House of Representatives
Rayburn House Office Bldg     Cannon House Office Bldg
Washington, DC 20515          Washington, DC 20515

Hon. Burgess Owens            Hon. Blake Moore
U.S. House of
Representatives               U.S. House of Representatives
Cannon House Office Bldg      Longworth House Office Bldg
Washington, DC 20515          Washington, DC 20515

Re: SUPPORT FOR THE GREAT SALT LAKE STEWARDSHIP ACT (H.R. 4094/S. 1955)

Dear Utah Congressional Delegation:

The Utah Department of Natural Resources is writing to express full
support for the Great Salt Lake Stewardship Act. This legislation
enhances access to federal funding for water conservation projects by
expanding the Central Utah Project Completion Act (CUPCA--Public Law
102-575). This bill allows water conservation projects in the Great
Salt Lake basin to be included in the CUPCA water conservation program.
Expanding the scope will bring greater participation from cities,
irrigation districts, and more. It will also provide a stable funding
source for future water conservation initiatives.
The Great Salt Lake is vital to the environment, ecology and
economy, not just in Utah but also the western United States. For the
second year in a row, Utah's legislative session concluded with
significant investment and a long list of bills targeting water
conservation, efficiency and infrastructure. This investment over the
past two years totals about $1 billion. It's a great start, but we must
do more to preserve and protect the lake.
Record-low levels have prompted unprecedented in interest in the
lake by media around the globe, policymakers, Utahns across all sectors
and more. We appreciate this interest and are taking action to protect
the lake and its unique ecosystem. Unfortunately, it often takes a
crisis to elevate an issue of this magnitude into the public eye.
Increasing water flows to the lake is a top and immediate priority.
This can be accomplished through aggressive and strategic water
conservation. In the past, Congress has invested federal funding in
water bodies of national importance, like the Great Salt Lake. The
Great Salt Lake Stewardship Act is an important piece of legislation
that will help protect this unique resource.
Thank you for your help and support as you guide the Great Salt
Lake Stewardship Act through the legislative process.

Sincerely,

Joel Ferry,
Executive Director

______

TROUT UNLIMITED

July 18, 2023

Hon. Mike Lee                 Hon. Mitt Romney
U.S. Senate                   U.S. Senate
Russell Senate Office Bldg    Russell Senate Office Bldg
Washington, DC 20510          Washington, DC 20510

Hon. John Curtis              Hon. Chris Stewart
U.S. House of
Representatives               U.S. House of Representatives
Rayburn House Office Bldg     Cannon House Office Bldg
Washington, DC 20515          Washington, DC 20515

Hon. Burgess Owens            Hon. Blake Moore
U.S. House of
Representatives               U.S. House of Representatives
Cannon House Office Bldg      Longworth House Office Bldg
Washington, DC 20515          Washington, DC 20515

Re: Support for the Great Salt Lake Stewardship Act (H.R. 4094/S. 1955)

Dear Utah Congressional Delegation:

Trout Unlimited is writing to express support for the Great Salt
Lake Stewardship Act. As one of the preeminent conservation
organizations working on rivers in the US, we are interested in the
conservation and preservation of our coldwater streams. This includes
work to conserve both flow and habitat dependent on riparian and mesic
systems. This legislation provides access to additional funding
resources needed to increase water conservation efforts and augment
water flows into the Great Salt Lake basin. Sustained drought has
caused the lake levels to decline to a concerning degree. Water
conservation is a top priority, and this bill recognizes the importance
of advancing projects that will help to replenish the Great Salt Lake.
The Great Salt Lake Stewardship Act will enhance access to federal
funding for water conservation projects by adding a new provision to
the Central Utah Project Completion Act (CUPCA--Public Law 102-575).
This change gives the Secretary of Interior the flexibility to
reallocate unspent budget authorities within Title II of CUPCA and to
put funds towards water conservation activities. Also, the bill expands
the scope of the CUPCA water conservation program to now include the
Great Salt Lake basin, which will greatly benefit the lake.
Additionally, we would like to see the scope of the bill expand to the
Uinta Basin where two to three hundred-thousand-acre feet are extracted
to support the water use of the Wasatch Front. The two systems are
linked by natural water cycles as well as transbasin diversions and
water conservation measures should be taken in both to promote healthy
waterways and communities throughout Utah. Finally, the CUPCA program
enjoys annual funding support from Congress providing a stable source
of future funding for water conservation initiatives.
Healthy streams and habitats are inextricably linked to healthy
communities with a high quality of life. Conservation measures big and
small should be prioritized to promote the health and safety of our
Utah population, the long term and continued health of our agriculture,
municipal, and industrial water systems, and a healthy ecosystem, all
of which drive a healthy Utah economy.
Thank you introducing Great Salt Lake Stewardship Act and for your
work in advancing it through the legislative process.

Warm regard,

Jordan Nielson,
Utah Water and Habitat Program Director

______

JORDAN VALLEY WATER CONSERVANCY DISTRICT

July 17, 2023

Hon. Mike Lee                 Hon. Mitt Romney
U.S. Senate                   U.S. Senate
Russell Senate Office Bldg    Russell Senate Office Bldg
Washington, DC 20510          Washington, DC 20510

Hon. John Curtis              Hon. Chris Stewart
U.S. House of
Representatives               U.S. House of Representatives
Rayburn House Office Bldg     Cannon House Office Bldg
Washington, DC 20515          Washington, DC 20515

Hon. Burgess Owens            Hon. Blake Moore
U.S. House of
Representatives               U.S. House of Representatives
Cannon House Office Bldg      Longworth House Office Bldg
Washington, DC 20515          Washington, DC 20515

Re: Support for the Great Salt Lake Stewardship Act (H.R. 4094/S. 1955)

Dear Utah Congressional Delegation:

I am pleased to express the full support of the Jordan Valley Water
Conservancy District (JVWCD) for the Great Salt Lake Stewardship Act.
As a regional water supply agency serving a population over 775,000 in
Salt Lake County, JVWCD will benefit from the more flexible water
conservation enabled by the legislation. This legislation provides
access to additional funding resources needed to increase water
conservation efforts and augment water flows into the Great Salt Lake
basin. Sustained drought has caused the lake levels to decline to a
concerning degree. Water conservation is a top priority, and this bill
recognizes the importance of advancing projects that will help to
replenish Great Salt Lake.
The Great Salt Lake Stewardship Act will enhance access to federal
funding for water conservation projects by adding a new provision to
the Central Utah Project Completion Act (CUPCA--Public Law 102-575).
This change gives the Secretary of Interior the flexibility to
reallocate unspent budget authorities within Title II of CUPCA and to
put funds towards water conservation activities. Also, the bill expands
the scope of the CUPCA water conservation program to now include the
Great Salt Lake basin, which will greatly benefit the lake. Finally,
the CUPCA program enjoys annual funding support from Congress providing
a stable source of future funding for water conservation initiatives.
Thank you for introducing Great Salt Lake Stewardship Act and for
your work in advancing it through the legislative process.

Sincerely,

Alan E. Packard,
General Manager/CEO

______

THE NATURE CONSERVANCY

Salt Lake City, UT

July 17, 2023

Hon. Mike Lee                 Hon. Mitt Romney
U.S. Senate                   U.S. Senate
Russell Senate Office Bldg    Russell Senate Office Bldg
Washington, DC 20510          Washington, DC 20510

Hon. John Curtis              Hon. Chris Stewart
U.S. House of
Representatives               U.S. House of Representatives
Rayburn House Office Bldg     Cannon House Office Bldg
Washington, DC 20515          Washington, DC 20515

Hon. Burgess Owens            Hon. Blake Moore
U.S. House of
Representatives               U.S. House of Representatives
Cannon House Office Bldg      Longworth House Office Bldg
Washington, DC 20515          Washington, DC 20515

Re: Support for the Great Salt Lake Stewardship Act (H.R. 4094/S. 1955)

Dear Utah Congressional Delegation:

On behalf of The Nature Conservancy in Utah, I would like to
express our support for the Great Salt Lake Stewardship Act. The
Conservancy has prioritized working on the Great Salt Lake for more
than three decades and has led and joined water projects throughout the
state to develop creative solutions to provide water to people and
nature.
We know the enormous toll caused by the loss or drying of terminal
lakes around the world and the costs to human health, the environment,
and economies, as well as the costs of mitigation. This legislation
provides access to additional funding resources needed to increase
water conservation efforts and augment water flows into the Great Salt
Lake basin. Sustained drought has caused the lake levels to decline to
a concerning degree. Water conservation is a top priority, and this
bill recognizes the importance of advancing projects that will help to
replenish the Great Salt Lake.
The Great Salt Lake Stewardship Act will enhance access to federal
funding for water conservation projects by adding a new provision to
the Central Utah Project Completion Act (CUPCA--Public Law 102-575).
This change gives the Secretary of Interior the flexibility to
reallocate unspent budget authorities within Title II of CUPCA and to
put funds towards water conservation activities. Also, the bill expands
the scope of the CUPCA water conservation program to now include the
Great Salt Lake basin, which will greatly benefit the lake. Finally,
the CUPCA program enjoys annual funding support from Congress providing
a stable source of future funding for water conservation initiatives.
We appreciate the full Utah delegation joining together on this
critical issue to introduce the Great Salt Lake Stewardship Act and for
your efforts move towards passage. Working together we can avoid the
potential for economic, public health, and ecological harm experienced
by other communities faced with drying lakes.

Sincerely,

Dave Livermore,
State Director

______

COLORADO RIVER AUTHORITY OF UTAH

July 17, 2023

Hon. Mike Lee                 Hon. Mitt Romney
U.S. Senate                   U.S. Senate
Russell Senate Office Bldg    Russell Senate Office Bldg
Washington, DC 20510          Washington, DC 20510

Hon. John Curtis              Hon. Chris Stewart
U.S. House of
Representatives               U.S. House of Representatives
Rayburn House Office Bldg     Cannon House Office Bldg
Washington, DC 20515          Washington, DC 20515

Hon. Burgess Owens            Hon. Blake Moore
U.S. House of
Representatives               U.S. House of Representatives
Cannon House Office Bldg      Longworth House Office Bldg
Washington, DC 20515          Washington, DC 20515

Re: Support for the Great Salt Lake Stewardship Act (H.R. 4094/S. 1955)

Honorable Members of the Utah Congressional Delegation:

On behalf of the Colorado River Authority of Utah (Authority), I
write to express our full support for the Great Salt lake Stewardship
Act. The Authority was created in 2021 by the Utah legislature to
``protect, conserve, use and develop Utah's waters of the Colorado
River system.'' Section 63M-14-21 UCA. In accordance with our statutory
mandate, the Authority supports the conservation initiatives undertaken
by the Central Utah Water Conservancy District through the Water
Conservation Credit Program which have yielded significant benefits to
the Central Utah Project. However, the proposed expansion of this
Program to include water conservation projects to benefit the Great
Salt Lake would provide enormous benefit to the state by both enhancing
resiliency in Utah's Colorado River water supply and restoring the
Great Salt Lake--arguably the two most pressing water issues facing the
Wasatch Front. This legislation provides access to additional funding
resources needed to increase water conservation efforts and augment
water flows into the Great Salt Lake basin, which have significantly
declined due to sustained drought and have resulted in alarming drops
in lake levels. Water conservation is a top priority, and this bill
recognizes the importance of advancing projects that will help to
replenish the Great Salt Lake.
The Great Salt Lake Stewardship Act will enhance access to federal
funding for water conservation projects by adding a new provision to
the Central Utah Project Completion Act (CUPCA--Public Law 102-575).
This change gives the Secretary of Interior the flexibility to
reallocate unspent budget authority within Title II of CUPCA and to put
funds towards water conservation activities. Also, the bill expands the
scope of the CUPCA water conservation program to now include the Great
Salt Lake basin, which will greatly benefit the lake. Finally, the
CUPCA program enjoys annual funding support from Congress providing a
stable source of future funding for water conservation initiatives.
Thank you introducing Great Salt Lake Stewardship Act and for your
work in advancing it through the legislative process.

Sincerely,

Amy I. Haas,
Executive Director

______

FRIENDS OF GREAT SALT LAKE

July 17, 2023

Hon. Mike Lee                 Hon. Mitt Romney
U.S. Senate                   U.S. Senate
Russell Senate Office Bldg    Russell Senate Office Bldg
Washington, DC 20510          Washington, DC 20510

Hon. John Curtis              Hon. Chris Stewart
U.S. House of
Representatives               U.S. House of Representatives
Rayburn House Office Bldg     Cannon House Office Bldg
Washington, DC 20515          Washington, DC 20515

Hon. Burgess Owens            Hon. Blake Moore
U.S. House of
Representatives               U.S. House of Representatives
Cannon House Office Bldg      Longworth House Office Bldg
Washington, DC 20515          Washington, DC 20515

Re: Support for the Great Salt Lake Stewardship Act (H.R. 4094/S. 1955)

Dear Utah Congressional Delegation:

I'm writing on behalf of FRIENDS of Great Salt Lake to express our
full support for the Great Salt Lake Stewardship Act. FRIENDS of Great
Salt Lake is a 501c3 membership organization founded in 1994. Our
mission is to preserve and protect the Great Salt Lake ecosystem and to
increase public awareness and appreciation through education, research,
advocacy, and the arts. Although we work on a daily basis with GSL
stakeholders, policy makers and the community at large, the scope of
our work goes beyond the Lake's watershed so we can learn more about
the science, management challenges, and policies from regional,
hemispheric, and global partners working on these unique and extremely
complex saline ecosystems. FRIENDS supports this bill because the work
that is required to preserve and protect what is not only a
hemispherically critical ecosystem for millions of migratory birds that
rely on it, but also a Public Trust resource to be managed in
perpetuity for the people of Utah requires an ``all hands on deck''
approach. Your initiative with the introduction of the Great Salt Lake
Stewardship Act endorses that responsibility and approach. Thank you.
Since 2017, FRIENDS has worked closely with the Utah Legislature in
support of its work to generate important water legislation addressing
the sustainable management of Utah's water supply while our population
continues to grow and Great Salt Lake continues to decline. FRIENDS has
been working with an array of GSL stakeholders including state, local,
and federal government agencies, academia, industry and scientists.
Doing this work, FRIENDS has had the particular honor and pleasure of
working closely with Speaker Brad Wilson, Utah House of Representatives
on timely legislation and public education to address the future of
Great Salt Lake.
The Great Salt Lake Stewardship Act provides access to additional
funding resources needed to increase water conservation efforts and
augment water flows into the Great Salt Lake basin. Sustained drought
has caused the lake levels to decline to a concerning degree. Water
conservation is a top priority, and this bill recognizes the importance
of advancing projects that will help to replenish the Great Salt Lake.
The Great Salt Lake Stewardship Act will enhance access to federal
funding for water conservation projects by adding a new provision to
the Central Utah Project Completion Act (CUPCA--Public Law 102-575).
This change gives the Secretary of Interior the flexibility to
reallocate unspent budget authorities within Title II of CUPCA and to
put funds towards water conservation activities. Also, the bill expands
the scope of the CUPCA water conservation program to now include the
Great Salt Lake basin, which will greatly benefit the lake. Finally,
the CUPCA program enjoys annual funding support from Congress providing
a stable source of future funding for water conservation initiatives.
We live along the shores of something GREAT-Great Salt Lake. A lake
that defines our history, our culture and our sense of place.
Thank you for introducing the Great Salt Lake Stewardship Act and
for your work in advancing it through the legislative process.

In saline and solidarity,

Lynn E. de Freitas,
Executive Director

______

WEBER BASIN WATER CONSERVANCY DISTRICT

Layton, Utah

July 14, 2023

Hon. Mike Lee                 Hon. Mitt Romney
U.S. Senate                   U.S. Senate
Russell Senate Office Bldg    Russell Senate Office Bldg
Washington, DC 20510          Washington, DC 20510

Hon. John Curtis              Hon. Chris Stewart
U.S. House of
Representatives               U.S. House of Representatives
Rayburn House Office Bldg     Cannon House Office Bldg
Washington, DC 20515          Washington, DC 20515

Hon. Burgess Owens            Hon. Blake Moore
U.S. House of
Representatives               U.S. House of Representatives
Cannon House Office Bldg      Longworth House Office Bldg
Washington, DC 20515          Washington, DC 20515

Re: Support for the Great Salt Lake Stewardship Act (H.R. 4094/S. 1955)

Dear Utah Congressional Delegation:

The Weber Basin Water Conservancy District would like to express
our full support for the Great Salt Lake Stewardship Act. With a
regional water supply responsibility, our District wholesales water to
and develops additional supplies for cities, districts and companies in
five Utah counties, serving over 700,000 people. This legislation
provides access to additional funding resources needed to increase
water conservation efforts and augment water flows into the Great Salt
Lake. Sustained drought has caused the lake levels to decline to a
concerning degree. Water conservation is a top priority, and this bill
recognizes the importance of advancing projects that will help to
replenish the Great Salt Lake.
The Great Salt Lake Stewardship Act will enhance access to federal
funding for water conservation projects by adding a new provision to
the Central Utah Project Completion Act (CUPCA--Public Law 102-575).
This change gives the Secretary of Interior the flexibility to
reallocate unspent budget authorities within Title II of CUPCA and to
put funds towards water conservation activities. Also, the bill expands
the scope of the CUPCA water conservation program to now include the
Great Salt Lake basin, which will greatly benefit the lake. Finally,
the CUPCA program enjoys annual funding support from Congress providing
a stable source of future funding for water conservation initiatives.
Weber Basin Water Conservancy District has been intensely involved
in water conservation projects and practices for at least the past two
decades, and we envision the need for even more programs into the
future. The current use of our water supplies, in both the agricultural
and Municipal settings, is simply not sustainable. We are encouraged by
the resources this Act could bring to the Great Salt Lake Basin.
Thank you for your efforts in introducing the Great Salt Lake
Stewardship Act and for your work in advancing it through the
legislative process.

Sincerely,

Scot W. Paxman,
General Manager/CEO

______

Mr. Bentz. Thank you, Mr. Shawcroft. I now recognize Mr.
Gibbons-Fly for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF WILLIAM GIBBONS-FLY, EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR, AMERICAN
TUNABOAT ASSOCIATION, SAN DIEGO, CALIFORNIA

Mr. Gibbons-Fly. Chairman Bentz, Ranking Member Huffman,
distinguished members of the Committee, thank you for the
opportunity to testify this morning. I am here to express the
strong support of the American Tuna Boat Association and its
members for passage of H.R. 1792 to amend the South Pacific
Tuna Treaty Act to reflect amendments to the treaty adopted in
2016.
The 2016 amendments represent years of hard-fought
negotiations to improve the operational conditions and
flexibility for the fleet, some of which can only be realized
after the necessary amendments to the implementing legislation
are in place.
As just one example, Mr. Chairman, the treaty previously
applied throughout wide areas of the high seas in the Western
and Central Pacific. The 2016 amendments removed the high seas
from under the treaty, which now applies only within waters
under the jurisdiction of the Pacific Island parties. And yet,
years later, U.S. law and regulations still include the high
seas under the treaty, meaning our vessels cannot fish in these
high seas areas without a treaty license. Without the option to
fish without a treaty license, our position in negotiations
with the Pacific Island States is significantly weakened, and
we have been compelled to accept terms to which we would
otherwise not have agreed.
H.R. 1792 resolves this and other conflicts, and its
passage will provide the fleet with greater operational
flexibility, clarity, and security as envisioned at the time
the 2016 amendments were negotiated. This is important, Mr.
Chairman, because our industry is struggling to survive.
In the past 3 years, the U.S. tuna purse seine fleet has
dropped from 34 vessels to just 13 vessels operating today. The
remaining vessels supply the vast majority of the tuna being
processed in American Samoa, and otherwise support the local
economy there.
Mr. Chairman, I have submitted with my written testimony a
document prepared by the authorities in American Samoa that
clearly demonstrate the overwhelming dependence of the economy
of American Samoa on the tuna industry. Yet, the American
Samoa-based fleet faces a number of challenges that risk
further reductions in the number of vessels.
In particular, the fleet operates on an increasingly uneven
playing field with respect to its international competitors, in
particular, China. China and other flag states can exempt their
vessels from a range of international regulatory requirements
by reflagging or entering into charter arrangements with
Pacific Island States who themselves are exempt from these
requirements.
And yet, although the underlying convention requires that
participating territories, such as American Samoa, be afforded
the same treatment as the Pacific Island States, the American
Samoa-based fleet is not treated in the same way, creating a
vastly disproportionate burden on the tuna-dependent economy of
American Samoa.
Moreover, Mr. Chairman, maintaining an active and viable
U.S. tuna purse seine fleet operating in the strategically
important Central Pacific Ocean is a critical counterbalance to
China's growing influence across the region. China understands
that building commercial and industry ties is the single-most
important vector for political and economic engagement with the
Pacific Island States, and China has focused strategically on
developing direct commercial ties with several Pacific Island
States through investments in the fisheries sector. As a
result, the U.S. tuna purse seine fleet operating under the
treaty contributes not only to the United States economy and to
the economy of American Samoa, but to regional food security,
national security, and other vital national interests.
The fleet also provides several additional sets of eyes and
ears across vast reaches of the Pacific Ocean. The full
implementation of the treaty amendments, as reflected in H.R.
1792 will not address all of the challenges facing the
industry, but it will be one important step in the right
direction.
Finally, Mr. Chairman, the treaty has always received
strong bipartisan support. H.R. 1792 itself represents a
bipartisan effort by Committee members Representative Radewagen
of American Samoa and Representative Case of Hawaii, and we
very much appreciate their leadership in moving this
legislation forward.
We urge this Committee and the Full House to pass this
legislation in the most expeditious manner possible. Thank you
for your consideration. I would be happy to take any questions
you may have.

[The prepared statement of Mr. Gibbons-Fly follows:]
Prepared Statement of William Gibbons-Fly, Executive Director, American
Tunaboat Association
on H.R. 1792

Chairman Bentz, Ranking Member Huffman, distinguished members of
the Committee, I am William Gibbons-Fly, Executive Director of the
American Tunaboat Association (ATA). ATA represents the owners and
operators of the U.S. flag tuna purse seine vessels operating in the
Pacific Ocean under the South Pacific Tuna Treaty, the last true
``distant water fishing fleet'' operating under U.S. flag. ATA members
are multi-generational, family-owned businesses with a long and storied
history as an important part of the U.S. fishing industry.
I am here today to express our strong support for passage of H.R.
1792, to amend the South Pacific Tuna Treaty Act of 1988 to reflect
amendments to the Treaty adopted in 2016 and to which the Senate
provided overwhelming bipartisan support for advice and consent to
ratification in 2022. Passage of the amendments in H.R. 1792 is vitally
important for the U.S. fleet. The 2016 amendments to the Treaty
represent years of hard-fought negotiations to improve the operational
conditions and flexibility for the fleet, some of which can only be
realized after the necessary amendments to the implementing legislation
are in place.
The governments that are party to the Treaty, including the United
States, have been applying many of the Treaty amendments provisionally
under a Memorandum of Understanding adopted concurrently with the
amendments themselves. However, in the absence of U.S. amendments to
the implementing legislation, key provisions of the domestic regulatory
regime continue to reflect aspects of the Treaty prior to the 2016
amendments being adopted. As a result, since 2017 the fleet has been
operating in a kind of ``limbo,'' with conflicts between certain
operational conditions in the amended Treaty, and those reflected under
the domestic regulatory regime.
As just one example, Mr. Chairman, the Treaty previously defined a
``Treaty Area'' and a ``Licensing Area,'' both of which included large
areas of high seas throughout the Western and Central Pacific Ocean.
The 2016 Treaty amendments removed the definition of ``Treaty Area''
and modified the definition of ``Licensing Area'' to include only the
waters under the jurisdiction of the Pacific Island Parties to the
Treaty. And yet, U.S. law and regulations still include the high seas
in the Treaty and Licensing Areas. As a result, our vessels still
cannot fish in these high seas areas without a Treaty License, even
though the high seas have not been covered under the Treaty since the
end of 2016. With no alternative to fish without a Treaty License, our
position during negotiations with the Pacific Island States is
significantly weakened and we have been compelled to accept terms to
which we would otherwise not have agreed.
H.R. 1792 resolves this and other conflicts, and its passage will
provide the fleet with greater operational flexibility, clarity and
security.
This is important, Mr. Chairman, because our industry is struggling
to survive. In the past three years, the U.S. tuna purse seine fleet
has been reduced from 34 vessels to just 13 vessels operating today.
The remaining vessels supply the vast majority of the tuna being
processed in American Samoa and otherwise support the local economy
there by utilizing a range of goods and services provided by local
businesses. The economy of American Samoa is overwhelmingly dependent
on the tuna industry and the related service industries that support
both the StarKist facility and the vessels based there. The future of
the U.S. purse seine fleet and the future of American Samoa are
inextricably and undeniably linked. I have attached to this testimony a
recently prepared document that makes the highly interdependent nature
of this relationship abundantly clear.
And yet, the American Samoa-based fleet faces a number of
challenges that risk further reductions in the number of vessels
operating in the region. These include a combination of domestic
regulatory requirements, increasingly onerous terms and conditions for
access to fishing in the waters of the Pacific Island States, and
increased foreign competition. In particular, Mr. Chairman, the fleet
operates on an increasingly uneven playing field with respect to its
international competitors, in particular China. On one hand, China and
other flag states are able to exempt their vessels from a range of
international regulatory requirements by reflagging or entering into
charter arrangements with Pacific Island States who themselves are
exempt from these requirements. And yet, although the underlying
Convention requires that ``Participating Territories'' such as American
Samoa be afforded the same treatment as the Pacific Island States, the
America Samoa-based fleet is not treated in the same way, creating a
vastly disproportionate burden on the tuna dependent economy of
American Samoa and people who depend on the industry for their
livelihood.
On the other hand, Chinese flag tuna vessels figure prominently in
many global reports on Illegal, Unreported and Unregulated (IUU)
fishing as well as the use of forced labor, large government subsidies
to the fisheries sector, and other factors. Although these practices
directly undermine the conservation objectives of the United States and
various international fisheries management regimes, they also provide
Chinese fisheries products, tuna and otherwise, with an inherent
competitive advantage in the marketplace with which is increasingly
difficult for our industry to compete.
Moreover, Mr. Chairman, maintaining an active and viable U.S. tuna
purse seine fleet operating under the Treaty in the strategically
important central Pacific Ocean is a critical counterbalance to China's
growing influence across the region. China has focused strategically on
developing direct commercial ties with several Pacific Island States
through investments in the fisheries sector, both through the
activities of its vessels as well as shoreside investments. China
understands that building commercial and industry ties is the single
most important vector for political and economic engagement with the
Pacific Island States.
The Treaty not only provides access for U.S. vessels to fish
throughout the region but is an increasingly important point of
engagement between the United States government and the Pacific Island
States on a wide range of economic and maritime security issues. As a
result, the purse seine fleet operating under the Treaty contributes
not only to the United States economy and, especially the American
Samoan economy, but to regional food security, national security, and
other vital national interests. The fleet also operates as several
additional sets of ``eyes and ears'' across vast reaches of the Western
and Central Pacific Ocean. The full implementation of the Treaty
Amendments through the enactment of this legislation will not address
all of the challenges facing the industry, but it will be an important
step in the right direction as we work to ensure these continuing
contributions to fundamental U.S. interests in the region.
Finally, Mr. Chairman, the Treaty has always received broad
bipartisan support and we would not expect passage of the legislation
to be controversial. As noted at the outset, this bipartisan support
was clearly reflected in the April 2022 hearing in the Senate Foreign
Relations Committee to consider the 2016 amendments. Likewise, the vote
of the full Senate for advice and consent to ratification was without
objection. H.R. 1792 itself represents a bipartisan effort by Committee
Members Rep. Amata Radewagen of American Samoa and Rep. Ed Case of
Hawaii and we very much appreciate their efforts to move this forward.
We urge this Committee and the full House to pass this legislation
in the most expeditious manner possible.
Thank you for your consideration. I am happy to answer any
questions you may have.

ATTACHMENT

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Bentz. Thank you. I now recognize Ms. Genest for 5
minutes.

STATEMENT OF GENEVIEVE GENEST, DONOR RELATIONS MANAGER,
GALVESTON BAY FOUNDATION, KEMAH, TEXAS

Ms. Genest. Chairman Bentz, Ranking Member Grijalva, and
members of the Subcommittee, thank you for the opportunity to
provide testimony to the House Natural Resources Subcommittee
on Water, Wildlife and Fisheries. My name is Genevieve Genest,
and I am the Donor Relations Manager for the Galveston Bay
Foundation, GBF, a non-profit working across the Houston-
Galveston, Texas region since 1987 to preserve and enhance
Galveston Bay as a healthy and productive resource for
generations to come.
I have served at GBF for 7 years, and I am here today to
express my organization's support for H.R. 2950, the Coastal
Habitat Conservation Act of 2023, which would authorize the
Fish and Wildlife Service Coastal Program.
GBF works in science-based program areas, including habitat
restoration, land conservation, education, advocacy, and water
protection, through which we proudly partner with recreational,
commercial, governmental, and industrial user groups, including
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, to find lasting solutions to
the challenges confronting our shared resource: Galveston Bay.
GBF is also a member of Restore America's Estuaries, an
alliance of 10 coastal restoration organizations around the
country working to create more resilient coastal communities by
protecting estuary and habitats to enhance the ecosystem,
economic and national security benefits they provide. Many of
these organizations are also beneficiaries and partners of the
Coastal Program.
For over two decades, the coastal program has been a key
partner for GBF, both as a reliable source of financial support
and a powerful tool for accessing and leveraging additional
funding. Over the years, the Coastal Program has invested over
$570,000 in GBF projects, and leveraged $25 million in partner
contributions to help GBF successfully restore and protect over
8,000 acres of coastal habitat to the Galveston Bay ecosystem
and economy.
Galveston Bay is Texas' largest bay and seventh largest in
the United States. Its watershed is home to over 14 million
Americans. The Bay Region supports a third of fisheries in
Texas, billions of dollars in economic activity, and 40 percent
of the United States' base petrochemical capacity as the
location of the largest container port in the Gulf of Mexico,
the Port of Houston.
As an estuary, Galveston Bay is one of the world's most
productive ecosystems. Its habitats, like oyster reef and
wetlands, provide numerous ecosystem services to the community
such as outdoor recreation, tourism, enhanced water quality,
reduced property loss, and nurseries for marine and wildlife
species. Plus, many studies show that healthy, intact
ecosystems in regions prone to tropical storms and hurricanes
like Galveston Bay can reduce the impact of flooding and storm
surge, saving lives and millions of dollars. Therefore, coastal
habitat and economic investments made through the Coastal
Program are also investments in protecting people and coastal
resiliency.
Developed in 1985, the Coastal Program protects, conserves,
and restores coastal ecosystems with a primary focus on
voluntary habitat conservation efforts on public and private
lands through partnerships with various organizations,
landowners, and agencies. To make this work happen, the Coastal
Program offers much more to GBF and our partners than just
dollars. Staff help foster collaboration and guide project
planning, and the program is an invaluable go-to resource for
expertise, technical assistance, and strategic advice
throughout the life of many projects, even when program funds
are not directly involved.
In total, the program has engaged over 8,200 conservation
partners to complete more than 4,900 conservation projects,
improve 600,000 acres, protect another 2.3 million acres of
priority habitat, and help downlist at least 15 species.
One of many examples of this partnership's success is GBF's
Moses Lake Shoreline Protection Project, which has protected
5,000 feet of eroding shoreline and restored 110 acres of
wetland and oyster habitat in Galveston Bay. We designed a rock
breakwater to allow marsh grass to take root and grow along the
shoreline, creating habitat, improving flood resilience,
benefiting Federal trust species, and supporting the region's
commercial fishing industry and recreational opportunities.
After completion, GBF organized marsh planting events that
engaged local students, community members, and corporate
volunteers in the process of restoring all 110 acres. None of
this would have been possible without the Coastal Program's
technical guidance, partner development, and financial support,
which in turn helped GBF secure an additional $3 million for
this project.
I personally planted some of the marsh grass at this now-
flourishing project site near my hometown, and have
participated in and seen firsthand the positive impact of many
of GBF's successful and beneficial restoration projects
supported by the Coastal Program.
Galveston Bay Foundation and our partners would like to
thank Ranking Member Huffman and Representative Gonzalez-Colon
for their leadership on this important issue. Thank you.

[The prepared statement of Ms. Genest follows:]
Prepared Statement of Genevieve Genest, Donor Relations Manager,
Galveston Bay Foundation
on H.R. 2950

Introduction
Chairman Bentz, Ranking Member Huffman, and members of the
subcommittee, thank you for the opportunity to provide testimony to the
House Natural Resources Subcommittee on Water, Wildlife, and Fisheries.
My name is Genevieve Genest, and I am the Donor Relations Manager for
the Galveston Bay Foundation (GBF) in the Houston--Galveston Region.
I am here today to express my organization's support for H.R. 2950,
the Coastal Habitat Conservation Act of 2023 and encourage the Members
of this subcommittee to support it, as well.
GBF is a nonprofit that has served as the guardian of Galveston Bay
since 1987. Our mission is to preserve and enhance Galveston Bay as a
healthy and productive place, so it remains fishable and swimmable for
generations to come. Our core programs areas include habitat
restoration, land conservation, education, advocacy, and water
protection. Through these programs we work across a 5-county area to
facilitate a true cross-section of Bay interests by collaborating with
recreational, commercial, and industrial users to find creative,
inclusive, and forward-thinking solutions to the challenges confronting
Galveston Bay.
Galveston Bay is the largest Bay in Texas and the 7th largest in
the United States, covering 600 square miles. Its watershed covers
24,000 square miles and is home to more than 14 million Americans,
including both Houston and Dallas. The Galveston Bay region supports
billions of dollars in economic activity and 40% of the United States's
base petrochemical capacity as the location of three major ports,
including the port of Houston, the largest container port in the Gulf
of Mexico.
As an estuary, Galveston Bay is one of the world's most productive
ecosystems. Its coastal habitats provide numerous benefits to the
greater Houston-Galveston community, such as supporting \1/3\ of
Texas's fisheries industry, enhancing water quality through natural
filtration processes, preventing property loss from erosion, providing
flood and storm protection, and sustaining recreational and tourism
industries that support more than 5,000 jobs.
Through actions and partnerships, including with the U.S. Fish and
Wildlife Service, and a commitment to sound science and research, GBF
has protected over 16,000 acres of natural lands and engaged tens of
thousands of community members through volunteer and public outreach
opportunities.
Additionally, Galveston Bay Foundation is a member of Restore
America's Estuaries, an alliance of 10 coastal restoration
organizations around the country working to protect estuaries, bays,
and coasts and enhance the value of these areas for the ecosystem,
economic, and national security benefits they provide. Many of these
organizations are also beneficiaries and supporters of the Program I'm
here to discuss.
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service Coastal Program

For more than two decades, GBF has worked closely with the U.S.
Fish and Wildlife Service Coastal Program to restore and protect more
than 8,000 acres of critical coastal habitat in Galveston Bay. These
projects support species conservation, habitat connectivity, and create
more resilient communities. By conserving these habitats, GBF and the
Service have been able to sustain ecosystem services and functions that
are critical to coastal communities, including tropical storm
protection, outdoor recreation, and nurseries for economically
important fish and wildlife. Through these projects, the Coastal
Program has invested more than $570,000 and leveraged more than $25
million in partner contributions for the Galveston Bay ecosystem and
economy.
The Coastal Program has been a key partner for GBF both directly as
a reliable source of financial support and indirectly as a powerful
tool for accessing and leveraging additional private and public funding
sources for high priority projects.
It also offers much more to GBF and our partners than just dollars.
The Coastal Program has been an invaluable partner throughout the life
of many projects as a go-to resource for expertise, technical
assistance, and strategic advice. Program staff help foster
collaboration among stakeholders and guide the project planning
process, sometimes even when Coastal Program funds are not directly
involved. All these services are at the disposal of partner
organizations like GBF to help translate community needs into project
ideas and execution.
Moses Lake Shoreline Protection Project (Texas)

One example of the impact this technical expertise and financial
support provides can be found at our Moses Lake Shoreline Protection
Project. Between 2013 and 2015, the Coastal Program uplifted a
partnership of federal and state agencies and NGOs, including the
Galveston Bay Foundation and The Nature Conservancy, to construct a
breakwater to protect 5,000 feet of rapidly eroding shoreline and
support the restoration of 110-acres of wetland habitat in Moses Lake
in western Galveston Bay.
This project included installing a rock breakwater, creating oyster
reefs, and restoring marsh habitat, all of which provide significant
benefits to fish and shellfish, migratory and resident waterfowl, and
shorebirds. The project location is important to the region's
commercial fishing industry and supportive of a wide range of
recreational activities, such as fishing and boating, so there was a
widely acknowledged need and desire to undertake a restoration project
of this size.
Additionally, the wetlands in this area had been lost over time due
to subsidence and erosion, and the breakwater project was designed to
allow sediment to deposit and accumulate between the protective barrier
and the shoreline, elevating the bay bottom enough to enable marsh
grass to take root and restore the ecosystem to a more natural state.
As a partner, the Coastal Program provided technical support and
guidance, as well as $125,000 in direct financial support for this
project. GBF and our partners leveraged this initial investment to
secure a nearly $3 million National Coastal Wetland Conservation Grant
for this project.
Following completion of the breakwater project, GBF was able to
engage and educate local community and corporate partners in the
habitat restoration process by organizing several successful volunteer-
based marsh cordgrass plantings. In 2018, volunteers and students
helped complete the planting of all 110-acres of marsh that will
promote coastal resiliency, improve water quality, reduce coastal
erosion and flooding, revitalize oyster reefs, and benefit federal
trust species including interjurisdictional fish and migratory birds
for decades to come.
Additionally, the project success prompted an adjacent private
landowner to sell 100 acres to GBF to permanently protect wetlands near
the restoration site in lieu of developing it, furthering the impact of
the project. None of this would have been possible without financial
and technical assistance from the USFWS Coastal Program.
In a region prone to tropical storms and hurricanes, an investment
along our coast is not just about preserving ecosystems and enhancing
recreational or commercial opportunities, they're also an investment in
protecting the people and communities of Galveston Bay. Many studies
have shown that healthy, intact ecosystems like oyster reefs, seagrass,
and wetlands substantially reduce the impact of storms--protecting
property, saving lives, and providing peace of mind.
Oyster Shell Recycling and Reef Restoration

Additionally, the partnership with the Service has allowed us to
expand our oyster shell recycling and reef restoration programs and
engage public and private landowners to restore shoreline and protect
lives and livelihoods from storms and flooding while also improving
water quality. Galveston Bay used to supply 80% of Texas's oysters, but
in the past 15 years, the Bay has lost more than 60% of its natural
oyster reefs due to damage from overharvesting, trawling, disease, and
natural disasters, like hurricanes. Healthy oyster populations are
critical to the health of Galveston Bay as a whole. They filter
pollution and provide shelter, food and breeding ground for baby
oysters, crabs, shrimp, fish and other wildlife, and importantly,
support the thriving commercial seafood industry upon which thousands
of individuals and businesses depend.
In 2012, GBF launched an Oyster Shell Recycling Program which
currently partners with over 30 local Houston-Galveston restaurants to
collect their shucked oyster shells and return them to Galveston Bay as
new oyster reef. To date, the program has diverted over 1,000 tons of
oyster shells from landfills.
Much of the growth and success of our shell recycling efforts can
be attributed to the Coastal Program. Coastal Program funding has
enabled GBF to engage public and private partners, community and
corporate volunteers, and students in three oyster reef construction
and restoration projects located in popular fishing areas that have
experienced historical habitat and shoreline degradation over the
years.
Coastal Program funds aided with collection and transportation of
recycled oyster shells to the project sites. Over the course of the
project, a total of 4,000 community and student volunteers helped build
2,200 feet of oyster reef to act as a natural breakwater for eroding
shorelines, create new oyster habitat, and facilitate marsh
restoration.
In total, funding and support received through the Coastal Program
helped return 760 tons of oyster shells to Galveston Bay and restore
32,000 square feet of critical oyster reef habitat.
H.R. 2950--Coastal Habitat Conservation Act of 2023

The Coastal Habitat Conservation Act of 2023 would help build upon
the successful record of accomplishment of the U.S. Fish and Wildlife
Service Coastal Program. The Program was developed in 1985 to protect,
conserve, and restore coastal ecosystems with a primary focus on
voluntary habitat conservation efforts on public and private lands
through partnerships with various agencies, organizations, and
landowners. Almost 40 years later, the Service works in 24 priority
coastal areas and has engaged an extensive portfolio of diverse
partners for the protection of priority species and habitats. In total,
the Program has engaged more than 8,200 conservation partners to
complete more than 4,900 conservation projects, improved more than
600,000 acres, and protected another 2.3 million acres of priority
habitat and supported the downlisting of at least 15 species.
In 2022 alone, the Coastal Program provided $4.3 million in support
of 185 projects. This investment was leveraged with $39.5 million in
partner contributions; a staggering 1:9 ratio. The 223 project partners
protected more than 31,000 acres of coastal habitat and restored an
additional 13,000 acres.
However, funding for the Coastal Program has remained stagnant
since at least 2014, with annual appropriations hovering between $13
and $14 million. H.R. 2950 would authorize and provide a much-needed
boost for this critical program through fiscal year 2028, with funding
increases to occur gradually over the five-year period. This funding
increase would serve to expand existing partnerships, engage new
partners, and further the mission of this highly effective,
cooperative, voluntary program. Although funding has remained stagnant,
demand from potential partners and for worthy and increasingly
necessary projects has only increased, and approved priority coastal
areas, such as the Columbia River Estuary and Georgia coast, remain
unstaffed and under engaged despite the demand and need for projects
and expertise.
With the passage of this proposed authorization, and increased
funding, Galveston Bay Foundation and the countless partners of the
Coastal Program could make serious headway towards further protecting
vulnerable coastal ecosystems and communities in the face of severe
storms, sea level rise, and pollution while also improving the economic
output of the many industries that rely on them.
We would like to thank Ranking Member Huffman and Representative
Gonzalez-Colon for their leadership on this important legislation and
we encourage the members of this Subcommittee to approve this needed
authorization and funding increase.

______

Mr. Bentz. Thank you, Ms. Genest, and I now recognize Mr.
Atkinson for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF SETH ATKINSON, QUILLBACK CONSULTING, SANTA CRUZ,
CALIFORNIA

Mr. Atkinson. Chairman Bentz, Ranking Member Huffman,
members of the Subcommittee, thank you for the opportunity to
testify today. My name is Seth Atkinson. I am a fishery policy
consultant and attorney, and my clients include both
conservation and commercial fishermen. My comments today are on
H.R. 4587, the red snapper legislation which would prohibit
fishery managers in the South Atlantic from using area-based
management until a study known as the Great Red Snapper Count
is complete.
First and most broadly, this bill conflicts with how
science is used in fishery management under the Magnuson-
Stevens Act. Under that law, managers must base their decisions
on the best scientific information available. And the key word
here is available. Science is an ongoing process in which data
are always coming in, methodologies change, and new techniques
are developed, and each iteration tends to represent the
cutting edge of knowledge until newer science comes along.
Requiring managers to act on the best scientific
information available is a key part of the law because it
ensures management can actually proceed on a common factual
basis. Without it, fishery management would be paralyzed by
arguments over what the basic facts are.
Under the Magnuson-Stevens Act framework, it is not
appropriate to ignore the current best scientific information
available and wait for some future study in hopes of getting
different results. Here the best scientific information
available is from SEDAR 73, the stock assessment for red
snapper completed in 2021. That assessment indicated the red
snapper population is recovering, and its abundance is at high
levels. That is excellent news.
The assessment also indicated, however, that the vast
majority of red snapper are young fish. Older red snapper
contribute much more to stock productivity. So, despite the
high abundance numbers, the stock is not yet rebuilt. Managers
essentially need to allow enough of these abundant youngsters
to survive so they can restore the age structure of the stock.
And this in turn means bringing fishing pressure down, because
the stock assessment also found that current fishing mortality
rates are high enough that they constitute over-fishing.
And over-fishing in this case is being driven by dead
discards from the recreational sector, which were found in
recent years to comprise around 83 percent of total catch. That
is discards plus landings, so 83 percent of all of that. How
that is possible is because, even when managers close the red
snapper season, meaning the species cannot be landed, red
snapper is still caught by fishermen targeting other species in
the same mixed bottom fish assemblage. It is effectively year-
round open access, only that all the red snapper caught must be
released, and some of them end up dying.
Meanwhile, the fishing power of the recreational sector has
steadily increased in recent decades with coastal population
growth combined with new technologies, more powerful boats. It
means both effort and efficiency of this sector are extremely
high.
And this is a genuinely difficult management situation. The
South Atlantic Council and NOAA fisheries are responsible for
making management decisions under the Magnuson-Stevens Act, and
they will need a range of options available to them. For that
reason, the prohibition on area-based management in H.R. 4587
is concerning. It takes a tool out of the toolkit.
The idea of relying on the Great Red Snapper Count as a way
to avoid these management challenges also is concerning.
First, that study won't be completed and integrated into an
assessment for several more years. Managers have a real
opportunity now, given the strong year classes recently, to
shepherd those young fish along and get the stock rebuilt.
Waiting could mean we lose that opportunity.
Second, we can't be sure what the Great Red Snapper Count
will show, and there is a number of scenarios in which it does
not necessarily help to get the stock declared rebuilt or allow
for a huge amount more yield. Neither of those are guaranteed
results from the study.
And third, the existing management challenges will need to
be addressed, if not with red snapper today, it will be
tomorrow with red porgy, black sea bass, great triggerfish,
which are trending downward or in the same assemblage, and are
subject to the same recreational fishery.
In closing, I just note on a basic human level that
commercial fisherman in the South Atlantic have been subject to
strict management for decades now, and there was no arbitrary
suspension of the rules for them, nor should there have been.
And I know for many that makes the approach of H.R. 4587
difficult to accept.
Thank you. I am happy to answer any questions.

[The prepared statement of Mr. Atkinson follows:]
Prepared Statement of Seth Atkinson, Quillback Consulting
on H.R. 4587

Chairman Bentz, Ranking Member Huffman, and members of the
Subcommittee, thank you for the invitation to testify today.
My name is Seth Atkinson. I am an attorney, and my practice focuses
on the management of fisheries in federal and state waters. My clients
include both conservation groups and commercial fishermen. I have 13
years of experience with fishery management issues from around the
country, as both a staff attorney at a nonprofit organization and as a
private consultant and attorney.
I have been invited to speak today on H.R. 4587, the South Atlantic
red snapper legislation before this Subcommittee. What that bill would
do is prohibit the use of area management for South Atlantic snapper-
grouper species until a population estimation exercise known as the
``South Atlantic Great Red Snapper Count'' is completed, and data from
that exercise have been incorporated into a formal stock assessment.
Before I get into the substance of my testimony, I should note that
I am currently representing commercial fishermen in a lawsuit that
deals with this same fishery--the South Atlantic snapper-grouper
fishery--and specifically the red snapper stock, although the issues
and arguments focus on a somewhat different aspect of management,
namely the setting of annual catch limits. That case is entitled Slash
Creek Waterworks et al. v. Raimondo, and the case number is 23-cv-1755
in the U.S. District Court for the District of Columbia. As this is an
active case, my testimony here will stay limited to H.R. 4587 and the
associated management issues for South Atlantic red snapper.
1. H.R. 4587 Conflicts with the Magnuson-Stevens Act Process for
Bringing Scientific Information into Management
First and most broadly, the approach proposed in H.R. 4587 is not,
and should not be, how science is used in fishery management under the
Magnuson-Stevens Fishery Conservation and Management Act. Specifically,
managers should not pause action for several years to wait for some
future scientific study that may give different results.
Under the Magnuson-Stevens Act, the Regional Fishery Management
Councils and the National Marine Fisheries Service, or NOAA Fisheries,
respond to the best scientific information available when managing our
fishery resources, and they adapt and update fishery management as new
scientific information becomes available. This approach reflects both
the realities of the fisheries science process, as well as the Act's
legal standard governing the use of science.
Scientific information on fish populations is gathered on a
continual basis and is synthesized into stock assessments periodically.
The whole process is dynamic; data are always coming in, methodologies
change as new techniques are developed or assumptions are revised, and
each iteration tends to represent the cutting edge of knowledge until
newer science comes along. That is how the scientific process works.
The Magnuson-Stevens Act's legal standard is crafted with exactly
this iterative process in mind. National Standard 2 requires the
Councils and agency to use the ``best scientific information
available,'' and the key word here is ``available.'' Information on
fish populations is never perfect, and, as just noted, it changes over
time. The National Standard 2 language was designed to acknowledge the
evolving nature of our scientific understanding, as it requires use of
what is ``available'' without waiting for some far-off day when perfect
information arrives. NOAA Fisheries itself has acknowledged as much,
stating in its regulatory guidelines interpreting National Standard 2
that ``mandatory management decisions should not be delayed due to
limitations in the scientific information or the promise of future data
collection or analysis.'' \1\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ 50 C.F.R. Sec. 600.315(a)(6)(v).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
This is an essential part of the bargain with fishery management
under the Magnuson-Stevens Act. Nearly everyone ends up frustrated with
the science at some point, regardless of their priorities and views.
But the National Standard 2 requirement for best available science
ensures that management can actually proceed on a common factual basis,
rather than getting bogged down in endless disagreements. This common
factual basis is a critical part of the Magnuson-Stevens Act, and also
shows up in a number of other federal natural resource and
environmental laws.\2\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ See, e.g., 16 U.S.C. Sec. 1533(b)(1)(A) (Endangered Species
Act); 42 U.S.C. Sec. 300g-1 (Safe Drinking Water Act); 15 U.S.C.
Sec. Sec. 2617, 2625 (Toxic Substances Control Act).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
So by proposing to put management on hold for a few years while one
particular scientific study is finished, H.R. 4587 goes against the
fundamental process for integrating science into management that has
been hammered out, agreed to, and relied upon in Magnuson-Stevens Act
management for the last forty-plus years.
2. Area Management May Be an Important Tool and Should Not Be Removed
from the Council and NOAA Fisheries' Toolbox

The next thing to note about the bill is that it needlessly
precludes the South Atlantic Council and NOAA Fisheries from using
area-based management in the snapper-grouper fishery. Area management
can take many forms and be used for different purposes, and it is
important for managers to be able to turn to this tool when necessary.
To understand why area-based management could be important here, it
helps to step back and review the status of South Atlantic red snapper.
The best available scientific information currently is from SEDAR 73, a
stock assessment completed by the Southeast Fisheries Science Center in
2021.\3\ That assessment indicated the red snapper population is
recovering, and that its abundance is at high levels. This is excellent
news.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ Southeast Data, Assessment, and Review, SEDAR 73: South
Atlantic Red Snapper (Mar. 2021).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The assessment also indicated, however, that the vast majority of
South Atlantic red snapper are young fish.\4\ The reproductive capacity
of red snapper increases significantly as the fish get older and
larger, so these young fish, while abundant, contribute relatively less
to the population's productivity. In technical terms, spawning stock
biomass is lagging behind abundance, and the stock is still overfished
and needs to finish rebuilding. Because of this dynamic where older
fish contribute more to productivity, rebuilding for South Atlantic red
snapper means allowing the age structure to recover--such that a higher
proportion of individuals in the population are from the older age
classes. And for a species that can live over fifty years, this can
take a while.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\ See, e.g., id. Section II, at 100 (Figure 14, displaying age
class contributions to total abundance).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
It is not just a matter of waiting for the age structure to
recover, though; fishing pressure must be brought down to a level where
some of today's abundant young fish can survive and get older. Which
brings us to the other main finding from the SEDAR 73 assessment--that
current fishing mortality rates are high enough that they are not
allowing sufficient numbers of fish to survive and grow older, and in
fact, current fishing mortality rates are so high that they constitute
overfishing.
In terms of fishery sectors and catch, the commercial fishery
currently only removes a small amount from the population. SEDAR 73
data shows commercial landings and discards combined amount to around
5-6% of total red snapper catch by weight in a given year.\5\
Recreational landings also are not large, at around 11% of total catch.
This makes sense, because only a 2 or 3 day directed recreational
season has been allowed recently. It is recreational dead discards,
however, that are sizable: around 83% of total red snapper catch in the
South Atlantic comes in the form of recreational dead discards.
Recreational dead discards are high enough, on their own, to drive
overfishing of this stock.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\ This and subsequent percentages are terminal three-year
averages from SEDAR 73 estimated landings and discards, by weight, as
set forth in Tables 20 and 22. See id. at 64, 66.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
This is happening because red snapper is part of a multispecies
assemblage, which includes several other popular bottomfish species.
The way South Atlantic management currently works is that even when the
red snapper season is ``closed,'' meaning red snapper cannot be landed,
recreational fishermen can still go out and fish for other species in
the same assemblage, they just have to throw back any red snapper that
end up on their line. So with year-round open access recreational
fishing--even charter licenses are unlimited--there are a tremendous
number of hooks in the water, catching a huge amount of young red
snapper, and these fish are then thrown back overboard. And what the
stock assessment has shown is that dead discards are having enough of
an impact on the population that it is struggling to replenish the
older age classes.
And stepping back a bit further, this is all a reflection of the
fact that recreational fishing in the Southeast has radically changed,
and today's fishery does not resemble the recreational fishery of the
1950s and 1960s. It is not a handful of people in skiffs with
underpowered outboard motors, or perhaps dangling a line off the side
of a sailboat. Today's recreational fishery is comprised of a
substantial portion of the coastal population in the Southeast--which
itself has dramatically increased in past decades--and consists of
millions of angler trips each year. In the South Atlantic alone, NOAA
Fisheries estimated over 70 million angler trips were taken in 2020.\6\
And many of these involve large fiberglass vessels with multiple
powerful engines that can reach deep water in a half hour, go straight
to a favorite reef or rock pile using GPS navigation, and lock in
position with sophisticated electronic systems that account for
currents and wind. When there, anglers deploy the latest tackle, bring
up bottomfish in an extremely efficient manner, and then head back to
shore where they share tips and photos via social media.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\6\ National Marine Fisheries Service, Technical Memorandum NMFS-F/
SPO-236: Fisheries Economics of the United States 2020, at 137 (Feb.
2023)
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
To be clear, none of this is morally wrong, illegal, or otherwise.
What it does mean, though, is that today's recreational snapper-grouper
fishery in the South Atlantic is at levels of capitalization and
participation never seen before. There are so many people out there,
and so many hooks in the water, that even when red snapper are thrown
back (or released carefully), the dead discards are enough to drive
overfishing.
By now it should be clear that the South Atlantic Council and NOAA
Fisheries are facing a difficult management situation with red snapper.
Recent council meetings have had some tough discussions on the topic,
with vigorous debate over which management approaches should be pursued
and how to solve the problem. Area management is one potential
approach; there may be others as well. I will not offer predictions as
to how the Council and agency will resolve the matter, but I can say
that the regional councils are typically very hesitant to adopt area
closures and only do so when absolutely necessary. And for exactly this
reason, H.R. 4587 is counterproductive: if and when the Council and
NOAA Fisheries need this tool, it should be there ready for use.
3. Delay Is Not the Answer and May Make Things Worse

The premise of H.R. 4587 is that an upcoming scientific exercise,
the South Atlantic Great Red Snapper Count, will provide a more
favorable view of the status of red snapper and will allow for higher
catch levels, thereby opening up a longer directed fishing season for
the recreational sector and making the rebuilding and overfishing
problems go away. By waiting, the bill suggests, we may be able to
avoid taking any difficult actions.
This is not a good approach, unfortunately, for the red snapper
stock or the broader snapper-grouper fishery.
As an initial matter, results from the Great Red Snapper Count will
not be ready for a while. By way of comparison, the Gulf of Mexico's
Great Red Snapper Count kicked off in 2017, according to the
Mississippi-Alabama Sea Grant Consortium,\7\ and scientists are still
working to integrate its results into the Gulf red snapper stock
assessment, which is expected to be released next year. Then managers
will need time to review that assessment and decide on the appropriate
management response. So even if the South Atlantic process is faster,
H.R. 4587 still would mean waiting a significant amount of time.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\7\ Mississippi-Alabama Sea Grant Consortium, ArcGIS Story Map:
Whatever Happened with the Great Red Snapper Count? (May 25, 2023),
https://storymaps.arcgis.com/stories/d03212c07af94ac79a98c9c3a210270e.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
And waiting means tolerating several more years of a status quo in
which the vast majority of red snapper yield is wasted as dead
discards, and which, as far as we can tell, is not even helping the
stock rebuild its age structure. This is not good policy. Moreover, it
could mean wasting our best chance to get the South Atlantic red
snapper stock fully rebuilt. There is no guarantee that recent high
recruitment levels will continue, and it would be a real failure to
just delay and do nothing, while some of the strongest year classes in
history get burned up as dead discards.
The next important thing to realize is that nobody yet knows what
the results from the Great Red Snapper Count will show. In terms of
rebuilding, and getting out of the current overfished status, there are
a lot of scenarios in which the Great Red Snapper Count does not
clearly address or solve this problem. As noted above, rebuilding South
Atlantic red snapper means restoring the stock's age structure. The
Great Red Snapper Count is expected to produce an absolute abundance
estimate for red snapper, but it may not include region-wide age
structure data. And an absolute abundance estimate alone does not
dictate a conclusion that the stock is rebuilt; if abundance is much
higher or lower than expected, this will raise questions about
productivity and whether the current reference points need to be
revised. Ultimately the stock's overfished or rebuilt status will be
hammered out in the assessment process and will depend on a number of
reworked parameters; it is not guaranteed to come out one way or the
other.
And in terms of overfishing, the same holds true. Available yield
is a function of not only current biomass but also productivity, and
those same productivity parameters just mentioned will need to be re-
worked during the stock assessment process before anyone knows what the
potential future yield will be. Even if the Great Red Snapper Count
ends up concluding there are a lot of red snapper hanging out in areas
of uncharacterized substrate, as was the case in the Gulf, it does not
necessarily follow that those fish mean more is available to the
fishery. As the Mississippi-Alabama Sea Grant Consortium notes in its
explainer about the Gulf study, dramatically increasing catch levels
based on abundance in unfished areas creates a risk that ``too many
fish would be removed from th[e] commonly fished areas.'' \8\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\8\ Id.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Another view on what sustainable yield from a rebuilt red snapper
stock may look like comes from the current stock assessment. Based on
SEDAR 73, current catch levels are likely around, or even above, the
eventual sustainable yield amounts for a fully rebuilt stock.\9\ This
would mean that even when red snapper is fully rebuilt, it is not clear
how much more yield will be available than is already being taken from
the population today.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\9\ See SEDAR 73, Section II at 71 (Table 27, listing reference
points, including current estimate of Maximum Sustainable Yield (MSY)
as approximately 404,000 pounds of landed catch per year); id. at 64
(Table 22, listing estimated landings by year, with terminal three-year
average exceeding the MSY estimate). Note also that the calculated MSY
value contains a lower assumed dead discard component than currently is
occurring, so while total catch levels at MSY are not explicitly
stated, they are likely lower than current total catch.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
For these reasons, waiting and hoping the Great Red Snapper Count
will solve red snapper's rebuilding status and dramatically increase
available yield is not a great approach. Yield is and will be finite;
the Great Red Snapper Count will not change that fact. And given trends
in recreational fishery participation and capitalization, a finite
amount of yield, even if modestly increased from today's levels, will
require some management in order to maximize landings, minimize dead
discards, and meet other management goals. The Council and NOAA
Fisheries are going to have to wrestle with this and come up with
solutions, as unpopular as it may be.
There is also a final pragmatic reason why it is misguided to delay
at this point: red snapper is not a lone stock in isolation, and there
are likely to be more problems on the way. Even if the Great Red
Snapper Count were to solve all the Council's problems with red
snapper, several other snapper-grouper stocks are facing similar issues
and will require the same underlying management tangle to be addressed.
Survey indices are stagnating or declining for several popular target
stocks like gag grouper, gray triggerfish, red porgy, and black sea
bass. Some of these stocks do not appear to have the resilience of red
snapper, and they are struggling under the current open-access,
unconstrained recreational fishery. When they do hit the overfished
threshold and require rebuilding, it is going to be a substantially
worse situation for the Council to work with than red snapper, because
rebuilding margins will be slim and there will be a lot less to go
around. It is better to deal with these management problems today,
under the more generous terms of red snapper, than to ignore them and
wait for a worse situation to arrive.
4. H.R. 4587 Creates a Real Fairness Problem

An additional concern here is that this bill represents Congress
intervening in ordinary fishery management because one particular
sector faces the possibility of management actions it views as
unfavorable. Other participants in the South Atlantic snapper-grouper
fishery have been subject to increasingly strict management for decades
now, and there was no arbitrary suspension of the rules--nor should
there have been. Commercial fishermen currently are managed under
numerical catch limits, with observers and logbooks, such that they are
accountable for every pound of fish they catch. And that's a good
thing, from both a conservation and a management perspective. There
also are aspects of commercial management that fishermen struggle with,
like extremely low trip limits that constrain their access to valuable
species, a 2-for-1 permit requirement that lowers the value of their
permits and continues to reduce the size of the commercial fishery past
its intended goal, and others. Despite all of this, they play by the
rules, they work with the Council and NOAA Fisheries, and they keep
coming back to the table--which makes the kind of one-off
exceptionalism presented by H.R. 4587 difficult to accept.

In closing, I would like to reiterate that H.R. 4587 is
inconsistent with the Magnuson-Stevens Act's scientific process. The
fishery in question needs management, and removing tools from the
toolbox is counterproductive. Waiting for a future scientific study is
the wrong approach, and the study in all likelihood is not going to
solve the management issues facing this fishery. Managers should face
the challenges now with red snapper, because those same challenges will
keep coming up, and they will be harder to deal with in future
scenarios involving other overfished species.

______

Mr. Bentz. Thank you, Mr. Atkinson. The Chair now
recognizes Mr. Graham for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF JACK GRAHAM, CAPTAIN, AFISHIANADO CHARTERS, NAGS
HEAD, NORTH CAROLINA

Mr. Graham. Hey, guys, thanks for having me. My name is
Jack Graham. I run a recreational charter boat out of Oregon
Inlet Fishing Center, fishing the Gulf Stream waters off the
coast of North Carolina's Outer Banks. I am here on behalf of
H.R. 4051.
I am one captain of a fleet of about 75 boats and one of
the youngbloods in my fleet. I work along some of the most
renowned and respected skippers on the planet, with over 500
years of cumulative experience. That is probably a conservative
estimate, a lot of really good fishermen in my fleet. Most of
us spend 125 to 200 days a year on the water, and I really
appreciate the invitation to come give testimony about a
phenomenon that has been occurring and exponentiating over the
past 10 years.
That phenomenon is an astounding depredation of yellowfin
and bigeye tuna by what we believe is one of the most
significant biomasses of large sharks in existence on the
planet. The testimony I am going to give here today is, by the
numbers, conservative in nature, as I don't want to give the
impression that I am telling a fish story. All the same, I
think you will all find this testimony interesting and, to be
quite honest, incredible.
To begin, I would like to congratulate the scientific
community and legislators who took initiative in conservation
efforts so many years ago. If what we are seeing on our
coastlines isn't proof that conservation works, I don't know
what is.
Just the other day, by my rudimentary calculations, there
were boats fishing in 300 feet of water all the way out to
3,000 feet of water, and all had multiple encounters and
depredation issues with large sharks feeding on a multitude of
species of fish on the end of their lines. I used my GPS and
drew a square from the northernmost boats to the southernmost
boats, and came up with a conservative area of approximately
300 square miles.
The species of sharks varied somewhat, depending on depth,
but the most common encounters are with dusky greater
hammerheads, silky spinner, and sandbar sharks. And interesting
side note, a little bit of research I have done tells me that
spinner sharks are coastal sharks. However, we routinely
encounter them in over 1,000 feet of water, 35 to 40 miles off
the coast.
I have traveled all over the world to fish and dive, and I
have seen just about every square inch of Australia's Great
Barrier Reef. And myself nor my colleagues have seen anything
that comes close to what we are seeing in our home waters.
I mentioned the square mileage, and that was just one day,
but I feel I need to stress this is a daily occurrence. From
about the middle of April through September we take bookings 7
days a week, and will fish days, and days, and days in a row if
weather permits.
For several years, I was trying to get in touch with folks
in the scientific community. I had gone to a meeting to protest
offshore drilling off our coast, and raised the question of
concern for the effects said drilling and seismic testing would
have on our marine mammal life. We sometimes catch tuna around
the pilot whales, so I was concerned not only for the mammals
themselves, but for the tunas my customers enjoy catching.
Anyway, a whale scientist from Duke University approached
me to thank me for my line of questioning. I, in turn, asked
him to point me to some folks in the scientific community who
may be interested in what we were seeing off the coast. He did,
and I made several calls, several e-mails, and I received a
little bit of feedback, but was never able to garner the
interest I felt like this area deserves.
I will put it this way: Shark Week has absolutely nothing
on what we are seeing off the coast of North Carolina right
now.
The reason I am telling you this story is because for years
I took records of the depredation happening on a daily and
monthly basis out of my marina. My method was fairly simple.
Our marina offers a fish cleaning service. Each day they pick
up each boat's fish and weigh them. The customer pays by the
pound. By knowing how many tuna were caught that day, I was
able to calculate the average size tuna brought to the docks
each day. I would then talk to the other boats, ask them how
many tuna they caught versus how many tuna were eaten by
sharks. In the beginning, it was about half and half. So, if I
hooked 20 tuna, I would get, on average, 10 to the boat. Some
days we are worse. Very rarely were they better.
For months on end, our fish cleaning service was cleaning
in the neighborhood of 10,000 pounds of tuna per day. Again,
this is average. There were days where we cleaned as much as
15,000 to 18,000 pounds in one day. But if we used just a
conservative estimate of 10,000 pounds of tuna per day, say
factor in 5 days per month of weather days where the fleet
didn't go fishing, that still adds up to about 250,000 pounds
of tuna depredation in one month. And that is just my small
marina with about 25 boats. There are about 75 boats in the
fleet.
So, including charter boats from three other marinas, a
fairly active recreational private sector, 250,000 pounds is
more than likely much higher. And this is happening for months,
and months, and months on end. Of course, now we can only get
about 1 in 10 fish, not 50 percent.
In addition to the recreational industry, my community
prided itself in having one of the most successful dayboat
hooking lines sustainable fleets off the East Coast. Hook and
line fishermen catching bigeye and yellowfin tuna that not only
supported our local restaurants, but were shipped out to fish
markets all over the country. Contrary to what you may have
seen on TV, bigeye tuna is the most valuable tuna per pound in
the United States, and our area was responsible for
distributing tons and tons of sustainable hook-and-line caught
bigeye tuna all over the country.
That domestically caught fish is now the thing of the past.
Those boats have been sold or are being used for different
reasons. I have not seen a commercial hook-and-line tuna boat
offshore in over 5 years.
Thanks, guys. I am happy to answer any questions you have.

[The prepared statement of Mr. Graham follows:]
Prepared Statement of Jack Graham, Captain, Afishianado Charters
on H.R. 4051

My name is Jack Graham. I run a recreational charter boat out of
the Oregon Fishing center, fishing the gulf stream waters off the coast
of North Carolina's Outer Banks. I'm one captain in a fleet of about 75
boats, one of the ``young bloods'' in my fleet. I work alongside some
of the most renowned and respected skippers on the planet with over 500
years of cumulative experience. Most of us spend 125-200 days per year
on the water. I appreciate the invitation to come give testimony about
a phenomenon that has been occurring, and exponentiating, over the past
10 years. That phenomenon is an astounding depredation of yellowfin and
bigeye tuna by what we believe is one of the most significant biomasses
of large sharks in existence on the planet. The testimony I am about to
give here today is, by the numbers, conservative in nature, as I do not
want to give the impression I am telling a ``fish story.'' All the
same, I think you all will find this testimony interesting, and to be
quite honest, incredible.
To begin, I would sincerely like to congratulate the scientific
community and legislators who took initiative in conservation efforts
so many years ago. If what we are seeing off our coastlines isn't proof
that conservation works, I don't know what is. Just the other day, by
rudimentary calculations, there were boats fishing in 300 feet of
water, all the way out to 3,000 feet of water, and all had multiple
encounters, and depredation issues with large sharks feeding on a
multitude of species of fish on the end of their lines. I used my GPS
and drew a square from the northernmost boats to the southernmost boats
and came up with an area of, and again conservatively, approximately
300 square miles. The species of shark varies somewhat depending on
depth, but the most common encounters are with Dusky, greater
hammerhead, silky, spinner and sandbar sharks. Interesting side note,
research tells me spinner sharks are coastal sharks, however we
routinely encounter them in over 1,000 feet of water 35-40 miles off
the coast. I have traveled all over the world to fish and dive, I have
seen just about every square inch of Australia's Great Barrier Reef,
and I, nor my colleagues have seen anything that comes close to what we
are seeing in our home waters.
I mentioned the square mileage, and that was just one day, but I
feel I must stress this is a daily occurrence. From about the middle of
April through September, we take bookings 7 days a week and will fish
days and days in a row if weather permits. For several years I was
trying to get in touch with folks in the scientific community. I had
gone to a meeting to protest offshore drilling off our coast and raised
a question of concern for the effect said drilling and seismic testing
would have on marine mammal life. We sometimes catch tuna around the
pilot whales so I was concerned not only for the mammals themselves,
but for the tuna my customers enjoy catching. Anyway, a whale scientist
from Duke university approached me to thank me for my line of
questioning. I in turn asked him to point me to some folks in the
scientific community who may be interested in what we were seeing off
the coast. He did. I made several calls, wrote several emails and did
receive some feedback, but was never able to garner the interest I felt
like this area deserves. I'll put it this way . . . shark week has
absolutely nothing on what we are seeing off the coast of North
Carolina right now. The reason I am telling you this story is because
for years I took records of the depredation happening on a daily, and
monthly basis out of my marina. My method was fairly simple. Our marina
offers a fish cleaning service. Each day they pick up each boat's fish
and weigh them. The customer pays by the pound. By knowing how many
tuna were caught that day I was able to calculate the average size tuna
brought to the docks each day. I would then talk to the other boats and
ask them how many tuna they caught vs. how many were eaten by sharks.
In the beginning it was about half and half. So if I hooked 20 tuna I
would get, on an average day, 10 to the boat. Some days were worse,
very rarely were they better. For months on end our fish cleaning
service was cleaning in the neighborhood of 10,000 pounds of tuna per
day. Again, this is an average, there were days they cleaned as much as
15-18,000 pounds. But if we use just a conservative estimate of 10,000
lbs of tuna per day, and factor in 5 days per month for weather days
where the fleet did not go fishing, that still adds up to a staggering
250,000 pounds of tuna depredation IN ONE MONTH. This has now been
going on for over 8 years. And these numbers just reflect my small
marina of about 25 boats. So including charter boats from 3 other
marinas, and a fairly active recreational private boat sector, that
number of 250,000 pounds is more than likely much higher. Only one
thing has changed over the years, it has gotten worse. Before a 50
percent average was justifiable, now it's about 1 fish in 10, and many
days we do not get any.
In the beginning, economically speaking, depredation created a
boom. We all thought it would be over soon, that they would move on and
this was an anomaly. After all, so many captains with so many years
experience had never seen anything like this in their lifetimes. The
sharks ate the tuna and bit through our lines. We needed more fishing
tackle, and the tackle shops were happy to oblige. We fished longer
days and made longer runs, so we burned more fuel and paid for it at
the pump. We bought new types of gear, electrical and hydraulic
equipment to try and find a method that would get the fish to the boat
faster than the shark could swim. I even bought shark deterrent
magnets, and worked with a shark deterrent company to try and develop a
product that would keep them away. But over the last few years a sort
of gloom has settled in over our fleet. Used to be, during good fishing
times, small trailer boats would come from all up and down the east
coast to experience our tuna fishery. Filling hotels, restaurants,
buying tackle from the shops, and booking vacation rental homes, some
for entire weeks just to go fishing.
In addition to the recreational industry, my community prided
itself in having one of the most successful day boat hook and line
sustainable tuna fleets on the east coast. Hook and line fisherman
catching bigeye and yellowfin tuna that not only supported our local
restaurants, but were shipped out to fish markets all over the country.
Contrary to what you may have seen on TV, bigeye tuna is the most
valuable tuna per pound in the United States, and our area was
responsible for distributing tons and tons of sustainable hook and line
caught bigeye tuna all over the country. That domestically caught fish
is now a thing of the past. Those boats have been sold off or are being
used for other things. I have not seen a commercial hook and line boat
offshore in over 5 years.
As for myself and others like me, my business is beginning to feel
the effects of the depredation. Our fleet takes all kinds of folks from
all over the country out for a day on the water, most coming in hopes
of experiencing some of our world class tuna fishing. They arrive armed
with canning supplies and vacuum packing machines, in hopes of taking
fresh fish home to somewhere it isn't readily available. It is not a
cheap trip after a long drive or flight, accommodation and charter fee
is paid. They are still seeing what would be world class fishing, lots
of action, lots of strikes, but very little reward for their efforts.
As a captain I can no longer in good conscience tell my clients we can
look forward to a fun day on the water. I feel that even if we are
fortunate enough to hook several tuna, they stand a very slim chance at
being harvested and processed on board my vessel. Across the board,
charters are down. And with several factors already working against us
in the industry, many of us, especially us young captains just starting
out, fear the depredation of the fish that put our fleet on the map,
could be our undoing. We have tried just about everything to outsmart
the sharks, tried to find areas where maybe there aren't as many, but
it hasn't yet been done with any success.
This testimony was not meant to be completely gloomy. There is a
success story here and it should be celebrated. If nothing else, what
we are seeing off our coast is that conservation truly does work. The
ocean is capable of healing in ways many could never imagine. In my
opinion it is a blueprint for aquatic ecosystems all over the world.
But as we attempt to create a balanced ecosystem we can also create an
imbalance, fishermen are the greatest tools available to the scientific
community. We are literally performing an experiment every day we put
our lines in the water. The ecosystems that exist off our coastlines
here in the United States are some of the most fascinating anywhere on
the planet. But I do believe we must adapt, and we must use the
valuable information we fishermen retain first hand each and every day
to help create a more balanced and productive ecosystem for future
generations to enjoy.

______

Mr. Bentz. Thank you, Mr. Graham. The Chair now recognizes
Ms. McCawley for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF JESSICA McCAWLEY, DIRECTOR, DIVISION OF MARINE
FISHERIES MANAGEMENT, FLORIDA FISH AND WILDLIFE CONSERVATION
COMMISSION, TALLAHASSEE, FLORIDA

Ms. McCawley. Chairman Bentz and members of the Committee,
thank you for the invitation to testify today to represent
Florida as the fishing capital of the world.
On behalf of FWC, I want to thank Congressman Webster and
Congresswoman Luna for their service on this Committee, and all
their efforts to conserve Florida's and the nation's natural
resources.
I will focus my remarks on the issue of dead discards and
how they impact the Atlantic red snapper fishery, why we and
others oppose NOAA's efforts to implement area closures for the
entire 55 fish snapper-grouper fishery, and Congressman
Rutherford's Red Snapper Act.
Discard mortality is a pervasive issue that impacts the
stock assessments of Atlantic red snapper, ultimately driving
fishery management decisions. Discard mortality occurs when
fish are caught alive, but then die after release. According to
the recent Atlantic Red Snapper Stock Assessment, the mortality
rate of fish that are discarded is estimated to range between
29 and 31 percent, driving the over-fishing status.
However, discard data are self-reported by anglers, and are
unvalidated making the magnitude of the discards difficult to
estimate precisely. No age or length information is available
to characterize dead discards, which is a problem because that
information is critical for stock assessment models to function
reliably. NOAA's own scientists in the South Atlantic Council's
SSC have indicated that these discard estimates are highly
uncertain, and should not be used for management.
Despite these dead discards, the Atlantic red snapper stock
is rebounding at an astonishing pace, and has reached record-
high abundance levels.
To reduce discards, NOAA, the South Atlantic Council, and
FWC have been implementing management actions in recent years.
The council implemented rules requiring descending devices be
on board vessels fishing for reef fish, and a single hook
requirement for all recreational anglers, has expanded
education and outreach, and is working on a management strategy
evaluation for the entire snapper-grouper fishery.
Similarly, FWC implemented reef fish regulations requiring
anglers to possess a descending device or venting tool in state
waters, and we are working with fishing groups to improve
discard education.
In addition, the congressionally-funded Atlantic Great Red
Snapper Count is underway, and when completed will provide
essential data that was previously unavailable to NOAA and
assessment scientists.
Finally, NOAA has said it would issue exempted fishing
permits to improve red snapper management and, if selected, FWC
would conduct a pilot program aimed at improving recreational
red snapper data collection and test various management
strategies.
Despite all these management efforts and the lack of
complete, scientifically accurate information about red snapper
discards, NOAA continues to advocate for an area closure for
the entire 55 fish complex to end over-fishing of red snapper
immediately. Florida and other South Atlantic states and an
overwhelming majority of the fishing community have opposed any
area or time closures for red snapper because the scientific
evidence does not support a closure.
Closures of the entire 55-fish complex based on an
assessment of one stock are not the answer. A closure would
have a devastating economic impact from Jacksonville to Key
West. NOAA estimates the value of recreational fishing of
Florida's reef fish contributes an output of nearly $384
million, and supports more than 3,700 jobs. Closing access to
reef fish off Florida's Atlantic coast would effectively
eliminate this financial contribution.
FWC thanks Florida Congressman Rutherford for introducing
H.R. 4587. This bill would prevent any closures until the
Atlantic Red Snapper Count results could be incorporated into
the next assessment. This is a common-sense solution, a
reasonable position, and gives us a chance to pump the brakes
on any draconian measures until the best scientific data is
available for use in management decisions.
It is important to note that the U.S. Court of Appeals
ruled recently that NOAA's decision to alter the management of
a species for the benefit of another using worst-case-scenario
science was not legal.
As trustees of the resource, we all must do everything we
can to help our commercial and recreational fishermen while
conserving our fisheries' resources for future generations.
I will conclude my remarks by thanking the Committee again
for this opportunity.

[The prepared statement of Ms. McCawley follows:]
Prepared Statement of Jessica McCawley, Director, Division of Marine
Fisheries Management, Florida Fish and Wildlife Conservation Commission
on H.R. 4587 and H.R. 4051

My name is Jessica McCawley, and I am the Director of the Division
of Marine Fisheries Management at the Florida Fish and Wildlife
Conservation Commission (FWC). In that capacity, I serve as a voting
member on the South Atlantic Fishery Management Council, including
chair of the Snapper Grouper Committee. From 2018 to 2020, I served as
chair of the South Atlantic Fishery Management Council.
With more than 7,700 lakes, 12,000 miles of rivers, streams and
canals, and 8,426 miles of tidal shoreline, Florida is a paradise for
anglers, boaters, and outdoors enthusiasts. Florida waters are home to
thousands of species of fish and wildlife. From red snapper to Key's
lobster, Florida supports thriving fisheries. Florida also is home to
warm weather, sunshine and friendly people who love ensuring others
have great fishing experiences. And at the end of the day, we also have
wonderful restaurants that are willing to cook the bounty harvested
from a beautiful day spent on Florida's waters.

A closer look at the numbers reveals an expansive and engaged
fishing community in Florida that is unrivaled anywhere in the world:

4.3 million Florida anglers,\1\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ American Sportfishing Association and Southwick Associates,
2021. Sportfishing in America: A Reliable Economic Force.

$13.9 billion economic output from recreational
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
fishing,
1

More than 120,380 jobs supported by recreational
fishing,
1

$197 million in commercial food fish dockside sales,\2\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ Fish and Wildlife Research Institute Commercial Landings Data,
2020.

More than $6.1 billion in value added economic impact by
the commercial seafood industry,\3\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, 2020.
Fisheries Economics of the United States 2020. NOAA Technical
Memorandum NMFS-F/SPO-236.

76,685 jobs supported by the commercial seafood
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
industry,
3
and

Home to 4,629 total game fish records, which makes Florida
the world leader.\4\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\ International Game Fish Association, 2021.

For these reasons, Florida is the Fishing Capital of the World.
While I am always happy to talk about the many opportunities for
fishing in Florida, I am here today to discuss South Atlantic red
snapper and H.R. 4587, the ``Red Snapper Act,'' and briefly comment on
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
H.R. 4051, the ``SHARKED Act.''

Before I get to the discussion of H.R. 4587, some background
information is needed.
First, while the subject matter today is South Atlantic red
snapper, it is important to recognize that red snapper is categorized
as part of the snapper grouper fishery in the South Atlantic. The
snapper grouper fishery includes 55 bottom- and reef-dwelling fish
species, including some species that are neither snappers nor groupers
(e.g., triggerfish and several jack species). Red snapper is an iconic
fish, and it receives a lot of attention, but red snapper comprises
only one species within the complex. However, other species, such as
yellowtail snapper and black grouper, within the complex are popular
within the fishing community.
Second, multiple agencies are involved in management of red snapper
in the South Atlantic, and all are bound by the overall harvest
allowance established by the Council through the federal Fishery
Management Plan. FWC manages red snapper harvest in Florida's state
waters, which is the shoreline out to three (3) nautical miles. The
South Atlantic Fishery Management Council (Council) manages commercial
and recreational red snapper harvest in South Atlantic federal waters
(3 nautical miles out to 200 nautical miles off North Carolina, South
Carolina, Georgia, and East Florida). NOAA Fisheries is the federal
agency that is responsible for implementing regulations approved by the
Council, for setting allowable catch levels, and monitoring catch and
effort throughout the year. In addition, NOAA Fisheries is responsible
for setting the South Atlantic recreational and commercial red snapper
seasons annually based on available quota, which was set by Snapper
Grouper Amendment 43 in 2019.
Third, a vast majority of the recreational landings of Atlantic red
snapper comes from Florida. As of June 2023, the total South Atlantic
red snapper quota (42,510 fish) is allocated between the commercial
sector (28.07 percent) and recreational sector (71.93 percent). That
allocation results in the current recreational quota of 29,656 fish and
the commercial quota of 124,815 pounds whole weight. Quotas set in
Amendment 43 are based on landings, and not discards, that were
observed from the 2014 limited red snapper season. This year, this
quota translated into a federal recreational fishing season of two (2)
days: July 14 and 15, 2023. However, in Florida state waters, FWC
allows for year-round harvest of red snapper and the recreational
regulations include 1 fish per person with a 20-inch minimum size
limit.
Fourth, South Atlantic red snapper catch and effort are monitored
through the federal Marine Recreational Information Program (MRIP). In
2020, FWC expanded our specialized survey called the State Reef Fish
Survey (SRFS) as a supplement to the federal MRIP survey, with the goal
of improving data collection for private recreational fishers
harvesting certain reef fish, including red snapper, off Florida's
Atlantic Coast. SRFS provides a focus of data collection on effort,
catch, and discards of recreational anglers who harvest certain reef
fish from private vessels. SRFS provides more accurate and timely
estimates of recreational harvest (monthly reporting) compared to MRIP
(bimonthly reporting), largely because it is a specialized survey
designed to accommodate how the reef fish fishery operates.
Due to the success of SRFS, NOAA Fisheries certified the survey and
other Gulf state surveys for use in management of red snapper in the
Gulf of Mexico. This has led to the delegation of authority from NOAA
Fisheries to the State of Florida and other Gulf states to manage Gulf
red snapper in state and federal waters. Ultimately, the use of SRFS
for managing Gulf red snapper over the federal MRIP survey has led to
expanded seasons and fishing opportunities for Florida stakeholders.
The current Gulf red snapper season is expected to last 70 days in Gulf
state and federal waters, which is the longest Florida Gulf red snapper
season since the State took over management. It is our goal that SRFS
can be used in the Atlantic to improve red snapper management.
In addition, every year during the federal South Atlantic red
snapper season, FWC staff significantly expands efforts to conduct
dockside interviews, obtain biological samples, and better understand
fishing effort through vessel counts at key inlets. These efforts
greatly contribute to better characterizing the South Atlantic red
snapper recreational fishery and provide essential information used in
the stock assessment process.
Fifth, discard mortality is a pervasive issue that impacts stock
assessments of South Atlantic red snapper. This is important because
discard data have become a key decision point in many fisheries
management deliberations. Discard mortality occurs when fish are caught
alive but then die after release. Discards occur commonly when an
angler is fishing for one species and catching another that cannot be
retained. In the case of Atlantic red snapper, dead discarded fish is
thought to comprise a significant percentage of the total (discarded
fish plus landed fish) removals. The mortality rate of fish that are
discarded is estimated to range between 28.75 percent to 31.07 percent
\5\ for Atlantic red snapper. (For example, a discard mortality rate of
20 percent implies that, of every five fish released, one fish would
die.) No age or length information is available to characterize dead
discards, which is problematic because that information is critical for
stock assessment models to function reliably. Since this data is self-
reported by commercial and recreational fishermen, and discarded fish
are not available for length or age sampling, the magnitude of the
number of discards is poorly understood, highly uncertain, unvalidated,
and difficult to estimate precisely.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\ SEDAR 73, 2021. SEDAR 73 South Atlantic Red Snapper Stock
Assessment Report. SEDAR, North Charleston, SC. 194 pp.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The lack of accurate and validated data pertaining to the rate and
magnitude of discards in the Atlantic red snapper fishery leads to a
highly uncertain stock assessment. Three sources of information are
critical to accurate stock assessments: the amount of fish removed by
fishing, the age of those fish, and independent surveys of abundance.
For a stock, such as red snapper, where it is presumed that upwards of
90 percent of the fish removed by fishing are the result of dead
discards, much of the assessment uncertainty is related to the
combination of highly uncertain discard estimates and the inability to
determine the age of those fish. The third information source,
abundance surveys, is relatively more reliable although information is
lacking on early life stages. This may contribute to the assessment's
inability to establish a relationship between spawning fish and their
offspring. When such relationships cannot be estimated, proxy values
must be used, but there is no way of knowing if such proxies are truly
representative of a given stock. In the case of red snapper, the proxy-
based targets for spawning stock biomass suggest the stock is not
rebuilt, yet the spawning fish in the population are producing higher
than expected numbers of offspring. The proxy-based target for fishing
mortality indicates overfishing is occurring, yet the stock has
steadily increased in biomass and abundance, including the important
abundance of older, mature fish. Both trap and video surveys of
abundance show a steep increase since 2011.
Fisheries managers and scientists who have reviewed the stock
assessment agree that the overfishing status of Atlantic red snapper is
driven primarily by high recreational discards. NOAA's own scientists
and the South Atlantic Fishery Management Council's Science and
Statistical Committee have indicated that these estimates of discarded
fish are highly uncertain and should not be used for management, and
this is why Amendment 43 established catch levels based on landed fish.
Despite these projected high numbers of dead discards, red snapper
abundance and biomass are at record high levels and Atlantic red
snapper has experienced strong recruitment over the last six years.
To reduce discards and help rebuild the red snapper fishery, all
parties involved in red snapper management have taken management
actions.
South Atlantic Fishery Management Council and Red Snapper

First, the South Atlantic Fishery Management Council approved
Regulatory Amendment 35, which will help reduce dead discards for all
species in the snapper grouper fishery by implementing a single hook
requirement for all recreational anglers (private and for-hire) fishing
from a vessel for snapper grouper species. The goal of this action is
to help slow the removal rate and reduce catch and discards across the
entire snapper grouper fishery. Additionally, the Council decided to
expand its outreach and education program to promote best fishing
practices to help reduce discard mortality for snapper grouper species.
This amendment is pending approval by the U.S. Secretary of Commerce.
Fishery managers from all South Atlantic states (Florida, Georgia,
South Carolina, and North Carolina) supported these efforts.
Second, in 2019, the Council approved Snapper Grouper Regulatory
Amendment 29 that requires anglers fishing in South Atlantic federal
waters to have a descending device rigged and ready when fishing for
snapper grouper species. The purpose of this rule was to help increase
the survival of released reef fish. A descending device is an
instrument capable of releasing a fish at a depth sufficient for the
fish to be able to recover from the effects of barotrauma. Barotrauma
is a pressure-related injury and is one of the top factors that can
contribute to the increased levels of discard mortality of reef fish.
The quick change in pressure can cause gas in the swim bladder to
expand and cause internal organ damage. The frequency and severity of
barotrauma can vary by species, fishing technique, and water
temperature. Quick and proper use of barotrauma mitigation tools like
descending devices and venting tools can help reef fish recover from
the effects of barotrauma and return to depth; ultimately, reducing
discard mortality for reef fish.
Third, the Council has started a management strategy evaluation
(MSE), scheduled to be completed in 2024, for the snapper grouper
fishery to find possible management options to reduce the number of
released fish. The MSE is a conceptual model that will evaluate
multiple strategies to determine which management options are best
suited to benefit the collective snapper grouper fishery and accomplish
the goals of the Council (e.g., decreasing discards, increasing
harvest).
Descending Device and Venting Tool Requirement in Florida

Earlier this year, FWC implemented a requirement for private
recreational anglers fishing for reef fish off a private vessel in
state waters to possess a descending device or venting tool.
Additionally, this regulation requires the appropriate use of such a
tool/device only if releasing a reef fish that is exhibiting symptoms
of barotrauma. Symptoms of barotrauma include protruding stomach,
bloated belly, distended intestines, bubbling scales, and bulging eyes.
Despite the federal regulations for descending devices listed
above, many fishers remain unaware of federal gear requirements and
lack confidence in properly using descending devices and venting tools.
Therefore, outreach and education are critical for generating fisher
buy-in, proper use of barotrauma mitigation tools and increased
regulatory compliance. FWC is recognized as a leader in the development
and promotion of educational programming on best fishing practices and
empowering the public to help conserve fisheries for the future. FWC
staff has engaged in a large-scale outreach and education program to
highlight the importance of barotrauma mitigation tools to the health
of Florida's reef fish stocks. FWC staff facilitate the Descending
Device Outreach Coordination Team that is comprised of partners across
the southeastern United States, including South Atlantic Fishery
Management Council staff, Return `Em Right, The Nature Conservancy,
Gulf States Marine Fisheries Commission, and other state fish and
wildlife agencies. The purpose of the team is to share outreach
strategies, coordinate messaging, and streamline efforts across the
region to promote best fishing practices to help increase survival of
released reef fish through use of barotrauma mitigation tools.

Next Steps

South Atlantic Red Snapper Research Program (aka, the South Atlantic
Great Red Snapper Count)

To have a better understanding of the number of red snapper in the
South Atlantic, Congress has funded much-needed independent research in
the South Atlantic. Modeled after the successful Gulf of Mexico Great
Red Snapper Count, this South Atlantic Red Snapper Research Program,
aka, the South Atlantic Great Red Snapper Count, is near completion and
is tasked with estimating the population size, distribution, and
density of South Atlantic Red Snapper. Research began in the fall of
2020 and is expected to be finished by fall of 2025. It is expected
that the results from this comprehensive, independent study will
provide a better understanding of the red snapper population, be
incorporated into the upcoming stock assessment, and ultimately improve
management decisions.
FWC's Atlantic Red Snapper Research

As a leader in fisheries research and management, FWC continues to
support innovative recreational data collection along the South
Atlantic. First, FWC is an active participant in the South Atlantic Red
Snapper Research Program described above. Secondly, in addition to
expanding SRFS statewide, FWC is in the process of expanding two
ongoing projects to increase data collection on red snapper and other
snapper grouper discards. FWC will be conducting year-round monitoring
to help validate recreational fishing survey estimates for private
vessels as well as expanding observer coverage in the charter and
headboat fishery in northeast Florida to identify hotspots of red
snapper discards. These expanded projects are expected to start in
January 2024.
Lastly, FWC's Fishery Dependent Monitoring Program has been
conducting fishery-independent hook-and-line sampling of red snapper
off northeast Florida for the last decade, and funding has been secured
to continue this critical long-term sampling program for the next
several years. This is a cooperative research program with the fishing
industry, including commercial and for-hire participants, and this
collaborative effort has provided critical information to help document
the rebuilding of the red snapper stock's age composition.
Exempted Fishing Permit

Under certain circumstances (e.g., limited testing, data
collection, etc.), NOAA Fisheries may authorize Exempted Fishing
Permits (EFP). During 2018 and 2019, FWC tested state management of
Gulf red snapper through an EFP that eventually led to the delegation
of private recreational red snapper management in federal waters to
each of the Gulf states. NOAA Fisheries has indicated that they will
release a ``Request for Proposals'' and a funding opportunity for an
EFP to address innovative management strategies that can help address
discards in the red snapper fishery in the South Atlantic. For the last
several months, FWC staff have been coordinating with fishery managers,
scientists, and stakeholders to develop strategies to obtain better
recreational data on fishing effort and discards to improve management,
modify angler behavior to reduce discard mortality, and improve harvest
opportunities. FWC plans to submit a proposal, and if chosen, the EFP
would be an opportunity for FWC to conduct a pilot program to obtain
better data for management. Any EFP that NOAA Fisheries ultimately
approves would likely go in effect for the 2024 fishing season.
State Data Collection

FWC launched the Gulf Reef Fish Survey in 2015, which ultimately
expanded to the State Reef Fish Survey in 2020. The key to SRFS's
success was the establishment of a new requirement for anglers and
spear fishers that intend to harvest reef fish from a private boat to
possess the State Reef Fish Angler designation. This designation
provides the State of Florida with a directory of participants in the
reef fish fishery statewide so that a special survey may be
administered. As of June 2023, more than 740,000 individuals possess a
valid State Reef Fish Angler designation in Florida.
SRFS consists of two complementary survey components: (1) a mail
survey of anglers with the State Reef Fish Angler designation, and (2)
dockside interviews with anglers after they return from fishing. The
mail survey collects information on recreational fishing trips taken by
reef fish anglers over the most recent month. During dockside surveys,
anglers are interviewed in person to collect detailed information on
the numbers and types of reef fishes caught and released during their
trip that day. Combined, mail and dockside survey components are used
to estimate the total number of recreational fishing trips taken each
month and the total numbers of reef fishes harvested and released by
anglers fishing from private boats.
Ultimately, one of the main goals of SRFS is for its use within the
stock assessment process, which will use more precise and timely data
for management. In the Gulf of Mexico, this has already occurred for
the recent Gulf gag grouper assessment and a transition plan is
currently being implemented for upcoming Gulf red snapper assessment.
As SRFS continues to improve data collection of reef fish in the South
Atlantic, FWC will continue to advocate for its use in management and
future stock assessments of South Atlantic red snapper and other reef
fish species.
H.R. 4587, the ``Red Snapper Act''

Introduced by U.S. Rep. John Rutherford (R-FL), the ``Red Snapper
Act'' would prevent NOAA from promulgating a rule that would force an
area closure in the South Atlantic for all 55 species in the snapper
grouper fishery until the results from the current South Atlantic Great
Red Snapper Count could be incorporated into the next stock assessment.
FWC supports H.R. 4587 because waiting for independent data to be
collected and incorporated into a stock assessment is a reasonable and
common-sense action.
Any kind of closure would have huge economic implications on the
South Atlantic. During work on Amendment 35, NOAA Fisheries provided
analyses and recommended a potential area/time closure from the
Florida-Georgia line to Cape Canaveral, where the ``red snapper discard
hotspot'' occurs. As the Florida fisheries management representative on
the Council, FWC vehemently opposed any management action that would
disproportionately impact Florida stakeholders. In addition, our
counterparts in Georgia, South Carolina, and North Carolina opposed
(and to this day, continue to oppose) any closure. One of the main
reasons FWC, the other South Atlantic States, and the fishing community
have opposed such time/area closures off Florida is due to the poor
recreational discard data that NOAA Fisheries is using to drive their
analyses and subsequent recommendations. Recreational discard data are
self-reported and unvalidated. The Council's own scientific advisors
have stated that discard data should not be used for management
purposes. In addition, NOAA Fisheries, in the past, has even cautioned
the South Atlantic Fishery Management Council on using estimates of
discards in their management of red snapper. However, recently, NOAA
Fisheries has pushed to use this self-reported, unvalidated discard
data to drive management decisions in its efforts to close large areas
of the South Atlantic to, not just for red snapper, but for the entire
55-species in the snapper grouper fishery. FWC has vehemently opposed
these draconian measures and has written letters to the Council and the
United States Secretary of Commerce about these potentially damaging
management measures.
Florida is known as the ``Fishing and Boating Capital of the
World'', and any hastily imposed and incompletely evaluated area/time
closures would significantly impact Florida recreational fishers, our
for-hire industry, communities, and economies. NOAA estimates the value
of recreational fishing of Florida's reef fishes contributes an output
of nearly $384 million and supports over 3,700 jobs.\6\ Closing access
for all 55 snapper grouper species would effectively eliminate this
financial contribution and job production to Florida's and the nation's
economy. Closing access to an entire complex to solve the problems of
one is irresponsible and would devastate local communities and
economies.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\6\ NOAA Coral Conservation Program, 2021. Economic Impact Analysis
of Recreational Fishing on Florida Reefs. NOAA Technical Memorandum
CRCP 41.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Additionally, all the for-hire industries, bait shops, fuel
stations, restaurants, hotels, and processors up and down Florida's
east coast would be hurt economically by a closure. Any sort of
potential closure could result in potential damage to the credibility
of the federal fishery management process. Public trust is an essential
part of being able to effectively manage natural resources. FWC
understands that difficult decisions sometimes need to be made.
However, these decisions should always be based on accurate and precise
scientific data that comprehensively consider the biological,
ecological, social, and economic effects. Results from the South
Atlantic Great Red Snapper Count will provide essential data,
previously unavailable to NOAA Fisheries and stock assessment
scientists, to better characterize red snapper abundance in the South
Atlantic. For the sake of responsible management and public trust in
the management process, it is imperative that results from the South
Atlantic Great Red Snapper Count are included in the upcoming red
snapper stock assessment prior to considering area closures driven by
poor discard data. Distrust can turn into poorer data being collected,
ultimately putting the management in worse shape.
The last time NOAA Fisheries attempted to use faulty data to
support a closure resulted in a court loss. In June 2023, the United
States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit ruled
against NOAA Fisheries and its use of ``worse-case scenario'' to
justify promulgating regulations intended to protect the North Atlantic
Right Whale regulations at the expense of the lobster industry. The
lobster industry sued NOAA Fisheries because it believed they had
improperly used worst-case scenarios in the development of models that
determine risk to right whales. In announcing its decision, the court
said NOAA Fisheries reliance on worst-case scenario assumptions was
arbitrary and capricious.
While the fish in question is different--red snapper and lobster--
the overarching issue is the same. In the case of South Atlantic red
snapper, the fundamental question is: Is NOAA's recommendation, and
desire, to close the fishery relying on ``worst-case scenario''
assumptions? Florida, our fellow south Atlantic states, and the
fishermen believe the answer is ``Yes!''
Conclusion
FWC has opposed any area or time closures to red snapper and the
entire snapper grouper fishery because the scientific evidence does not
support a closure. There is no denying that we need sustainable
fisheries, but continued access to these resources is also of paramount
importance. People are a part of the fishery, and the fishery is part
of the people. Every day we hear from fishermen stating that red
snapper abundance is higher than they can remember. Building and
maintaining public trust is absolutely essential to the success of the
federal management process and necessary to continue to conserve our
fisheries for the long-term. We need to ensure that all new research
(e.g., South Atlantic Red Snapper Count, FWC expanded surveys) and data
streams are included in the upcoming red snapper research track
assessment so we can accurately characterize the status of the Atlantic
red snapper fishery and provide more effective management strategies.
Spatial or temporal closures of the entire 55 stock snapper grouper
fishery based on an assessment of one stock are not the answer, and
complex problems need thoughtful solutions before taking drastic
action. As we have seen with previous management decisions, once a
fishery is closed, it is very difficult to reopen. We need to
understand what the Council's MSE might suggest about how to manage
both red snapper and the entire snapper grouper fishery. FWC would like
to test ways to change angler behavior, reduce discards, and improve
harvest opportunities through an EFP in the red snapper hot spot areas
off of Florida, which could provide valuable insight for the Council
and NOAA Fisheries. As trustees of the resource, we all must do
everything we can to help our commercial and recreational fishermen
while conserving our fisheries resources for future generations.
Finally, FWC is pleased to support H.R. 4051, the ``Supporting the
Health of Aquatic systems through Research Knowledge and Enhanced
Dialogue Act,'' or the ``SHARKED'' Act, which U.S. Rep. Wittman (R-VA)
introduced. Florida Congressman Soto is a co-sponsor of the
legislation, and we thank both congressmen for addressing this issue.
We have heard about shark depredation for many years--from fishermen in
the Keys whose prized snapper or grouper catch was eaten by a shark,
from fishermen throughout the Gulf of Mexico during a Gulf of Mexico
Regional Fishery Management Council discussion on the subject, and from
countless fishermen from Pensacola to Jacksonville. We have heard
stories from fishermen about sharks associating the sound of a motor
stopping with an easy meal. Even before a fishing line is in the water,
numerous sharks surround the boat ready to steal any fish that happens
to get hooked. Shark depredation is a serious issue. Some recreational
anglers spend a lot of money for a day on the water and are
disappointed when half of a fish is on the other end of their line. In
fact, according to a survey conducted by Casselberry et al.,\7\ 77
percent of respondents had experienced depredation in nearshore and
pelagic fisheries in the last five years, with depredation more
commonly reported in the southeastern United States. FWC supports
appointing a task force of serious scientists who want to educate
people about the problem and believe the task force is a step forward
to finding workable solutions.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\7\ Grace A. Casselberry, Ezra M. Markowitz, Kelly Alves, et al.,
2022. When fishing bites: Understanding angler responses to shark
depredation, Fisheries Research, Volume 246.

---------------------------------------------------------------------------
______

Mr. Bentz. Thank you, and I thank the witnesses for their
testimony, and I will now recognize Members for 5 minutes each
for questions.
Mr. Wittman, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Wittman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would like to thank
our witnesses today.
Mr. Graham, thank you. I know that it cost you money to
come up here, because these are days that you would otherwise
be out on the water, fishing. Let me ask a couple of different
things. I think you really illustrate the picture perfectly for
what it means for our recreational fisheries that rely on
clients to charter their boats to go out and fish. And as you
said, the middle Atlantic, as well as other places like Florida
and others, have an incredibly robust recreational fishery as
it relates to the charter business.
Some folks have said, well, this is just sharks being
sharks. Can you give me your perspective, and explain how this
is not just sharks being sharks, and how this issue in your
mind has changed through the years, and where things are today?
You have spoken to me about a number of things that you
have tried to try to overcome this shark depredation, different
technologies, different practices, and what those are, if they
have been successful and you being able to mitigate how these
sharks are aggressively working to take every bit of the tuna
that you catch?
Mr. Graham. Yes, we have electric reels. There is a $10,000
hydraulic winch we call a tuna brute and it is supposed to get
the tuna faster than the shark. None of it has worked.
When I first started out, we sat on the back of the boat
when we hooked a bunch of tuna, and we made fun of the guy who
was getting his butt kicked by that big, strong fish. It is no
fun anymore. Like I said, 1 in 10 tunas maybe you will get to
the boat.
And, yes, each year gets progressively worse, and I think
the sharks are definitely learning. Just like you see the
tarpon in the marina in Key West, when the people are feeding
them by hand.
I mean, obviously, when boats are showing up, but we are
seeing the sharks with the tuna. We are having predation issues
out in 6,000 feet of water, where no boats have been in a week.
I mean, I will run out 50, 60 miles offshore to try to find
tuna, they are more normally on the continental shelf, but I
will go try to find them somewhere else. And when I finally do
find them, when I burn the extra fuel and spend the extra
money, they still get eaten.
So, it has really become just an unbelievable biomass of
inescapable biomass.
Mr. Wittman. I want to ask you, too, you heard me ask a
question earlier of the witness from the National Marine
Fisheries Service about shark stock assessments, and she didn't
have any idea about what the stock assessment showed in the
past, or when ones were going to be going forward. It is pretty
amazing, since Magnuson-Stevens requires the Agency to do those
things. So, maybe she ought to read Magnuson-Stevens.
But give me your perspective. I know that you know a lot
more about it than our witness from National Marine Fisheries
Service.
Mr. Graham. Well, I was at a meeting with the head of HMS
from NOAA a couple nights ago with a couple of the actual
commercial fishermen who do the stock assessments, or have done
them in the past. There is no money in it for them anymore.
So, the problem is these are commercial fishermen who just
can't afford to go fishing every day for free, so they can't
make any money off the sharks that they are studying. So, there
is no one volunteering to do these studies anymore.
And I think you asked something about the mortality rate of
young. I just did a bit of research, and the scientists that I
talked to said the mortality rate for sharks that give live
birth to their young is generally accepted as much lower as
fish eggs and whatnot, because, I mean, they literally come out
of the shark swimming and ready to eat my tuna.
[Laughter.]
Mr. Wittman. Well, Mr. Graham, thank you.
Ms. McCawley, I want to ask you, NOAA claims that they are
already working on this. If they are working on this, it
doesn't seem like they are in any way, shape, or form
successful in this. In fact, it seems like it is getting
exponentially worse as we hear the testimony from Mr. Graham.
Do you think that there is enough already being done to
figure out what is really at the root of this, and why things
are so far out of balance now, and what NOAA is not doing in
relationship to making sure that species are sustainable?
And it kind of goes back to some testimony we heard earlier
about red snapper. I mean, they are looking at mortality based
upon releases. This is mortality on tuna populations based on,
essentially, impact from sharks. Again, this all goes to NOAA's
requirement to manage the species.
Give us your thoughts about what NOAA is doing in relation
to managing shark populations.
Ms. McCawley. Yes, thank you for that question. We support
the shark legislation, and we think that depredation is a
serious problem, and we think that the task force is really a
step forward to finding a workable solution. NOAA Fisheries has
worked on this, but I think more needs to be done, and I think
that this task force is a great solution.
Mr. Wittman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Mr. Bentz. Thank you. The Chair recognizes Mrs. Radewagen
for 5 minutes.
Mrs. Radewagen. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Talofa Lava. Good
morning, and thank you all for testifying today. My questions
will focus on my bill that I introduced with my good friend,
Congressman Case, on the South Pacific Tuna Treaty
implementation language. This implementation language is vital
for the success of the American fishing fleet in the South
Pacific.
I would like to submit for the record a letter from four of
American Samoa's tuna boat owners in support of this
legislation.

Mr. Bentz. Without objection.

[The information follows:]

July 27, 2023

Hon. Cliff Bentz, Chairman
Hon. Jared Huffman, Ranking Member
Subcommittee on Water, Wildlife and Fisheries
Committee on Natural Resources
1324 Longworth House Office Building
Washington, DC 20515

Dear Chairman Bentz and Ranking Member Huffman:

We are writing to express our strong support for H.R. 1792,
legislation introduced by Representatives Radewagen and Case that would
amend the South Pacific Tuna Treaty Act of 1988. This legislation is
critical to the survival of the U.S. distant water tuna purse seine
fleet, so we ask that your Subcommittee expeditiously approve the bill
and recommend its' passage to the full Natural Resources Committee.
Since we have found no opposition to the Treaty or the implementing
legislation, we are hopeful H.R. 1792 can be approved by the House and
sent to the Senate this legislative session.
By way of background, our families have been part of the U.S. South
Pacific tuna fleet for many generations. Our four independent purse
seine fishing vessels are homeported in Pago Pago, where we supply fish
to American Samoa and support many of the local business by purchasing
fuel, supplies and other goods. We are also members of the American
Tunaboat Association (ATA) who also strongly support the legislation.
Our vessels fish in the US EEZ, the high seas and in the EEZ's of
Pacific Islands party to the Treaty. Because we fish under a Treaty
license issued pursuant to the South Pacific Tuna Treaty, we are able
to access and fish in the EEZ's of other Pacific Island nations. Since
our vessels were fishing under a Treaty license prior to November 3,
1995, our vessels are also ``grandfathered'' under the South Pacific
Tuna Act Treaty Amendments of 1995 (included in the Fisheries Act of
1995), meaning that our vessels are eligible to fish in all of the
Treaty areas, including the U.S. EEZ. The U.S. Coast Guard has verified
our vessels as ``grandfathered'' and issued letter rulings to each one.
Access to the US EEZ is becoming increasingly important with increased
competition from foreign fleets. The US EEZ in the Pacific represents
important historical fishing areas that our vessels have relied on for
decades.
After years of negotiations with the 16 Pacific Island Parties, all
parties formally agreed to the ``renegotiated'' Treaty text and Annexes
on December 3, 2016, in Nadi, Fiji. Soon thereafter all parties signed
a Memorandum of Understanding committing to provisionally implementing
the new Treaty amendments, allowing U.S. vessels to continue to operate
without interruption. While the renegotiated Treaty was finalized at
the end of the Obama administration, it was the first treaty that
President Trump submitted to Congress on August 28, 2018. Finally, in
June 2022 the Senate Foreign Relations Committee recommended that the
Senate give its advice and consent to ratification and on July 19,
2022, the Senate did just that! While the full Senate has given its
advice and consent for ratification of the renegotiated Treaty, we are
told the White House is waiting for Congress to approve Treaty
implementing legislation prior to depositing the instrument of
ratification. We've provided this background to illustrate the
importance of action on H.R. 1792 by your Subcommittee and the full
Committee.
The amendments made by H.R. 1792 to Sec. 9 (16 U.S.C. 973g Licenses
of the South Pacific Tuna Treaty Act of 1988) clarify and maintain the
grandfather for our vessels. These changes were necessary because the
renegotiated Treaty text eliminates the term ``Treaty area'' and
instead uses the term ``licensing area''. We strongly support the
changes made to Sec. 9 by H.R. 1972 as it will preserve the original
intent of Congress in 1995.
We want to thank you for scheduling the hearing on H.R. 1792 and
ask for your support in moving the bill. Please contact our Washington
representative Mr. Jeffrey Pike (202 731-9148) should you require any
additional information.

Sincerely,

F/V Western Pacific           F/V Evelina Da Rosa
Stuart Chikami                Larry Da Rosa

F/V Pacific Princess          F/V Sea Encounter
Ricardo da Rosa               Randall De Silva

______

Mrs. Radewagen. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Gibbons-Fly, can you describe some of the challenges
the U.S. fleet has had because the treaty implementation
language has not yet become law?
Mr. Gibbons-Fly. Yes, good morning, and thank you.
In my written and oral testimony, I described the largest
issue, which is the inclusion of the high seas, that the high
seas remains included within the treaty area so that we can't
fish on the high seas without a license. That is the largest
issue.
But beyond that, there were some additional provisions of
the treaty that allowed the U.S. fleet to negotiate independent
of the treaty with the Pacific Island States, so that they
could negotiate agreements either under the umbrella of the
treaty or completely independent under whatever terms and
conditions might be agreed, which allows a lot more flexibility
in terms of the nature of the requirements that would apply to
the U.S. fleet.
But because we can't fish in the treaty area without a
treaty license, that second option that I just described is not
yet open to us. So, we are limited in the access to the high
seas. We can't fish there without a treaty license, and we
can't negotiate those alternative agreements under which we
might be able to negotiate better terms and conditions which
are desperately needed by the fleet as the cost of access
continues to increase, and increase, and increase.
And this might not sound like a big deal to somebody
sitting in this room listening, but to a fleet that is
struggling to survive each and every day, every option and
every bit of flexibility that we can find is vitally important.
Mrs. Radewagen. Thank you. And as a follow-up, among the
challenges facing your industry your written testimony
references certain pending domestic regulatory actions. Can you
tell us more about these and the potential impact on the fleet?
Mr. Gibbons-Fly. Yes, thank you for that question. I will
mention two in particular, two issues that are seemingly
separate and apart but, if implemented together, would have a
devastating impact on the American Samoa-based purse seine
fleet.
The first is that, under the international management
regime that applies in the Central and Western Pacific, the
United States is allocated a certain number of fishing days for
the high seas in the U.S. EEZ. Historically, the United States
has implemented that as a combined quota so that those days
could be fished either in the U.S. EEZ on the high seas. The
current administration is proposing to take over 500 of those
days out of a total of roughly 1,800, so almost a third of
those days, and require that they be fished in the U.S.
Exclusive Economic Zone.
The second issue is that a separate part of the
Administration is proposing to close the entire U.S. EEZ to
fishing under the establishment of a National Marine Sanctuary
in what is called the Pacific Remote Island Areas. So, if you
take 500 days and say they can only be fished in the U.S. EEZ
and then you close the U.S. EEZ, those days have essentially
disappeared. And the only option for the vessels to recoup
those days is to negotiate bilateral access with the Pacific
Island States at up to $13,000 per vessel per day.
So, in my opinion, this combination of actions, if
implemented, would have a seriously detrimental and even a
potentially existential threat to the American Samoa-based
fleet.
Mrs. Radewagen. Thank you very much for your responses.
I yield back the balance of my time, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Bentz. Thank you. The Chair recognizes Mr. Carl for 5
minutes.
Mr. Carl. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would like to real
quickly back up just a second, a conversation that Dr. Kryc and
Congressman Graves had about the juvenile snapper.
I pulled up here--he gave me LSU, I don't trust LSU a whole
lot over Alabama, but we will have to go with LSU numbers here.
[Laughter.]
Mr. Carl. Just for the record, those fish that Garret
caught were actually from Alabama. That is the reason they are
red. But the LSU says that a snapper will give birth between
the age of 2 and 6. Two years old is when they start giving
birth. At 2 years old, they lay 1,000 eggs 30 times during the
spawning season. At 6 years old, they are laying 2.5 million
eggs during the spawning season. For a lifetime of those 4
years, 4 billion eggs is what they are laying. So, the numbers
that she was talking about and the numbers we are trying to
point out do not get anywhere close. I don't think that is an
issue.
Mr. Graham, thank you for being here today. I thank all the
members on this panel for being here. And I sympathize with
some of the situations that you all were put in. But the
SHARKED Act is what I want to focus on, because it is huge down
in the Gulf. It is a huge problem we have, also.
Tackling the increase of the problems with the sharks
depredation, which is significant, implicating for both
recreational fishermen and the balance of marine life. You
can't bring a snapper in without sharks chasing it. If they get
it, they get it, and you go back after another one. Unless you
have seen it, and I will be fishing next week in the Gulf, you
can't believe it. They lay up under the boat, in the shadows,
and they wait.
But this SHARKED Act is a critical first step toward
addressing this issue on a national scale, I should hope, and I
appreciate the Congressman for advancing this.
My question, Mr. Graham, can you tell me more on how the
sharks depredation has affected your business? Because I am a
businessman, and I am always about the nickels and dimes, and I
want to know how it affects your business.
Mr. Graham. It is pretty wild. I mean, there are a lot more
boats this year tied to the dock. We are getting letters, we
are getting calls, asking, ``Are the sharks there?'' We catch
mahi one day, but we don't want to catch the sharks anymore.
So, it is really starting to hit home.
At the beginning, we were kind of, OK, well, this is maybe
just a phenomenon that is going to happen, be gone overnight.
You know how fishing is, sometimes something goes on for a
little while, but then it changes. But this has, like I said,
become exponentially worse. And now we can't look our customers
in the eye and tell them that they are going to have any fun
today. We can promise them they will get some bites. We can
promise them that we will have some action. But the fish just
don't come on the boat, and we lose all our tackle. We lose all
our gear, everything like that.
So, the fact that the sharks have made our sustainable
fishery unsustainable is definitely affecting our business in a
major way. It is affecting local businesses in a major way on
the commercial side, restaurants, everything like that.
And then, people coming into town to stay at the hotel,
stay at the houses, as well as the recreational private boats
who used to come in droves. On Memorial Day weekend, you would
see 600 or 1,000 boats out there. And now there is no one
there, except us charter boats who have to suffer through
another 1,000 or 2,000 pounds of tuna lost each day.
Mr. Carl. I agree with you. I was trying to pull it up to
find out what type of shark it is, but we are seeing sharks
down on the Gulf Coast we have never seen before. The world's
largest fishing rodeo, most people probably don't realize it,
but it is in Dolphin Island, Alabama, and I think they had
40,000 tickets. That is 40,000 boats that fished in that
tournament.
Mr. Graham. Wow.
Mr. Carl. They caught a 1,069-pound shark.
Mr. Graham. I saw that.
Mr. Carl. OK, you are the expert. I am not going to tell
you what type of shark it was. Maybe you knew. But it just blew
the records that had been going on for 70 years. This is not a
new event. So, these sharks are getting much larger. They are
getting closer to the shores. Of course, Orange Beach and Gulf
Shores is beautiful, and Prestige Beach resort in my district
also we are seeing lots of sharks, again, that we have never
seen before.
So, I appreciate this bill and I appreciate your efforts.
Mr. Graham. Thank you, sir.
Mr. Carl. And what your industry does is very important in
my district also.
So, that said, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Bentz. Thank you, Mr. Carl.
Mr. LaMalfa, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. LaMalfa. I am sorry, panelists and fellow colleagues, I
have had two other simultaneous committees, both that had votes
during them. Right, Mr. Carl? Anyway, I am kind of parachuting
in.
But I was curious, Mr. Gibbons-Fly, just in general, I
caught part of the conversation here about how many fishing
days you are allowed, and licensing and offshore international
waters and all that. How well do other countries adhere to
similar standards of what the United States has for its
fishermen?
Does China even have them?
Do other countries even have them like this, or are we the
only ones that have these, it sounds like rationing of days, et
cetera?
Mr. Gibbons-Fly. Well, there are a couple of different
layers to your question, Congressman, and thank you very much
for the question.
The first is there is a series of rules to which all
countries are expected to comply, but no one enforces those
rules as strictly and with as much rigor and with the level of
penalties as the Government of the United States applies to the
U.S. fleet. So, we are facing an unlevel playing field there.
And, clearly, we would simply like the other countries to
enforce the rules in the same way that the United States does.
There is a second element to this that different countries
can operate under different rules. The Pacific Island States,
for example, exempt themselves as developing states from a
number of the requirements. But this creates a loophole for
countries like China, like Korea, like Taiwan, who can reflag
their vessels, can enter into charter arrangements, and then
themselves become exempt from those requirements.
So, the United States is complying with one set of
requirements and the number of vessels that are exempting
themselves by reflagging and chartering is going up, and up,
and up. So, the playing field is becoming more and more
unlevel.
Yet, the Convention itself provides that participating
territories like American Samoa are to be treated in the same
way as the Pacific Island States, and that is not happening
with respect to the American Samoa-based fleet.
Mr. LaMalfa. Thank you. It sounds like it is probably
almost impossible to keep everybody level, even if you are
allowing extra for particular states to even keep them within
the two tiers and with the reflagging and all that. So, I guess
what you have to do, just go out-fish them until the whole
thing is over with.
So, thank you. Let me jump to another panelist here.
Mr. Besher, with the issue of cow and calf kills due to
predators and such, I sympathize with what you have to deal
with on proving it, whether you have a wolf kill or a grizzly,
I guess. So, the topic here I have is what is happening with
predatory black vultures, is there a reimbursement plan for
that?
What kind of proof is there on that?
Comment on any of those, whether it is the vultures or go
back to the wolf and the grizzly, if you wish.
Mr. Besher. Thank you, Congressman, for the question. Yes,
there is a livestock indemnity program, but you have to meet a
threshold of 5 percent loss over your total herd before----
Mr. LaMalfa. On the vulture or all the predators?
Mr. Besher. On all predators, sir.
Mr. LaMalfa. So, you have to lose 5 percent before they
talk to you, basically?
Mr. Besher. Yes.
Mr. LaMalfa. Five percent?
Mr. Besher. Yes, through the Farm Service Agency.
Mr. LaMalfa. So, my understanding, and I am kind of loose
on it right now, is that each time there is a calf kill, or a
cow kill, or whatever, that you document that and Fish and
Wildlife is supposed to come take a look. And my understanding
is there is supposed to be reimbursement for each time it
happens if they agree that it has been proven.
Mr. Besher. In Missouri, how it reads right now is you have
to have a licensed vet or a USDA APHIS official come out and do
a necropsy, and prove that the animal was taken alive. And you
turn those in at each take.
Mr. LaMalfa. How much does it cost to process that, who is
paying for that?
Mr. Besher. Well, in Missouri right now, the Missouri
Department of Agriculture will reimburse you $250. But with the
shortage of veterinarians across this country, you are not
going to get one without him being on an emergency basis, and
we have to pay a $250 emergency fee. Then the necropsy will
probably cost you another $250. So, you are going to be out
$250.
Mr. LaMalfa. What would be a nice, round number for how
much income you would make from that head of stock, generally?
Mr. Besher. In today's time, about $2,200.
Mr. LaMalfa. So, $500 off the top of that, on all the
massive margin you have, right?
Mr. Besher. Yes, very massive.
Mr. LaMalfa. And that differs from state to state. It
sounds like Missouri has different rules than others.
Mr. Besher. I believe so, sir, yes.
Mr. LaMalfa. Yes. Because in California, where I am from,
unfortunately, as far as the politics of it, I love my home,
but anyway, our guys, especially up in Northern California like
Siskiyou County, eastern Shasta County, like that, they have a
devil of a time getting them to verify, yes, this is a wolf
kill. I mean, what else is it? They say, ``Well, we don't
know.''
So, I mean, any more thoughts on that?
Mr. Besher. Well, and verifying that loss is getting tough
to do. You know, USDA APHIS, they are stressed for personnel to
get one of them out, a shortage of veterinarians.
Mr. LaMalfa. Do you believe we have a shortage of wolves in
this country yet?
Mr. Besher. No, I do not.
Mr. LaMalfa. Time to pull it off the endangered species
list?
Mr. Besher. Absolutely.
Mr. LaMalfa. Yes. All right, God bless you, sir. You hang
in there. Hopefully, the cavalry is coming here. Take care.
Mr. Bentz. Thank you, Mr. LaMalfa. The Chair recognizes Mr.
Rutherford for 5 minutes.
Mr. Rutherford. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
First, I want to thank all of the witnesses for being here
today, and I really do appreciate you coming up and informing
us about all these issues and your positions.
Mr. Atkinson, if I could ask you, do you believe that the
current data collection process does a good job capturing data
on recreational fishing, specifically on recreational discard
data for our reef fish?
Mr. Atkinson. Sir, I know that is part of the stock
assessment, and I know that stock assessment based on that has
been deemed the best available science by those who make such
decisions.
Mr. Rutherford. So, is that a yes or no?
Mr. Atkinson. It is the best available, sir. So, I suppose
that is a yes.
Mr. Rutherford. OK.
Mr. Atkinson. It will get better, as well.
Mr. Rutherford. Mr. Chairman, if I could, I would like to
ask unanimous consent to place in the record the September 13,
2022 South Atlantic Red Snapper Council report from NOAA.
Dr. Wittman [presiding]. Without objection.
Mr. Rutherford. Thank you.

[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Rutherford. And, Mr. Chairman, that is the report that
I referenced earlier, where on page 5 NOAA says, in big letters
here, ``And there is scientific uncertainty, data uncertainty.
Commercial discards, recreational discards,'' and this entire
conversation revolves around these discards, so that is why I
am a little concerned when we start to rely on those discard
numbers in driving our policy.
So, Director McCawley, if I could ask you, talk about your
concerns about the current data collection. Also about these
high discard numbers, how they are driving this whole
conversation. And do you think we are capturing good data?
Ms. McCawley. Thank you for that question, Congressman, and
I also want to thank you for all of your efforts to conserve
Florida's resources.
I would say that the state of Florida is definitely trying
to get better data on recreational discards. The state of
Florida has the state reef fish survey, which is trying to get
targeted information because NOAA's MRIP data doesn't really
capture those offshore reef fish very well in their surveys.
So, we are definitely trying to get better information.
And we also think that, with NOAA's exempted fishing
permits that they say they are going to give to the states in
the coming months, that we can get even better data about the
discard information. And as you mentioned earlier, that Great
Red Snapper Count, that is going to get better information
about recreational discards in that fishery, as well.
Mr. Rutherford. Right. And I would point out also to the
Committee that this bill, the Red Snapper Act, does nothing to
impede what the Council is already moving forward with in their
management of this fish stock, it does nothing. It simply says,
until you get this new data, you can't take these extreme
measures. Can you talk about the impact that these closures
would have not just on this species, but the taking of the
other species, as well?
Ms. McCawley. Yes, thank you for that question.
I talked about in my testimony that, yes, there are 55
species in that snapper-grouper complex, and the discussion is
primarily for northeast Florida to close down fishing for all
55 species in order to try to get at this discard issue for
one, for red snapper.
We indicated in our testimony that we are talking about
hundreds of millions of dollars' worth of impact, and over
3,500 jobs alone, just on the recreational side.
Mr. Rutherford. Thank you very much.
And Mr. Chairman, I would like to go on record I will be
co-sponsoring all of the bills that I have heard discussed here
today. I am very supportive of what all these witnesses are
trying to achieve.
And I would like to request that the Committee support the
Red Snapper Act. We don't need to be doing economic damage to
particularly northeast Florida when we have bad data. We can
wait for the good data.
With that, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Wittman. I thank the gentleman from Florida, and now
recognize Mrs. Luna for 5 minutes.
Mrs. Luna. I am just going to piggyback off of what my
colleague just said.
We obviously have a massive red snapper fan base in my home
state of Florida, especially in Pinellas County. But in a
multi-year-long study, it has been now found, and I am sure you
have heard these stats already repeated, but we now have over
118 million red snapper in the Gulf of Mexico, which is
drastically different from the 36 million that was previously
reported, and I even went as far as signing a letter with a
majority of my Florida colleagues to appropriately increase the
red snapper quota for the Gulf of Mexico anglers to stimulate
our economy.
With the South Atlantic Great Red Snapper Count now
underway, NOAA indeed should be using more updated information
in their decision-making process. But instead, to my
understanding, they are not doing so. So, my questions for you
guys, and specifically Ms. McCawley, is does it make sense for
the fishery management decisions to be made on incomplete and
outdated data?
Ms. McCawley. Thank you, Congresswoman, for your question.
And also thank you for all of your efforts to conserve
Florida's resources, and I would say, no, it doesn't make sense
for them to make decisions when we have this new data on the
way.
And also, we don't necessarily agree with that discard
information that they are using right now, which is why Florida
has gone so far as to establish a new survey, the State Reef
Fish Survey, to try to get additional information.
And we are also supportive of that Great Red Snapper Count
that was wonderful in the Gulf. And we are excited about the
results over on the Atlantic in hopes that it will be used in
the stock assessment before any draconian measures are taken.
Mrs. Luna. You probably just gave, I think, most of
Florida's fishermen a massive morale boost. So, I am going to
clip that and post it on my social. So, you guys heard it here.
She said it. She agrees with us.
OK. Prior to proposing their draconian closures in the
South Atlantic last year, did NOAA consult with state agencies
like Florida Fish and Wildlife Conservation Commission or
anglers that are on the waters every day about the impacts that
their decision would have on local businesses and the fishing
economy?
Ms. McCawley. Yes, thank you for that question. NOAA sits
on the South Atlantic Council with us, so they do hear from
fishermen as they come to the Council to give public comment.
And we also interact with our Federal colleagues.
However, I don't know that they fully understand the
magnitude of what those closures would do, the economic impact,
the number of jobs that would be affected if a closure were to
be implemented.
Mrs. Luna. To your understanding, are any of those people
that sit on that Council with you, are they fishermen, or
business owners, anglers? Like, legitimate anglers?
Ms. McCawley. Yes, thank you for that question. There are
both recreational fishermen and commercial fishermen, as well
as state agency reps like myself on that Council.
Mrs. Luna. That are represented by NOAA?
Ms. McCawley. Oh, NOAA just has one seat. Thank you for
that clarification. NOAA just has one seat and one vote on that
Council.
Mrs. Luna. And do you know if that individual is an angler,
professional fisherman, or small business owner?
Ms. McCawley. No, he just works for the Federal agency. I
think maybe he fishes in his spare time. But no, he is not a
professional fisherman.
Mrs. Luna. So, he is a B word, a bureaucrat, yes?
Ms. McCawley. Yes.
Mrs. Luna. OK. Well, Chairman, I yield the rest of my time.
Thank you very much for coming today.
Mr. Bentz [presiding]. Thank you, Mrs. Luna. The Chair
recognizes Mr. Rose for 5 minutes.
Mr. Rose. Thank you, Chairman Bentz, and thank you for the
opportunity to waive on to the Committee today, for holding
this important hearing.
Mr. Besher, I just wanted to start out by saying thank you
for traveling here from Missouri to offer your testimony on
behalf of the National Cattlemen's Beef Association, NCBA. I
believe that your perspective as a cow-calf producer is vitally
important to the discussion surrounding how best to tackle
black vulture depredation.
Mr. Besher, in your written testimony, you highlighted that
even in a year where markets in your industry are favorable to
producers, that your margins are slim. Would you discuss just
how devastating financially black vulture depredation can be to
producers who operate on such slim margins?
Mr. Besher. Thank you, Congressman, for the question. Yes,
we do have slim margins, sir. And right now, our average, we
will lose three to four calves a year. In today's markets,
those animals are worth anywhere from $2,000 to $2,500 finished
out. So, that is a big financial loss. And you take what the
average cow size, 100 or less, that is a big hit to a farmer.
And not only are you losing the financial there, but the
genetics that you have just lost in that animal. Most producers
are growing their herds, increasing their genetics, so all that
is down the drain also.
Mr. Rose. Thank you. And Mr. Besher, my bill, the
bipartisan Black Vulture Relief Act of 2023, has a once-a-year
reporting requirement. Do you feel that a once-a-year reporting
requirement is sufficient for monitoring population management
while also balancing against overly burdensome reporting
requirements for producers?
Mr. Besher. I do. I mean, and right now we have a Federal
permit and we report our takes at the end of every year. And
that gives you a checks and balances of what is being out
there, how many are being hatched out.
We actually have a nest that was actually hatched out in
one of our barns. We had to get USDA APHIS down there to
relocate those.
But yes, I think a 1-year checks and balance would be
appropriate.
Mr. Rose. And I think you have just made reference to my
next question, but ``take'' under the Migratory Bird Treaty Act
doesn't necessarily mean killing the bird. It can mean
disturbance of an animal or its habitat. Can you talk about the
non-lethal tools that you currently use as part of your
operation and their relative success?
Mr. Besher. We have used a lot of non-lethal tools,
anywhere from pyrotechnics, which we cannot use right now
because we are in a very serious drought, afraid of starting a
wildfire. We have used propane cannons that are effective for
maybe a day or two.
The only effective tool is to use an effigy, is to take an
animal, hang it in a tree, fence row. That is the only
effective tool that we have found that works. But the issue
with that is that you are taking the buzzard population that is
on your place and you are pushing it off on your neighbor. So,
the problem is not going away, you are just moving it to
another area.
Mr. Rose. In your written testimony, you also referred to
the connection between grazing and rotational patterns and
forage use and these black vultures. If you could, address what
it means for your operation, day to day.
Mr. Besher. We practice rotational grazing on our operation
just for soil health and increasing forage mass. By pulling the
cattle down tighter, we will pull 200 cows down into a 50-acre
paddock, condense them. When we get an attack from some
vultures, there are usually 40 or 50 in the group. Pulling the
animals down tighter, that gives more defense to the little
calves.
We should not have to look over our animals that closely.
It is very sad every day when you go out and check your cattle
or feed your cattle, that you have to carry a firearm with you.
Mr. Rose. And we discussed this earlier, but I am also a
cow-calf producer. And speaking to that same issue of how you
manage your pasture, your grazing rotation, we had such a
significant presence of black vultures on one of my farms where
we literally had to abandon use of that particular 300-acre
tract because there were 300-plus black vultures there. Any cow
that attempted to calve or we had calving during calving season
was attacked. And literally, to solve that problem we would
either have had to kill 300 black vultures, or a significant
number, or move them.
So, I appreciate, again, you being here today. I want to
just stress how important this issue is to cow-calf producers
and livestock producers all across the country.
Thank you. I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Bentz. Thank you, Mr. Rose. The Chair recognizes Mrs.
Boebert for 5 minutes.
Mrs. Boebert. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Wolff, I want to thank you again for making the trip to
come out and testify on H.R. 4596. This is a very important
bill.
I know that you have touched on it in your testimony, and I
appreciate that, but would you mind expanding upon the
successes of this program that it will have once it is
reauthorized by this bill?
Mr. Wolff. Thank you for the question, Representative
Boebert.
I think the successes have been outlined in the two
original goals: recovery of the fish species and administration
of allowing water development to go forward unhindered. Those
things have gone forward for 30-plus years. The alternative to
that is the burden of individual section 7 compliance, the
conflicts that brings, and the potential litigation of which we
have seen none of that with these programs.
So, reauthorization of the programs will allow a
cooperative, collaborative process to move forward and do good
without bringing some of the other things we have seen across
the country.
Mrs. Boebert. Yes. So, we have seen the recovery. We have
seen the downlisting of the humpback chub, and then we have
also seen that the razorback is recommended for downlisting.
Capital funding also supports major infrastructure projects
at reservoirs, diversion dams, canals, and floodplains across
the basins.
Can you expand upon how including diverse stakeholders in
the conversation to draft this 7-year authorization improved
this legislation?
Mr. Wolff. Thank you for the question.
I think the success of the programs have been because
everybody is at the table making the decisions. We all work
together. Whether you are a water user, you work for a
conservation group, you are a state, you are a Federal entity,
a tribe, hydropower, we are all at the table making the
decisions together and collaboratively. So, we have all been
able to move the program forward, and we hope to be able to
continue that.
Mrs. Boebert. Mr. Wolff, of the 2,500 water users that
benefit from this legislation, 1,200 of them are located in
Colorado. Would you mind discussing the consequences for local
communities if these important programs aren't reauthorized?
Mr. Wolff. Thank you for the question.
I think, without the reauthorization, these programs will
go away and we will get back to what I mentioned, individual
section 7 compliance that brings burdens, conflict, and
probably litigation. And I would argue, probably cease to see
the advances in recovery of the species we have seen under the
programs. It is a model that we don't want to see. We want to
continue forward with the cooperativeness that we have seen.
Mrs. Boebert. Yes. And I would also add that leaving this
work unfinished will risk losing control of critical water
sources that underpin and help grow local economies. These
projects provide water for local municipalities, tribes, major
reservoirs, agriculture, ski areas, power generation
facilities, and others that use more than 3.69 million acre-
feet of water per year.
Mr. Wolff, you touched on it in your testimony, but can you
elaborate on the non-Federal contributions being made by states
and local stakeholders to support these programs?
Mr. Wolff. Oh, absolutely. Thank you for the question.
Non-Federal contributions come in three forms. First, all
the states and some other partners provide some cash into the
program themselves. There are significant non-cash
contributions. Many of the states work on a lot of the
monitoring and research efforts relative to the species and
some of the propagation. There is also a significant amount of
water contributions to the programs by many entities within the
system. That is a voluntary contribution provided to help meet
flow targets in certain critical reaches of the habitat. So,
those are the three main non-Federal contributions.
Mrs. Boebert. Thank you, Mr. Wolff. Can you also elaborate
on the importance of non-Federal water users contributing
nearly 3 million acre-feet of water to benefit endangered fish?
Mr. Wolff. Absolutely, thank you for the question. And I
think I just started to address that.
There are certain critical reaches that are very, very
important to the recovery of these fish species. Several
entities across the basin contribute water on an annual basis
to help to meet flow targets, meet the habitat needs of the
fish. And that has been critical in the recovery of the fish
species that we have seen.
Mrs. Boebert. And just while we have 20 seconds, is there
anything else on this program that you would like to add?
Mr. Wolff. I think I have said it. These are cooperative,
collaborative programs that benefit water users across the
basin, and we are recovering fish species.
Thank you for introducing the bill. We hope to move it
forward.
Mrs. Boebert. Yes, thank you. I hope to see its quick
passage, and I thank you again for making the trip, and thank
you to the rest of the witnesses who are here today.
Mr. Chairman, I yield.
Mr. Bentz. Thank you, Mrs. Boebert. The Chair recognizes
himself for 5 minutes.
Mr. Shawcroft, in the bill there is a phrase the you want
to use the ``unexpended budget authority.'' How much is left?
Mr. Shawcroft. There is approximately $100 million left
that could be transferred and used for these conservation
efforts.
Mr. Bentz. The term ``conservation'' as defined in that
bill is of interest to me because it has a wide variety of
uses. As is reflected in this bill, what does it mean?
Mr. Shawcroft. In this case, conservation means taking
water that was used for one purpose and being able to use it
for another purpose.
So, for example, one of the items that we are pursuing is
grass turf removal. So, the water that would have otherwise
been used on that grass would now be able to be used for other
purposes, which may be growth----
Mr. Bentz. Forgive me for interrupting, but it is not the
paper, right, that you are working from. It is the actual
amount that was consumed by the grass that is the measure of
conservation, is it not?
Mr. Shawcroft. Correct.
Mr. Bentz. Yes.
Mr. Shawcroft. It is an actual measurement, acre-foot, of
water that is used for a different purpose.
Mr. Bentz. Correct. Thank you for that.
Mr. Besher, I am from a cattle ranching background, so I
have seen all that you have described. I note in looking during
some of the other testimony that the number of these black
vultures back in 2018 was around 4.26 million, and that it was
suggested that in some spaces you could ``take as many as
287,000 a year.''
So, I am just curious, has someone done a study to suggest,
if this bill passed and you were allowed to take these
creatures without having to go through the work of acquiring a
permit, how long before you wipe out the population? You have
4.2 million to take. That was 5 years ago.
Mr. Besher. Thank you, Congressman, for the question. I am
unfamiliar with the breeding pattern of these, but the steady
increase that we have seen over the past years, I mean,
producers are not wanting to wipe them off the face of the
Earth. We are just wanting to get this population in check
where they are not depredating our calves.
Mr. Bentz. Yes, I just checked and the estimate is the
population increases by between 1 and 4 percent a year. So, my
point is, the odds of cattle ranchers wiping out the population
is zero. And, in fact, even keeping up with the increase in
population at this particular point is unlikely.
Mr. Besher. Absolutely.
Mr. Bentz. Is that a correct take on the situation?
Mr. Besher. Yes, sir.
Mr. Bentz. So, why in the world you are having to go
through this work is unclear to me.
I want to shift to Mr. Graham. The concept of too many
black vultures on the one hand, and now too many sharks on the
other is pretty apparent. But is that the outcome that you are
seeking when it comes to this independent group?
Sure, we already know you are suffering depredation issues.
What is it that you want to see happen?
Mr. Graham. Well, I mean, and too many red snappers, too.
We have to talk.
But I think there are a lot of answers. I mean, like I
said, we have been trying to use devices. I think we need to
research why. I think we need to know why this is happening. Is
it because we protected all these fish species? Is it because
we protected the vultures? Is it because we protected all these
different species of sharks, and has that conservation worked?
And if so, we should be very proud of that.
But we have now created a sustainable resource, made
another resource unsustainable, a more popular resource of tuna
and steak, I might add. So, now we need to know how do we sort
this out to where we can balance this thing.
Mr. Bentz. What is the life of a shark? How long does a
shark live?
Mr. Graham. Oh gosh, it would have to be in the 40 to 50
years range.
Mr. Bentz. So, if you are going to rely upon figuring out
how to make the population decline naturally, you have a long
wait. Is your suggestion that, should the study indicate there
are too many sharks, then there is going to be some way to
reduce the population? Is that the ultimate outcome you are
seeking?
Mr. Graham. I think there are ways to definitely reduce the
population in a sustainable way, absolutely. So, if that be the
case, there are markets, there are fish. A tuna is a fish, so
absolutely.
I think you have to look at the previous markets from
previous years before this was an issue, and go from there and
see how we can sort it out.
Mr. Bentz. All right. I want to thank the panel for all of
your patience with our questions and for sitting in such close
quarters. I really wish we had had more space for you. And I
want to thank you for your testimony and thank the Members for
the questions.
The members of the Committee may have some additional
questions for the witnesses, and we will ask you to respond to
these in writing.
Under Committee Rule 3, members of the Committee must
submit questions to the Subcommittee Clerk by 5 p.m. Eastern
Time on Tuesday, August 1. The hearing record will be held open
for 10 business days for these responses.
If there is no further business, hearing none, without
objection the Subcommittee stands adjourned.

[Whereupon, at 1:10 p.m., the Subcommittee was adjourned.]

[ADDITIONAL MATERIALS SUBMITTED FOR THE RECORD]

Statement for the Record
U.S. Department of the Interior
on H.R. 4094, Great Salt Lake Stewardship Act

Thank you for the opportunity to provide this statement on H.R.
4094, the Great Salt Lake Stewardship Act. If enacted, this legislation
would amend Title II of the Central Utah Project Completion Act (CUPCA)
P.L. 102-575 and include a new Section 213. Enacted in 1992, Title II
of CUPCA authorized budget authority for development of Central Utah
Project features and created a successful water conservation program
entitled the Water Management Improvement Program, in Section 207. This
new Section 213 would provide additional flexibility for the Department
to utilize any unexpended budget authority that may be available from
other sections of Title II to augment the Water Management Improvement
Program.

In addition, H.R. 4094 would expand the geographic area covered by
CUPCA's Water Management Improvement Program to consider water
conservation measures in the Great Salt Lake drainage basin. Water
conservation measures implemented under this amendment would be
considered compliant with the Bonneville Unit's Definite Plan Report.

Drought and climate change are having a significant effect on water
resources in the Western United States including impacts to the Great
Salt Lake. Should Congress enact this legislation, the Department will
consider additional water conservation measures, including in the Great
Salt Lake drainage basin, while continuing to prioritize construction
of the Central Utah Project.

______

Statement for the Record
U.S. Bureau of Reclamation
H.R. 4596, Upper Colorado and San Juan River Basins Endangered Fish
Recovery Programs Reauthorization Act of 2023

Thank you for the opportunity to provide Interior's views on H.R.
4596, Upper Colorado and San Juan River Basins Endangered Fish Recovery
Programs Reauthorization Act of 2023.
H.R. 4596, Upper Colorado and San Juan River Basins Endangered Fish
Recovery Programs Reauthorization Act of 2023

This bill would extend authority for the Upper Colorado River and
San Juan River Basin endangered fish recovery implementation programs
(recovery programs). Reclamation supports and urges reauthorization of
these important and successful recovery programs. Reauthorization of
the recovery programs provides certainty for the programs and ensures
current and future water development in the Upper Colorado River Basin.
For more than 30 years, the recovery programs have been a model of
Endangered Species Act (ESA) implementation. The recovery programs'
goals are to protect and recover federally listed fishes (Colorado
pikeminnow, razorback sucker, humpback chub, and bonytail) found only
in the Colorado River basin while water development proceeds according
to federal and state laws, interstate compacts, Supreme Court decrees,
and federal trust responsibility to Tribes. The recovery programs'
actions provide ESA compliance for more than 2,500 federal, Tribal, and
non-federal water projects which deliver more than 3.69 million acre-
feet of water for agricultural, industrial, Tribal, and municipal uses.
The recovery programs facilitate delivery from Flaming Gorge, Navajo,
and Aspinall Unit reservoirs of the Colorado River Storage Project
(CRSP) which collectively have more than 6.6 million acre-feet of
storage capacity, as well as depletions of a few acre-feet or less by
small, individual, projects in the four Upper Basin states of Colorado,
New Mexico, Utah, and Wyoming.
When the recovery programs were initiated in 1988 and 1992, the
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service indicated that the trajectory of all
four listed species was toward extinction. The implementation of these
recovery programs has not only prevented extinctions, but substantially
improved the prospect for recovering the listed fish while
simultaneously providing timely implementation of water delivery and
hydropower projects. The recovery programs have contributed to the
downlisting of the humpback chub from endangered to threatened in 2021.
The razorback sucker is being recommended for downlisting based on
reestablishment of adult populations across the Colorado River basin
and increasing signs of natural recruitment.
Participants in the recovery programs include the Upper Basin
states; federal agencies, including the Bureau of Reclamation, Fish and
Wildlife Service, Western Area Power Administration, National Park
Service, Bureau of Land Management, and Bureau of Indian Affairs;
American Indian Tribes including the Navajo Nation, Jicarilla Apache
Nation, Southern Ute Tribe, and Ute Mountain Ute Tribe; water users;
power users; and environmental organizations.
Similar to other recovery and conservation programs outside of the
Upper Colorado River Basin which have cost-share between Federal and
non-Federal sources, these two recovery programs have historically been
supported from a variety of funding sources, including cash and in-kind
contributions by states, water users, and power customers, as well as
hydropower revenues and federal appropriations. Shared contributions
from program participants are essential for the continued success of
the recovery programs.
Recovery program activities are implemented through a combination
of annual base funding and capital project expenditures. Annual base
funding supports recurring expenses for staff time, facility operations
and maintenance, field activities, monitoring and data collection, data
analysis and management, public outreach, committee meetings, and
general administrative support. Capital funding supports major
infrastructure improvements implemented at reservoirs, canals,
diversion dams, and floodplains across the basin.
Reclamation supports this bill and urges extended re-authorization
of P.L. 106-392 as the continued recovery of endangered and threatened
species is essential to Reclamation's mission. The continued success of
the recovery programs to ensure the recovery of threatened and
endangered fish will provide certainty and allow for continued
operation and future water development in the Upper Colorado River
Basin.

______

Submissions for the Record by Rep. Grijalva

OCEANA

August 4, 2023

Hon. Cliff Bentz, Chairman
Hon. Jared Huffman, Ranking Member
House Natural Resources Committee
Subcommittee on Water, Wildlife and Fisheries
Washington, DC 20515

Re: SHARKED Act--July 27, 2023 Subcommittee on Water, Wildlife and
Fisheries Legislative Hearing

Dear Chair Bentz and Ranking Member Huffman:

On behalf of Oceana and its 1.2 million members and supporters in
the United States we write to provide feedback and concerns about H.R.
4051, Supporting the Health of Aquatic systems through Research,
Knowledge, and Enhanced Dialogue Act (SHARKED Act) which focuses on
potentially problematic solutions to ``depredation,'' the phenomenon of
sharks eating fish previously hooked by commercial and recreational
fishermen. Shark conservation and modern management has been a priority
of Oceana's for many years. As written, Oceana cannot support this
bill. Instead of the SHARKED Act, we recommend that this subcommittee
focus on the variety of much-needed improvements to the way that
America's shark populations are managed and providing adequate
resources to the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA)
to better understand and manage America's shark populations.
Modern, science-based fishery management under the Magnuson-Stevens
Act (MSA) works, if administered responsibly and effectively. Dozens of
fish species around the country have benefited from the requirements of
the Magnuson-Stevens Act. However, sharks have largely been ignored by
the fishery management process and the outcomes on the water show this.
More than half of all U.S. shark stocks lack the fundamental
information to support proper management according to the most recent
Status of the Stocks report from the National Marine Fisheries Service,
the relevant agency within the National Oceanic & Atmospheric
Administration (NOAA) (``Fisheries Service or ``NOAA Fisheries''). Many
more are mismanaged through crude tools like stock complexes that group
shark species arbitrarily and not based on common biological
attributes.
The SHARKED Act has two major proposals. First it will create a
duplicative ``Task Force'' to explore the issue of shark depredation;
develop ways to improve coordination and communication and education to
``address'' shark depredation; and identify research priorities and
funding opportunities. Most alarmingly, the bill charges the Task Force
to ``develop recommended management strategies to address shark
depredation'' without any reference to current fishery law.
Second the SHARKED Act will amend the Magnuson-Stevens Act to
expand the list of existing Cooperative Research and Management
Programs to include ``projects to better understand shark depredation,
including identifying what causes increases in shark depredation and
determining how to best address shark depredation.'' Improving U.S.
shark management is needed but the SHARKED Act, as proposed, will do
little, if anything to solve these problems facing sharks. In fact, it
may make things worse. Instead of supporting a niche bill designed to
respond to a perceived problem, Congress should be working on improving
U.S. shark management and on-the-water outcomes for these imperiled
species, including better management of ``depredation.''
As introduced, the SHARKED Act is unnecessary and duplicative of
existing programs, requirements and authorities in federal fisheries
management. The SHARKED Act will take limited funds and resources away
from existing, under-resourced fishery science and management programs
around the country. And the SHARKED Act could also allow unproven
management strategies to take hold instead of science-based management
that has been the heart of MSA management for decades. In the words of
one witness and charter captain in last week's House Natural Resources
Subcommittee on Water, Wildlife and Fisheries hearing, this bill may
open the door to ``reducing the population of sharks in a sustainable
way.'' \1\ This witness was likely referring to one of the provisions
of the SHARKED Act, which requires the Task Force to identify research
and funding opportunities for using ``non-lethal deterrents'' and other
management strategies that may be harmful to shark populations without
reference to the requirements of the Magnuson-Stevens Act.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Oral Testimony of Mr. Jack Graham, Captain Afishianado Charters
on H.R. 4051 available at https://naturalresources.house.gov/calendar/
eventsingle.aspx?EventID=414642 (Last accessed July 31, 2023 at
3:07:50).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Instead of pursuing the SHARKED Act, Congress should first seek to
improve shark management in the U.S. and ensure robust funding for
shark science and management. Other legislative efforts should
prioritize the threats to global shark populations, the role of the
U.S. in shark management and how effective modern management can help
restore and protect these key parts of the ocean ecosystem. The
Magnuson-Stevens Act provides powerful tools for the U.S. to use
science-based fisheries management including requirements to set
meaningful catch limits (including for bycatch) and establish
safeguards along these lines. If fully implemented and funded, modern
shark management can restore our shark populations and help respond to
a variety issues, even including depredation. However, because of
mismanagement and excessive exceptions and exemptions, many shark
stocks are in trouble.
Congress should seek to ensure U.S. shark science and management
are fully supported--rather than detracting from important fishery
science and management priorities. In order to improve our shark
populations and the management responses available for issues like
depredation, we must ensure that there are updated, high-quality stock
assessments and robust mechanisms to administer fishery management
regulations. With respect to depredation specifically, NOAA Fisheries
has clearly stated that more can be done to address depredation if
provided with resources to do this.\2\ Congress should follow through
and allow the Fisheries Service to build on the work it started in the
2022 depredation report.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ NOAA Report to Congress, 2022. Interactions between bottlenose
dolphins and sharks in commercial, for-hire, and private recreational
fisheries in the Gulf of Mexico and South Atlantic. NOAA Report to
Congress, 2022. (https://media.fisheries.noaa.gov/2022-08/NMFS-
Assessment-Fishing-Interference-RTC-08_29_22.pdf)
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
We have fought too hard for too many decades to restore shark
populations and end harmful shark fishing practices, and the work is
far from done. Sharks are integral to healthy ecosystems because they
keep prey species populations in check. Sharks also bring scuba divers,
snorkelers, and others out to our waters, hoping for a chance to
witness them. In Florida alone, sharks add around $350 million in
economic impact per year.
On behalf of our supporters, we are concerned by the SHARKED Act's
wasteful directives and potential to harm other fishery science and
management priorities. For these reasons, we urge Chairman Bentz and
Ranking Member Huffman to reject this bill in favor of a comprehensive
shark management and funding strategy. This broader approach will
improve the science, management, and outcomes for these species rather
than focusing on niche, unproven approaches that will improve
management and management outcomes for all sharks, including
depredation issues with other fisheries.
Oceana does not support the SHARKED Act and we appreciate the
opportunity to comment and urge you to consider our perspective in this
conversation.

Sincerely,

Gib Brogan,
Campaign Director, U.S. Fisheries

______

ATTACHMENT

The SHARKED Act is Duplicative of Existing Programs

In many ways, both major priorities of the SHARKED Act are
duplicative of existing programs and authorities in U.S. shark
management. The Fisheries Service has career staff exploring the issues
raised in the SHARKED Act and has already produced useful results from
their work. It is important to note that as recently as 2022 the
Fisheries Service produced a report at the direction of Congress
entitled ``Interactions between bottlenose dolphins and sharks in
commercial, for-hire, and private recreational fisheries in the Gulf of
Mexico and South Atlantic \3\'' that explored the interactions between
both bottlenose dolphins and sharks and fisheries in the Gulf of Mexico
and South Atlantic that ``quantified the degree to which dolphins and
sharks interfere with commercial, charter, and recreational fishing and
recommends non-lethal methods to deter dolphins and sharks.\4\''
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ NOAA Report to Congress, 2022. Interactions between bottlenose
dolphins and sharks in commercial, for-hire, and private recreational
fisheries in the Gulf of Mexico and South Atlantic. NOAA Report to
Congress, 2022. (https://media.fisheries.noaa.gov/2022-08/NMFS-
Assessment-Fishing-Interference-RTC-08_29_22.pdf)
\4\ NOAA Website, Debunking Common Shark Myths, https://
www.fisheries.noaa.gov/feature-story/debunking-common-shark-myths
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
This report concluded: ``the nature, extent, frequency, and
geographic locations of dolphin- and shark-fishery interactions are not
fully understood.'' Further, ``(m)ore data would be needed to improve
our ability to quantify dolphin and shark interactions with fisheries.
These data could be collected if additional resources were available to
augment and analyze existing datasets.''
The report then went on to advise on the status of various
management tools, including those specified in the SHARKED Act and to
reiterate that ``an enhanced, thoughtful, and collaborative approach is
needed to manage the complex nature of fishery interactions with
dolphins and sharks, in coordination with numerous stakeholders,
including state natural resource agencies, commercial and recreational
fishers, researchers and academics, and others.'' The Fisheries Service
ends with a commitment to pursuing this issue to ``the fullest extent
our resources allow.\5\''
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\ NOAA Report to Congress, 2022. Interactions between bottlenose
dolphins and sharks in commercial, for-hire, and private recreational
fisheries in the Gulf of Mexico and South Atlantic. NOAA Report to
Congress, 2022. (https://media.fisheries.noaa.gov/2022-08/NMFS-
Assessment-Fishing-Interference-RTC-08_29_22.pdf) Executive summary
page 6.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Finally, the Fisheries Service notes ``we hope to identify best
practices that will help fishermen to avoid unwanted interactions with
sharks.''

The SHARKED Act will take funding from other fishery research
priorities

A robust cooperative fishery research program supports fishery
science and management around the country by partnering scientists with
members of the commercial, recreational and for-hire fisheries. These
programs are guided by existing policy and guidelines including clear
language in the Magnuson-Stevens Act that spells out that cooperative
research ``should address needs identified under this Act and under any
other marine resource laws enforced by the Secretary,'' and that
funding should be ``part of a coherent program of research focused on
solving priority issues identified by the Councils'' giving priority to
the following projects:

Projects to collect data to improve, supplement, or
enhance stock assessments, including the use of fishing
vessels or acoustic or other marine technology.

Projects to assess the amount and type of bycatch or post-
release mortality occurring in a fishery.

Conservation engineering projects designed to reduce
bycatch, including avoidance of post-release mortality,
reduction of bycatch in high seas fisheries, and transfer
of such fishing technologies to other nations.

Projects for the identification of habitat areas of
particular concern and for habitat conservation.

Projects designed to collect and compile economic and
social data.\6\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\6\ Magnuson-Stevens Act Section 318(c).

The existing cooperative research program supports many worthy
fishery research projects in fisheries from New England to the Western
Pacific. Adding a narrowly specific priority for depredation studies
will likely alter funding streams across the country with unknown
effects. It is important to note that research on shark depredation is
currently provided for and the agency notes ``NOAA Fisheries has funded
several cooperative research studies in the Atlantic and Gulf of Mexico
aimed at characterizing and reducing the extent of shark depredation in
the region . . . collecting genetic data to identify which shark
species are mostly commonly responsible for depredation events and
surveying fishermen about their depredation experiences.''
Because of the recent finding of the Fisheries Service report and
the current research being conducted under MSA, both of the primary
sections of the SHARKED Act are already in progress. U.S. shark
management does not need this legislation to recreate the wheel that is
already rolling at the Fisheries Service. Instead, Congress should
focus on improving shark management in U.S. fisheries and fully funding
shark science and management through the appropriations process with
new funding for depredation research, management and outreach.

The SHARKED Act will not improve failing shark management in the U.S.

U.S. management of shark populations is failing. As a group, sharks
grow slowly, mature late, and then produce relatively few young. As a
result, they are sensitive to overexploitation, as we have seen over
the years, with global oceanic shark and ray abundance decreasing by
more than 70 percent since 1970. To make things worse in the U.S.,
managers don't know the status of more than 54% of the 66 shark stocks
under federal management and only 23% of U.S. shark stocks are healthy
(not overfished or experiencing overfishing). The below graphic is from
the 2021 Status of Stocks, but the data has not changed in the new
assessment.

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

.eps(Source https://usa.oceana.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/4/
Oceana-SharkFacts-9-2-Final.pdf)

Instead of the shortsighted SHARKED Act, Congress should prioritize
improving management of shark stocks and fully funding the Fisheries
Service's shark assessment and research efforts instead of the wide
latitude and duplicative effort offered in SHARKED Act.

______

NATIONAL AUDUBON SOCIETY

Salt Lake City, UT

July 26, 2023

Hon. Mike Lee                 Hon. Mitt Romney
U.S. Senate                   U.S. Senate
Russell Senate Office Bldg    Russell Senate Office Bldg
Washington, DC 20510          Washington, DC 20510

Hon. John Curtis              Hon. Chris Stewart
U.S. House of
Representatives               U.S. House of Representatives
Rayburn House Office Bldg     Cannon House Office Bldg
Washington, DC 20515          Washington, DC 20515

Hon. Burgess Owens            Hon. Blake Moore
U.S. House of
Representatives               U.S. House of Representatives
Cannon House Office Bldg      Longworth House Office Bldg
Washington, DC 20515          Washington, DC 20515

Re: Audubon Support for the Great Salt Lake Stewardship Act (H.R. 4094,
S. 1955)

Dear Utah Congressional Delegation:

On behalf of National Audubon Society (Audubon), I write to express
support for the Great Salt Lake Stewardship Act. Audubon and its Saline
Lakes Program, as part of our Western Water Initiative, works to
advance balanced solutions for water use to ensure that birds,
ecosystems, people, and economies that rely on water resources can
thrive.
For more than 25 years, Audubon has been working to protect Great
Salt Lake, including managing the Gillmor Sanctuary on the Shore of
Great Salt Lake to provide wetland habitat for shorebirds and other
waterbirds.
Great Salt Lake and other saline lake ecosystems are faced with
serious challenges resulting from decreased inflows and diversions,
drought, and the impacts of a changing climate. The devastating
implications of drying lakes on people, businesses and the environment
throughout the world is well known.
Increasing water conservation efforts and reducing water
consumption is particularly essential to preserve Great Salt Lake and
its surrounding wetlands habitats. Thus, many of our efforts in Utah
support frameworks and tools to help communities and businesses
conserve and balance demand for the state's limited water supplies.
The Great Salt Lake Stewardship Act provides an important means to
aid the State of Utah and its residents in their continuing efforts to
stretch limited water supplies through the Central Utah Project
Completion Act's purpose of promoting water conservation projects in
the Great Salt Lake basin, which could in turn benefit the lake and
surrounding communities.

We greatly appreciate the support of the entire Utah Congressional
Delegation in introducing and advancing the Great Salt Lake Stewardship
Act.

Sincerely,

Marcelle Shoop,
Director, Saline Lakes Program

______

August 2, 2023

Hon. Cliff Bentz, Chairman
Hon. Jared Huffman, Ranking Member
House Natural Resources Committee
Subcommittee on Water, Wildlife and Fisheries
Washington, DC 20515

Re: National and Regional Organizations Support the Bipartisan New
York-New Jersey Watershed Protection Act (H.R. 2982/S. 1335)

Dear Chairman Bentz and Ranking Member Huffman:

As representatives of organizations nationwide as well as in New
York and New Jersey, we support H.R. 2982/S. 1335, the New York-New
Jersey Watershed Protection Act (NYNJWPA). This year provides a
historic opportunity to authorize the NYNJWPA and ensure that
communities across the New York-New Jersey region have the opportunity
to collaborate with the federal government to advance local watershed
management that many other regions have benefited from for decades.

Along with supplying clean water to some 15 million Americans
living in one of the country's most densely populated and economically
diverse regions, the harbor and its watersheds--including the Hudson,
Mohawk, Raritan, Passaic, Hackensack, and Bronx rivers--host some of
the busiest U.S. ports, provide opportunities for tourism and outdoor
recreation that attract people from around the world and improve public
health, sustain significant fisheries and critical wildlife habitat,
and protect businesses and vital infrastructure from flooding and other
storm-related damages. Additionally, the NYNJWPA will provide critical
support for rural communities across the region by providing funding to
support local public access and wildlife management plans. The
conservation of this watershed is especially critical as the home to
millions of Americans and significant economic activity; in addition to
ensuring a healthy and resilient ecosystem, and promoting jobs for the
family-owned businesses equipped to do habitat restoration work, it is
critical to secure and improve public access for outdoor recreationists
including sportsmen and women.

The NYNJWPA offers a once-in-a-generation opportunity to secure a
coordinated, watershed-wide program built upon decades of efforts to
restore some of the nation's most impaired and degraded waters. Federal
partnerships in the watersheds of Chesapeake Bay, Delaware River, Long
Island Sound, Lake Champlain, the Great Lakes, and others have
successfully demonstrated how such a program can deliver direct
benefits to the environment, local communities, and state economies.
Notably, the grant program authorized by this legislation will match
local funds and leverage additional resources to assist communities
lacking in environmental justice, as well as the small, rural
communities that are critical to the economic and environmental well-
being of the watershed.

These waterways play a critical role in enhancing Americans'
quality of life, health, and prosperity, and in restoring communities
disproportionately challenged by climate change. Local partnerships are
strong and regional priorities have been established through dozens of
science-based, consensus-driven plans to manage these natural resources
and protect fish and wildlife habitats, improve water quality, increase
public access to the water, mitigate flood risks, and develop public
outreach and educational activities. In addition to helping to
implement these locally approved plans, federal leadership,
coordination, and resources will amplify their impacts by promoting
collaboration that will ensure on-the-ground public benefits span the
entire region.
The New York-New Jersey Watershed Protection Act is essential to
the recovery of the region's water, economic well-being, wildlife, and
communities. We strongly support the passage of this legislation and
urge Senators and Representatives to move this legislation forward
during the 118th Congress.

Sincerely,

Scenic Hudson                 NJ Chapter of Backcountry Hunters
& Anglers

Riverkeeper                   NY Chapter of Backcountry Hunters
& Anglers

Boone and Crockett Club       NY-NJ Baykeeper

Engineers Labor-Employer
Cooperative Local 825         Nature Conservancy of New York

Hudson River Sloop
Clearwater                    Nature Conservancy of New Jersey

Mississippi River Trust

______

Prepared Statement of the Hon. Paul Tonko, a Representative in Congress
from the State of New York
on H.R. 2982, the New York-New Jersey Watershed Protection Act

Thank you, Chairman Bentz and Ranking Member Huffman, for the
opportunity to address the Subcommittee and for including my bill, H.R.
2982, the New York-New Jersey Watershed Protection Act, in today's
hearing.
I am proud to represent New York's Capital Region, a community and
economy that is inextricably linked to the historic Hudson and Mohawk
Rivers that flow nearby. These waters, along with the Raritan River and
their tributaries, make up the nation's most populous watershed. Our
water resources serve as sources of drinking water for millions of
people, provide habitats for more than 200 fish species, and support
critical outdoor recreation and tourism industries.
Like water resources all across the country, our waterways have,
for decades, faced severe challenges that threaten public health and
safety. The Hudson River is the nation's largest Superfund site.
Hazardous waste and legacy chemicals remain unacceptably high,
threatening the health and safety of ecosystems, wildlife, and human
health throughout the entire Watershed. The metropolitan area includes
more than 500 miles of coastline, yet only a scant few of those miles
are available for outdoor recreation, and even fewer in communities
experiencing environmental injustice.
Record rainfall over this past month has caused catastrophic
flooding across New York, endangering families and communities and
causing significant infrastructure damage, closed roadways, and delayed
travel. Extreme weather events and the impacts of sea-level rise like
increasing storm surges and flood risks are only being exacerbated by
the climate crisis.
We must take pause and re-evaluate our connection and
responsibility to the waters of our region.
Local watershed stewardship--by coordinated groups of community
leaders, scientists, outdoor recreationists, and others--is so
important to restoring the health and resilience of our water
resources, and the communities and economies that rely on them. Across
the nation, there is a network of effective regional watershed
programs--for example, in Delaware, the Great Lakes, and the Chesapeake
Bay--that create a targeted role for the federal government in
coordinating and boosting local conservation efforts.
The New York-New Jersey Watershed Protection Act would fill a gap
in our nation's regional watershed programs by extending this existing
model to the Hudson, Mohawk, and Raritan Rivers and their tributaries.
I am proud to have reintroduced this legislation in the 118th
Congress with 20 bipartisan co-sponsors and more than 50 local and
national stakeholder groups. The bill would establish the New York-New
Jersey Watershed Restoration Program and Grant Program to coordinate
restoration efforts across the region, build local capacity, and
implement local restoration plans that communities have already found
consensus on. The program would ensure that restoration efforts utilize
science-based principles to protect fish and wildlife habitats, improve
water quality, increase public access, mitigate flood risks.
I greatly appreciated the engagement from my colleagues across the
aisle in the 117th Congress that resulted in new additions and changes
to the bill before it advanced out of Committee and was passed by the
House, and I am prepared and eager to work with you to continue that
process in the 118th Congress.
The New York-New Jersey Watershed is an economic engine not just
for our local communities, but for the nation, and federal investment
is long overdue to ensure that these water resources can continue to
boost economic opportunity, tourism, and outdoor recreation, while
protecting public health and access to clean water.

[all]
