- LEGISLATIVE HEARING ON H.R. 6841, TO AMEND THE COASTAL ZONE MANAGEMENT ACT OF 1972 TO ALLOW THE SECRETARY OF COMMERCE TO ESTABLISH A COASTAL AND ESTUARINE RESILIENCE AND RESTORA- TION PROGRAM, AND FOR OTHER PUR- POSES; H.R. 7925, TO PROVIDE FOR THE STANDARDIZATION, PUBLICATION, AND ACCESSIBILITY OF DATA RELATING TO PUBLIC OUTDOOR RECREATIONAL USE OF FEDERAL WATERWAYS, AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES, "MODERNIZING ACCESS TO OUR PUBLIC OCEANS ACT"; H.R. 8704, TO RE- QUIRE THE SECRETARY OF COMMERCE TO ESTABLISH A GRANT PROGRAM TO FOSTER ENHANCED COEXISTENCE BETWEEN OCEAN USERS AND NORTH ATLANTIC RIGHT WHALES AND OTHER LARGE CETACEAN SPECIES; AND H.R. 8705, TO REQUIRE THE ADMINISTRATOR OF THE NATIONAL OCE- ANIC AND ATMOSPHERIC ADMINISTRATION TO REFORM THE MARINE RECREATIONAL INFORMATION PROGRAM OF THE NA- TIONAL MARINE FISHERIES SERVICE, AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES, "FISHERIES DATA MODERNIZATION AND ACCURACY ACT OF 2024"

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

H.R. 6841, H.R. 7925, H.R. 8704,
AND H.R. 8705

=======================================================================

LEGISLATIVE HEARING

before the

SUBCOMMITTEE ON WATER, WILDLIFE AND
FISHERIES

of the

COMMITTEE ON NATURAL RESOURCES
U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION
__________

Thursday, June 27, 2024
__________

Serial No. 118-132
__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Natural Resources

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.govinfo.gov
or
Committee address: http://naturalresources.house.gov
______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

56-169 PDF                 WASHINGTON : 2025

COMMITTEE ON NATURAL RESOURCES

BRUCE WESTERMAN, AR, Chairman
DOUG LAMBORN, CO, Vice Chairman
RAUL M. GRIJALVA, AZ, Ranking Member

Doug Lamborn, CO                     Grace F. Napolitano, CA
Robert J. Wittman, VA                Gregorio Kilili Camacho Sablan,
Tom McClintock, CA                     CNMI
Paul Gosar, AZ                       Jared Huffman, CA
Garret Graves, LA                    Ruben Gallego, AZ
Aumua Amata C. Radewagen, AS         Joe Neguse, CO
Doug LaMalfa, CA                     Mike Levin, CA
Daniel Webster, FL                   Katie Porter, CA
Jenniffer Gonzalez-Colon, PR         Teresa Leger Fernandez, NM
Russ Fulcher, ID                     Melanie A. Stansbury, NM
Pete Stauber, MN                     Mary Sattler Peltola, AK
John R. Curtis, UT                   Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez, NY
Tom Tiffany, WI                      Kevin Mullin, CA
Jerry Carl, AL                       Val T. Hoyle, OR
Matt Rosendale, MT                   Sydney Kamlager-Dove, CA
Lauren Boebert, CO                   Seth Magaziner, RI
Cliff Bentz, OR                      Nydia M. Velazquez, NY
Jen Kiggans, VA                      Ed Case, HI
Jim Moylan, GU                       Debbie Dingell, MI
Wesley P. Hunt, TX                   Susie Lee, NV
Mike Collins, GA
Anna Paulina Luna, FL
John Duarte, CA
Harriet M. Hageman, WY
Vivian Moeglein, Staff Director
Tom Connally, Chief Counsel
Lora Snyder, Democratic Staff Director
http://naturalresources.house.gov
------

SUBCOMMITTEE ON WATER, WILDLIFE AND FISHERIES

CLIFF BENTZ, OR, Chairman
JEN KIGGANS, VA, Vice Chair
JARED HUFFMAN, CA, Ranking Member

Robert J. Wittman, VA                Grace F. Napolitano, CA
Tom McClintock, CA                   Mike Levin, CA
Garret Graves, LA                    Mary Sattler Peltola, AK
Aumua Amata C. Radewagen, AS         Kevin Mullin, CA
Doug LaMalfa, CA                     Val T. Hoyle, OR
Daniel Webster, FL                   Seth Magaziner, RI
Jenniffer Gonzalez-Colon, PR         Debbie Dingell, MI
Jerry Carl, AL                       Ruben Gallego, AZ
Lauren Boebert, CO                   Joe Neguse, CO
Jen Kiggans, VA                      Katie Porter, CA
Anna Paulina Luna, FL                Ed Case, HI
John Duarte, CA                      Raul M. Grijalva, AZ, ex officio
Harriet M. Hageman, WY
Bruce Westerman, AR, ex officio

------

CONTENTS

----------
Page

Hearing Memo.....................................................     v
Hearing held on Thursday, June 27, 2024..........................     1

Statement of Members:

Bentz, Hon. Cliff, a Representative in Congress from the
State of Oregon............................................     2
Huffman, Hon. Jared, a Representative in Congress from the
State of California........................................     4

Panel I:

Graves, Hon. Garret, a Representative in Congress from the
State of Louisiana.........................................     5
Levin, Hon. Mike, a Representative in Congress from the State
of California..............................................     7
Carter, Hon. Earl L. ``Buddy'', a Representative in Congress
from the State of Georgia..................................     8
D'Esposito, Hon. Anthony, a Representative in Congress from
the State of New York......................................    10

Statement of Witnesses:

Panel II:

Howell, Evan, Director, National Marine Fisheries Service
Office of Science and Technology, NOAA, U.S. Department of
Commerce, Silver Spring, Maryland..........................    11
Prepared statement of....................................    13
Questions submitted for the record.......................    17
Guyas, Martha, Southeast Fisheries Policy Director, American
Sportfishing Association, Tallahassee, Florida.............    18
Prepared statement of....................................    20
Questions submitted for the record.......................    24
Strong, Jeff, Chair of the Marine Retailers Association of
the Americans Board of Directors, and President of Strong's
Marine, Mattituck, New York................................    25
Prepared statement of....................................    26
Questions submitted for the record.......................    29
Redfern, Jessica, Associate Vice President for Ocean
Conservation Science, Anderson Cabot Center for Ocean Life,
New England Aquarium, Boston, Massachusetts................    30
Prepared statement of....................................    32
McCurry, James (Jamie), Jr., Chief Administrative Officer,
Georgia Ports Authority, Savannah, Georgia.................    43
Prepared statement of....................................    45
Questions submitted for the record.......................    47

Additional Materials Submitted for the Record:

Submissions for the Record by Representative Bentz

Georgia Ports Authority, Letter to the Secretary of
Commerce...............................................    72
National Marine Manufacturers Association, Letter to the
Committee..............................................    74
Marine Industries, Letter to the Secretary of Commerce...    78
Viking Yachts, Letter to the Committee...................    82

Submissions for the Record by Representative Graves

Jared Huffman, Letter to NOAA............................    69

Submissions for the Record by Representative Huffman

Conservation Groups, Letter to the Committee.............    85

Submissions for the Record by Representative Levin

Port Gamble S'Klallam Tribe, Letter to the Committee.....    88

Submissions for the Record by Representative Fry

Post and Courier, ``Commentary: NOAA's proposed vessel-
speed rule would devastate SC's coastal economy........    60

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

To:        Subcommittee on Water, Wildlife and Fisheries Republican
Members

From:     Subcommittee on Water, Wildlife and Fisheries staff: Annick
Miller, x58331 (
[email protected]
), Thomas Shipman
(thomas.
[email protected]
), and Kirby Struhar
(
[email protected]
. gov)

Date:     Thursday, June 27, 2024

Subject:   Legislative Hearing on H.R. 6841, H.R. 7925, H.R. 8704, and
H.R. 8705
________________________________________________________________________

The Subcommittee on Water, Wildlife and Fisheries will hold a
legislative hearing on: H.R. 6841 (Rep. Levin), To amend the Coastal
Zone Management Act of 1972; H.R. 7925 (Rep. D'Esposito), ``Modernizing
Access to Our Public Oceans (MAPOceans) Act''; H.R. 8704 (Rep. Carter),
To require the Secretary of Commerce to establish a grant program to
foster enhanced coexistence between ocean users and North Atlantic
right whales and other large cetacean species; and H.R. 8705 (Rep.
Graves of Louisiana), the ``Fisheries Data Modernization and Accuracy
Act'' on Thursday, June 27, 2024, at 9:30 a.m. in 1324 Longworth House
Office Building.

Member offices are requested to notify Lindsay Walton
(lindsay.walton @mail.house.gov) by 4:30 p.m. on Wednesday, June 26,
2024, if their Member intends to participate in the hearing.

I. KEY MESSAGES

H.R. 8704 would prevent the National Oceanic and
Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) from finalizing the
expanded vessel speed restriction rule first proposed in
2022, keeping the existing restriction in place. It also
would create a new grant program to encourage the
development and deployment of technology to reduce vessel
strikes of endangered species like the North Atlantic right
whale.

H.R. 6841 would reauthorize the Coastal and Estuarine Land
Conservation Program and the National Estuarine Research
Reserve System, which help manage coastal areas.

H.R. 7925 would require NOAA to publish data related to
federal waterways in one location, ensuring safety and
improving the experience of ocean users.

H.R. 8705 would reform NOAA's Marine Recreational
Information Program (MRIP), encouraging NOAA to work more
effectively with states and entities like the National
Academies of Science, Engineering, and Medicine.

II. WITNESSES
Panel I

Members of Congress TBD

Panel II

Dr. Evan Howell, Director, National Marine Fisheries
Service Office of Science and Technology, NOAA, U.S.
Department of Commerce, Silver Spring, MD (All bills)

Ms. Martha Guyas, Southeast Fisheries Policy Director,
American Sportfishing Association, Tallahassee, FL (H.R.
8705)

Mr. James (Jamie) McCurry Jr., Chief Administrative
Officer, Georgia Ports Authority, Savannah, GA (H.R. 8704)

Mr. Jeff Strong, Chair of the Marine Retailers Association
of the Americas Board of Directors, and President of
Strong's Marine, Mattituck NY (H.R. 7925 and H.R. 8704)

Dr. Jessica Redfern, Associate Vice President for Ocean
Conservation Science, Anderson Cabot Center for Ocean Life,
New England Aquarium, Boston, MA [Minority Witness] (H.R.
8704)

III. BACKGROUND

H.R. 6841 (Rep. Levin, D-CA), To amend the Coastal Zone Management Act
of 1972 to allow the Secretary of Commerce to establish a
Coastal and Estuarine Resilience and Restoration Program, and
for other purposes.

The Coastal Zone Management Act of 1972 authorized three key
programs to help NOAA protect coastal communities.\1\ The National
Coastal Zone Management Program is a voluntary partnership between NOAA
and 34 coastal and Great Lakes states to design programs for effective
coastal management.\2\ The National Estuarine Research Reserve System
(System) is a collection of 30 sites in coastal communities along the
Pacific, Atlantic, and Gulf of Mexico coasts that allows NOAA to study
estuarine systems.\3\ The System encourages partnership between NOAA
and states to assist research, training, and education efforts for
stewardship of the System.\4\ Past focus topics include habitat
restoration efforts, increased resilience, and nonpoint source
pollution.\5\ Finally, the Coastal and Estuarine Land Conservation
Program (CELCP) works with coastal programs to purchase and conserve
coastal lands ``that are ecologically important or possess other
coastal conservation values, such as historic features, scenic views,
or recreational opportunities.'' \6\ It has ``protected more than
110,000 acres through funds to state and local governments'' \7\ to
help protect coastal and estuarine lands. Notably, the CELCP expired in
fiscal year (FY) 2013, with funding running out in FY 2017.\8\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ NOAA Office for Coastal Management. Coastal Zone Management
Act. https://coast.noaa.gov/czm/act/.
\2\ NOAA Office for Coastal Management. The National Coastal Zone
Management Program. https://coast.noaa.gov/czm/.
\3\ NOAA Office for Coastal Management. National Estuarine Research
Reserves. https://coast.noaa.gov/nerrs/.
\4\ NOAA Office for Coastal Management. National Estuarine Research
Reserves Overview. https://coast.noaa.gov/nerrs/about/.
\5\ Id.
\6\ NOAA Office for Coastal Management. The Coastal and Estuarine
Land Conservation Program. https://coast.noaa.gov/czm/
landconservation/.
\7\ Id.
\8\ Congresswoman Jen Kiggans. Kiggans, Colleagues Introduce
Bipartisan Bill to Protect Coastal Ecosystems. December 23, 2023.
https://kiggans.house.gov/posts/kiggans-colleagues-introduce-
bipartisan-bill-to-protect-coastal-ecosystems.

H.R. 6841 reauthorizes the CELCP, which the bill renames as the
Coastal and Estuarine Resilience and Restoration Program, at $60
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
million annually through FY 2028.

H.R. 6841 also reauthorizes the National Estuarine Research Reserve
System at $47 million annually through FY 2028. The legislation
requires the Secretary of Commerce to designate five additional
national estuarine reserves within five years of enactment. In
reauthorizing this program, the Secretary is directed to establish
research guidelines with estuarine systems and adds direction to
establish methods to model the impact of sea level rise. The
reauthorization also directs the Secretary to use the System's reserves
as the ``preferred placements for fellowship and research positions for
the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration.'' \9\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\9\ H.R. 6841. https://www.congress.gov/118/bills/hr6841/BILLS-
118hr6841ih.pdf.

H.R. 6841 has 9 Republican cosponsors and 8 Democrat cosponsors.
H.R. 7925 (Rep. D'Esposito, R-NY), ``Modernizing Access to Our Public
Oceans (MAPOceans) Act''

The United States' waterways serve commercial and recreational
industries critical to the domestic and global economy. Operating on
the water safely and effectively requires a wide variety of data,
including the types of vessels allowed to operate and other
restrictions that may be in place. The restrictions and data can vary
from region to region, which can often cause confusion.
The MAPOceans Act seeks to make this information readily
accessible. Specifically, the legislation directs the Secretary of
Commerce to work with stakeholders to develop standards to collect and
disseminate information. Such information includes when federal
waterways are open, no-wake zone areas or speed restrictions, the types
of vessels allowed, or the boundaries of fishing restrictions. The
Secretary would also be required to consult the public on the data used
and its accessibility.
The Secretary would be required to make this data available within
four years of enactment of this legislation, publishing it on a public
website and ensuring that the data is organized in a user-friendly way.
Additionally, the legislation requires the Secretary to update this
data no less than twice a year.
Given the changing dynamics of our federal waterways--with
restrictions and protocols varying from region to region--ensuring that
this information is publicly available and updated regularly will give
our ocean users the most up-to-date information. This will enhance the
recreational experience, encourage compliance with applicable laws and
regulations, and support industries that are vital to the American
economy.

H.R. 7925 has 6 Republican cosponsors and 10 Democrat cosponsors.
H.R. 8704 (Rep. Carter, R-GA), To require the Secretary of Commerce to
establish a grant program to foster enhanced coexistence
between ocean users and North Atlantic right whales and other
large cetacean species.

Several critical sectors of the American economy operate on
America's waters, including along the Atlantic Coast. Whether it's
fishing, tourism, or recreation, the vessels supporting these
activities vary in size and operate at different speeds. America's
waters, and the Atlantic coast, are also home to several endangered
species like the North Atlantic right whale. The multiple uses of the
United States' natural resources require effective strategies to
protect endangered species that do not unnecessarily inhibit or burden
ocean users.
Since 2008, NOAA has enforced a 10-knot speed limit on vessels 65
feet and longer to prevent them from striking the North Atlantic right
whale.\10\ While this restriction has made progress in preventing and
reducing vessel strikes,\11\ several stakeholders have advocated for
using technologies that allow vessel operators to detect whales in real
time.\12\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\10\ 50 C.F.R. Sec. 224.105; National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration (NOAA), National Marine Fisheries Service (NMFS),
``Amendments to the North Atlantic Right Whale Vessel Strike Reduction
Rule,'' 87 Federal Register 46921-46936, August 1, 2022. Hereinafter
NOAA, NMFS, ``Amendments to the North Atlantic Right Whale Vessel
Strike Reduction Rule.''
\11\ National Marine Fisheries Service Office of Protected
Resources. North Atlantic Right Whale (Eubalaena glacialis). Vessel
Speed Rule Assessment. June 2020. https://media.fisheries.noaa.gov/
2021-01/FINAL_NARW_Vessel_Speed_Rule_Report_Jun_2020.pdf?null.
\12\ National Marine Manufacturers Association. Recreational
Boating Industry Decries Advancement of Vessel Speed Rule. March 7,
2024. https://www.nmma.org/advocacy/news/
24641#::text=Proposed%20by%20NOAA%2C%20the%20rule,up%20the%20recreation
al%20 boating%20industry.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
In August of 2022, NOAA proposed an update to the current vessel
speed restriction rule, expanding it to include vessels from 35 to 65
feet.\13\ Throughout the comment period, stakeholders and industries
have told NOAA that this proposed expansion will dramatically limit
outdoor recreation sectors. Outdoor recreation contributed more than
$550 billion, or 2.2 percent, to the United States' gross domestic
product (GDP) in 2022.\14\ If implemented, the expanded restrictions
that are currently under review at the Office of Management and
Budget's Office of Information and Regulatory Affairs \15\ will have
devastating consequences.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\13\ 50 C.F.R. Sec. 224.105; National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration (NOAA), National Marine Fisheries Service (NMFS),
``Amendments to the North Atlantic Right Whale Vessel Strike Reduction
Rule,'' 87 Federal Register 46921-46936, August 1, 2022. Hereinafter
NOAA, NMFS, ``Amendments to the North Atlantic Right Whale Vessel
Strike Reduction Rule.''
\14\ U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis. Outdoor Recreation Satellite
Account, U.S. and States, 2022. https://www.bea.gov/news/2023/outdoor-
recreation-satellite-account-us-and-states-2022.
\15\ RIN 0648-BI88. Received date: March 5, 2024. https://
www.reginfo.gov/public/jsp/EO/
eoDashboard.myjsp?agency_cd=0600&agency_nm=DOC&stage_cd=3&from_page=inde
x.jsp&sub _index=0.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Last June, this Subcommittee held an oversight hearing on this
issue. Witnesses representing marine manufacturers, marine pilots, and
charter boats discussed how expanding the existing vessel speed
restriction rule would increase safety concerns, threaten industries
that depend on the maritime sector, and cause inefficiencies at ports
along the East Coast. Information from that hearing, including
testimony, can be found here, and the hearing memo can be found here.

H.R. 8704 prevents the devastating impacts of the proposed rule by
requiring the existing rule that has been in place since 2008 to remain
in place until December 31, 2030. Additionally, the legislation creates
a new grant program administered by the National Fish and Wildlife
Foundation (NFWF) to deploy innovative technologies and other best
practices to limit vessel strikes and other harmful interactions
between ocean users and species like the North Atlantic right whale.
This legislation will provide regulatory certainty to stakeholders,
encourage innovation, and ensure that endangered species like the North
Atlantic right whale are protected.

H.R. 8704 has 2 Republican cosponsors and 1 Democrat cosponsor.
H.R. 8705 (Rep. Graves, R-LA), ``Fisheries Data Modernization and
Accuracy Act''

NOAA's data collection and broader fisheries management efforts,
including their Marine Recreational Information Program (MRIP), have
long been the subject of criticism and concern. Last year, the Center
for Sportfishing Policy (CSP) released its ``Modern Fish Act
Implementation Report,'' which monitored and graded the federal
government's implementation of the Modernizing Recreational Fisheries
Management Act of 2018 (Modern Fish Act).\16\ According to CSP, the
Modern Fish Act ``recognizes that recreational and commercial fishing
are fundamentally different endeavors and should be managed
accordingly.'' \17\ While the report indicated that NMFS is improving
on implementing this law, CSP indicated that the agency is ``not yet
meeting expectations'' regarding the statute's section requiring the
improvement of federal-state cooperative data collection or
recreational data collection.\18\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\16\ 2023 Modern Fish Act Implementation Progress Report, Center
for Sportfishing Policy. http://www.sportfishingpolicy.com/2019-modern-
fish-act-implementation-progress-report/.
\17\ Id.
\18\ Id.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
In April of 2024, several members of the Committee on Natural
Resources sent a letter to NOAA's Assistant Administrator for
Fisheries, Janet Coit, expressing concern with NOAA's continued
reliance on the MRIP, stating that utilizing the survey is ``causing
premature fishery closures across the country, limiting both economic
and recreational opportunities.'' \19\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\19\ Letter to Assistant Administrator Coit. April 18, 2024.
https://garretgraves.house.gov/uploadedfiles/
2024.04.18_bicameral_ltr_to_nmfs_re_fisheries_data.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
H.R. 8705 seeks to reform MRIP to ensure that the best available
science and data are used by NOAA as it makes fisheries management
decisions. The legislation directs NOAA to establish a standing
committee with the National Academies of Science, Engineering, and
Medicine (NAS). Through the standing committee, NOAA and the NAS are
directed to meet regularly to work on recreational fisheries management
and data collection issues. They are specifically directed to consider
whether MRIP data is ``appropriate and useful for management
decisions'' \20\ and how the NAS' activities ``can and should be
applied in light of the particular context of the fishery being
considered.'' \21\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\20\ H.R. 8705. ``Fisheries Data Modernization and Accuracy Act.''
https://www.congress.gov/bill/118th-congress/house-bill/
8705?q=%7B%22search%22%3A%22hr+8705%22%7D&s=2&r=1.
\21\ Id.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
To encourage better management decisions, the legislation would
also require the Secretary to publish stock assessment plans in the
Federal Register to ensure they're regularly updated. The legislation
would also allow the Administrator of NOAA to partner with the private
sector to incorporate additional abundance surveys.
Finally, the legislation also gives states the ability to develop
their own recreational fishery data collection programs and would
create a new grant program within six months of enactment to encourage
those efforts.

IV. MAJOR PROVISIONS & ANALYSIS

H.R. 6841 (Rep. Levin, D-CA), To amend the Coastal Zone Management Act
of 1972 to allow the Secretary of Commerce to establish a
Coastal and Estuarine Resilience and Restoration Program, and
for other purposes.

Amends the Coastal Zone Management Act of 1972 to
reauthorize the Coastal and Estuarine Resilience and
Restoration. This program expired in 2013 and would be
funded at $60 million annually through 2028.

This bill also reauthorizes the National Estuarine
Research Reserve System Program and requires the Secretary
to designate five new national estuarine reserves within
five years. This program would be funded at $47 million per
year through 2028. The bill directs the Secretary to
consider the impact of sea rise on estuarine systems and
requires the Secretary to develop systemwide programs to
improve the management of the System.

H.R. 7925 (Rep. D'Esposito, R-NY), ``Modernizing Access to Our Public
Oceans (MAPOceans) Act''

This bill directs the Secretary to create a publicly
accessible website that includes information and data
relating to recreational use of Federal waterways. This
data includes restrictions on motorized propulsion, entry
closures, fishing restrictions, permissibility of certain
boats, and more. The bill directs the Secretary to make
this data publicly available within four years.
H.R. 8704 (Rep. Carter, R-GA), To require the Secretary of Commerce to
establish a grant program to foster enhanced coexistence
between ocean users and North Atlantic right whales and other
large cetacean species.

Stipulates that the vessel speed restriction rule to
protect the North Atlantic right whale that was finalized
in 2008 shall remain in place until December 31, 2030.

Authorizes a grant program from NOAA to be administered by
the NFWF to reduce vessel strikes and other dangerous
interactions between vessels and large cetacean species,
including the North Atlantic right whale.
H.R. 8705 (Rep. Graves, R-LA), ``Fisheries Data Modernization and
Accuracy Act''

Reforms the Marine Recreational Information Program (MRIP)
within NOAA. The legislation directs the Administrator to
enter into an agreement with the National Academies of
Science, Engineering, and Medicine to collaborate on
recreational fisheries management.

The legislation also gives states the ability to create
their own recreational fishery catch data collection
program; if such a program is created, NOAA would be
required to use the data that the state collected.

Establishes a grant program for states to develop their
own data collection programs or improve existing programs.

V. COST

The Congressional Budget Office has not provided cost estimates for
these bills.

VI. EFFECT ON CURRENT LAW

H.R. 6841

H.R. 8705

LEGISLATIVE  HEARING  ON  H.R. 6841, TO
AMEND  THE  COASTAL  ZONE   MANAGEMENT
ACT OF 1972 TO ALLOW THE SECRETARY  OF
COMMERCE  TO ESTABLISH  A  COASTAL AND
ESTUARINE  RESILIENCE   AND   RESTORA-
TION  PROGRAM,  AND  FOR  OTHER   PUR-
POSES;  H.R. 7925,  TO PROVIDE FOR THE
STANDARDIZATION,    PUBLICATION,   AND
ACCESSIBILITY  OF  DATA   RELATING  TO
PUBLIC  OUTDOOR  RECREATIONAL   USE OF
FEDERAL  WATERWAYS,   AND   FOR  OTHER
PURPOSES, ``MODERNIZING ACCESS TO  OUR
PUBLIC OCEANS ACT''; H.R. 8704, TO RE-
QUIRE THE  SECRETARY  OF  COMMERCE  TO
ESTABLISH  A  GRANT  PROGRAM TO FOSTER
ENHANCED  COEXISTENCE   BETWEEN  OCEAN
USERS   AND   NORTH   ATLANTIC   RIGHT
WHALES   AND  OTHER   LARGE   CETACEAN
SPECIES; AND H.R. 8705, TO REQUIRE THE
ADMINISTRATOR  OF  THE  NATIONAL  OCE-
ANIC  AND  ATMOSPHERIC  ADMINISTRATION
TO   REFORM  THE  MARINE  RECREATIONAL
INFORMATION   PROGRAM   OF   THE   NA-
TIONAL MARINE  FISHERIES SERVICE,  AND
FOR OTHER  PURPOSES, ``FISHERIES  DATA
MODERNIZATION   AND  ACCURACY  ACT  OF
2024''

----------

Thursday, June 27, 2024
U.S. House of Representatives
Subcommittee on Water, Wildlife and Fisheries
Committee on Natural Resources
Washington, DC

----------

The Subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 9:31 a.m. in
Room 1324, Longworth House Office Building, Hon. Cliff Bentz
[Chairman of the Subcommittee] presiding.

Present: Representatives Bentz, Wittman, Graves, Radewagen,
Carl, Hageman; Huffman, Levin, Hoyle, Magaziner, Porter, and
Case.
Also present: Representatives Carter, D'Esposito, Fry; and
Beyer.

Mr. Bentz. The Subcommittee on Water, Wildlife and
Fisheries will come to order.
Good morning, everyone. I want to welcome Members,
witnesses, and our guests in the audience to today's hearing.
Without objection, the Chair is authorized to declare a
recess of the Subcommittee at any time.
Under Committee Rule 4(f), any oral statements at hearings
are limited to the Chairman and the Ranking Member. I,
therefore, ask unanimous consent that all other Members'
opening statements be made part of the hearing record if they
are submitted in accordance with the Committee Rule 3(o).
Without objection, so ordered.
I also ask unanimous consent that the Congressman from New
York, Mr. D'Esposito; the Congressman from Georgia, Mr. Carter;
and the Congressman from South Carolina, Mr. Fry, be allowed to
participate in today's hearing.
Mr. Huffman. No objection. May I request unanimous consent
that Mr. Beyer from Virginia be allowed to similarly
participate?
Mr. Bentz. So ordered.
We are here today to consider four legislative measures:
H.R. 6841, to amend the Coastal Zone Management Act of 1972 to
allow the Secretary of Commerce to establish a coastal and
estuarine resilience program, and for other purposes, sponsored
by Representative Levin of California; H.R. 7925, the
Modernizing Access to Our Public Oceans Act, sponsored by
Representative D'Esposito of New York; H.R. 8704, to require
the Secretary of Commerce to establish a grant program to
foster enhanced co-existence between ocean users and North
Atlantic right whales and other large, cetacean species,
sponsored by Representative Carter of Georgia; and H.R. 8705,
the Fisheries Data Modernization and Accuracy Act of 2024,
sponsored by Representative Graves of Louisiana.
I now recognize myself for 5 minutes for an opening
statement.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. CLIFF BENTZ, A REPRESENTATIVE
IN CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF OREGON

Mr. Bentz. I want to thank the Members that are joining us
today and their interest in the bills we are considering.
I also want to thank the witnesses that traveled to
Washington to be here. We look forward to hearing from you.
Historically, the United States has managed our natural
resources in a way that recognizes the benefits of their
multiple uses. NOAA's work in doing so to protect America's
coasts, marine mammals, and fisheries, among other things,
requires the most up-to-date science, data, and research to
make decisions. This morning, we are considering four bills
that would address critical issues within the National Oceanic
and Atmospheric Administration that relate to that objective.
Congressman D'Esposito's MAPOceans Act looks to make
important data from NOAA easily accessible to the multiple
users of our ocean resources. The recreational and commercial
industries that operate on America's waters require an immense
amount of data, including when waterways are open and closed,
and other restrictions relating to vessel speed and fishing.
Congressman D'Esposito's legislation directs NOAA to work
with stakeholders and the public to determine what data should
be included, and publish it on a publicly available website,
with an emphasis on user access. This effort builds on similar
pieces of legislation that this Committee has advanced this
Congress. I appreciate Congressman D'Esposito's championing
this legislation which will enhance safety and improve the
recreational experience for ocean users.
Congressman Levin's bill would reauthorize two programs
created by the Coastal Zone Management Act of 1972. The bill
reauthorizes the National Estuarine Research Reserve System.
The program was created to provide the research, training, and
education necessary to conserve and study estuarine systems.
Today, it serves as a network of 30 coastal sites covering 1.4
million acres of study area, offering information on non-point
source pollution, community resilience, habitat restoration,
and invasive species.
The bill also reauthorizes the Coastal and Estuarine Land
Conservation Program, which conserves coastal lands that hold
ecological or historic importance.
We are also considering Congressman Garret Graves'
Fisheries Data Modernization and Accuracy Act. This bill builds
on this Subcommittee's efforts to ensure that NOAA uses the
most accurate data in managing the United States' recreational
fisheries.
In April this year, many members of this Subcommittee
signed a bicameral letter to NOAA's Assistant Administrator for
Fisheries, Janet Coit, expressing frustration with the
continued failures of the Marine Recreational Information
Program, or MRIP. Interestingly, since this program is not used
on the West Coast, there are clearly better ways to manage the
recreational fishing. Clearly, it is time to move away from
MRIP.
Congressman Graves' bill would require NOAA to enter into
an agreement with the National Academies of Science,
Engineering, and Medicine to develop a standing committee made
up of experts in recreational fishing data collection to
improve the management process. It would also develop a process
for states to gain NOAA's approval to establish their own
recreational fishery data collection program.
Finally, there are few issues that have faced more
criticism in this Congress than proposed changes to NOAA's
vessel speed rules on the East Coast.
Let me start with the obvious. There is no member of this
Committee that seeks to harm an endangered species like the
North Atlantic right whale. However, in August 2022, NOAA
proposed a dramatic expansion of this rule to vessels as small
as 35 feet. We have repeatedly heard from stakeholders that
this expansion would cause tremendous harm to the nation's
sports recreational industries, and the manufacturing and
retail industries that support outdoor recreation.
Congressman Carter's legislation would do two critical
things. First, it would keep the existing 2008 speed
restriction rule in place through the end of the decade,
providing regulatory certainty to stakeholders. It would also
establish a grant program administered by NOAA and the National
Fish and Wildlife Foundation to develop new technologies to
reduce vessel strikes and develop additional mitigation
measures. This bill represents the path forward that NOAA
should have taken to address this issue from the beginning.
I want to once again thank the Members and the witnesses
for their time and interest today. I look forward to a robust
discussion.
With that, I recognize the Ranking Member for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. JARED HUFFMAN, A REPRESENTA-
TIVE IN CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA

Mr. Huffman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Good morning,
everyone.
Welcome to the Water, Wildlife and Fisheries Subcommittee,
a subcommittee that, by virtue of its authority and title,
should be working to find solutions that recover fisheries and
endangered species, that ensure marine ecosystems and coastal
communities actually thrive. But too often, and in this case
with two bills we are considering today, we are considering
efforts that do the opposite of those objectives.
So, the two bills before us would undermine the best
available science, make it harder for a Federal agency like
NOAA to comply with the law. And worse, instead of helping
boaters and fishermen, the stated objectives of this
legislation, bills like H.R. 8704 and H.R. 8705 will probably
backfire, resulting in more punitive restrictions on fishing in
the end, and boating, precisely the opposite of what the
sponsors are trying to achieve.
Look, one year ago this Subcommittee had a hearing on
NOAA's proposed Vessel Speed Rule, which will help North
Atlantic right whale mortality, help save this critically
endangered species from extinction because of vessel strikes.
And guess what? Since that hearing, the evidence for a stronger
Vessel Speed Rule has only grown. At least four right whales
have died from vessel strikes since January, though we can only
afford to lose less than one per year if the population is to
recover, according to scientists.
By law, NOAA is required to do more in this situation in
order to limit right whale deaths from vessel strikes. Even the
former administration, the one with the convicted felon from
New York, recognized that additional measures were needed. They
identified strategies such as vessel speed reductions for
smaller vessels and mandatory seasonal slow zones for
consideration.
H.R. 8704 blocks any updates to a 2008 Vessel Speed Rule
until 2031, an arbitrary date. And this is what happens when
Members of Congress mess with science and try to be wildlife
biologists. The North Atlantic right whale could well be on the
verge of functional extinction by that point.
And to make up for this essentially warm embrace of
extinction, this legislation includes a token grant program
with a one-time authorization of $10 million. Now, Congress
enacted a similar grant program 2 years ago, and lest one
confuse this grant program as a sign that my colleagues are
interested in protecting right whales and developing technology
to help ocean users and marine life co-exist, let me demystify
this for you and explain why that little grant program is in
the bill. It is tacked on in order to secure some jurisdiction
before the Natural Resources Committee, because otherwise this
is a bill that would go to the Transportation and
Infrastructure Committee, where it would probably not see the
light of day.
Turning to H.R. 8705, the Fisheries Data Modernization and
Accuracy Act of 2024, we have another example of sticking our
heads deeper into the sand for the answer to improving the
problem. And I will admit, we have a problem with the certainty
of NOAA's recreational fishing data. But the answer should not
be to arbitrarily replace it with, in many cases, data that is
even worse.
I won't defend the current state of recreational fishing
data collected by NOAA, the states, the fishery commissions
through various surveys and methods. It needs to get better.
The Marine Recreational Information Program, or MRIP, is then
responsible for taking all this data and making sense of it,
all these different lines of data, turning them into
recreational catch estimates. And yes, there are known issues.
But the goal here should be recreational catch estimates
with low uncertainty. Likely, if we do that, it would allow
people to fish more while maintaining recoverable stocks. But
using all the data, and strengthening the data sources is how
we reduce that uncertainty. That is the smartest path forward.
However, the legislation that is being proposed today says that
if the data passes a certain specific threshold of uncertainty,
there is an automatic stop on using Federal data, and that NOAA
would only be allowed to use state data, even if it is worse
than the Federal data. And while you are at it, NOAA would be
disallowed from further work to calibrate the data.
So, this bill directs recreational fishing estimates to be
made on a smaller subset of data and limits the math that NOAA
can use to help the data make sense. That is not good policy.
You lose a lot when you do this, by the way. Baselines and
long-term estimates are ignored, and there is no continuity
across data collection methods. In short, you probably increase
the uncertainty that you set out to improve at the beginning.
This bill doesn't solve the known problems with
recreational data, and it doesn't improve the accuracy or the
precision of the MRIP program. The best thing Congress can do
right now is to step back and let NOAA, the states, and the
commissions finish their research and collaborative efforts to
make the data better.
With that, Mr. Chairman, we do have two bills that I am
happy to support before us today. I look forward to the
conversation.
I yield back.

Mr. Bentz. I will now introduce our first panel. As is
typical with legislative hearings, the bills' sponsors will be
recognized for 5 minutes each to discuss their bills.
With us today is Congressman Graves, who is recognized for
5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. GARRET GRAVES, A REPRESENTA-
TIVE IN CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF LOUISIANA

Mr. Graves. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate all of
you being here today, and look forward to your testimony.
I will note I am going to be bouncing back and forth
between two committees today, so I may not be here for all of
it. I want to apologize on the front end, but thanks again for
being here, and I look forward to engaging you in questions a
little bit later.
We are excited today because one of the bills that is on
the agenda is our legislation, and the legislation is H.R.
8705, that helps to improve the data collection that my friend
from California was just speaking about. I want to put things
in practical terms.
First of all, years ago, in regard to red snapper, the area
where I represent and Congressman Carl represents, we were
facing 3 to 9 days of fishing, 3 to 9 days. When I was a kid
growing up, we could fish year round. This is part of our
culture in South Louisiana. It is one of the recreational
opportunities, and something that we often do with families
growing up, and enjoying the bounty of the Gulf of Mexico. I
want to be crystal clear. The last thing in the world I would
ever do is push legislation or anything that would undermine or
jeopardize the sustainability of fisheries. It is selfish, it
is, quite frankly, in a word, just stupid. And I would never do
that.
But what we were able to do, against the efforts of people,
including my friend Mr. Huffman, is we were able to actually
migrate to a state-based management system. And as a result of
that, we were able to fish in recent years 250 days, yet doing
it with improved data, and doing it in a way that actually left
a cushion between what was projected to be sustainable
fisheries and being over-fished. So, again, we left a cushion
in there to ensure that we intentionally under-fished.
Now, the data that my friend from California is trying to
protect is data that has been proven, and I want to thank Dr.
Howell for coming out and acknowledging this as data that has
shown that it had projected over 30 percent over-fishing,
totally inaccurate, totally inaccurate. And that was the data
that my friend from California is here defending.
Further, when independent academia was given the
opportunity to come in, they were given the opportunity to come
in and able to look in an independent assessment, not using
state data, not using Federal data. They found that the data
that was being used to manage fisheries by the Federal
Government in the Gulf of Mexico had under-counted fish
substantially. As a matter of fact, the great red snapper count
found that the abundance of fish was three times the number of
red snapper that were actually being managed under the Federal
data.
So, said another way, if Federal data said there were 100
fish, this independent assessment by academia came in and said
no, there are 300. So, this data that my friend from California
is here trying to protect and calling sacrosanct could not be
more wrong.
Now, I do want to thank Dr. Howell, who I think has been
very constructive in coming in.
First of all, I want to thank you for acknowledging that
there were errors in the Federal data, but also your efforts to
try to take some of the more accurate data, proven, accurate
data that is being collected by the states, including my home
state of Louisiana under the LA Creole program, and trying to
find ways to incorporate that or work on a calibration where
the data collected by the various states, and I know that Ms.
Guyas is going to be talking about that a little bit today, is
data that is more accurate, more dynamic, more live, and allows
you to actually manage fisheries in a dynamic manner in season.
So, look, bottom line is that the way that we have written
this bill is that it builds upon some of the lessons, and works
to build better science to build fisheries dependent, which is
the data that is being collected by the actual fishers, by the
states, as well as independent fish data, which goes out there
and just does independent stock assessments absent of the
participation of the actual fisheries.
But I think it is really important that at the end of the
day, we are using the best science available. And if we have
calibration issues where there is less accurate data or
different metrics of data, we have to make sure that we can
incorporate those and make them be able to actually be utilized
or speak to one another.
But one of my major concerns is that we are going to take
the data that Ms. Guyas in Florida, the state of Louisiana, and
others have done that is more accurate, and we are going to
basically dumb it down to calibrate it to the Federal system
versus going the other way around. If our data is more
accurate, we need to use the data with more specificity, and
that is exactly what our bill does.
So, again, Mr. Chairman, more accurate data, better
management of the fisheries, more dynamic and, at the end of
the day, ensuring sustainable fisheries while balancing with
access for both recreational and commercial fishing.
I yield back.

Mr. Bentz. I thank Congressman Graves for his testimony. I
now recognize Congressman Levin for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. MIKE LEVIN, A REPRESENTATIVE
IN CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA

Mr. Levin. Thank you so much, Mr. Chairman, and thank you
for including my bill, H.R. 6841, the Resilient Coasts and
Estuaries Act, in today's hearing.
This bipartisan bill, which I introduced alongside my
colleagues, Representatives Brian Mast, Jen Kiggans, and
Suzanne Bonamici, would provide crucial funding for state and
local governments to preserve our nation's coastal habitats.
I have been heartened by our success in building a strong,
bipartisan coalition to protect our nation's treasured natural
resources, and I am similarly glad that H.R. 7925, the
bipartisan MAPOceans Act, which I co-lead with Representative
D'Esposito, is also included in today's hearing.
This bill will help coastal communities like my own access
the information they need to enjoy our beautiful waterways and
protect them for years to come. I am proud to represent
California's 49th Congressional District, which is home to over
50 miles of pristine coastline, as well as many cherished
lagoons and other estuaries that are important for our local
ecosystem, recreation, and economy.
Our region is also home to the Tijuana River Research
Reserve, which supports vital work to clean up the heavily-
polluted Tijuana River Valley, and provides important resources
to coastal communities in my district. That is why I introduced
the Resilient Coasts and Estuaries Act, which would strengthen
efforts to protect coastal and estuarine habitats by
reauthorizing and revitalizing the Coastal and Estuarine Land
Conservation Program, also known as CELCP.
CELCP has protected over 110,000 acres of locally owned and
managed coastal and estuary land. However, Congress stopped
funding this program in 2013, and other Federal funding
mechanisms ran out in 2017. My bill would reauthorize this
essential program at previous funding levels to help
communities protect estuaries like the San Mateo Creek, San
Luis Rey River, Buena Vista Lagoon, Batiquitos Lagoon, Agua
Hedionda Lagoon, San Elijo Lagoon, and so many more in my
district. We have six lagoons in my district.
My bill would also direct NOAA to designate five new
National Estuarine Research Reserves over the next 5 years, and
expand research guidelines to include long-term data monitoring
and modeling on the impacts of climate change. This will expand
the capacity of the reserve system to research, monitor, and
support local conservation and management efforts across the
country.
I am proud that this bill has strong bipartisan support
from coastal areas all across the country, and I would like to
ask for unanimous consent to enter into the record these
letters of support from 36 different hunting, fishing, and
conservation organizations, as well as the Batiquitos Lagoon
Foundation, which is doing great work in my district.
Mr. Bentz. Without objection.
Mr. Levin. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I would now like to turn to my questions.
Dr. Howell, my district is constantly grappling, oh, just
testimony.
Sorry, I got ahead of my skis. That is what happens, Mr.
Chairman, when I get here and then have to speak 60 seconds
later. Thank you.
Mr. Bentz. We thank Congressman Levin for his testimony. I
now recognize Congressman Carter for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. EARL L. ``BUDDY'' CARTER, A REP-
RESENTATIVE IN CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF GEORGIA

Mr. Carter. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for allowing me to
waive on to your Committee today, and for considering my bill,
H.R. 8704.
The bill would, first and foremost, stop NOAA from
finalizing the expanded vessel speed restriction rule first
proposed in 2022, keeping the current rules in place.
NOAA is proposing to broaden the Atlantic right whale
strike reduction rule by requiring vessels 35 to 65 feet in
length to maintain a speed of roughly 11.5 miles per hour when
a water is inhabited by right whales. The proposed rule would
cause grave safety issues for recreational vessels and pilot
vessels alike, as it presents a safety concern for traversing
the shipping channels and safety issues at sea. You can imagine
trying to drive a boat in the sea at 11.5 miles per hour. I
mean, it is just dangerous to think about it.
Second, it creates a new grant program to encourage the
development and employment of technology to reduce vessel
strikes of endangered species like the North Atlantic right
whale. This is important because there are technological
innovations available, and I want to stress that. I am not just
offering something to stop something, I am offering solutions
to it.
We care about the right whales. We need to protect the
right whales. But we have to balance that with public safety
and the needs for our coastal shipping economy. For example,
buoys with sensors to help detect these whales have already
been placed off Georgia's coast. Technology can play a key role
in balancing the safety of both the right whale and boaters, as
well as our coastal economy. This bill will allow us to expand
use of those solutions.
Unfortunately, if this rule goes into effect, boaters who
use 35-foot or larger vessels will simply not take fishing
trips, and the market will die for these kinds of vessels. That
is why the rule threatens 27,000 direct and indirect jobs, in
Georgia alone, related to recreational fishing and boating. I
have significant concerns about how this will impact the
state's recreational boating industry, which has an annual
impact of $4.3 billion.
NOAA's calculations for determining projected economic
impacts of their rule are just wrong. They are flat-out wrong.
To start, it estimates that this rule would make an economic
impact of only $47 million. Suffice it to say, we all know in
this room that that is more like $47 billion. In fact,
estimates say that nearly $84 billion in negative impacts and
jeopardizing Americans' 340,000 jobs.
It does not consider the differences in hull design between
recreational and commercial vessels. Using NOAA's own data, the
chance that a recreational vessel will strike a right whale is
less than one in a million, less than one in a million.
There is bipartisan agreement that we can protect the
endangered right whales without harming our ports and coastal
communities. And we want to protect the right whales. I don't
know of any boater who wants to hit a right whale. We want to
protect them.
Harbor pilots must be considered in the crafting of this
rule. I am very concerned, very concerned for both their safety
and the port's overall operations. That is why I am very
pleased to have my good friend, a former staffer, here in
Washington, Jamie McCurry from the Georgia Ports Authority here
today to testify on the impact this rule can have on our
nation's ports.
I represent the entire coast of Georgia, two major
seaports, the Port of Savannah and the Port of Brunswick. The
Port of Savannah is the single largest and fastest-growing
container terminal in America, in addition to being the second
largest port on the East Coast by volume. The Port of
Brunswick, the No. 2 roll-on, roll-off port in the country,
their success has translated into growth and prosperity
throughout the region, and this rule directly jeopardizes that.
Communities like ours depend on the ocean for our
livelihoods. There is bipartisan agreement that we can protect
the endangered right whales without harming our ports and
coastal communities.
I want to share a story with you, Mr. Chairman. I was in
Canada last year, and we were hearing from Meta Canada, and
they were telling me, they said, ``We can identify species in
the wild.''
And I asked them, I said, ``Wait a minute, can you identify
right whales in the wild?''
And they said, ``Sure, we can.''
I said, ``Do you have to tag them?''
They said, ``No, we have the technology now, we can tell
you where they are at.''
We are not just saying we don't want to protect the right
whales. We do want to protect the right whales, and that is
what this bill does, because it offers solutions, solutions
that won't destroy our recreational fishing, and solutions that
won't have a negative economic impact on our ports.
Again, thank you, Mr. Chairman, for considering this bill.
Thank you for allowing me to waive on, and I yield back.

Mr. Bentz. I thank Congressman Carter for his testimony. I
will now recognize Congressman D'Esposito for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF  THE HON. ANTHONY D'ESPOSITO,  A
REPRESENTATIVE IN CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF
NEW YORK

Mr. D'Esposito. Thank you very much. Good morning,
everyone, and thank you, Chairman Bentz, for allowing me to
waive on to the Subcommittee hearing to speak about legislation
myself and Representative Levin introduced, H.R. 7925,
Modernizing Access to Our Public Oceans Act, or MAPOceans Act.
Thank you to the witnesses for coming here today to speak
about the important issues that we have in front of us. I am
also glad to see a fellow Long Islander and community leader,
Jeff Strong, is here with us, as well. Thank you for taking the
trip, and thank the members of the Committee for showing an
interest in the MAPOceans Act.
The MAPOceans Act would create a publicly accessible
website for recreational boaters, anglers, and those who use
our coastal waterways, displaying up-to-date information on a
variety of Federal waterway regulations and fishing
restrictions off the coast. Available information includes the
types of vessels allowed, when Federal waterways are available
to use, no-wake zones, speed restrictions, geographic fishing
restrictions, and even the types of fishing equipment allowed.
Furthermore, MAPOceans would digitize Geographical
Information System data, which includes navigation information,
depth charts, and other critical information.
The Secretary of Commerce, through NOAA, must cooperate and
coordinate with Federal agencies, state agencies, interstate
marine fisheries commissions, regional ocean partnerships,
experts, the private sector, and non-profits in carrying out
the legislation in this bill.
Navigating the water and abiding by Federal fishing
regulations is often complicated for boaters and anglers. It is
critical that this information is publicly available and easily
accessible. The MAPOceans Act would allow recreational boaters,
anglers, and others to have access to consolidated, up-to-date
information that will enable them to follow the rules of the
water and disseminate information in a real time, and be
effective.
Not only would this legislation help recreational boaters
and anglers, but it would benefit their critical industries.
Strategic partnerships between Federal agencies such as NOAA,
experts, and the private sector will allow for the
technological innovation, accelerating business and economic
output within these two industries.
Providing digital information on fishing regulation, as
well as mapping tools will allow for responsible and
sustainable fishing off America's coastal waterways. The
website's mapping of data could be used to ensure compliance in
the fishing sector. Recreational fishing generates a
significant amount of money for conservation efforts, and I am
confident that new technology will only further conservation
and achievements.
Like many coastal districts around the nation, my district
on Long Island benefits economically from the recreational
boating and fishing industry. I am confident that this
bipartisan legislation would tremendously benefit my neighbors
back home, as well as coastal communities across this great
nation.
I look forward to hearing from my colleagues and the
witnesses today, and I am confident that this hearing will be a
positive first step in advancing this important legislation.
Once again, thank you to the panel.
Mr. Chairman, thank you, I yield back.

Mr. Bentz. I thank Congressman D'Esposito for his
testimony, and I thank the other Members for their testimony. I
will now introduce our second panel.
Dr. Evan Howell, Director of the Office of Science and
Technology with the National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration in Washington, DC; Ms. Martha Guyas, Southeast
Fisheries Policy Director of the American Sport Fishing
Association of Alexandria, Virginia; Mr. Jeff Strong, Chair of
the Marine Retailers Association of the Americas, and President
of Strong Marines in Mattituck, New York; Dr. Jessica Redfern,
Associate Vice President for Ocean Conservation Science of the
Anderson Cabot Center for Ocean Life in Boston, Massachusetts;
and Mr. Jamie McCurry, Jr, Chief Administrative Officer of the
Georgia Ports Authority in Savannah, Georgia.
Let me remind the witnesses that under Committee Rules,
they must limit their oral statements to 5 minutes, but their
entire statement will appear in the hearing record.
To begin your testimony, please press the ``on'' button on
the microphone.
We use timing lights. When you begin, the light will turn
green. When you have 1 minute remaining, the light will turn
yellow. And at the end of the 5 minutes, the light will turn
red, and I will ask you to complete your statement.
I will also allow all witnesses to testify before Member
questioning.
I now recognize Dr. Howell for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF  EVAN HOWELL,  DIRECTOR,  NATIONAL
MARINE FISHERIES SERVICE OFFICE OF SCIENCE AND
TECHNOLOGY, NOAA, U.S. DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE,
SILVER SPRING, MARYLAND

Dr. Howell. Chairman Bentz, Ranking Member Huffman, and
members of the Subcommittee, thank you for the opportunity to
provide comments from NOAA on H.R. 6841, H.R. 7925, H.R. 8704,
and H.R. 8705. My name is Evan Howell, and I am the Director of
the Office of Science Technology within NOAA Fisheries,
providing comments on behalf of NOAA.
In regard to H.R. 8705, Fisheries Data Modernization and
Accuracy Act, NOAA recognizes the challenges and limitations
associated with the current recreational fishing data
collection partnership, known as MRIP. Many of the bill's main
tenets highlight issues about which we share concerns and are
actively working to address.
Currently, NOAA has a cooperative effort to improve the
Federal-State framework to collaboratively produce more
accurate and precise catch and effort estimates, which are
critical for resource management. I and my staff have
personally attended numerous council and commission meetings in
the Gulf and Atlantic to continue to build partnerships, listen
to ideas and concerns, and identify actions for positive impact
and change together.
We support the core concept that all recreational data
collection systems should have clear and universal standards.
This is why we established the National Recreational Data
Standards with input from states, commissions, councils, and
the broader fishing community, and why we have also initiated
an independent peer review of these standards by the National
Academies Committee on National Statistics.
We do note, however, that the bill's requirements have
significant resource implications on the agency through
enhanced consultation based on the percent standard error
thresholds and development of the grant program for state data
collection. We look forward to working with the Committee to
improve our shared Federal-State recreational data program.
Next, regarding H.R. 8704, North Atlantic right whales.
Endangered North Atlantic right whales are among the most
imperiled species on the planet. Since 2011, we have lost over
200 individual whales, primarily as a result of vessel strikes
and entanglements in fishing gear. Our mandates under the
Endangered Species Act and Marine Mammal Protection Act require
us to reduce the risk to the species immediately to prevent the
loss of any additional North Atlantic right whales.
The grant program included in this bill dovetails with our
current efforts to develop and expand the use of technology-
based innovations to promote co-existence between large whales
and ocean users. NOAA remains fully committed to minimizing the
regulatory burden on ocean users by investing in and adopting
technology-based tools to reduce vessel strike risk to North
Atlantic right whales. However, as it stands, there is no
proven technology that can be adopted rapidly enough to reduce
lethal vessel strikes of North Atlantic right whales and ward
off extinction.
In light of the necessity of the rulemaking that will
modify the North Atlantic right whale vessel speed regulations,
NOAA opposes H.R. 8704. The species cannot wait until 2030 to
finalize the amendments to the Vessel Speed Rule. Over the past
few months alone, we have documented four right whale
mortalities in the U.S. waters, three of which were from vessel
strikes.
Next, regarding H.R. 7925, the Modernizing Access to our
Public Oceans, we agree that NOAA could be the authoritative
source for delivering fisheries access mapping data to the
public and the developers of apps, GIS, and navigational chart-
plotting software and devices. NOAA is supportive of the vision
of this bill to provide clear answers to the question, where
can I fish?
We also fully agree that collaboration with partners will
be key to the success of this bill, especially learning from
innovators and data scientists already serving the fishing
communities. Interagency coordination will also be critical to
ensuring that the published data is complete and easily
accessible to the public.
However, we note that there are some provisions in the
bill, particularly the timelines for updating the information,
that would be difficult to implement, given existing resources.
With this in mind, NOAA acknowledges Congress' intent in
increasing access to Federal waters for fishing while engaging
the fishing community and building sustainable commercial and
recreational fisheries.
Lastly, regarding H.R. 6841, Coastal and Estuarine
Resilience and Restoration Program, this bill would authorize
restoration efforts and prioritize investments that increase
resilience and equity, and mitigate the effects of climate
change and sea level rise, while preserving critical resources.
This bill would authorize non-governmental organizations to
apply for a grant under the section, providing flexibility in
cases where state or local governments are limited in their
ability to take ownership of additional properties.
This bill would codify existing system wide and place-based
programmatic components of the National Estuarine Research
Reserves, including the Margaret A. Davidson Fellowship.
Finally, H.R. 6841 would require the designation of five
new National Estuarine Research Reserves within 5 years. We are
concerned with this requirement. The designation process is
state-driven and involves considerable time to ensure state,
tribal, local government, and public input and engagement. The
timing, therefore, may be partly beyond NOAA's control.
We appreciate the opportunity to comment on these bills,
and look forward to working with bill sponsors and Committee
staff on our shared areas of interest and efforts to improve
resource management and climate resilience. Thank you.

[The prepared statement of Dr. Howell follows:]
Prepared Statement of Dr. Evan Howell, Director, NOAA Fisheries' Office
of Science and Technology

on H.R. 6841, H.R. 7925, H.R. 8704, and H.R. 8705

Chairman Bentz, Ranking Member Huffman, and members of the
Subcommittee, thank you for the opportunity for the National Oceanic
and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) to provide comments regarding
H.R. 6841--To amend the Coastal Zone Management Act of 1972 to allow
the Secretary of Commerce to establish a Coastal and Estuarine
Resilience and Restoration Program, and for other purposes, H.R 7925--
Modernizing Access To Our Public Oceans (Map Oceans) Act, H.R. 8704--To
require the Secretary of Commerce to establish a Grant Program to
Foster Enhanced Coexistence between Ocean Users and NARW and other
large cetacean species, and H.R. 8705--Fisheries Data Modernization and
Accuracy Act of 2024. I am the Director of the Office of Science and
Technology within NOAA's National Marine Fisheries Service (NMFS)
providing comments on behalf of NOAA.
H.R. 6841--To amend the Coastal Zone Management Act of 1972 to allow
the Secretary of Commerce to establish a Coastal and Estuarine
Resilience and Restoration Program, and for other purposes

Coastal communities are home to nearly half the American
population, support 54.6 million jobs, and contribute approximately
$9.5 trillion to the U.S. economy. Of those who live in coastal
counties, approximately 40 percent of the population fall into an
elevated coastal hazard risk category. These include at-risk
populations, such as children, older adults, households where English
is not the primary language, and people living below the poverty line.
For over 50 years, the Coastal Zone Management Act has provided a
framework for the Federal government to work in partnership with state
and local leaders to address the complex challenges facing our coasts
and to ensure they can benefit generations to come.
H.R. 6841 would amend the Coastal Zone Management Act to expand the
authority and funding authorization for the Coastal and Estuarine Land
Conservation Program and National Estuarine Research Reserve System
(Sections 307A and 315, 16 U.S.C. 1456-1 and 1461, respectively). The
bill would expand the Coastal and Estuarine Land Conservation Program
to authorize restoration efforts and prioritize investments that
increase resilience and equity, and mitigate the effects of climate
change and sea level rise, in addition to preserving recreational,
ecological, cultural, and other benefits. It would also authorize non-
governmental organizations to apply for a grant under this section
provided that the organization has documented support from the lead
state agency, ensures public access, and identifies how the property
will be managed or transitioned to an eligible entity in the event that
the organization is no longer in operation. This will provide
flexibility in cases where state, territorial, Tribal or local
governments are limited in their ability to take ownership of
additional properties.
H.R. 6841 seeks to protect and restore coastal and estuarine lands
and to expand and codify components of the National Estuarine Research
Reserve System (NERRS) that ensure it is best positioned to meet the
current and future needs of coastal communities. H.R. 6841 would modify
the authorization for the National Estuarine Research Reserve System to
require the designation of five new reserves within five years and
codify existing systemwide and place-based programmatic components,
including the Margaret A. Davidson Fellowship.
NOAA appreciates the intent of H.R. 6841 and your support for NOAA
activities pursuant to the Coastal Zone Management Act. NOAA supports
the authorization for the Coastal and Estuarine Land Conservation
Program. NOAA is also supportive of the intent to expand the National
Estuarine Research Reserve System; however, NOAA is concerned that the
requirement to designate no less than five new estuarine reserves
within five years of the bill's enactment may be infeasible. The
designation process is state-driven and involves considerable time to
ensure state, Tribal, local government, and public input and
engagement. The timing, therefore, may be partly beyond NOAA's control.
NOAA is currently managing three proposed new designations, which
has been a multi-year effort.
NOAA currently does not have the resources to implement this
program and if enacted, NOAA would have to weigh these program needs
against other priorities.
H.R. 7925--Modernizing Access to Our Public Oceans (MAP Oceans) Act

Recreational saltwater fishing and boating are traditional American
activities that are integral to the culture and economies of coastal
communities across the nation. These time-honored activities allow
millions of people access to America's great outdoors each year, while
generating billions of dollars in economic value.
NOAA's National Saltwater Recreational Fisheries Policy has a goal
to promote inclusive public access to sustainable and abundant
recreational fishing opportunities, especially understanding and
addressing barriers and constraints to participation in recreational
fisheries and stewardship.
As envisioned in the MAP Oceans Act, NOAA could would deliver
fishing access mapping data to the public and the developers of apps,
GIS and navigational chart plotting software and devices. Through the
America the Beautiful initiative, the Fishery Management Councils and
NOAA have for the first time built a national database of fishery
managed areas. This, coupled with NOAA's Marine Protected Areas
Inventory, provides the most complete picture to date of Federal
fishery management measures. This national managed area database is an
important step in achieving the goals of this bill, but we would also
need to augment the area data with detailed information on where, when
and how fishing can occur.
Safe navigation is key to the public accessing available commercial
and recreational fishing resources. As mandated under the Coast and
Geodetic Survey Act, NOAA is responsible for providing charts and
related information for the safe navigation of marine commerce. Our
customers include the recreational boating and fishing communities that
rely on the data nautical charts provide. NOAA will continue to provide
navigational charts and fundamental data to the public so vessel
operators can reach fishing grounds and return to port safely.
NOAA is supportive of The Modernizing Access to Our Public Oceans
Act, and its vision of providing clear answers to the question: ``Where
can I fish?'' We also fully agree that collaboration with partners will
be key to the success of the Act, especially learning from innovators
and data scientists who are already serving the fishing communities. In
addition, we note that other Federal agencies, such as the U.S. Fish
and Wildlife Service (FWS), have sole or joint jurisdiction over public
recreational access to many coastal and/or marine waters. Interagency
coordination between NOAA, FWS, and other Federal agencies will be
critical to ensuring that the published data is complete and easily
accessible to the public.
However, we note that many of the Act's requirements have
significant cost implications to the agency, in particular the
timelines for updating information. Implementing the Act could also
place a financial strain on other Federal agencies who would need to
coordinate with NOAA to ensure compatibility among Federal databases
and, potentially, collect new information. NOAA currently does not have
the resources to implement this program and if enacted, NOAA would have
to weigh these program needs against other priorities.
With this in mind, NOAA looks forward to implementing the vision
laid out by the MAP Oceans Act and increasing access to Federal waters
for fishing while engaging the fishing community in building
sustainable commercial and recreational fisheries.
H.R. 8704--To require the Secretary of Commerce to establish a grant
program to foster enhanced coexistence between ocean users and
NARW and other large cetacean species

Endangered North Atlantic right whales are among the most imperiled
species on the planet, with an estimated total population of about 360
whales and only about 70 reproductive females remaining. Vessel strikes
are one of the two leading causes of death to North Atlantic right
whales. Since 2011, we have lost over 200 individual whales, primarily
as a result of vessel strikes and entanglements in fishing gear.
Our mandates under the Endangered Species Act and Marine Mammal
Protection Act require us to reduce the risks to the species to prevent
the loss of any additional North Atlantic right whales. In addition to
working with industry and partners on non-regulatory or technological
tools that could help prevent additional deaths, we have been engaged
in a rulemaking process to update the existing North Atlantic right
whale vessel speed regulation to reduce risk of serious injury and
death and begin to recover this species. We have also taken into
account the best available science on the distribution of right whales
and the risks they face. Investing in technological tools is a key
aspect of our road to recovery, and NOAA Fisheries is taking steps to
support development of new technologies to detect and reduce risk to
whales. But until the promise of technological and other advancements
can be proven, a more effective vessel speed rule is needed to minimize
risk.
The final rule to modify the existing North Atlantic right whale
vessel speed regulations is now with the White House Office of
Information and Regulatory Affairs (OIRA), part of the Office of
Management and Budget, for review under Executive Order 12866. The rule
package was submitted to OIRA following careful consideration of the
nearly 90,000 comments received during the 90-day comment period, and
appropriate incorporation of this input. Because the rulemaking process
is ongoing, we are unable to comment on any changes made to the
proposed rule.
In light of this rulemaking, the National Marine Fisheries Service
opposes H.R. 8704. Section 1 would explicitly prevent (through 2030)
finalization of amendments to the vessel speed rule that would update
the safety deviation provision and enhance protections needed to reduce
the risk of extinction of North Atlantic right whales. Vessel strikes
are an ongoing, unsustainable threat that NMFS has the statutory
authority and mandate to address under the Endangered Species Act and
the Marine Mammal Protection Act. Over the past few months alone, we
have documented four right whale mortalities in U.S. waters. Three of
these were consistent with vessel strikes as the cause of death,
including one involving a young calf that was struck and killed by a
boat estimated to be 35-57 feet in length.
The grant program included in this bill dovetails with our current
efforts to develop and expand the use of technology-based innovations
to promote coexistence between large cetaceans and ocean users. It will
take years to evaluate the effectiveness of these innovative tools and
even longer to fully operationalize them. NMFS remains fully committed
to minimizing the regulatory burden on ocean users by investing in and
adopting technology-based tools to reduce vessel strike risk to North
Atlantic right whales. However, as it stands, there is no proven
technology that can be adopted rapidly enough to reduce lethal vessel
strikes of North Atlantic right whale and ward off extinction, and the
species cannot wait for decisive action until 2030.
H.R. 8705--Fisheries Data Modernization and Accuracy Act of 2024

NOAA Fisheries recognizes the challenges and limitations associated
with the current recreational fishing data collection partnership. We
are pleased to discuss the legislation aimed at further improving the
Marine Recreational Information Program (MRIP). Many of the bill's main
tenets highlight issues about which we share concerns and are actively
working to address.
We agree with the authors of this bill that our shared recreational
data program must focus on increased precision and accuracy of
estimates; more collaborative feedback mechanisms for regional data
review; national standardization practices that drive consistency
across survey programs, support for state surveys; and independent
expert review. To help achieve this, we have initiated a cooperative
transparent effort to strengthen our Federal-State data partnership,
beginning an initial information-gathering phase in May 2024, with
plans to host external visioning workshops in 2025. These activities
will identify actions for shared Federal-State process and data
improvements, with the intent to implement actions and opportunities
for change as they are identified through this process. A primary
objective of this strengthening process is to collaboratively produce
more accurate and precise catch and effort estimates to better inform
the stock assessments that underpin management decisions that support
sustainable fisheries. Through these actions, we will achieve the goal
of finalizing an improved program framework driven by regional and
state partner input by early 2026.
Parallel to this effort, we are working closely with our fisheries
information networks, including the Gulf of Mexico Fisheries
Information Network (GulfFIN), and state partners to improve partner
review of preliminary estimates, as we recognize the importance of
incorporating regional knowledge of fishing activity.
While we are already executing improvements in many of these areas,
we will continue to advocate for all data systems to undergo continual
improvement, and welcome options to enhance our current and future
Federal-State program partnership.
We support the core concept that any recreational data collection
system should have clear and universal standards that provide national
coherence and regional flexibility. This was the basis for why we
established national recreational fishing and survey and data standards
with input from states, interstate marine fisheries commissions,
fishery management councils, and the broader fishing community, and why
we have initiated an independent peer review of these standards by the
National Academies' Committee on National Statistics.
We are committed to continuing our work to improve precision and
accuracy of estimates from both Federal and state surveys to best
inform decision-making. In order for the data from any data collection
system to be usable in regional resource management, it must be
consistent and comparable across a full management region. We emphasize
here that any new system will need to be compared to an existing survey
time series to scientifically compare and track trends in fishing,
which is critical for stock assessments. We want to highlight that any
prohibition on the ability to calibrate any new survey with Federal
MRIP data could negatively impact the scientific rigor of our existing
data time series used in our stock assessment enterprise.
NMFS also remains committed to using the objective regional
frameworks in place for Best Scientific Information Available (BSIA)
decision making, which currently considers all available data,
including data derived from State surveys. A recent example is the
utilization of the Florida State Reef Fish Survey to make NOAA
Fisheries management decisions for gag grouper.
We do note that H.R. 8705's requirements have significant resource
implications on the agency. We support in concept the formation of an
independent standing committee to discuss recreational fisheries data
collection and management issues, and for consultation purposes when
Percent Standard Error (PSE) exceeds an established threshold. The
requirement for consultation as written will require additional
resources to support the development of this new committee, and to
support the level of consultation that would be required using the 30%
PSE threshold for seasonal fisheries contained in this bill.
Additionally, the establishment of a new grant program for development
of state data collection systems would require new resources to ensure
existing Federal-state shared data collection efforts could continue at
current levels. NOAA currently does not have the resources to implement
this program and if enacted, NOAA would have to weigh these program
needs against other priorities.
Overall, NMFS appreciates the opportunity to comment on this bill
and looks forward to working with the committee and staff on our shared
areas of interest. This includes improving our recreational data
collection capabilities to support effective resource management and
maintain recreational opportunities.

______

Questions Submitted for the Record to Dr. Evan Howell, Director, NOAA's
Office of Science and Technology

Dr. Howell did not submit responses to the Committee by the appropriate
deadline for inclusion in the printed record.

Questions Submitted by Representative Bentz

Question 1. Dr. Howell, during our hearing one of the criticisms
that we heard of NOAA's proposed amendments to the North Atlantic Right
Whale Vessel Strike Reduction Rule was that NOAA failed to fully
incorporate feedback from impacted industries. More specifically,
stakeholders believe NOAA failed to consider technological solutions to
reduce vessel strikes and other interactions with species like the
North Atlantic right whale. During the hearing, you mentioned the
technology workshop that NOAA held back in March. However, as has been
noted on many occasions, the proposed rule was transmitted to the
Office of Information and Regulatory Affairs (OIRA) on the same day as
the workshop.

1a) How would NOAA have been able to incorporate any feedback or
lessons learned at the workshop if the proposed rule was already
submitted to OIRA before the workshop concluded?

Question 2. When you were asked if there were technological devices
that would allow for vessel operators to detect whales while on the
water, you stated that NOAA was currently going through the technology
review.

2a) Wouldn't it be more effective to conduct a thorough technology
review prior to moving ahead with the proposed amendments?

Question 3. Dr. Howell, on June 26th in an offshore wind briefing
hosted by NOAA, Ms. Jenni Wallace, Director of NOAA Fisheries Office of
Policy, went into detail describing the compensation program for
businesses impacted by offshore wind lease sales.

Questions Submitted by Representative Gonzalez-Colon

Question 1. H.R. 8705 seeks to reform NOAA's Marine Recreational
Information Program (MRIP), which develops statistics on recreational
fishing catch and effort. I've previously expressed concerns with the
limited or lack of recreational fishing data for Puerto Rico included
within the program. I understand the latest available recreational
statistics for Puerto Rico are from 2016, given data collection efforts
on the Island were suspended in late 2017 following Hurricane Maria.

In response to questions I submitted last year, NOAA indicated that
the Caribbean MRIP Regional Implementation Team was working on
developing alternative survey designs for both Puerto Rico and the U.S.
Virgin Islands that can generate reliable catch statistics. NOAA
further indicated that it believed the team could complete this effort
in 2023, and that once feasible and statistically sound designs were
identified, it would work with regional partners to assemble the
necessary resources and commence recreational effort and catch data
collection in both territories.

Could you provide an update on the status of this initiative and
discuss NOAA's efforts to support the resumption of recreational
fishing data collection efforts in Puerto Rico?
Questions Submitted by Representative Carl

Question 1. Dr. Howell, during your tenure at NOAA, you have been
actively engaged in efforts to reform the management of our
recreational fisheries. In what ways do you think NOAA can most
effectively incorporate independent, third-party surveys and the work
of state agencies to help manage our nation's fisheries?

Questions Submitted by Representative Levin

Question 1. Dr. Howell, my district is constantly grappling with
coastal issues, but we have seen firsthand how wetland and estuary
habitats not only support vibrant and diverse ecosystems, but also
provide economic benefits and help to protect against erosion. Can you
speak to how the Coastal and Estuarine Land Conservation Program
(CELCP) and the National Estuarine Research Reserve System support the
resilience and economies of coastal communities across the country?

______

Mr. Bentz. Thank you, Dr. Howell. I now recognize Ms. Guyas
for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF MARTHA GUYAS,  SOUTHEAST  FISHERIES
POLICY DIRECTOR, AMERICAN SPORTFISHING ASSOCIA-
TION, TALLAHASSEE, FLORIDA

Ms. Guyas. Chairman Bentz, Ranking Member Huffman, and
members of the Subcommittee, thank you for inviting me to speak
on behalf of the American Sportfishing Association regarding
the Fisheries Data Modernization and Accuracy Act of 2024.
ASA's mission is to look out for the interests of the
sportfishing industry and the entire recreational fishing
community. Recreational fishing is a deeply American activity,
with 57.7 million participants in 2023 supporting more than
945,000 jobs and contributing $148 billion to the economy.
In addition, fishing connects people to the outdoors and
provides substantial funding for conservation. Fishing
participation is dependent on access and healthy fisheries.
Incredible data on catches and fishing effort, along with
information about the biology and ecology of fish stocks, are
critical to ensuring fishery stock assessments accurately
characterize the status of stocks and, in turn, ensure that
management decisions are informed by the best available
science.
Too often, especially where I live in the Southeast, stock
assessments that are used to inform management decisions have
high levels of uncertainty due to unreliable or sparse fishery
data. This uncertainty can have severe implications for fish
stocks, anglers, businesses, communities, and the economy. ASA
commends Congressman Graves for introducing the Fisheries Data
Modernization and Accuracy Act to address these issues and
improve confidence in the scientific information used for
fisheries management.
The bill proposes reforms to the Marine Recreational
Information Program, or MRIP, which is a NOAA program designed
to provide big-picture information on recreational fishing
trends. In Federal fisheries management, MRIP estimates are
used to manage fisheries to exact poundage-based annual catch
limits.
Fishermen, managers, states, and other stakeholders have
expressed concerns that MRIP estimates have high levels of
uncertainty and are too imprecise, and this has led to
unrealistic catch estimates, unnecessary fishery closures, and
erosion of public trust in fisheries management. A 2023 pilot
study conducted by NOAA found that MRIP Fishing Effort Survey
may be causing over-estimation of recreational catch in effort
by 30 to 40 percent seems to validate these concerns.
Oftentimes, MRIP data are all that are available, so are
considered best science, even though estimates may not meet
NOAA established standards for use in management. However, in
some cases states have created their own recreational data
collection programs to better align data collection with
management needs. Many of these state surveys, such as those
conducted by California and Louisiana, are routinely used for
Federal fisheries assessments and management, and are certified
by NOAA fisheries, meaning they have been found to be
scientifically sound.
The Fisheries Data Modernization and Accuracy Act aims to
address these issues and enhance recreational fishing data by
doing two things: (1) encouraging improvement of MRIP by
convening a National Academies panel of experts to consider
options for how to improve MRIP estimates and management for
seasonal fisheries in cases where no established data standards
aren't being met, or where MRIP may not do a good job of
estimating catching effort, such as for fisheries that are
rarely sampled; and (2) building off the success of state-led
data programs that are already out there, the bill would also
facilitate states and NOAA working together to develop and
enhance state-led data collection programs. Universal standards
set by NOAA would ensure the programs are useful for
management, while allowing flexibility to account for
differences and recreational fishing activity among states.
Additionally, the Act would require coordinated stock
assessment planning for priority species, which would help
ensure the science used to manage important fisheries stays
current.
The bill would also encourage improvement of fishery data
by facilitating abundant surveys, similar to the Gulf of Mexico
great red snapper count, and review lessons learned to provide
insight on how to best apply results of similar studies in the
future. Abundant surveys like this have a lot of potential to
provide insights on stocks that can further improve management
and assessment of fisheries.
Alongside H.R. 8705, ASA supports the three other bills
being considered by the Subcommittee today. Those are the
Resilient Coasts and Estuaries Act, which supports vital
conservation programs for estuaries; the MAPOceans Act, which
aims to digitize boating and fishing information for enhanced
recreational opportunities; and H.R. 8704, which promotes the
co-existence of ocean users and large cetaceans like the North
Atlantic right whale through technological solutions, rather
than overly restrictive regulations.
I appreciate the opportunity to provide the sport fishing
industry's perspective on these important bills, and we are
committed to working with the Committee to continue
strengthening the management and conservation of our nation's
natural resources. Thank you.

[The prepared statement of Ms. Guyas follows:]

Prepared Statement of Martha Guyas, Southeast Fisheries Policy
Director, American Sportfishing Association

on H.R. 8705

On behalf of the American Sportfishing Association, I am honored to
have been asked to testify before the House Committee on Natural
Resources Subcommittee on Water, Wildlife and Fisheries regarding
legislation that affects marine resources and the recreational fishing
industry.
The American Sportfishing Association (ASA) is the sportfishing
industry's trade association committed to representing the interests of
the sportfishing industry as well as the entire sportfishing community.
We give the industry and anglers a unified voice when emerging laws and
policies could significantly affect sportfishing business or
sportfishing itself. ASA invests in long-term ventures to ensure the
industry will remain strong and prosperous, as well as safeguard and
promote the enduring economic, conservation and social values of
sportfishing in America. Recreational fishing is truly an all-American
activity. Our fisheries resources, which are held in the public trust
and conserved through sound laws and policies, are envied the world
over. In 2023, 57.7 million people went fishing in the U.S.\1\
Recreational fishing supports 945,500 jobs and contributes $148 billion
to the economy.\2\ Fishing is the third most popular outdoor recreation
activity, behind only running and hiking.\3\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Recreational Boating and Fishing Foundation. 2024 Special
Report on Fishing. Available online at: https://www.takemefishing.org/
getmedia/7d775bde-f3a1-4f97-b9bb-845dcb9e05ba/Special-Rport-2024-
Infographic.pdf
\2\ American Sportfishing Association. 2023 Economic Contributions
of Recreational Fishing. Available online at: https://asafishing.org/
economic-impacts-of-recreational-fishing/
\3\ Outdoor Foundation. 2021 Participation Trends Report. Available
online at: https://outdoorindustry.org/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/2021-
Outdoor-Participation-Trends-Report.pdf
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
All of this fishing activity supports the economy, connects people
to the outdoors and provides substantial funding for conservation.
Through fishing license purchases, excise taxes and direct donations,
the recreational fishing community contributes approximately $1.7
billion toward aquatic resource conservation each year. I am confident
in saying that no other user group contributes nearly as much toward
ensuring our nation's waterways and fisheries are healthy and
accessible to the public.
Fishing participation is dependent on two primary factors--access
and healthy fisheries. Access can take several forms, including
physical access to water (e.g., boat ramps, piers, public shorelines)
and regulatory access (e.g., seasons, bag limits, size limits,
closures). While simply being outdoors and wetting a line is a large
part of the enjoyment of fishing, at some level, most people want to
actually catch fish too. There are many more effective ways of catching
fish than a rod, reel and hook, so for recreational fishermen to have a
decent probability of encountering a fish, there have to be a lot of
fish in the water.
In most cases, the foundation for fisheries management and
conservation decisions is scientific information. Credible data on
catches and fishing effort, along with information about the biology
and ecology of fish stocks, are critical to ensuring fisheries stock
assessments accurately characterize the status of stocks and in turn,
ensure that management decisions are informed by the best science.
This is particularly the case with federal fisheries management, in
which harvest is monitored relative to annual catch limits (ACLs), and
accountability measures such as seasonal closures and ACL paybacks are
used to constrain harvest. The federal government, via the National
Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA), manages fisheries in the
exclusive economic zone (EEZ), which for the purpose of fisheries
management is 3-200 miles off the South Atlantic coast and 9-200 miles
in the Gulf of Mexico.
H.R. 8705 ``Fisheries Data Modernization and Accuracy Act of 2024''

Too often, especially in the southeastern U.S. where I live,
fisheries stock assessments have high levels of uncertainty (if
assessments are even available) due to unreliable or sparse fishery
data. The uncertainty caused by use of questionable fishery data to
inform the status of fisheries and make management decisions can have
severe implications for fish stocks, anglers, businesses, communities
and the economy. ASA commends Congressman Graves for introducing the
Fisheries Data Modernization and Accuracy Act of 2024 to address these
issues and improve confidence in the scientific information used for
fisheries management.

The Marine Recreational Information Program (MRIP) is a NOAA
program that provides estimates of recreational fishing catches and
trips that occur from Maine to Mississippi and Hawaii. These data are
used to assess and manage state and federal fisheries in the Atlantic,
Gulf of Mexico and Hawaii. MRIP is the product of two different
components:

1.  Dockside interviews administered by state partners that gather
information on angler catch rates (i.e., number, types and
sizes of fish caught); and

2.  A mail survey administered by NOAA known as the Fishing Effort
Survey (FES), which is used to estimate fishing effort
(i.e., the number of fishing trips that occur).

For years, MRIP catch estimates have been a source of contention
for anglers, state agencies, and other fishery managers that depend on
accurate and precise data for decision-making. MRIP was originally
designed to provide broad (imprecise) information about recreational
fishing catch and effort trends. However, MRIP is currently used to
manage federal fisheries to exact, poundage-based ACLs, in accordance
with the Magnuson-Stevens Fishery Conservation and Management Act
(MSA). In most cases, MRIP is the only information available on
recreational catch and effort due to a lack of alternative data
sources, and is considered best scientific information available (BSIA)
by default. NOAA cautions use of MRIP estimates in fisheries management
when percent standard error (PSE), which is a measure of precision or
margin of error around an estimate, is greater than 30 and does not
support use of MRIP estimates with PSEs above 50.\4\ Unfortunately,
MRIP estimates routinely have PSEs that are well above these thresholds
but are nonetheless used by NOAA as the basis for fisheries management
decisions. Using data that does not meet data quality standards to
manage our fisheries results in lost access when fisheries are closed
due to unrealistically high and highly uncertain catch estimates, is
detrimental to conservation, and further erodes public trust in the
fishery management process.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\ NOAA Fisheries Service. An Introduction to Marine Recreational
Information Program Data. Available online at: https://
www.fisheries.noaa.gov/recreational-fishing-data/introduction-marine-
recreational-information-program-data#data-use-considerations
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
In response to longstanding concerns with MRIP or its precursor,
the Marine Recreational Fisheries Statistical Survey (MRFSS), several
states designed their own recreational data collection programs to
supplement or replace MRIP to better align data collection with their
management needs. The most recent state surveys are those developed and
implemented over the past 10 years by the Gulf of Mexico states, such
as Louisiana's LA Creel. There is a long history of state-run
recreational fishery surveys being used to generate recreational
fisheries data that are used for management our nation's fisheries. For
example, California, Oregon, and Washington withdrew from MRFSS about
20 years ago to implement state surveys that better meet local needs.
Many state surveys are certified by NOAA, meaning they have undergone a
rigorous scientific peer review process and have been found to be
scientifically sound and defensible.
Since FES was overhauled in 2018, replacing a survey design based
on calls to coastal landlines to a mail-based survey, many anglers and
state agencies have expressed concerns that MRIP effort estimates have
been greatly inflated, often producing unrealistically or impossibly
high estimates. Indeed, a 2023 pilot study \5\ conducted by NOAA in
response to these and other concerns about MRIP estimates found that
the order of mail survey questions in FES may be causing overestimation
of recreational catch and effort by 30-40%. While ASA appreciates that
NOAA is conducting a follow-up study to further investigate this issue,
it is clear that changes beyond adjusting MRIP based on pilot study
findings are needed to meet the needs of anglers and fisheries
managers. MRIP is in need of an overhaul, not tweaks around the
margins.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\ NOAA Fisheries Service, Office of Science and Technology.
Evaluating Measurement Error in the MRIP Fishing Effort Survey.
Available online at: https://apps-st.fisheries.noaa.gov/rpts/main/
public_docs/
Evaluating%20Measurement%20Error%20in%20the%20FES%20Consolidated
%20Final%20w%20Review.pdf?method=PUB_MANUSCRIPT&id=32268
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
A recent example of unrealistically high MRIP harvest estimates for
Gulf of Mexico recreational gag grouper during September-October (MRIP
Wave 5) last year was highlighted in a bicameral letter \6\ to the NOAA
Assistant Administrator that included signatures from several members
of the House Natural Resources Committee. Shortly after MRIP estimates
for Wave 5 were released, Gulf recreational fishermen raised suspicions
that the 1.6 million pounds of gag grouper estimated to be harvested by
anglers during the September 1-October 18 open season was
unrealistically high. Although the length of the open season was set
based on when NOAA predicted the ACL would be met, MRIP estimates
indicated that harvest during this time period was nearly four times
greater than the ACL. The PSEs for the MRIP estimates were also above
the 30% threshold set by NOAA (33-98%). In the Gulf of Mexico, gag
grouper are caught almost exclusively off Florida. Thankfully, the
State of Florida conducts a survey called the State Reef Fish Survey
(SRFS) which is specifically designed to provide better recreational
catch and effort data for gag grouper and 12 other reef fish species
that could be used to compare with the unrealistically high MRIP
estimate. SRFS estimated gag grouper harvest was only one-seventh of
the MRIP estimate and prompted further review of the MRIP estimates,
which were ultimately revised substantially. Without the SRFS estimates
being available for contrast, it is unclear if the MRIP estimates would
have been revised, and if there would be a recreational gag grouper
season in the Gulf of Mexico this year due to the extreme overage
estimated by MRIP. This would have been disastrous for the anglers,
for-hire operations, tackle shops, marinas, and other fishing
businesses in Florida that depend on gag grouper harvest opportunities.
Florida SRFS estimates will be used to manage this fishery in the
future based on direction from the Gulf of Mexico Fishery Management
Council.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\6\ April 18, 2024 Letter to NOAA Assistant Administrator Coit.
Available online at: https://garretgraves.house.gov/uploadedfiles/
2024.04.18_bicameral_ltr_to_nmfs_re_fisheries_data.pdf
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Highly uncertain and unrealistically high MRIP estimates of
recreational discards (fish that are caught and released) can also
cause problems for stock assessments and lead to significant management
headaches. This has been the case for South Atlantic red snapper, which
have rebounded so much in the past 15 years that scientists and
fishermen both agree the stock is at record abundance and biomass, such
that there are now more red snapper in the South Atlantic today than
any living person has ever seen. Yet, highly uncertain and unvalidated
MRIP estimates of recreational discards, which are used to estimate the
proportion of fish that do not survive catch and release, are causing
the fishery to be classified as undergoing overfishing. This
overfishing designation has resulted in severe limitations on harvest
despite the clear progress in stock rebuilding (this year's
recreational harvest season will be just one day, July 12) and
discussion of draconian measures such as large bottom fishing area
closures for all 55 species of the snapper grouper complex to prevent
red snapper from being caught and released by fishermen while they
target other species.
Recognizing that significant changes are needed, the Fisheries Data
Modernization and Accuracy Act would advance reform of recreational
fishing data collection. First, the bill would convene a National
Academies panel of experts to consider options for improving MRIP
estimates and/or management of seasonal fisheries that have high PSEs
(greater than the NOAA-established standard of 30%) or are identified
as problematic by a state via petition. In cases where increasing the
precision of estimates is not practicable, the committee would consider
options for adjusting management while adhering to the management and
conservation requirements of MSA. These options would be presented in a
report for consideration by the relevant regional fishery management
council and include recommendations from the NOAA Administrator.
Critically, as part of this process, the panel and NOAA Administrator
would consider whether MRIP is the most appropriate tool for use in
management decisions for a given seasonal fishery. Options and
recommendations from the panel would not override or interfere with
scientific recommendations from a council's scientific and statistical
committee (SSC), but would provide an objective bird's eye view that
can help identify common issues and solutions across fisheries and
regions for consideration by NOAA, the federal fishery management
councils, and SSCs. Second, H.R. 8705 would help facilitate development
and use of state-led data collection programs. Existing programs such
as LA Creel, Florida's SRFS and the Pacific states' Recreational
Fisheries Information Network have demonstrated the potential for
superior accuracy and precision of harvest estimated produced by the
states. The bill would create universal standards for such data
collection programs to ensure capability and use for management, while
allowing for flexibility to account for differences in recreational
fishing activity among states. While the Gulf states' data collection
programs have proven extremely valuable, the process for establishing
each of them independently and ultimately ensuring the data is used for
management has been challenging. Having a clear system for establishing
such programs, with the support of NOAA, will provide a smoother and
more efficient path for additional state-led programs to address state
and regional management needs.
In addition to improving recreational data collection, the
Fisheries Data Modernization and Accuracy Act would encourage
coordinated planning of stock assessments for priority species and
improvement of fishery independent data (scientific survey data rather
than fishery dependent catch data) by facilitating third-party fishery-
independent abundance surveys of federally managed fish stocks.
Abundance surveys, such as the Great Red Snapper Count (GRSC), are
designed to provide an estimate of how many fish are in a given stock.
Numerous discussions at council and scientific and statistical
committee meetings indicate that fishery-independent surveys like the
GRSC that estimate absolute abundance of fish stocks can provide
important insights for management and assessment of fisheries.
Additional Congressionally funded independent studies similar to the
GRSC are currently underway for greater amberjack and South Atlantic
red snapper.
Results of the GRSC, which was funded with a $10 million
appropriation from Congress to provide an independent estimate of
abundance of Gulf of Mexico red snapper, indicate that there are more
than 118 million red snapper in the Gulf (as of 2019). Abundance was
previously estimated to be about 36 million fish. The wide disparity in
estimates is explained by the GRSC finding a surprisingly large biomass
of red snapper over uncharacterized bottom that was not considered in
previous stock assessments. Although the GRSC improves our knowledge of
red snapper in the Gulf of Mexico, the path to integrating this
groundbreaking science into red snapper management and assessment has
not been straightforward. Reviewing the path of the GRSC as proposed in
this legislation would provide valuable lessons on how the results of
other independent abundance surveys should best be incorporated into
management and assessments in the future.
Lastly, this legislation would promote transparency and public
understanding of SSC decision making by ensuring that recordings and
transcripts of SSC meetings are readily available to the public. This
is simply good governance and is already common practice by some
federal fishery management councils.
Other Legislation Under Consideration

ASA is also grateful that the committee is considering in this
hearing other legislation that will benefit conservation and public
access to the ocean.

H.R. 6841 (Rep. Levin), the Resilient Coasts and Estuaries
Act: The nation's estuaries are critical fish nurseries, in
addition to providing a wide range of other environmental
benefits such as preventing soil erosion and protecting
against storm surges. H.R. 6841 supports two important
conservation programs established under the Coastal Zone
Management Act: the Coastal and Estuarine Land Conservation
Program (CELCP) and the National Estuarine Research Reserve
System (NERRS). The CELCP bolsters state and locally led
efforts to conserve ecologically important coastal lands.
The NERRS currently contains 30 reserves--all owned and
operated by state or local governments--that provide
crucial stewardship, research, training, and education
necessary to manage and conserve estuaries across the
United States. The Resilient Coasts and Estuaries Act would
reauthorize both programs at their most recent fund levels
and make other modest but important policy improvements.

H.R. 7925 (Rep. D'Esposito), the Modernizing Access to Our
Public Oceans (MAPOceans) Act: The MAPOceans Act directs
the standardization, consolidation, and digitization of
boating and recreational fishing information for federally
managed marine waters and federal fisheries administered by
NOAA. This bill will enhance and expand recreation
opportunities by investing in modern technology commonly
found in smartphone applications to provide anglers,
boaters, and other users with the information they need to
safely and legally enjoy offshore waters and federal
saltwater fisheries. The hundreds of thousands of offshore
ocean miles and numerous saltwater fish species regulated
by NOAA present enormous recreational opportunities where
restrictions are difficult to access and constantly
changing. MAPOceans directs the federal agency to compile
those rules in digital form so they can be integrated into
GPS units and smartphone applications that are popular with
boaters and anglers, making that information available to
the public in real time.

H.R. 8704 (Rep. Carter), To require the Secretary of
Commerce to establish a grant program to foster enhanced
coexistence between ocean users and North Atlantic right
whales and other large cetacean species: ASA understands
the importance of protecting right whales and minimizing
vessel strikes by small vessels, as rare as these
occurrences are. Unfortunately, NOAA's 2022 proposed
amendments to the North Atlantic Right Whale Vessel Strike
Reduction Rule are misguided, excessively restrictive and a
risk to human safety. Due to the large area covered and the
unfeasibility of traveling offshore under 10 knot speed
restrictions, this rule would effectively prohibit most
offshore fishing trips for approximately half the year. In
addition, forcing boaters to travel at slow speeds, even in
dangerous conditions, puts human safety at risk. Technology
to better identify right whale locations in real time and
disseminating the information to mariners in a timely
manner provides a much more effective and efficient
strategy to minimize vessel strikes. H.R. 8704 would
support the development and expansion of such technology,
most of which is currently available, while pausing
unnecessary and economically devastating regulatory changes
from moving forward.

Conclusion

Thank you again for the opportunity to provide the sportfishing
industry's perspective on these important bills. We are grateful for
the ongoing work of the House Natural Resources Committee and
Subcommittee on Water, Wildlife and Fisheries to advance legislation
that will strengthen the management and conservation of the nation's
public lands and waters. We look forward to working with the Committee
on these and other important measures that impact the recreational
fishing industry and America's 54.5 million anglers.

______

Questions Submitted for the Record to Martha Guyas, Southeast Fisheries
Policy Director, American Sportfishing Association

Questions Submitted by Representative Carl

Question 1. I have been deeply involved with issues surrounding the
Great Red Snapper Count and the calibration of fisheries data. It has
become increasingly clear to me that the management of these processes
should be left to the states. Mr. Graves' bill is a significant step
forward in achieving this goal. It empowers states to create their own
recreational fishery catch data collection programs, with NOAA being
required to utilize the state-collected data. I have told NOAA that the
state has done a fantastic job monitoring snapper season.

With this context, Ms. Guyas, in your testimony you emphasized the
significance of the Great Red Snapper Count as a model for third-party
abundance surveys that can inform management decisions, along with
similar studies currently underway.

Could you expand on ways that you think NOAA could more effectively
incorporate studies like the Great Red Snapper Count into management
decisions?

Answer. Studies like the Great Red Snapper Count provide
opportunities to assess and manage fisheries based on the absolute
abundance of fish in a stock. Section 7 of H.R. 8705 would facilitate
this by requiring that the National Academies, in consultation with
Harte Research Institute, submit a publicly available report to the
Committee on Natural Resources regarding use of Great Red Snapper Count
results in fisheries management decisions, as well as recommendations
for how to incorporate results of similar studies in management
decisions made by the National Marine Fisheries Service.

Questions Submitted by Representative Levin

Question 1. I appreciate that in your testimony, you discuss how
programs like the Coastal and Estuarine Land Conservation Program
(CELCP) and the National Estuarine Research Reserve System help to
manage and conserve estuaries across the country. Can you share more
about how hunters and fishers benefit from these coastal conservation
programs?

Answer. The Coastal Estuarine Land Conservation Program (CELCP) and
National Estuarine Research Reserve System (NERRS) are vital programs
to manage and conserve estuaries throughout the country. Estuaries are
important spawning and nursery habitats for a wide range of sportfish
species, so conserving and providing responsible public access to them
provide significant benefits for recreational fishing. Since 2002,
CELCP has conserved over 110,000 acres of coastal and estuarine land,
in partnership with states providing an equivalent non-federal funding
match. The stewardship, monitoring, research, training and education
that occurs throughout the NERRS provides social, economic, and
environmental benefits--particularly toward outdoor recreation--that
far exceed their cost of operation.

Question 2. Will the establishment of new research reserves limit
hunting and fishing in coastal areas?

Answer. Section 2(j) of H.R. 6841 requires that fishing, hunting
and cultural uses be allowed unless explicitly prohibited in a
management plan. Currently 90% of research reserves allow recreational
fishing and 75% allow hunting. Any restrictions would need to be based
on sound, scientific reasoning.

______

Mr. Bentz. Thank you, Ms. Guyas. I now recognize Mr. Strong
for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF JEFF STRONG,  CHAIR  OF  THE MARINE
RETAILERS ASSOCIATION OF THE AMERICANS BOARD OF
DIRECTORS,  AND  PRESIDENT OF STRONG'S  MARINE,
MATTITUCK, NEW YORK

Mr. Strong. Good morning, Chairman Bentz, Ranking Member
Huffman, Congressman D'Esposito, and esteemed members of the
Committee. Thank you for providing me the opportunity to
testify in support of the MAPOceans Act, or H.R. 7925. My name
is Jeff Strong. I am President of our family business, Strong's
Marine. We are a full-service marine dealership with six marina
locations throughout Long Island. Our family has been in
business since 1945. We employ 125 full-time, year-round
employees. I also serve as Chairman of the Board of the Marine
Retailers Association of the Americas, supporting 3,500
dealers.
I thank Congressman D'Esposito and Congressman Levin for
their leadership on H.R. 7925, as this bipartisan bill is a
significant step towards enhancing the accessibility, safety,
and the enjoyment of our nation's Federal waterways.
In the United States, recreational boating is a major
economic driver and a crucial part of our nation's $1.1
trillion outdoor recreation economy. Recreational boating alone
annually contributes $230 billion to our economy, supports more
than 800,000 jobs and 36,000 businesses. The industry is
uniquely American, as 90 to 95 percent of all boats sold in the
United States are American-made and sold at family-owned
businesses just like Strong's Marine.
Throughout my 51 years in the industry, I have seen
firsthand the value that our coastal regions provide, not just
as critical habitat, but also as recreational spaces that
support local economies. The MAPOceans Act will address the
need for standardized and accessible data relating to the
public use of our waterways. By digitizing information about
these waterways like fishing restrictions and regulations, we
are taking a step towards ensuring the safety and enjoyment of
recreational boaters and anglers and the conservation of
sportfish populations.
With Strong's Marine being a fourth-generation family
business, I am no stranger to the advances in technology we
have seen in the industry, from LORAN to GPS. I am confident
that the provisions in MAPOceans will be crucial in helping to
usher in a new innovation in our sector. MAPOceans will create
an important platform that is ready to aggregate and
disseminate crucial data to recreational mariners. Ultimately,
it would be like Waze is for cars for mariners, which would
provide real-time alerts of what areas must be avoided or where
a dynamic speed zone is established due to the presence of
endangered species or at-risk creatures.
MAPOceans will allow boaters and customers of Strong's
Marine to provide more safety, confidence, and in accordance
with Federal fisheries regulations. It will also support
innovation in the industry to relay this information to
mariners in real time on displays right aboard their vessels.
This will help keep boaters safe, but also ensure that we have
more critical tools to protect our wildlife that we share the
ocean ecosystem we all love so dearly.
As a marine retailer with six Atlantic Coast locations, we
sell and service boats over 35 feet and have extensive dock
space for these vessels, which is why I would also offer
support for H.R. 8704, which balances conservation with
protecting coastal businesses. The proposed North Atlantic
Right Whale Vessel Strike Rule amendments would severely impact
our business. Imagine owning a 45-foot vessel and desiring to
fish off shore, typically 80 to 90 miles, and being restricted
to a speed of 10 knots. Our clients will not do this. They will
sell their boats and create significant job losses.
While the rule aims to protect right whales, NOAA failed to
consider existing technology-based solutions that can protect
the species. NOAA did host a technology workshop on March 5 of
this year. It also transmitted the rule to the Office of Budget
and Management during that workshop, ensuring the technologies
presented would not even be considered in the rule.
Additionally, the economic impact analysis overlooks the
significant negative effects on our businesses. This would
result in an average loss of $4.1 million in business per
dealer, over 500 dealers, resulting in $2 billion in loss along
the East Coast. This is just one shortcoming with the proposed
amendments, but is the one that hits closest to home for me as
a marine dealer.
I believe H.R. 8704 will help protect and restore the North
Atlantic right whale while protecting the coastal economy. My
business and the entire industry believe keeping boaters safe
on the water is the highest priority, and technology is the key
to ensuring boaters are informed and able to protect themselves
and endangered wildlife. Thank you.

[The prepared statement of Mr. Strong follows:]

Prepared Statement of Jeff Strong, President, Strong's Marine

on H.R. 7925 and H.R. 8704

Good morning, Chairman Bentz, Ranking Member Huffman, Congressman
D'Esposito, and esteemed members of the Committee. Thank you for
providing me with the opportunity to testify in support of the
MAPOceans Act or H.R. 7925.
My name is Jeff Strong, and I am the President of Strongs Marine, a
family owned full service marine dealership and marina with locations
throughout Long Island, where we are dedicated to fulfilling dreams by
creating life-enhancing recreational possibilities, one family at a
time. I also serve as the Chairman of the Board for the Marine
Retailers Association of the Americas, a 501(c)6 dedicated to fueling
marine dealer success, so it is safe to say that recreational boating
is in my blood and a pastime I care about deeply. I thank Congressman
D'Esposito and Congressman Levin for their leadership on H.R. 7925, as
this bipartisan bill is a significant step toward enhancing the
accessibility, safety, and enjoyment of our nation's federal waterways.
In the United States, Recreational boating is a major economic
driver and a crucial part of our nations $1.1 trillion outdoor
recreation economy. According to statistics from the National Marine
Manufacturers Association, recreational boating alone annually
contributes $230.3 billion to our economy, supports more than 800,000
jobs and 36,000 businesses. Furthermore, the recreational boating
industry is uniquely American, as 95% of all boats sold in the United
States are American made and sold at family owned small businesses just
like Strongs Marine.
Throughout my 51 years in the recreational marine industry, I have
seen firsthand the immense value that our coastal regions provide, not
just as critical habitat but also as recreational spaces that foster
communities and support local economies. The MAPOceans Act will address
a pressing need for standardized, published, and accessible data
relating to the public recreational use of our federal waterways. By
digitizing this important information about these waterways, and
fishing restrictions and regulations we are taking a critical step
toward ensuring the safety and enjoyment of recreational boaters and
anglers and the conservation of various sport-fish populations.
At Strong's Marine we not only have marina facilities where
experienced and new boaters alike keep their vessels, we also sell new
and pre-owned boats and get people on the water for the very first
time. Time and time again both new and experienced boaters alike come
to members of my staff, or even myself, with questions regarding
navigation or need help finding and figuring out fisheries regulations
and catch limits. While our staff and I are always pleased to work with
our customers and teach them where to look to find this information,
these constant needs by the boating public underscore the importance of
the MAPOceans Act, as this important information will be made much more
available and accessible, making it easier for the boating public to
boat and fish safely, confidently, and in accordance with Federal
fisheries regulations.
The Modernizing Access to Our Public Oceans Act is a vital piece of
legislation that promises to enhance the safety, accessibility, and
enjoyment of our nation's waterways. By providing standardized, up-to-
date information, we are empowering recreational users to connect with
nature responsibly and sustainably. I urge you to support this
important initiative, which benefits our environment, our communities,
and our economy.
In addition to the MAPOceans Act, I would like to offer my support
of H.R. 8704, which would require the Secretary of Commerce to
establish a grant program to foster enhanced coexistence between ocean
users and North Atlantic right whales and other large cetacean species.
In addition the reasons stated below, I believe this bill will also
benefit from the MAPOceans Act's standardization and publication of
accessible data on our federal waterways as a means to collect and
disseminate near-real time information on the location of protected
species such as the North Atlantic Right Whale so recreational boaters
can avoid those areas and empower boaters who encounter a protected
species to report their sighting to alert others in the area.
I would like to express my appreciation for the efforts of this
Committee and the bill's sponsors, Mr. Carter of Georgia, and Mrs.
Peltola of Alaska, in addressing the critical balance between whale
conservation, human safety, and economic sustainability. Furthermore, I
would like to reiterate something the entire recreational boating and
fishing industry has worked to make clear and that is we all support
the protection and restoration of this critically endangered animal. As
an industry directly tied to the health of our nations oceans and
freshwater resources, we understand better than most the importance of
robust marine mammal populations for overall ocean ecosystem health,
however, our community strives to find the means to provide for the
recovery of this species while allowing for continued safe access to
the waters off the Atlantic Coast. For that reason, I express my
support for H.R. 8704 and again thank Representatives Carter and
Peltola for their dedication to finding a balanced approach to the
conservation of this key species.
As a marine retailer with 4 locations on the Atlantic Coast who
sells and services boats above 35 feet and dock space for vessels of
the same size category, I stand to be negatively impacted by the
Proposed Amendments to the North Atlantic Right Whale Vessel Strike
Rule and support the provisions laid out in H.R. 8704 as focusing on
technological solutions strikes the right balance between conserving
the endangered North Atlantic Right Whale and ensuring coastal
communities and family run small businesses like Strongs Marine are not
shuttered due the proposed expansions of the North Atlantic Right Whale
Vessel Strike Reduction Rule.
In addition to failing to consider the potential of existing
technologies to measurably reduce the risk of a vessel striking a North
Atlantic Right Whale, NOAA also failed to complete a thorough and
thoughtful economic impact analysis and completely missed the mark on
how the proposed rule would impact the recreational marine industry at
large, and more specifically small marine retailers like me who stretch
down the Atlantic Coast. The Initial Regulatory Flexibility Analysis
done by the National Marine Fisheries Service found that the proposed
rule would only have an economic impact of $46 million per year, and
only evaluated the number of ``delayed transit hours'' for impacted
vessels. NMFS essentially cherry picked the single and likely smallest
facet of the vast economic impact of the proposed rule, completely
ignoring the impact to businesses like mine, and many other industries
that are integral to the fabric of coastal communities along the
Atlantic Seaboard. It is also worth noting that these concerns have
been echoed by a variety of stakeholders, including the Small Business
Administration office of Advocacy who stated in a letter to NMFS that
they should ``Consider all potential impacts to small businesses from
the proposed rule, and to update its IRFA to better account for these
small business impacts.'' Despite these concerns being made during and
after the public input period, no such work has been done to better
understand the devastating impacts this rule stands to have on small-
businesses and the recreational marine industry at large.
Furthermore, the Marine Retailers Association of the Americas
recently surveyed 65 of their members to examine the negative impact
the proposed rule would have on small businesses. Ultimately, the
survey found that on average a marine retailer or broker typically
sells just over 23 boats between the 35-and 65-feet range annually, and
that the average revenue generated by boats in this size category is
between $3.7 million per year. Respondents also indicated an estimated
average loss in revenue of $3 million per business per year and a total
loss of sales revenue of more than $153.2 million. Additionally, the
proposed rule will not just impact marine retailers and brokers'
ability to sell boats within and above the 35-65 size class, it will
likely result in decreased revenues from servicing, provisioning, and
the storage of these vessels. The survey also found that non-sales
related losses would average $1.1 million per year. It is important to
note that this was a survey of just 65 members, and with almost 500
marine retailers on the East Coast, the full impact is estimated at
just over $2 billion.
While the aforementioned survey works to provide a clearer impact
on marine retailers, I have been hearing first-hand from current and
potential customers about the proposed rule, many feeling discouraged
about buying a new vessel or upgrading to a larger size and concerned
about the safety implications of traveling at only 10kts, or the speed
of a bicycle. Furthermore, the recreational anglers in my marinas are
also outraged by the proposed regulations, as they would simply make an
offshore trip to the Canyons for tuna and other pelagic species
impossible. It is not uncommon when traveling offshore for recreational
angling to cover 200 miles or more, about the distance from New York to
Washington D.C., now imagine having to cover that distance on a bicycle
instead of in a car or train.
For my business and the entire recreational marine industry,
nothing is more important than the safety of boaters on the water and
technology is a key part of creating a safe and confident boater who
can enjoy our shared waters while protecting endangered species like
the North Atlantic Right Whale and the environment as a whole.
These foreseen and unintended impacts underscore the importance of
H.R. 8704, as we need to work together on a solution that will better
accomplish the goal of conserving the North Atlantic Right Whale, while
simultaneously ensuring recreational boaters can continue to enjoy our
nations oceans and be stewards on the high seas. Furthermore, H.R. 8704
is focused on developing technological solutions that can be applied to
all large cetaceans, and this will ultimately ensure that we foster an
overall safer recreational boating experience for users and wildlife
alike.
Again, I would like to thank the Chairman Bentz, Ranking Member
Huffman, Representatives D'Esposito, Levin, Carter, and Peltola for
their work and focus on these important pieces of legislation. Together
H.R. 7925 and H.R. 8704 will be crucial in furthering the ability of
recreational anglers and boaters to be stewards of the Atlantic while
ensuring the conservation sport fish populations, cetaceans.

______

Questions Submitted for the Record to Mr. Jeff Strong, President of
Strong's Marine and Chair of the Marine Retailers Association
of the Americas Board of Directors

Questions Submitted by Representative Bentz

Question 1. Mr. Strong, one of the other witnesses at our hearing
talked about technological approaches needing to be more thoroughly
evaluated to ``show whether these approaches can be used to replace,
rather than supplement, vessel speed restrictions.'' However, it's
important to note that the legislation we considered seeks to keep the
existing rule in place, not remove it entirely.

1a) Can you talk about the importance of pursuing a more thoughtful
approach that utilizes technologies and other forms of mitigation to
prevent vessel strikes?

Answer. NOAA neglected to evaluate opportunities that would
leverage existing technology to support risk reduction. Instead, it is
simply relying on archaic speed limits--which will likely be much less
effective than taking a 21st century approach. Sophisticated technology
that could be implemented immediately exists today, including radio
frequency transmission and whale collection data aggregation. There are
also various technologies currently in development, including 3D sonar
mapping, infrared imagery detection and innovative marine radar
algorithms. The combination of these technologies enables mariners to
detect and monitor whales more efficiently and take proactive measures
to help prevent strikes. For example, the Massachusetts Division of
Marine Fisheries partners with the Provincetown Center for Coastal
Studies, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution and the National Marine
Fisheries Service to conduct a real and acoustic monitoring of Cape Cod
Bay to inform targeted fishery closures and vessel speed
restrictions.\1\ Regular monitoring of these areas ensures that these
fishery closures and vessel speed restrictions are only in place during
times when right whales are known to be present. Not only did NOAA
overlook examples of how technology is currently leveraged to conserve
the NARW, they also did not meaningfully consult with the recreational
marine industry to determine what technologies currently exist. In
short, technology and other approaches must be considered not only to
increase the likelihood of success for the NARW population, but to also
minimize negative economic impact on stakeholders while maintaining
access to our nation's ocean.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ https://www.mass.gov/doc/042823-dmf-monitoring-presence-of-
right-whales-in-coastal-waters/download

Question 2. When you discussed how to integrate technology to
reduce vessel strikes and mitigate the impact to species like the North
American right whale, one of our colleagues said that it might be
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
beneficial to revisit the rule once those technologies were in place.

2a) Do you believe that NOAA should take more time to work with the
sectors of the economy that stand to be hurt by these proposed
amendments before moving forward? And do you agree that there are
technologies that currently exist that help accomplish that objective?

Answer. These technologies are in place. For example, in February,
the National Marine Manufacturers Association hosted Janet Coit,
Assistant Administrator for NOAA Fisheries, at the Discover Boating
Miami International Boat Show to show her and her team exactly what
technologies exist today to detect marine mammals and reduce boat
strikes.\2\ In March, NOAA hosted a technology workshop to hear from
key stakeholders and businesses that have the data and technologies
today to help mitigate the risk of vessel strikes. In April, many of
these same manufacturers briefed Congress and showcased the technology
that exists today that can better reduce the risk of marine mammal
vessel strikes. NOAA must not only work with impacted sectors of the
economy before moving forward but should also work with scientists and
technology developers to better understand what technology and tactics
can be employed to conserve the NARW. Furthermore, more than 1.5 years
after the rule was proposed. Lastly, to highlight currently existing
technologies as well as develop and research other technology the
marine industry has created the Whales and Vessel Speed (WAVS) Task
Force. In October 2023, the Taskforce shared a white paper (found on
the WAVS Taskforce site) with NOAA that provides an overview of the
technology that's currently available for deployment today. The WAVS
Taskforce is focused on five key areas, known as the Vessel Strike Risk
Reduction Chain:
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ https://www.nmma.org/press/article/24622

1.  Detection: Using various technologies to detect the presence of
whales and other marine mammals, including sonar, radar,
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
camera & AI, crowd sourced observation, etc.

2.  Aggregation: Collecting data for a central clearing house.
Analyzing data to reduce noise, duplication, and other
artifacts.

3.  Dissemination: Sending the data out for stakeholder receipt in an
efficient and timely manner.

4.  Integration: Leveraging disseminated data to create an on-board
experience aimed to influence operation and decision
making.

5.   Risk reduction: Boaters use the display data to make informed
decisions and take appropriate action to reduce vessel
strike risk.

______

Mr. Bentz. Thank you. I now recognize Dr. Redfern for 5
minutes.

STATEMENT OF JESSICA REDFERN, ASSOCIATE VICE PRESI-
DENT  FOR  OCEAN  CONSERVATION  SCIENCE,  ANDERSON
CABOT  CENTER   FOR   OCEAN   LIFE,  NEW   ENGLAND
AQUARIUM, BOSTON, MASSACHUSETTS

Dr. Redfern. Thank you, Chair Bentz and Ranking Member
Huffman, for the opportunity to testify today. I am the
Associate Vice President for Ocean Conservation Science in the
Anderson Cabot Center for Ocean Life at the New England
Aquarium.

The New England Aquarium is a catalyst for global change
through innovative scientific research, commitment to marine
animal conservation, public engagement and education, and
effective advocacy for a vital and vibrant ocean.

I have used statistical models to address wildlife
conservation challenges for more than 25 years, and have
published scientific papers on a broad range of topics
including species habitat modeling, vessel traffic patterns,
and the risk of human activities to whales, including vessel
strikes.

In the hearing today, I will address H.R. 8704. This bill
would have devastating consequences for right whales because it
delays NOAA's ability to implement its proposed protections
from vessel strikes through December 2030. Right whales must
survive long enough to benefit from the approaches for co-
existence that would be funded in this bill, including
technology.

There are less than 360 right whales, and less than 70 of
these whales are reproductive females. Vessel strikes are a
leading cause of the decline of this critically endangered
species. A long history of research shows that NOAA's 2008
Vessel Strike Rule does not provide sufficient protections. I
provided scientific evidence at a Subcommittee hearing in June
2023, just over a year ago, that shows the revisions in NOAA's
proposed rule would contribute to right whale survival by
reducing the risk of vessel strikes. Recent research shows that
the revisions in the proposed rule will also protect humpback,
fin, and sei whales from vessel strikes. It has been more than
22 months since NOAA proposed the revisions, and the final rule
has yet to be released.

My testimony last year showed that even one human-caused
death of a right whale is not consistent with scientific
evidence and U.S. laws. In the years since I testified, at
least three right whales were killed by vessels. The details of
these three lethal vessel strikes demonstrate the need for the
changes in the proposed rule.

The first calf of the 2024 season was seen off South
Carolina on January 6 with deep propeller cuts across its head.
On March 3, the calf was found dead on the shores of Georgia.
The expert that reviewed the images of the calf's propeller
wounds estimated that the vessel that killed this calf was
likely between 35 and 57 feet in length. The death of this calf
highlights the need to make speed restrictions mandatory for
vessels smaller than 65 feet.

The second mortality was documented on February 13, 2024.
The carcass of a 1-year-old female was seen floating off
Georgia and, when examined, showed evidence of blunt force
trauma consistent with vessel strike. Her death shows the
vulnerability of right whales during calving season, which
occurs annually off the southeastern United States from
November through April.

The third mortality was a female right whale that was at
least 35 years old. She was found off Virginia on March 30,
2024. Her spine was dislocated, and all the vertebrae in her
lower back were fractured. Months before this strike, she had
given birth to her sixth calf. Although several aerial survey
teams searched the area, her calf was not spotted. A nursing
calf this young is not expected to survive without its mother.
This calf is not included in the number of human-caused
mortalities that I reported for this year, and it is a good
reminder that documented mortalities represent a minimum number
because not all mortalities are observed.

A female right whale can contribute at least 30 individuals
to the population when her offspring and their subsequent
offspring are considered, emphasizing the important effect that
a single reproductive female can have on this endangered
population. Human-caused mortality of reproductive females
removes that individual and their future contributions to
population growth.

The number of human-caused right whale deaths in the last
year are more than three times the number of deaths estimated
to be sustainable by the Marine Mammal Protection Act. These
vessel strikes have increased the urgency of implementing the
revisions in the proposed rule to help curb the current
trajectory towards the extinction of this endangered species.

The implications for the survival of right whales are
clear. Action is needed now to reduce vessel strikes.
Protecting whales through measures known to be effective, such
as speed restrictions and funding the development of other
approaches to reduce vessel strikes, including technology, are
not mutually exclusive. It is critical to ensure right whales
survive long enough for the approaches in this bill to be
developed, assessed, and carried out. Thank you.

[The prepared statement of Dr. Redfern follows:]

Prepared Statement of Dr. Jessica Redfern, Associate Vice President,
Ocean Conservation Science, Anderson Cabot Center for Ocean Life,
New England Aquarium

on H.R. 8704

Thank you Subcommittee Chairman Bentz, Subcommittee Vice Chair
Kiggans, and Subcommittee Ranking Member Huffman for inviting me to
testify at this hearing. I am the Associate Vice President for Ocean
Conservation Science in the Anderson Cabot Center for Ocean Life at the
New England Aquarium. The New England Aquarium is a catalyst for global
change through innovative scientific research, commitment to marine
animal conservation, public engagement and education, and effective
advocacy for a vital and vibrant ocean. We conduct research that
advances animal and ocean health, promotes responsible ocean use, and
contributes to developing science-based solutions to ocean conservation
challenges.
I have been using statistical models to address such conservation
challenges for more than 25 years. My research focuses primarily on
developing cetacean-habitat models and using predictions from these
models to reduce risk to cetaceans. I have published numerous
scientific papers on a broad range of topics, including species habitat
modeling, vessel traffic patterns, the risk of human activities to
whales (i.e., vessel strikes, entanglements, and chronic noise), and
estimating species diversity to guide designation of marine protected
areas. I served as a guest editor for a research topic in Frontiers in
Marine Science about the impacts of shipping on marine fauna. I also
serve as an invited member on the International Council for the
Exploration of the Sea's (ICES) Working Group on Shipping Impacts in
the Marine Environment. Finally, I have been an invited expert at a
workshop on the Identification of Important Marine Mammal Areas in the
North West Atlantic Ocean Region hosted by the IUCN Marine Mammal
Protected Areas Task Force and my research has been presented at a
workshop on The Future of Shipping at the Biodiversity and Climate
Nexus hosted by the World Maritime University.
The New England Aquarium has been extensively studying North
Atlantic right whales (NARW; Eubalaena glacialis) for more than 40
years. We curate the photo-identification catalog for NARW and use the
catalog to monitor human impacts to individuals, including
entanglements and vessel strikes. We also conduct analyses to assess
risk from vessel strikes; facilitate communication across the maritime
industry to reduce vessel strikes; collaborate with the fishing
community to reduce entanglements; collect the data and conduct
analyses needed to understand and mitigate the potential impacts of
offshore wind energy development; and work with lawmakers locally,
nationally, and internationally to develop science-based protections
for NARW.
The New England Aquarium commends the National Oceanic and
Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) for reviewing the 2008 North Atlantic
Right Whale Vessel Strike Reduction Rule (hereafter, 2008 Rule; NOAA,
2020). This review found that the 2008 Rule required revision to
fulfill NOAA's mandates under the Endangered Species Act and Marine
Mammal Protection Act to protect the endangered NARW. On August 1,
2022, NOAA proposed revisions to the 2008 Rule (hereafter, Proposed
Rule; NOAA, 2022) that are necessary to further reduce the likelihood
of mortalities and serious injuries to NARW from vessel strikes. It has
been more than 22 months since NOAA proposed the revisions and the
Final Rule has yet to be released.
On June 6, 2023, I testified on behalf of the New England Aquarium
before this subcommittee at a hearing titled ``Examining the impacts of
the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration's proposed changes
to the North Atlantic Right Whale Vessel Strike Reduction Rule.'' My
testimony highlighted the scientific research that shows that the
changes in the Proposed Rule are an essential component of preventing
the extinction of the critically endangered NARW. In that hearing, I
noted that the changes in the Proposed Rule were needed as immediately
as possible because the species cannot afford to lose even one
individual to human-caused mortality. The events of the intervening
year have increased the urgency of implementing these changes.
Specifically, at least three NARW were killed by vessels since the
beginning of 2024. This number of deaths is more than four times the
number estimated to be sustainable by the Marine Mammal Protection
Act--a Potential Biological Removal of only 0.7--for an estimated
population of 356 individuals. These deaths show that the 2008 Rule
does not adequately protect NARW from vessel strikes. NOAA's proposed
improvements to the 2008 Rule would help curb the current trajectory
toward NARW species extinction.
In the hearing today, I will address H.R. 8704. The bill would have
devastating consequences for NARW because it delays NOAA's ability to
implement its proposed protections from vessel strikes through December
31, 2030. Protecting whales through measures known to be effective,
such as speed restrictions, and funding the development of other
approaches, including technology, to reduce vessel strike risk are not
mutually exclusive: it is critical to ensure NARW survive long enough
for the approaches in H.R. 8704 to be developed, assessed, and carried
out. Scientific evaluation of the changes in the Proposed Rule shows
that these changes would contribute to NARW survival by reducing the
risk of vessel strikes, especially during particularly vulnerable
times, like calving season, which occurs annually from November through
April. While the Proposed Rule focuses on NARW, my colleagues and I
published a paper in the peer-reviewed journal, Biological Conservation
(Estimating reductions in the risk of vessels striking whales achieved
by management strategies, Redfern et al., 2024), that shows that the
Seasonal Speed Zones in the Proposed Rule will protect humpback
(Megaptera novaeangliae), fin (Balaenoptera physalus), and sei
(Balaenoptera borealis) whales, in addition to protecting NARW, from
vessel strikes.
New England Aquarium scientists and our other experts are committed
to working on the development of technological and other approaches to
reduce the risk of vessel strikes. For example, we participate in
government-convened technology workshops as invited scientific experts
and are starting to use our expertise to design studies that can
rigorously evaluate proposed technological solutions (e.g., thermal
imaging cameras). Evaluations of technological and other approaches are
needed to quantify the risk reduction that they can achieve,
particularly in comparison to the risk reduction realized through known
methods, such as speed restrictions and vessel routing changes. These
evaluations will show whether these approaches can be used to replace,
rather than supplement, vessel speed restrictions.
Ongoing delay in releasing the critically important Proposed Rule
would put NARW at continued risk of death and serious injury from
vessel strikes. NARW must survive long enough to benefit from the
approaches for coexistence that would be funded in H.R. 8704, including
technology and enhanced awareness. While these approaches are
developed, assessed, and carried out, we must implement measures known
to reduce the risk of vessel strike, such as those included in the
Proposed Rule that was released nearly two years ago.

To support this position, this testimony provides additional
details on the following:

1.  Implications for the survival of the NARW species if we do not
take action to reduce vessel strikes;

2.  NARW deaths caused by vessel strikes so far in 2024; and

3.  The scientific evidence that supports the Proposed Rule.

Implications of vessel strikes for the survival of the NARW species

The NARW is one of the most endangered large whale species in the
world. The NARW has been protected from hunting since 1935 and
experienced a slow, but steady, recovery until 2011. In particular, the
recent estimates of the number of NARW (i.e., the population size
estimate) grew from 261 (+4/-2) in 1990 to a high of 481 individuals
(+4/-3) in 2011. Over the last decade, the number of NARW steadily
declined from the high in 2011 to 356 individuals (+7/-10) in 2022
(Linden, 2023; Pettis and Hamilton, 2024). The current population size
estimate is one of the lowest in the past 20 years (Linden, 2023;
Pettis and Hamilton, 2024). Additionally, the number of reproductive
NARW females has declined and Reed et al. (2022) estimated that fewer
than 70 were alive in 2018. The species recovery has been limited by
lethal and sub-lethal effects of entanglements and vessel strikes
(Corkeron et al., 2018; Sharp et al., 2019; Pirotta et al., 2023).
However, population viability analysis shows that the current
trajectory toward extinction for NARW can be reversed if the risk of
entanglement and vessel strikes are reduced (Runge et al., 2023).
The ``take'' of a NARW is generally prohibited under both the U.S.
Endangered Species Act (ESA) and the U.S. Marine Mammal Protection Act
(16 U.S.C. 1532(19); 16 U.S.C. 1362(13)). The Marine Mammal Protection
Act defines the Potential Biological Removal (PBR) from a marine mammal
stock as the maximum number of animals, not including natural
mortalities, that may be removed while allowing the stock to reach or
maintain its optimum sustainable population. When I testified last
year, I was asked about natural mortality in NARW. Sharp et al. (2019)
reviewed 70 NARW mortalities documented between 2003 and 2018 from
Florida, USA, to the Gulf of St. Lawrence, Canada. The cases included
30 adults, 14 juveniles, 10 calves, and 16 whales of unknown age. A
cause of death was determined in 43 cases: 38 (88.4%) of these deaths
were caused by humans, including 22 (57.9%) from entanglement and 16
(42.1%) from vessel strike. No natural mortalities were observed in
adult or juvenile NARW. Natural mortalities were only found in five
calf deaths. The primary sources of natural mortality in calves are
perinatal complications and malnutrition due to either presumed
maternal abandonment or developmental abnormalities. There was one
necropsy report that concluded that a calf death was caused by shark
predation. This predation death is one of four shark predation case
studies presented by Taylor et al. (2013) using necropsy and aerial
survey data collected between 1994 and 2011. The other three cases
presented by Taylor et al. (2013) represent documentation of shark
bites on a living calf, a calf that died from an interaction between
shark predation and entanglement, and a two-year-old whale that
experienced shark predation while severely entangled. The research on
NARW mortality that spans more than two decades shows that human-caused
mortalities are driving NARW toward extinction.
The PBR for NARW defined by the Marine Mammal Protection Act is 0.7
(Hayes et al., 2022) and shows that the survival of every individual
matters and that even one human-caused mortality puts the species at
risk of extinction. There is a long history of NARW vessel strikes (see
Figure 1 in the Supplement). The New England Aquarium collates
information on NARW mortalities and injuries from vessel strikes as
curators of the North Atlantic Right Whale Consortium's photo-
identification catalog (https://rwcatalog.neaq.org/#). We provide this
information in annual reports to NOAA (https://www.narwc.org/narw-
catalog-reports.html) and in the annual report card of the North
Atlantic Right Whale Consortium (https://darchive.mblwhoilibrary.org/
browse/title?scope=3afd3800-5620-59b9-8b77-fc901b0c0f ec). From 1972
through June 2024, a total of 124 cases with blunt trauma or external
injuries (i.e., propeller cuts or gashes) from vessel strikes have been
documented in U.S. and Canadian waters (Moore et al., 2004; Sharp et
al., 2019; NOAA, 2020; NARWC, 2023; NOAA, 2023b). The evidence for
these strikes include observed deaths (determined by the presence of
deep propeller cuts that occurred pre-mortem and/or examining a carcass
and finding evidence of pre-mortem blunt trauma) and sightings of
living whales with cuts or gashes that are categorized as deep,
shallow, or superficial. Pirotta et al. (2023) found that sub-lethal
vessel strikes associated with deep and shallow wounds decreased a
NARW's chance of survival. These vessel strikes are part of an Unusual
Mortality Event (UME) for NARW. NOAA declared an UME because a
particularly high number of deaths have been observed from Florida,
U.S., to the Gulf of St. Lawrence, Canada, since 2017 (NOAA, 2023b).
The life history of every individual NARW that has been
photographed is tracked in the North Atlantic Right Whale Catalog
(https://rwcatalog.neaq.org/#). These life history data demonstrate the
consequences of vessel strikes on the NARW population and show how the
loss of each of these whales, particularly females, is compounded by
the loss of their reproductive potential. Female NARW can give birth to
at least nine calves in their lifetime (Hamilton and Knowlton, 2021).
For example, one whale, Wart, has given birth to seven calves since
1982 and is responsible for at least 31 whales being added to the
population so far. However, Wart's family has experienced 11 vessel
strikes, including the death of the one-year-old calf that occurred
this year (see details below). Wart's contribution to the NARW
population emphasizes the important effect that a single reproductive
female can have on this small population and the negative impacts of
vessel strikes. Females and calves are particularly vulnerable to
vessel strikes because they spend >70% of their time resting at or just
below the surface (Cusano et al., 2019).
NARW deaths caused by vessel strikes so far in 2024

Three NARW deaths caused by vessel strikes have been documented
this year, all during calving season. This number of deaths is more
than four times the number of deaths estimated to be sustainable by the
Marine Mammal Protection Act--a Potential Biological Removal of only
0.7--for this population. The number of actual strikes is likely
higher, since documented vessel strikes represent the minimum number of
strikes because not every death or injury is observed. Pace et al.
(2021) showed that documented mortalities accounted for only 36% of all
estimated NARW deaths between 1990 and 2017.

The details of these three deaths demonstrate the need for the
changes in the Proposed Rule and what the loss of these individuals,
particularly females, means to the population as a whole:

1.  February 2024, offshore of Georgia, one-year-old female calf of
Catalog #4340 (Pilgrim): On February 13, 2024, the carcass
of this one-year-old female calf was seen floating offshore
of Savannah, Georgia. The carcass was towed ashore for a
necropsy. The multi-organization necropsy led by the
University of North Carolina, Wilmington, showed evidence
of blunt force trauma consistent with a vessel strike prior
to death. Full necropsy details are pending and this strike
is considered an active NOAA Office of Law Enforcement
investigation. This whale's family has experienced at least
10 other vessel strikes, including one that was killed and
one that was seriously injured due to a strike by a 54-foot
sport-fishing vessel. The seriously injured whale has not
been sighted again as of submission of this testimony.

2.  January to March 2024, offshore of South Carolina and Georgia,
calf of Catalog #1612 (Juno): This calf was the first
documented calf of the 2024 season and was seen off Edisto,
South Carolina, with propeller cuts across its head (see
Figure 2 in the Supplement) in early January 2024. NOAA
Fisheries biologists reviewed the case and determined that
it met the criteria of a serious injury, meaning the calf
was likely to die as a result of the injuries. NOAA also
noted that the injuries could impact this calf's ability to
nurse successfully. The calf was closely monitored through
January and February. On March 3, the calf was found dead
on the shore of Cumberland Island, Georgia. The expert
(Paul Kamen, a forensic naval architect) that reviewed the
images of the calf's propeller wounds estimated that the
vessel that struck and ultimately killed this calf was
likely between 35-57 feet in length (see Figure 3 in the
Supplement).

3.  March 2024, offshore of Virginia, adult female Catalog #1950:
This NARW was at least 35 years old and her carcass was
found floating 50 miles offshore east of Back Bay National
Wildlife Refuge, Virginia, on March 30, 2024 (see Figure 4
in the Supplement). Months before this strike, this whale
had given birth to her sixth calf. Although several aerial
survey teams searched the area, her calf was not spotted. A
nursing calf this young is not expected to survive without
its mother. Preliminary necropsy results of #1950, provided
by the Virginia Aquarium and Marine Science Center and
others, found catastrophic injuries consistent with blunt
force trauma from a vessel strike, including dislocation of
the spine and fractures to all vertebrae in her lower back.
Before the strike, she had been seen healthy and with her
calf on February 16, off the coast of Florida.

These three incidents underscore the need to make speed
restrictions mandatory for vessels smaller than 65 feet in length; the
particular vulnerabilities during calving season; and the ripple
effects of losing female whales from the population. In addition, the
lethal and sub-lethal effects of vessel strikes may be delayed, as in
the case of Juno's calf (#2 above) and as has been previously
documented in strikes to other whales (e.g., Glass et al., 2010).
Vessel strikes can also directly harm calves that are dependent on
their mother, as in the case of calf of Catalog #1950 (#3 above).
Scientific support for NOAA's Proposed Rule

In 2022, NOAA proposed changes to the 2008 Rule (NOAA, 2022) to
further reduce the likelihood of mortalities and serious injuries to
NARW from vessel strikes. The proposed changes for reducing the risk of
vessel strikes to the statutorily protected NARW are necessary and
based on the best available science. Specifically, Garrison et al.
(2022) used the most up-to-date data available about NARW distributions
and vessel traffic patterns to develop an encounter risk model for the
U.S. East Coast. The methodology used by Garrison et al. (2022) has
been used on the U.S. East and West Coasts (e.g., Martin et al., 2016;
Rockwood et al., 2017; Crum et al., 2019; Rockwood et al., 2020).
Mortality estimates from encounter risk models developed for fin,
humpback, and blue whales have been included in NOAA's marine mammal
stock assessment reports (Carretta et al., 2022). Garrison et al.
(2022) used the encounter risk model to estimate the reduction in NARW
mortalities that could be achieved by implementing speed restrictions
in broad areas along the U.S. East Coast. Their broad areas were
defined as the areas of highest risk to NARW. They found an
approximately 28% reduction in NARW vessel strike risk when 10 knot
speed restrictions were implemented in their broad areas.
In January 2024, I published a study (Redfern et al., 2024) with
scientists from the Anderson Cabot Center for Ocean Life at the New
England Aquarium, NOAA, academia, and other organizations in the peer-
reviewed journal, Biological Conservation, that supports the findings
of Garrison et al. (2022). We developed a metric for estimating the
reduction in risk achieved by management strategies that is easy to use
and understand. The metric estimates risk reduction using the
relationship between vessel speed and the probability that a strike is
lethal, the distance a vessel travels, and whale habitat use. This
metric does not include estimates of the time species spend in the
strike zone; consequently, no assumptions are made about the size of a
vessel's draft. In our study, we used the metric to assess potential
vessel strike risk reductions for several species of large whales on
the U.S. East Coast, including North Atlantic right, humpback, fin, and
sei whales. We found that a 10-knot speed restriction, rather than a
12- or 14-knot speed restriction, was necessary for reducing risk. We
also found that a 10-knot speed restriction applied in broad areas
defined by core whale habitat reduces the risk of a lethal vessel
strike for these species. The core whale habitat defined in our study
was similar to the Seasonal Speed Zones in the Proposed Rule and
supports the study by Garrison et al. (2022) that shows that a 10-knot
speed restriction in the Seasonal Speed Zones reduces vessel strike
risk for NARW. While the core whale habitat used in our study was
primarily defined to protect NARW, our results suggest that these areas
also protect humpback, fin, and sei whales.

Below we address three of the four specific changes in the Proposed
Rule based on the New England Aquarium's longstanding expertise and
study of the species:

1.  Expanding the spatial and temporal extent of Seasonal Speed
Zones;

2.  Expanding the vessels subject to the speed restrictions to most
vessels greater than or equal to 35 feet (10.7 m) and less
than 65 feet (19.8 m); and

3.  Implementing mandatory speed restrictions in Dynamic Speed Zones,
which are established when whales are detected outside of
Seasonal Speed Zones.

The fourth proposed change updates the safety deviation provisions
in the 2008 Rule. We do not have expertise in this area; consequently,
we do not address this change.
Expanding the Seasonal Speed Zones

The New England Aquarium reviewed the proposed Seasonal Speed Zones
(SSZ) and associated best available science, which supports the
expansion of the size of the SSZ and the length of time the SSZ are
active. We support NOAA's approach to determining whether, where, and
for how long speed restrictions should be in place, which recognizes
responsible use of the ocean by establishing the smallest spatial and
temporal footprint needed to protect the species, while allowing for
vessel activity. Vessel speed restrictions have been used to mitigate
vessel-strike risk because studies (Vanderlaan and Taggart, 2007; Conn
and Silber, 2013) have shown that the probability of a lethal vessel
strike increases at higher vessel speeds. The SSZ, which are larger and
active longer than the Seasonal Management Areas established in the
2008 Rule, address the shortcomings identified in the 2008 Rule's
Seasonal Management Areas.
Analyses of the proximity of NARW vessel strikes to Seasonal
Management Areas (Laist et al., 2014) and analyses comparing the number
of NARW struck before and after management measures were implemented
(NOAA, 2020) suggest that the Seasonal Management Areas have helped to
reduce vessel strikes of NARW. However, multiple studies and continued
vessel strikes of NARW since 2008 demonstrate that these areas fall
short of achieving the risk reduction necessary to prevent extinction
of NARW. In particular, multiple studies have shown that these Seasonal
Management Areas are insufficient in both space and time (Schick et
al., 2009; Laist et al., 2014; van der Hoop et al., 2015). The size of
the Seasonal Management Areas was likely insufficient when the 2008
Rule was implemented because nearly one-third of detected NARW vessel
strike mortalities occurred outside of the managed space but within
managed timeframes (van der Hoop et al., 2015).
U.S. East Coast waters represent year-round NARW habitat (Davis et
al., 2017). The spatial and temporal expansion of the SSZ ensure that
they are better aligned with NARW habitat, cover areas where previous
vessel strike mortalities have been detected, and buffer against
climate-driven changes in NARW habitat. Climate change has caused NARW
distributions to shift to new areas and has changed the time periods
over which NARW use different areas (Record et al., 2019; Pendleton et
al., 2022). For example, NARW have returned to historically important
areas, such as southern New England shelf waters. Southern New England
shelf waters were formerly a whaling ground and these waters have
reemerged as an important NARW habitat (O'Brien et al., 2022).
Additionally, studies have shown that climate change has resulted in
the peak usage of Cape Cod Bay by NARW occurring later in the season
(Pendleton et al., 2022) and in a higher abundance of NARW in Cape Cod
Bay (Ganley et al., 2022). The expanded SSZ help ensure that vessel
strike risk is addressed in these areas with documented, climate-driven
changes in NARW habitat use.
Additionally, the Proposed Rule will benefit other baleen whale
species (Redfern et al., 2024). For example, NOAA declared an Unusual
Mortality Event for humpback whales because of an elevated number of
humpback whale mortalities along the U.S. East Coast from Maine through
Florida since 2016 (NOAA, 2023a). This Unusual Mortality Event remains
active as of June 2024. A total of 224 humpback whale mortality cases
through June 13, 2024 are included in the UME with 85% of these cases
(205 cases) detected between Massachusetts and North Carolina.
Determination of cause of death for recent cases is ongoing. However,
of the 90 carcasses examined, 40% were attributed to vessel strikes or
entanglements (NOAA, 2023a). The Proposed Rule establishes a SSZ in
waters off these states, which would reduce the risk of a lethal vessel
strike for humpback whales.
Expanding the vessels subject to the speed restriction

The New England Aquarium supports the Proposed Rule's expansion of
the vessels subject to the speed restriction to most vessels greater
than or equal to 35 feet (10.7 m) and less than 65 feet (19.8 m). The
2008 Rule focused on reducing risk in U.S. waters from vessels over 65
feet, which were the vessel sizes thought to be the main threat to NARW
at that time. However, at least five vessel strikes in U.S. waters
since 2008 (including three after 2020) that resulted in death or
serious injury involved vessels smaller than 65 feet, which are not
subject to the mandatory speed restrictions in the 2008 Rule.
Specifically, a 46-foot vessel struck a NARW off Georgia in 2012,
resulting in a serious injury (NOAA, 2020). Additionally, a 39-foot
vessel struck a NARW off Massachusetts in 2014, resulting in propeller
cuts and serious injury (NOAA, 2020). These individual NARW could not
be identified because they were not photographed; consequently, the
ultimate outcome of these strikes are not known. In 2021, a
reproductive female NARW, Infinity, was seriously injured and her calf
was killed when they were struck by a 54-foot vessel. Infinity was last
sighted four days after the strike with deep propeller wounds to her
side and has not been sighted again as of submission of this testimony
(NOAA, 2023b). Finally, a months-old calf suffered significant
propeller wounds to its head in January 2024 and died from those
injuries in March. Forensic analyses indicate that the vessel
responsible for the strike was between 35 and 57 feet in length.
Additional details about this calf's death are provided above.
Mandatory speed restrictions in Dynamic Speed Zones

Static speed management is not sufficient as a sole strategy to
reduce vessel strike risk because of variability in species
distributions. Consequently, it is necessary to include Dynamic Speed
Zones in the Proposed Rule and for speed restrictions in these Dynamic
Speed Zones to be mandatory. Over a decade of research on the U.S. East
and West Coasts shows low compliance with voluntary speed restrictions
(e.g., McKenna et al., 2012; Silber et al., 2012; Freedman et al.,
2017; Morten et al., 2022). Mandatory speed restrictions were found to
achieve high compliance when they were implemented and enforced on the
U.S. East Coast (Silber et al., 2014). This research suggests that
implementing and enforcing mandatory speed restrictions in areas of
high risk identified using the best available science will reduce the
risk of lethal vessel strikes for NARW. To ensure that the Dynamic
Speed Zones provide the protection needed to reduce vessel strike risk
requires the continued use of both visual sightings and acoustic
detections. Both monitoring methods require sufficient effort (e.g.,
surveillance flights and acoustic monitoring stations) to ensure that
NARW are detected and Dynamic Speed Zones are established.
Conclusion

On behalf of the New England Aquarium, this testimony is grounded
in the best available science, consistent with the U.S. statutory laws
that protect North Atlantic right whales (NARW), and necessary given
the extinction trajectory of the NARW species. H.R. 8704 would have
devastating consequences for NARW because it delays NOAA's ability to
implement its proposed protections from vessel strikes through December
31, 2030. NOAA's Proposed Rule (NOAA, 2022) is necessary to further
reduce the likelihood of mortalities and serious injuries to NARW from
vessel strikes. It has been more than 22 months since NOAA released the
Proposed Rule on August 1, 2022, and the Final Rule has yet to be
released. Further delay in releasing the important protections would
put the critically endangered NARW at continued risk of death and
serious injury from vessel strikes.
Scientific evaluation of the changes in the Proposed Rule show that
these changes contribute to NARW survival by reducing the risk of
vessel strikes. Specifically, expanding the Seasonal Speed Zones in
space and time is necessary to ensure that these zones are better
aligned with NARW habitat (e.g., Davis et al., 2017), cover areas where
previous vessel strike mortalities have been detected (e.g., van der
Hoop et al., 2015), and buffer against climate-driven changes in NARW
habitat (e.g., O'Brien et al., 2022). Expanding the speed restriction
to most vessels greater than or equal to 35 feet (10.7 m) and less than
65 feet (19.8 m) is necessary because at least five documented vessel
strikes in U.S. waters since 2008 (including three after 2020) that
resulted in death or serious injury involved vessels smaller than 65
feet (NOAA, 2020; 2023b). Implementing mandatory Dynamic Speed Zones is
necessary because of variability in species distributions and over a
decade of research on the U.S. East and West Coasts shows low
cooperation with voluntary speed restrictions (e.g., McKenna et al.,
2012; Silber et al., 2012; Freedman et al., 2017; Morten et al., 2022).
Protecting whales through measures known to be effective, such as
speed restrictions, and funding the development of other approaches,
including technology, to reduce vessel strike risk are not mutually
exclusive. However, NARW must survive long enough to benefit from the
approaches for coexistence that would be funded in H.R. 8704, including
technology and enhanced awareness. While these approaches are
developed, assessed, and carried out, we must implement measures known
to reduce the risk of vessel strike to NARW, such as those included in
the Proposed Rule that was released nearly two years ago. Recent
research shows that the Seasonal Speed Zones in the Proposed Rule will
also protect humpback, fin, and sei whales from vessel strikes. A long
history of research shows that the 2008 Rule is not sufficient to
protect NARW. Research also shows that the changes in the Proposed Rule
reduce the risk of vessel strikes for NARW, especially during
particularly vulnerable times, like calving season, which occurs from
November through April. The deaths of three NARW that were caused by
vessel strikes so far this year have increased the urgency of
implementing the changes in the Proposed Rule to help curb the current
trajectory toward the NARW species extinction. The implications for the
survival of the NARW species are clear: action is needed now to reduce
vessel strike risk through measures known to be effective, such as
speed restrictions.
References

Carretta, J.V., Oleson, E.M., Forney, K.A., et al. (2022). U.S. Pacific
marine mammal stock assessments: 2021. NOAA-TM-NMFS-SWFSC-663.

Conn, P.B., and Silber, G.K. (2013). Vessel speed restrictions reduce
risk of collision-related mortality for North Atlantic right whales.
Ecosphere 4(4), 1-16. doi: 10.1890/ES13-00004.1.

Corkeron, P., Hamilton, P., Bannister, J., et al. (2018). The recovery
of North Atlantic right whales, Eubalaena glacialis, has been
constrained by human-caused mortality. Royal Society Open Science
5(11), 180892. doi: 10.1098/rsos.180892.

Crum, N., Gowan, T., Krzystan, A., and Martin, J. (2019). Quantifying
risk of whale-vessel collisions across space, time, and management
policies. Ecosphere 10(4), e02713. doi: 10.1002/ecs2.2713.

Cusano, D.A., Conger, L.A., Van Parijs, S.M., and Parks, S.E. (2019).
Implementing conservation measures for the North Atlantic right whale:
considering the behavioral ontogeny of mother-calf pairs. Animal
Conservation 22(3), 228-237. doi: https://doi.org/10.1111/acv.12457.

Davis, G.E., Baumgartner, M.F., Bonnell, J.M., et al. (2017). Long-term
passive acoustic recordings track the changing distribution of North
Atlantic right whales (Eubalaena glacialis) from 2004 to 2014.
Scientific Reports 7(1), 13460. doi: 10.1038/s41598-017-13359-3.

Freedman, R., Herron, S., Byrd, et al. (2017). The effectiveness of
incentivized and non-incentivized vessel speed reduction programs: case
study in the Santa Barbara channel. Ocean & Coastal Management 148, 31-
39. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ocecoaman.2017.07.013.

Ganley, L.C., Byrnes, J., Pendleton, D.E., et al. (2022). Effects of
changing temperature phenology on the abundance of a critically
endangered baleen whale. Global Ecology and Conservation 38, e02193.
doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.gecco.2022.e02193.

Garrison, L.P., Adams, J., Patterson, E.M., and Good, C.P. (2022).
Assessing the risk of vessel strike mortality in North Atlantic right
whales along the U.S. East Coast. NOAA Technical Memorandum NOAA NMFS-
SEFSC-757: 42 p.

Glass, A.H., Cole, T.V., and Garron, M. (2010). Mortality and serious
injury determinations for baleen whale stocks along the United States
and Canadian Eastern Seaboards, 2004-2008. NOAA Technical Memorandum
NOAA-TM-NMFS-NE-214, Woods Hole, Massachusetts. doi: https://doi.org/
10.25923/3v2z-j845.

Hamilton, P.K., and Knowlton, A.R. (2021). The power of knowing the
individual-the North Atlantic Right Whale Catalogs. In Right Whales at
Risk. Special issue of Whalewatcher. Corkeron. P. ed. 18-23. https://
acs.memberclicks.net/assets/Whalewatchers/Whalewatcher-2021-final.pdf

Hayes, S.H., Josephson, E., Maze-Foley, K., et al. (2022). U.S.
Atlantic and Gulf of Mexico Marine Mammal Stock Assessments 2021. NOAA
Technical Memorandum NMFS-NE-288. doi: https://doi.org/10.25923/6tt7-
kc16.

Linden, D.W. (2023). Population size estimation of North Atlantic right
whales from 1990-2022. NOAA Technical Memorandum, NOAA-TM-NMFS-NE-314,
Woods Hole, Massachusetts. doi: https://doi.org/10.25923/3v2z-j845.

Martin, J., Sabatier, Q., Gowan, T.A., et al. (2016). A quantitative
framework for investigating risk of deadly collisions between marine
wildlife and boats. Methods in Ecology and Evolution 7(1), 42-50. doi:
10.1111/2041-210X.12447.

McKenna, M.F., Katz, S.L., Condit, C., and Walbridge, S. (2012).
Response of commercial ships to a voluntary speed reduction measure:
are voluntary strategies adequate for mitigating ship-strike risk?
Coastal Management 40(6), 634-650. doi: 10.1080/08920753.2012.727749.

Moore, M.J., Knowlton, A.R., Kraus, S.D., et al. (2004). Morphometry,
gross morphology and available histopathology in North Atlantic right
whale (Eubalaena glacialis) mortalities (1970-2002). Journal of
Cetacean Research and Management 6, 199-214.

Morten, J., Freedman, R., Adams, J.D., et al. (2022). Evaluating
adherence with voluntary slow speed initiatives to protect endangered
whales. Frontiers in Marine Science 9. doi: 10.3389/fmars.2022.833206.

NARWC (2023). North Atlantic Right Whale Consortium Anthropogenic
Events Database 06/01/2023, Anderson Cabot Center for Ocean Life at the
New England Aquarium, Boston, MA, U.S.

NOAA (2020). North Atlantic right whale (Eubalaena glacialis) vessel
speed rule assessment. Office of Protected Resources.

NOAA (2022). Amendments to the North Atlantic Right Whale Vessel Strike
Reduction Rule. Federal Register. Document Citation 87 FR 46921. 50 CFR
Part 224. Docket No. 220722-0162. RIN 0648-BI88.

NOAA (2023a). 2016-2023 Humpback Whale Unusual Mortality Event Along
the Atlantic Coast. https://www.fisheries.noaa.gov/national/marine-
life-distress/2016-2023-humpback-whale-unusual-mortality-event-along-
atlantic-coast#causes-of-the-humpback-whale-ume.

NOAA (2023b). NOAA 2017-2023 North Atlantic Right Whale Unusual
Mortality Event. https://www.fisheries.noaa.gov/national/marine-life-
distress/2017-2023-north-atlantic-right-whale-unusual-mortality-event.

O'Brien, O., Pendleton, D.E., Ganley, L.C., et al. (2022). Repatriation
of a historical North Atlantic right whale habitat during an era of
rapid climate change. Nature Scientific Reports.

Pace, R.M., Williams, R., Kraus, S.D., et al. (2021). Cryptic mortality
of North Atlantic right whales. Conservation Science and Practice 3(2),
e346. doi: https://doi.org/10.1111/csp2.346.

Pendleton, D.E., Tingley, M.W., Ganley, L.C., et al. (2022). Decadal-
scale phenology and seasonal climate drivers of migratory baleen whales
in a rapidly warming marine ecosystem. Global Change Biology 28(16),
4989-5005. doi: https://doi.org/10.1111/gcb.16225.

Pettis, H.M., and Hamilton, P.K. (2024). North Atlantic Right Whale
Consortium 2023 Annual Report Card. Report to the North Atlantic Right
Whale Consortium.

Pirotta, E., Schick, R.S., Hamilton, P.K., et al. (2023). Estimating
the effects of stressors on the health, survival and reproduction of a
critically endangered, long-lived species. Oikos 2023(5), e09801. doi:
https://doi.org/10.1111/oik.09801.

Record, N.R., Runge, J.A., Pendleton, D.E., et al. (2019). Rapid
climate-driven circulation changes threaten conservation of endangered
North Atlantic right whales. Oceanography 32(2), 162-169.

Redfern, J.V., Hodge, B.C., Pendleton, D.E., et al. (2024). Estimating
reductions in the risk of vessels striking whales achieved by
management strategies. Biological Conservation 290, 110427. doi:
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biocon.2023.110427.

Reed, J., New, L., Corkeron, P., and Harcourt, R. (2022). Multi-event
modeling of true reproductive states of individual female right whales
provides new insights into their decline. Frontiers in Marine Science
9. doi: 10.3389/fmars.2022.994481.

Rockwood, R.C., Adams, J., Silber, G., and Jahncke, J. (2020).
Estimating effectiveness of speed reduction measures for decreasing
whale-strike mortality in a high-risk region. Endangered Species
Research 43, 145-166.

Rockwood, R.C., Calambokidis, J., and Jahncke, J. (2017). High
mortality of blue, humpback and fin whales from modeling of vessel
collisions on the U.S. West Coast suggests population impacts and
insufficient protection. PLOS ONE 12(8), e0183052. doi: 10.1371/
journal.pone.0183052.

Runge, M.C., Linden, D.W., Hostetler, J.A., et al. (2023). A
management-focused population viability analysis for North Atlantic
right whales. NOAA Technical Memorandum, NOAA-TM-NMFS-NE-307, Woods
Hole, Massachusetts. doi: https://doi.org/10.25923/3v2z-j845.

Sharp, S.M., McLellan, W.A., Rotstein, D.S., et al. (2019). Gross and
histopathologic diagnoses from North Atlantic right whale Eubalaena
glacialis mortalities between 2003 and 2018. Diseases of Aquatic
Organisms 135(1), 1-31.

Silber, G.K., Adams, J.D., and Bettridge, S. (2012). Vessel operator
response to a voluntary measure for reducing collisions with whales.
Endangered Species Research 17(3), 245-254.

Silber, G.K., Adams, J.D., and Fonnesbeck, C.J. (2014). Compliance with
vessel speed restrictions to protect North Atlantic right whales. PeerJ
2, e399. doi: 10.7717/peerj.399.

Taylor, J.K.D., Mandelman, J.W., McLellan, W.A., et al. (2013). Shark
predation on North Atlantic right whales (Eubalaena glacialis) in the
southeastern United States calving ground. Marine Mammal Science 29(1),
204-212. doi: https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1748-7692.2011.00542.x.

van der Hoop, J.M., Vanderlaan, A.S.M., Cole, T.V.N., et al. (2015).
Vessel strikes to large whales before and after the 2008 ship strike
rule. Conservation Letters 8(1), 24-32. doi: 10.1111/conl.12105.

Vanderlaan, A.S.M., and Taggart, C.T. (2007). Vessel collisions with
whales: the probability of lethal injury based on vessel speed. Marine
Mammal Science 23(1), 144-156. doi: 10.1111/j.1748-7692.2006.00098.x.

Supplement to Written Testimony

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Figure 1. Vessel strikes of North Atlantic right whales since
1972, including both photographed and unphotographed cases as reported
in Knowlton et al (2001), Moore et al. (2004), Sharp et al. (2019),
NOAA (2020), recent North Atlantic Right Whale Consortium report cards,
and the ongoing Unusual Mortality Event. The 124 cases represented in
this graph include 46 dead whales and 5 whales that are presumed dead
from their injuries. These cases also include two females who were
pregnant at the time of the strike, one female that was struck as a
calf and died when her injuries reopened during her first pregnancy 14
years later (Glass et al., 2010), and two females that had dependent
calves when struck. The dependent calves were too young to survive
without their mother and are included in this graph as blunt trauma
mortalities. Studies have shown that whales that survive a strike, but
experience deep or shallow injuries, suffer negative effects on health,
reproduction, and survival (Pirotta et al. 2023). These effects are not
captured in the graph, but provide further evidence of the necessity of
protecting North Atlantic right whales from vessel strikes.

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Figure 2. The 2024 calf of Juno seen with vessel strike
injuries on January 3, 2024 off Edisto, SC. Credit: Forever Hooked
Charters of South Carolina. See NOAA Updates page for details: https://
www.fisheries.noaa.gov/national/endangered-species-conservation/north-
atlantic-right-whale-updates#2024-calf-of-juno-(right-whale-1612.

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Figure 3. Illustration of the estimated propeller diameter that
produced the cuts observed on the 2024 calf of Juno (Catalog #1612). An
estimate of the propeller diameter was obtained using estimated
measurements of calf's head length and the lengths and spacing of the
cuts. The estimated propeller diameter suggests that the vessel size
was between 35 and 57 feet. Credit: NOAA Fisheries, taken under NOAA
permit #21371. Illustration created by forensic naval architect Paul
Kamen. See NOAA Updates page for details: https://
www.fisheries.noaa.gov/national/endangered-species-conservation/north-
atlantic-right-whale-updates#2024-calf-of-juno-(right-whale-1612.

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Figure 4. The carcass of Catalog #1950, a female North Atlantic
right whale that was at least 35 years old, was found floating 50 miles
offshore east of Back Bay National Wildlife Refuge, Virginia, on March
30, 2024. Credit: Clearwater Marine Aquarium Research Institute, taken
under NOAA permit #24359. Aerial survey funded by United States Army
Corps of Engineers. See NOAA Updates page for details: https://
www.fisheries.noaa.gov/national/endangered-species-conservation/north-
atlantic-right-whale-updates#2024-calf-of-juno-(right-whale-1612.

______

Mr. Bentz. Thank you, Dr. Redfern. I now recognize Mr.
McCurry for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF JAMES (JAMIE) McCURRY, JR., CHIEF ADMIN-
ISTRATIVE   OFFICER,    GEORGIA   PORTS   AUTHORITY,
SAVANNAH, GEORGIA

Mr. McCurry. Thank you, Mr. Chair, for inviting me to
testify today as the Chief Administrative Officer of the
Georgia Ports Authority. I have 22 years of experience in the
maritime industry and have witnessed firsthand the critical
role our ports play in both local and national economies.
Today, I am here in support of H.R. 8704, a bill introduced by
Congressman Buddy Carter which seeks to balance environmental
protection with economic stability and operational safety.
The Georgia Ports Authority, a public entity of the state
of Georgia, is dedicated to providing customers with the most
efficient and productive port facilities in the nation, and to
creating jobs and business opportunities for our nation's
benefit. Our ports serve as magnets for international trade and
investment, supporting critical sectors of our economy such as
agriculture, manufacturing, and retail. We are committed to
maintaining a competitive edge through the development of
leading-edge technology, marketing, and operations to move
cargo faster. The Authority is constantly working to identify
what must be done today to sustain growth, performance, and
security for tomorrow.
Georgia's deepwater ports in Savannah and Brunswick,
together with our inland terminals in Chatsworth and
Bainbridge, are gateways for the world of American commerce.
They are the critical conduits to which raw materials and
finished products flow to and from destinations around the
globe. As one of the state's largest public employers, the GPA
directly employs approximately 1,800 trained logistics
professionals. GPA operations, together with private sector
port-related operations, account for more than 609,000 jobs in
Georgia alone, including $171 billion in business revenue, and
generate over $10 billion in Federal tax revenues annually,
again, in Georgia alone.
The proposed amendments to the North Atlantic Right Whale
Vessel Strike Reduction Rule, while well intended, pose a
significant threat to port operations on the East Coast. These
changes will lead to extensive delays for piloted services,
with Savannah experiencing delays of up to 28 days and
Brunswick up to 9 days, resulting in substantial economic
losses. Our third-party study indicates that potential job
losses of up to 26,820 jobs, and a $1.85 billion reduction in
GDP, again, in Georgia alone.
The repercussions would be felt nationwide, disrupting
supply chains and increasing costs for customers. State license
pilots face significant challenges due to these speed
restrictions. Reduced speeds compromise their ability to
navigate safely, particularly in adverse weather conditions.
For instance, during high wind days, the slower speeds required
by the rule would make it nearly impossible for pilots to
safely guide ships, leading to increased risk of accidents and
port closures. These operational challenges not only threaten
safety, but also contribute to significant congestion and
delays, further straining an already overburdened supply chain.
While the intention behind the rule is to protect the North
Atlantic right whale, the unintended consequences stand to be a
dramatic increase in greenhouse gas emissions. Ships idling at
sea and rerouted cargo would contribute to emissions three
times higher than those from the Ports of Los Angeles and Long
Beach combined in 2020. This is an environmental cost that we
cannot afford.
The financial burden on East Coast pilots and ports is
substantial. Compliance costs, including the need for new pilot
boats and additional crew, are estimated to exceed tens of
millions of dollars annually. Furthermore, increased legal
liabilities for pilots will lead to more conservative
operations, exacerbating delays and congestion.
In conclusion, while we support the protection of the North
Atlantic right whale, it is crucial to find a balanced approach
that safeguards our economy and operational safety. H.R. 8704
offers a pathway to achieve this balance.
I urge the Committee to support this bill and work with all
stakeholders to develop a solution that protects our
environment and our economic interests, and the critically
important maritime safety. By doing so, we can ensure the
continued prosperity of the East Coast ports and the broader
economy they support. Thank you for your time and
consideration.

[The prepared statement of Mr. McCurry follows:]

Prepared Statement of Mr. James C. McCurry, Jr., Chief Administrative
Officer, Georgia Ports Authority

on H.R. 8704

Thank you, Chairman Westerman, Committee Ranking Member Grijalva,
Subcommittee Chairman Bentz, Subcommittee Ranking Member Huffman for
inviting me to testify at this hearing. To all of the committee members
present, I also extend my gratitude for your time and interest in this
important subject. I speak to you today in support of H.R. 8704 from my
Congressman Buddy Carter, who represents the entire coast of Georgia,
including the ports of Brunswick and Savannah.
As the Chief Administrative Officer of the Georgia Ports Authority,
I am charged with overseeing Contracts, Properties & Planning;
Purchasing; Grants Administration; Risk Management & Sustainability;
Navigation Programs; Governmental Affairs and all legal matters for the
Authority. I have 22 years of experience in the maritime industry and
hold a Master of Science degree in Transportation Management from the
University of Denver.
The Georgia Ports Authority, a state-owned entity, is dedicated to
providing customers with the most efficient, productive port facilities
in the nation, and to creating jobs and business opportunities to our
nation's benefit. Our ports serve as magnets for international trade
and investment, supporting critical sectors of our economy such as
agriculture, manufacturing and retail. We are committed to maintaining
a competitive edge through development of leading-edge technology,
marketing and operations to move cargo faster. The Authority works hard
to identify what must be done today to sustain growth, performance and
security for tomorrow.
Georgia's deepwater ports in Savannah and Brunswick, together with
inland terminals in Chatsworth and Bainbridge are gateways to the world
for American commerce. They are the critical conduits through which raw
materials and finished products flow to and from destinations around
the globe.
As one of the state's largest public employers, the GPA directly
employs almost 1,800 trained logistics professionals. The GPA, however,
generates far more employment throughout the state. GPA operations,
together with private sector, port-related operations, account for more
than 609,000 jobs statewide, $171 billion dollars in revenue, and
generates over $10 billion in federal revenues annually in Georgia
alone.
The Port of Savannah, home to the largest single-terminal container
facility of its kind in North America, is comprised of two modern,
deepwater terminals: Garden City Terminal and Ocean Terminal. Together,
these facilities exemplify the GPA's exacting standards of efficiency
and productivity.
The Port of Brunswick is comprised of three GPA-owned deepwater
terminals. The port's well-earned reputation for productivity and
efficiency is heightened by its position as one of the fastest growing
auto and heavy machinery ports in North America. Today, more than 12
major auto manufacturers, supported by three auto processors, utilize
the Colonel's Island Terminal. The terminal is home to the United
States' largest and fastest growing Ro-Ro operation.
The Georgia Ports Authority has joined other East Coast Port
Authorities, Maritime Terminal Operators, Harbor Pilots and other
maritime-focused interests in opposing NOAA's proposed ``Amendments to
the North Atlantic Right Whale Vessel Strike Reduction Rule'' since it
was released. NOAA did not take into account or properly weigh several
critical factors when developing the proposed changes to the existing
rule. The proposed rule raises considerable life and safety concerns
and would cause further delays to an already strained supply chain. If
implemented, this rule change will create significant congestion at our
nation's ports--resulting in substantial detrimental effects on the
nation's economy.
The GPA understands the need for reasonable regulations to protect
the North Atlantic Right Whale and is committed to that effort. In
fact, we have implemented several voluntary measures throughout the
years to help protect the critically endangered species. Recently, CMA-
CGM, in partnership with the GPA, launched an acoustic monitoring buoy
off the coast of Savannah to increase North Atlantic right whale
detection efforts.
Furthermore, we agree that it is important to monitor the
effectiveness of vessel speed regulations to reduce vessel strikes.
However, it is also critical to find balance between American economic
priorities and conservation goals. The GPA believes that present
regulations offer sufficient protection while a more thoroughly vetted
solution, including modern technological monitoring is developed.
The GPA is concerned that NOAA's recently proposed changes to the
existing vessel speed rule will negatively affect the safe transit of
ocean-going vessels during the designated seasonal management window.
State-licensed pilots are expected to act in the public interest, and
to maintain a professional judgment that comports with the needs of
maritime safety. In addition, state and federal licensing and
regulatory authorities require compulsory pilots to take all reasonable
actions to prevent ships under their navigational control from engaging
in unsafe operations.
Local pilots must consider hydrological, meteorological and many
other factors for safe navigation. These considerations greatly affect
maneuverability and steering controls--particularly at slower speeds
for larger vessels when transiting our nation's harbors.
The NOAA-proposed speed restriction requires slower speeds for
pilot boats, which will lead to reduced service capacity and ship
delays along virtually the entire Eastern seaboard. Without speed as an
effective tool to overcome other navigational influences, ocean-going
cargo vessels will be unable to safely traverse our nation's harbors
under currently normal operating conditions--resulting in temporary
port closures and significant congestion outside the affected harbors.
When ship delays increase, shippers will reroute to other ports
resulting in further congestion elsewhere.
It is highly unlikely that ships will wait at sea for weeks or
months for a berth and will seek alternative ports not impacted by this
rule--ports in South Florida, the Gulf Coast or the West Coast. These
alternative sites do not have the ability to absorb 40% to 50% of the
affected ports' volumes and would quickly back up as well--resulting in
pandemic era or worse supply chain disruptions.
Freight moves based upon connectivity and cost. This rerouted cargo
would have an increased impact on the environment compared to current
operations--as it would be moving a greater distance over land at a
greater cost to the shipper. The resultant cost increases would be
passed along to the consumer and cause significant inflationary impacts
to the American economy.
The potential increases of greenhouse gas emissions from the
landside transportation of rerouted cargo are merely a fraction of what
the emission impacts of vessels anchored at sea, waiting for weeks for
a berth. As inbound vessels arrive and congestion sets in, cargo delays
will also continue to increase. In Savannah and Brunswick, maximum peak
days could see over 200 vessels per day waiting at anchorage. Over 1.8
million metric tons of GHG emissions may be emitted in Georgia alone as
a result of these vessels--potentially 3 times higher than the 2020
vessel emissions for the Ports of Los Angeles and Long Beach combined.
NOAA's economic impact assessment for the newly proposed rule does
not consider any additional negative impacts to ocean-going vessels
because they are already regulated under the existing rule. The changes
in deviation reporting and enforcement proposed under this rule,
however, greatly alter the enforcement and oversight of necessary
deviations, thereby greatly expanding the impacts on ocean-going
vessels.
The negative economic impact of this proposed rule equates to the
loss of up to an estimated 1,283 diverted cargo ships destined for
Georgia port facilities. Amongst other cargoes, these diverted ships
would include up to 3.1 million TEUs, equating to an estimated loss of
$3.8 Billion in revenue for Georgia businesses, 26,820 Georgia jobs,
$1.3 billion in personal income and $1.85 billion in GDP--far
surpassing the total negative economic impacts assumed by the 2022
Draft Regulatory Impact Review and Initial Regulatory Flexibility
Analysis of this proposed rule for the entire East Coast.
We have highly encouraged NOAA to consult with appropriate federal
partners to assess the full scope of the impacts of their proposal. The
United States Coast Guard is a key partner of the maritime sector in
protecting the safe and efficient movement of cargo into and out of our
nation's ports. The Environmental Protection Agency can thoroughly
assess the significant negative air quality impacts that ships anchored
off the Eastern seaboard would generate. Congress should also further
consider their priorities regarding the massive economic disruptions
created by NOAA's proposition.
Congressman Carter's legislation, if enacted, would pause NOAA's
otherwise well-intentioned proposal until technology authorized by H.R.
8704 can implement safeguards for the North Atlantic Right Whale
without the significantly negative commercial and life-safety issues
created by it.
In support of our nation's agricultural, manufacturing and retail
interests and the hundreds of millions of Americans who rely upon the
efficient flow of commerce, the Georgia Ports Authority would highly
encourage the members of this committee to support H.R. 8704.

______

Questions Submitted for the Record to Mr. Jamie McCurry, Chief
Administrative Officer, Georgia Ports Authority

Questions Submitted by Representative Bentz

Question 1. Mr. McCurry, one issue with NOAA's proposed amendments
to the North Atlantic Right Whale Vessel Strike Reduction Rule that the
Georgia Ports Authority raised in its comments to NOAA was the proposed
change to the rule's deviation clause.

1a) Could you expand on how the requirements included in NOAA's
proposed rule would be burdensome to pilots and operators?

Question 2. Mr. McCurry, during the hearing there was a reference
made to the Port of Los Angeles' Vessel Speed Reduction Program, a
voluntary speed restriction program that has been in place for more
than a decade. However, the Program's guidelines note that while there
are incentives awarded for achieving certain compliance percentages, it
is noted that this is a voluntary program.

2a) Could you talk about the difference between voluntary programs
put in place at ports like Los Angeles versus the wide-ranging
implications of NOAA's proposed amendments to the North Atlantic Right
Whale Vessel Strike Reduction Rule?

Response

On behalf of the Georgia Ports Authority, I would like to thank you
for the opportunity to testify before your committee last week. I
appreciated the discussion and certainly hope I was able to clarify any
questions you may have had on how NOAA's proposed Vessel Speed Rule
will negatively affect the port industry in America and all of the
nation's economic sectors--like agriculture, manufacturing, and
retail--that rely upon the efficient flow of commerce.
During the hearing, it became clear that some committee members
have been misinformed about the proposed rules' changes to existing
practices when it comes to deviating for the purposes of navigational
safety. I appreciate the opportunity to extend my remarks and offer
some clarity.
NOAA's Proposed Deviation Clause Criminalizes Real-time Navigational
Decisions

Each pilotage assignment normally begins with a conference between
the pilot and the master, often referred to as the Master-Pilot
Exchange or MPX. The MPX is an opportunity not only to exchange
information that the pilot and master each need, but also for the pilot
and the master to establish an appropriate working relationship that
will continue throughout the pilotage assignment. A mutually supportive
and trusting relationship between the pilot and the ship's master/
bridge crew is a critical component of navigation safety in pilotage
waters.
NOAA's language describing the navigation safety deviation clause
will, however, negatively impact the dynamics of the critical Master/
Pilot Relationship. The language overtly criminalizes real-time
decisions about safe navigation that vessel masters and pilots must
make. Specifically, the proposed new regulatory language states, ``it
is unlawful for any person subject to the jurisdiction of the U.S. to
commit, to attempt to commit, to solicit another to commit, or to cause
to be committed any speed violation with a vessel subject to the
restrictions.'' This pronounced emphasis on criminality will
undoubtedly strain the relationship between the pilot, in charge of
directing the ship's navigation and protecting the marine environment,
and the master, responsible for the overall safety of the vessel and
responsible to the shipping company.
If this relationship is damaged or compromised, there will be
negative consequences. The proposed changes to the navigation safety
deviation clause will cause masters and pilots, at a critical point
when they are considering whether to increase speed for the safety of
the ship--and its crew, passengers, and cargo--to be worrying about
whether their decision could subject them to criminal penalties,
including imprisonment.
Because the proposed regulation envisions the master and pilot
agreeing upon the need to deviate from the speed limitation and
concurring on all the details to be submitted in the Safety Deviation
Report, a lack of understanding, hesitation, or unwillingness on the
part of masters to invoke the deviation clause can create tension
between the master and pilot. This would negatively impact what should
be a mutually supportive and cooperative relationship.
The proposed ``Safety Deviation Report'' is Unworkable

NOAA wants to better monitor the use of the navigation safety
deviation clause in its new proposed amendment. However, the proposed
alternative is both dangerous and unworkable. The changes to the
reporting requirements in the 2008 rule would jeopardize navigational
safety by distracting pilots and masters--at precisely the wrong time--
from focusing squarely on safely navigating large ocean-going vessels
in the constricted waters of FNCs.
Additionally, the proposed amendments to the deviation clause are
unworkable as drafted. Rather than create a new, unwieldy, and
dangerous new regulatory scheme, NOAA should instead require the
submission of relevant sections of the ship's log within 30 days of
invoking the navigation safety deviation clause. This will not only
allow NOAA to gather, in a timely manner, the information it requires,
but it will also not unnecessarily distract professional mariners from
the duties to navigate large merchant vessels safely.
Furthermore, the requirement for the vessel operator to submit a
``Safety Deviation Report'' to NMFS within 48 hours of using the
deviation clause is impracticable, and the detailed reporting
requirements are lengthy, detailed, and extremely cumbersome. The
proposed recordkeeping and reporting requirements will require
considerable time to gather the information (if it, in fact, is even
available in some offshore waters), compile it, fill out the form, and
transmit it to NMFS. Further, if the vessel is under pilotage, ``the
pilot must attest to the accuracy of the information contained in the
report.'' Even though NMFS proposes to allow 48 hours for the Safety
Deviation Report to be submitted, the only practical way to comply with
the rule would be for the master to complete the Report in near real-
time and the pilot to remain on the ship to review and ``attest'' to
the information on the form.
It is unrealistic to expect that the pilot could depart the ship to
service other ships, the ship would transit off to the next port of
call, and then the pilot and master would correspond electronically
over the next two days to complete, agree upon, and submit the form to
NMFS. It is simply not realistic to expect such a process to be
practical or workable.
Our industry strongly recommends NMFS reconsider its
criminalization of the decision to use a safety speed deviation,
especially for vessels operating in areas of restricted maneuverability
like FNCs and pilot boarding areas. We also believe that NOAA should
instead require that when a ship opts to exercise the navigation safety
deviation clause and exceed 1O knots, the shipping interests must
submit the relevant portions of the ship's log (e.g., the log entry
information currently required by 50 CFR Sec. 224.105) to NMFS within
30 days. Requiring the prompt submission of relevant portions of the
ship's log, which is an official document with significant legal
standing both in the U.S. and internationally, will provide NMFS with
timely access to information pertaining to the use of the navigation
safety deviation clause by large ocean-going vessels.
Federally Required Speed Rules Preclude Safe Passage in Georgia Harbors

Every port in America is served by harbor pilots who are charged by
their state with preventing vessel operations that might pose a danger
to navigation or to the state's environment and economy. The official
responsibility of these state-licensed pilots is to protect the marine
environment as they ensure the safe and efficient movement of maritime
commerce. To fulfill that mission, pilots are required to not only have
detailed knowledge of local waters, but also expected to be world-class
ship handlers, and to understand how ships and their pilot boats
interact with each other and the elements. Pilots along the East Coast
are intimately familiar with the oceanography, hydrographic, and
meteorological conditions of Federal Navigation Channels FNCs) and
waterways in which the speed restrictions would apply.
Unlike airline pilots who experience more uniform approaches to
airport runways, seaport runways or Federal Navigation Channels are all
unique. The diversity of our nation's FNCs dictates distinctive
challenges to the safe and efficient operation of commercial vessels at
every port. Since this rule affects the speed of vessels offshore, a
review of the dimensions of the entrance channels at key ports is
appropriate.

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

The data above shows the dimensions of the three California
ports--San Francisco, Los Angeles and Long Beach have very wide and
very short entrance channels with ample available depth. Georgia's port
entrance channels are much narrower, longer, and shallower than their
West Coast peers. Navigational challenges where speed becomes a
critical consideration are more prevalent along the Georgia coast due
primarily to FNC dimensions at these ports.
The maneuverability of large, deep-draft ocean vessels is already
restricted by the depths and width in Georgia's much longer entrance
channels. The vessels are limited in how far they might be able to turn
or alter course based on their deep drafts and other tidal
considerations. The NARW vessel strike rules compound the dangers of
navigating these large vessels by limiting the ability of pilots to use
the necessary speed to maintain safe navigation in these waters.
These entrance channels are perpendicular to the high winds and
currents that are prevalent in the winter months. The perpendicular
winds and currents often demand increased speed to keep these vessels
on track. It is in these offshore, unsheltered, and restricted
channels--with the challenging combination of strong currents, confused
winds, heavy vessel traffic, and proximity to dangerous shoal waters--
where Savannah and Brunswick's state-licensed pilots ply their trade.
Due to the rapid growth in length, width, sail area, and draft of
vessels calling at Georgia's ports, our concerns about the ability of
pilots to safely navigate in narrow and challenging FNC waters have
only increased since mandatory NARW speed restrictions began in 2008.
Furthermore, California's voluntary Vessel Speed Reduction Program
(VSRP) was crafted to reduce diesel particulate matter, nitrous oxides,
and other greenhouse gas emissions from ocean-going vessels, not to
reduce impacts on sea life . This program was established in
partnership with the Environmental Protection Agency and various
California-based air quality regulatory agencies and offers financial
incentives to encourage participants to comply.
Conversely, a federally required speed reduction rule will have the
opposite effect in Georgia, where air quality is not subject to EPA-
mandated remediation efforts. Requiring harbor pilots to delay ship
movements due to safety considerations created by this proposed rule
will cause ships to remain at anchor offshore and unnecessarily emit
additional particulates into an otherwise pristine environment. Cargo
that diverts to other ports will be required to travel further to or
from inland destinations, creating additional emissions throughout the
Southeast.
Thank you again for allowing us to testify before your committee
and for including this additional information into the record.

______

Mr. Bentz. Thank you, Mr. McCurry. I thank all the
witnesses for their testimony, and we will now recognize
Members for 5 minutes each for questions.
Congresswoman Hageman, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
Ms. Hageman. Thank you very much, and thank the witnesses
for being here today.
I am on the Judiciary Committee, and we recently had a
hearing related to the anti-trust aspects of the ESG radical
agenda. And it is a radical agenda. One of the things that
became clear during the course of that particular hearing is
that they are coming for our food. And this is yet another
example of that. The areas that they have targeted the most are
our energy industry, our airline industry, and then they have
also made clear that they want to go after the livestock and
agriculture industry.
And again, I think that this is partly an extension of that
when they adopt regulations that will destroy entire
communities and entire industries that have done just an
absolutely phenomenal job of taking care of our environment and
protecting our various wildlife and fisheries species.
Mr. McCurry, the grant program established in H.R. 8704 is
supposed to help deploy innovative technologies and best
practices to limit vessel strikes with whales. And what are
some of the best practices, and why is the funding provided
through this grant program necessary to assist with that?
Mr. McCurry. Well, I can offer one example that we have
employed at the Port of Savannah in partnership with CMA CGM.
We have deployed a buoy that can help locate the North Atlantic
right whales that are in the area of the navigation channel, so
that ships will be aware of their presence and know to avoid
them. It is that type of technology that is pinpointing the
presence of a whale or any other species. I think the
technology is available to do a lot of things that can, in the
time of need, allow for pilots and the maritime crews on the
vessels to perform in a safe manner while not, I guess,
overdoing that on a constant basis during the season.
Ms. Hageman. And you have demonstrated that you can operate
in a safe manner and protect the species, as well. Isn't that
true?
Mr. McCurry. That is correct. In fact, to our knowledge,
there has never been a vessel strike by a pilot boat anywhere
on the East Coast, and certainly not in Georgia. In fact, the
pilot boats that are used in Georgia, and I think in most
states, are actually jet propulsion vessels, so they do not
contribute to the problem that this rule is seeking to avoid.
Ms. Hageman. And what is interesting to me is that, when we
are going after your industry, or this Administration is going
after and attempting to destroy this industry, and as you say,
disrupt and impact the supply chain, it will impact our ability
to bring goods and materials into the country. And these are
the same people who are advocating for massive wind farms off
the coast that we know do have an impact upon the right whale
and other species, including birds and other marine species.
So, it is just so interesting to me that they want to destroy a
very successful industry that has done a great job of
protecting a variety of species, while also advocating for
things that we know are destructive.
I am going to direct my questions to Mr. Strong.
Mr. Strong, in your opinion, why is the funding provided
through the grant program established in this legislation
necessary for implementing some of these best practices that we
just talked about?
Mr. Strong. Thank you. In our experience, the technology
vastly does exist. It is unfortunate that NOAA has chosen not
to include our industry during what was supposed to be
collaboration. They didn't reach out. When they were finally
forced to reach out, and they had a technology conference, that
was after their submission for the rule. So, the findings and
the information during that technology conference were never
even included.
For the funding aspect of it, it is our industry's belief
that the vast majority of technology does exist, but is not
well integrated currently. So, the funding of this would help
to advance the timeline of being able to integrate multiple
technologies that do exist, again, as I testified earlier
briefly, much like Waze is for cars. A similar type application
could be applied for boats that would show right up on the
vessel screen, along with other fishing regulations and things
that would be helpful for boaters.
Ms. Hageman. Dr. Howell, why didn't you reach out to the
industry to address the technology that is available?
Dr. Howell. The team did hold the Advanced Technology
Workshop, and they reached out to the people I think that they
felt were there. I am not sure. I can get back to the team to
understand how the list of participants was selected.
Ms. Hageman. I would sure like to know why you would
exclude the very industry that is involved in developing the
technology and has the expertise. It is just so interesting to
me that they would be excluded when you are talking about
adopting a rule of this magnitude that would essentially
destroy their industry. Don't you think you should have?
Dr. Howell. I would like to focus on two things. One is
there are two separations, the Vessel Speed Rule itself and
then the advanced technology incorporation, which we----
Ms. Hageman. Well, my question is, don't you think you
should have reached out to the industry to get their input from
the beginning, so that you understand what kind of technology
is available in the industry itself? It is a yes or no
question.
Dr. Howell. Our intention was to include the people that
are necessary for this.
Ms. Hageman. But apparently you didn't reach out to the
industry.
Dr. Howell. I won't say that I didn't reach out to
industry----
Ms. Hageman. Well, they are saying that you didn't.
Mr. Bentz. The Congresswoman's time has expired.
Ms. Hageman. Thank you. I yield back.
Mr. Bentz. The Chair recognizes the Ranking Member for 5
minutes.
Mr. Huffman. Yes, and just to clarify, because there has
been so much hyperbole and performative stuff in the last 5
minutes, I heard the gentleman from NOAA say he did reach out
to the industry, but apparently maybe not this specific
technology, this specific company.
Dr. Howell, I am sure you would be happy to hear more about
that. And if there is a wonderful fix here through technology,
I am sure you would love to consider that in your rulemaking.
Is that fair to say?
Dr. Howell. That is fair.
Mr. Huffman. All right, thank you. Yes, hyperbole is
getting a bad name in this Subcommittee. Apparently, there is
some other world somewhere where a vast conspiracy of hyper-
woke Democrats is trying to ruin entire industries. I don't
know where that world is, but I want to bring us back to this
world, where there has been a lot of misinformation about this
vessel speed reduction issue.
So, I want to ask you, Dr. Redfern, what does the science
tell us is the best tool that we currently have to save right
whales from extinction?
Dr. Redfern. There are two threats that right whales are
facing: entanglements and vessel strikes. We are talking about
vessel strikes today. The scientific evidence is clear that the
revisions NOAA proposed to the 2008 Vessel Speed Rule will
reduce the risk of vessel strikes for right whales, and that is
critically important to curbing the trajectory towards
extinction for this species.
Mr. Huffman. And is there a percentage of death reduction
that has been calculated from a Vessel Speed Rule?
Dr. Redfern. Yes, and that has been calculated in two
different ways, and I find that really important because when
we use different methods that show the same thing, I have
confidence in those results. They are robust, any of the
assumptions going into them. And both of them are showing on
the order of 20 to 30 percent risk reductions.
Mr. Huffman. All right, thank you. Under the Endangered
Species Act, if a boater injures or kills a North Atlantic
right whale, they are liable, correct?
Dr. Redfern. I would like to pass that to Dr. Howell.
Mr. Huffman. All right, Dr. Howell, am I correct?
Dr. Howell. I don't have the direct answer for that.
Mr. Huffman. That is a take.
Dr. Howell. Yes.
Mr. Huffman. I can answer it. How is that?
Dr. Howell. Yes.
[Laughter.]
Mr. Huffman. So, I am just wondering how an individual
boater can reduce their risk of striking and killing a right
whale if they are operating in a seasonal North Atlantic right
whale migratory zone. If there is a better way for them to
avoid that individual liability, I would love to hear about it.
Maybe the technology Mr. Strong talked about can help them in
that regard, but it seems like vessel speed rules would also be
of great benefit to avoiding that individual liability.
Dr. Redfern, is there technology currently available and
employed that can save right whales in the absence of a speed
rule?
Dr. Redfern. The technology is not yet ready or available.
One of the things that is critical about technology and
other approaches to reducing vessel strike is that they need to
be rigorously evaluated so that we can understand exactly the
risk reduction that they provide, and compare that to measures
we know are effective, such as rerouting vessels or slowing
vessels down.
And I just want to point out the history that there is a
lot of research that shows that slowing vessels down reduces
the risk of a lethal strike to whales. It also gives whales and
the boaters more time to react if a whale is detected in front
of them so they can take the actions they need to avoid the
strike.
Mr. Huffman. And you talked about the impact of losing a
reproductively mature female right whale. Mothers and calves
are particularly important to protect for this population,
right?
Dr. Redfern. Yes.
Mr. Huffman. And where do mothers and calves spend most of
their time?
Dr. Redfern. I looked into this before the hearing. A study
shows that they are spending 70 percent of their time at or
near the surface.
Another point I want to make, because it is really relevant
to the technology discussion, mothers and calves are not
calling, and that is why buoys to detect calling whales are not
going to be as successful for mothers and calves down in the
southeast, where they are not calling. So, that is something
else that we need to be thinking about and working on. And the
Aquarium is committed to working with our partners to find
technological solutions, we just have to make sure right whales
survive long enough to benefit from those technologies.
Mr. Huffman. Thank you. And you also gave important
testimony to show that we are not just hypothesizing that
smaller vessels between 35 and 65 feet can kill right whales.
You have hard data showing that that has happened, right?
Dr. Redfern. Yes.
Mr. Huffman. And we know that those are just the examples
you have been able to confirm. So, there are surely others.
Dr. Redfern. That is exactly right. There have been five
since the 2008 Vessel Speed Rule, and three of them since 2021.
Mr. Huffman. Thank you, Dr. Redfern.
Just to close, look, I don't want to arbitrarily do
anything that harms boaters. I like boats, I like recreating on
them. I have probably done more of that than most members of
this Committee, Mr. Graves has probably spent more time than me
on the water, but not many others do. So, I would not be
supporting this common-sense approach NOAA has taken if I
didn't think it was absolutely necessary to save the North
Atlantic right whale.
And I also know, in response to some of the doom and gloom
we have heard about vessel speed reductions, that it happens
all the time. In the West Coast, we have voluntary speed
reductions. I am sure the Port of Georgia is very important.
So, is the Port of Los Angeles, and Long Beach, and Oakland,
where we have had voluntary speed reductions from big-time
shippers just because they want to do the right thing. And the
world didn't come to an end.
With that, I yield back.
Mr. Bentz. Mr. Graves, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Graves. Thank you.
Mr. McCurry, why don't we have a 5 mile-per-hour speed
limit on the interstates?
Mr. McCurry. Well, I suppose that has to do with safety.
Mr. Graves. So, if we put a 5 mile-per-hour speed limit on
interstates, it would probably be safer, but it would take
approximately forever for people to get places, right?
Mr. McCurry. I would argue that it would be less safe to
have that kind of speed on the interstate, but yes, it would
take forever to get anywhere.
Mr. Graves. Yes, all right. I am just curious. So, there
are probably other considerations and a balance in the overall
kind of thinking through.
Mr. McCurry. Absolutely.
Mr. Graves. Yes, all right. Just curious.
Ms. Guyas, in your testimony, you talk about how MRIP is
used. I think you said East Coast, Gulf, and then you said
Hawaii. You said over to Hawaii. And I am not a geography
major, but I just noted that you didn't make reference to the
West Coast. Can you talk a little bit about that background,
and perhaps why that wasn't explicitly included?
Ms. Guyas. Yes, thanks for that question. The West Coast
states used to participate in a data collection system that was
federally run prior to MRIP. That was called, the acronym is
MRFSS, and at the time, about 20 years ago, some of the states
over there were running their own surveys on top of that, and
they decided that they would, 20 years ago, stop with the
Federal program. And each state, California, Oregon, and
Washington, has their own survey that they have been doing for
20 years that is used for management.
Mr. Graves. Could you say that again? I just wanted to make
sure I heard you. For Oregon, Washington, and California, they
what?
Ms. Guyas. They all have their own state surveys that they
use instead of MRIP.
Mr. Graves. Wow, that is fascinating.
[Laughter.]
Mr. Graves. Fascinating, fascinating. I am sorry. Thank
you.
Mr. Huffman. If the gentleman wants to yield, I can
demystify it for him, but maybe you would prefer to preserve
the mystery.
Mr. Graves. No, I have to tell you, I feel like I have
heard enough out of you for a lifetime, a lifetime.
Mr. Huffman. Let the mystery----
Mr. Graves. No. For those of you who don't know, Mr.
Huffman is a friend of mine. He really is. We violently
disagree on things, and only one of us is rational, but he is a
friend of mine.
Ms. Guyas, can you talk about some of the issues we have
had with calibration in the Gulf?
And I made comments earlier in my opening statement about
translating, converting, calibrating, and talked about going
State to Federal versus Federal to State, and just how you
effectively dilute accuracy. Could you talk about that a bit?
Ms. Guyas. Yes, thanks for that question, too.
As you know, each of the Gulf states has their own survey
for red snapper, and maybe other species too. In the case of
Louisiana, their survey covers everything, right?
So, one of the ongoing struggles that has been going on in
the Gulf of Mexico with red snapper is how to calibrate or, in
other words, convert from MRIP, which used to be used to
monitor that fishery, to now these state data programs because
you do need to be able to compare what has happened in the past
and what was caught with MRIP versus what is being monitored
and caught now under the state programs.
And we have had situations with some of the states. I will
use the example of Mississippi, because I think it is an easy
one to follow. So, Mississippi, when they were using MRIP to
track red snapper landings, they would have years where MRIP
was telling them no red snapper were landed, which they knew
was not true. And then it was kind of scattershot otherwise,
where they would have really high landings or really low. So,
the program that they have developed is called Tails and
Scales. They are able to get much more refined information from
the anglers that are out there fishing for red snapper. It is a
lot more reliable.
And one of the struggles with calibration has been with
Mississippi. How do we calibrate this program that was very
inconsistent and we know does not paint a good picture of what
has happened, really, in the past with this program that seems
to be a lot more reliable? And the approach has been to
calibrate all of the state surveys back to MRIP, which is not
being used anymore for red snapper, and has some issues.
So, there have been a lot of conversations about the best
way to do that. I feel like it is still an ongoing
conversation. Does that help answer your question?
Mr. Graves. Yes, it was very helpful. I do want to push
back on one thing you said in regard to not catching any fish
in Mississippi in one year. I have seen them fish there before,
and I wouldn't be shocked at all if that were the case.
[Laughter.]
Mr. Graves. Just kidding.
Dr. Howell, I would like to ask you, in regard to your
testimony about a bill, I noticed that you talked about
sections related to improving recreational fishing data
collection. However, we did try to incorporate some of the
lessons learned from the great red snapper count into that. Is
it reasonable that more consistent surveys of that type, the
independent type like the great red snapper count, would help
to improve or fill in the gaps on some of the stock
assessments?
Dr. Howell. The great red snapper count represented one of
the biggest studies that was ever done on red snapper at one
point in time. Using the technology that was in there is
definitely a way that we could look to try to get more towards
absolute or a better abundance estimate than we use just from
the survey.
So, we have been investing IRA money. We have about $10
million that is going into a workshop, $2 million of this for
just the optical system. So, look at a mini-great red snapper
count, more every year.
Mr. Graves. Great. Thank you. I yield back.
Mr. Bentz. We are going to go into recess now until after
votes. They were called, so we will see you in an hour-and-a-
half or so.
[Recess.]
Mr. Bentz. The hearing will come to order. The Chair
recognizes Congressman Carter for 5 minutes.
Mr. Carter. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and again, thank you
for allowing me to waive on.
Mr. McCurry, thank you again for being here. As I said in
my opening statement, Georgia's ports have seen tremendous
growth over the past few years, and a few decades, to be quite
honest with you, and they have seen significant investments
into the infrastructure required for our ports. And I didn't
say, but I want to say the Georgia ports are the economic
engine of the Southeast. And when I say Southeast, I don't mean
southeast Georgia, I mean the Southeast. The impact of the
Georgia ports are felt all the way up to the Ohio Valley, as
you know, and as I hope everybody knows.
Mr. McCurry, could you expand on the potential impacts this
rule could have on port operations?
Mr. McCurry. Yes, sir. Thank you, Mr. Carter.
I think that, first and foremost, none of us, I believe I
speak for everybody here, want to see any right whales injured,
much less killed for one reason or another. But when you look
at the practical impacts that the proposed rule would have on
operations at the Port of Savannah, the Port of Brunswick, any
port along the East Coast, most of the ports on the East Coast
are in the zone affected, you run into two things. With the
size of the pilot vessels having to be restricted, or the speed
restricted in lieu of a size change, the lives and the safety
of the pilots are perversely at danger.
And when considerations offshore, which is, obviously,
prevalent all the time, particularly during the winter season
and into the early spring, what would happen if the pilots
cannot go out and access the vessels for transit on schedule,
then they will just have to wait. Particularly with the element
of criminalization of the decision to adjust the speeds of the
vessels that are necessary for safely transiting the channels,
you are looking at, in all likelihood, supply chain delays that
probably exceed those that we saw during the pandemic because
of the delay of vessels being able to safely transit channels.
In terms of the ships themselves, the speed of the vessel
must constantly be adjusted to maintain safe transit. I think
that we have seen an unfortunate accident--now, granted, it was
because of the loss of power and, therefore, steerage of a
vessel very near here, in Baltimore. But if you can't
constantly adjust the speed of the vessel in and out of a port,
then you obviously are at risk of a grounding or a collision,
vessels colliding with one another, or potentially even a
vessel colliding with buildings along a channel, such as what
you see in Savannah and other places.
So, it is not about a preference of rule or no rule. It is
about smart rulemaking, and providing for the safety above all
else of the maritime traffic.
Mr. Carter. If you had a backlog, like could potentially
happen because the ships couldn't get into port in a timely
fashion, how would that impact the competitiveness of the ports
on the East Coast?
Mr. McCurry. Well, I think that, practically speaking,
those delays become such that the ships have to find other
ports to go to. So, there is an economic impact to the ports
along the East Coast by virtue of vessels departing to go to
other places.
There is also, as I stated earlier in my testimony, the
environmental impacts of vessels having to steam longer or
simply sit at anchor with their engines running. That creates
additional greenhouse gas emissions that we don't want to see,
either.
So, there are economic consequences to not just, selfishly,
the ports that want the business, but to the cost of moving
goods on the East Coast and the businesses that are in place
along the East Coast that will be affected by that. And then
there is an environmental impact by the longer transit and
longer steaming times at anchor.
Mr. Carter. Right. Well, as you know, we have the largest
single economic development project ever in the state of
Georgia close to the Savannah port in the 1st District that I
have the honor and privilege of representing, a $5.5 billion
investment by Hyundai that is going to create 8,100 jobs. We
are having enormous growth in our area. If this rule were to go
into effect, what kind of impact would it have on the future of
the Savannah port, as well as the Brunswick port?
Mr. McCurry. I think, at a minimum, you are talking about a
significant increase in the cost of moving goods, so the good
movement often finds the path of least resistance, both
financially and in terms of the time to get to and from
markets. So, it could have a significant economic impact on the
ports in your district.
But honestly, the same applies up and down the East Coast,
the ports that are also going to be impacted by this.
Mr. Carter. Great. Again, thank you for being here today.
Mr. Chairman, again, thank you for allowing me to waive on.
Mr. Bentz. The Chair recognizes Congresswoman Hoyle for 5
minutes.
Ms. Hoyle. Thank you, Mr. Chair. I would like to yield my
time to Mr. Huffman.
Mr. Huffman. Through the Chair, I would like to thank the
gentlelady from Oregon.
Director Howell, I want to ask you some questions about
this data MRIP issue.
And my colleague from Louisiana, Mr. Graves, is right. We
are friends. But as I said off mic, sometimes that is not easy,
because my friend, Mr. Graves, did a little something that you
hear in congressional debates quite often. I think those who
were here for my opening remarks heard me say quite plainly
that the data we use on the Federal side for recreational
fishing is not great. It is flawed. It needs to get better, and
we are in the process of trying to make it better. I have
worked with Mr. Graves, in fact, to push NOAA to work with
states in order to make that data set much better and much less
uncertain.
So, what my friend from Louisiana did in his time was to
say that I regard the Federal data as sacred, that I am trying
to protect it, I consider it sacrosanct. And then, once you
have set up that straw man, you attack it. And that is how we
debate things here in Congress. But I hope folks who are
following along know that that little sleight of hand is not
exactly accurate or fair. Our data is not great, Dr. Howell, I
don't think you would disagree with that when it comes to
recreational fishing. And I want to talk to you a little bit
about that.
But first of all, before I get there, let's circle back to
the North Atlantic right whale for just one moment, because
some concerns were raised about human safety and the fact that
these vessel speed reductions, if there is a storm, if there is
an emergency, that boaters could really be put at risk by an
arbitrary 10 knot vessel speed reduction. Tell me a little more
about the flexibility that you anticipate building into your
rulemaking.
Dr. Howell. I appreciate that question.
For the rulemaking, I will need to get back with the
regulatory folks to understand what flexibilities are built in.
I understand that it was built in mind with having ideas like
safety available.
Mr. Huffman. My understanding is the proposed rule includes
an expansion of the safety deviation provision to include
emergency situations, any emergency situation that presents a
threat to health, safety, or the life of a person. So, if I am
wrong about that, please correct me. Please get back to us.
Dr. Howell. I will not correct you, sir.
Mr. Huffman. But honestly, to suggest that people are going
to be put in harm's way because of this is simply inaccurate.
It is at odds with the actual rule as it currently stands.
Let me go back to MRIP and the data. You are currently
reviewing and updating the MRIP program, correct?
Dr. Howell. Correct.
Mr. Huffman. And does this bill allow for managers at NOAA
to objectively assess all data sources?
I mean, the best data, the most reliable data actually
takes in everything we have. And I just want to know if this
bill would allow you to do that.
I am talking about Mr. Graves' legislation.
Dr. Howell. Absolutely, yes. Thank you for that question.
Right now, we currently have a system that does allow us to
use all data that is available. We have state-led systems, we
have Federal-led surveys, as you have mentioned.
There are concerns with the bill that we would be forced to
decide between one, either a state-led system or a Federal-led
system, depending on what was proposed. There may be
consequences where we would not be able to use all of the data
that is available, or we would be forced to choose in building
one system over the other.
Mr. Huffman. Yes. Now, there are ways that you can improve
the percent standard error, I believe. Is it PSE or PES----
Dr. Howell. PSE.
Mr. Huffman [continuing]. That is referred to in the
current data models that you are running. Tell us about those
ways that you are trying to improve it.
Dr. Howell. Thank you again for the opportunity to talk
about this. There are ways that we can improve the PSEs, the
Percent Standard Errors, by doing additional sampling. There
are also ways that we can look at taking the Federal survey,
which really tries to cover the 50 million anglers in the
United States, with the state surveys that are very specialized
towards what they are looking for in that particular region. We
can take those data fields together to improve our ability to
collect information in a collaborative way, and not a
competitive way.
Mr. Huffman. Thank you. How can we be certain that state
data, I mean, let's say the triggers under this bill are met,
and you are forced to default to state data instead of your
data. How can we be sure that it would result in a reduction in
PSE?
In other words, that it would increase certainty.
Dr. Howell. The best thing that we could do is create a
rulemaking or a standards and best practices framework. And we
have this in the regions which says that all of the data that
is used has to undergo the same rigorous scientific review,
transparency documentation. That allows us to see that the
survey itself is being done, and it is also the way that the
survey is being done in a representative way. Then we can
review that data, take it in, and the ability for us to use
more data should account for our ability to lower the PSEs.
Mr. Huffman. And Mr. Graves' bill would prevent you from
doing that, as I understand it.
I am out of time, but I am going to circle back to this
subject if I can get a friendly Member to yield me time later.
Thank you, I yield back.
Dr. Howell. Thank you.
Mr. Bentz. The Chair recognizes Congressman Fry for 5
minutes.
Mr. Fry. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you for the
opportunity to waive on to this hearing today. This proposed
rule is incredibly impactful to my district in South Carolina.
COVID brought back outside recreation. People were golfing,
people were going out, they were kayaking. They were also going
out on boats. They were going fishing. And in my region of
South Carolina, we saw tremendous growth in this industry. It
has always been the lifeblood of our economy, tourism. People
travel from all over the country to come to Myrtle Beach, South
Carolina every single year. And one of the things that they do
is they go fishing.
The Gulf Coast is 75 to 100 miles off the coast of South
Carolina. And this proposed rule, sir, instead of taking 3
hours to get to the to the Gulf Stream, it would take 5 to 6.
There is an article that was in Savannah, Georgia, in Buddy
Carter's district, and somebody says, ``We go out up to 100
miles off the Gulf Stream. It takes us 3 hours. They do this,
and it will take 5 to 6 to get out there. Ninety-nine percent
of people will just say `we would rather not go fishing'.''
There are going to be tremendous impacts because of this.
And I fear that we are taking an axe to where we need a
scalpel. Everyone wants to protect this endangered species, but
I don't think that the data backs up what we are actually
doing.
In my district of South Carolina, Mickey Thompson, the
owner of Sportsman's Choice Marine in Long, South Carolina,
said this: ``It would be devastating to my business. One of my
best selling boats is a 39-foot boat, and we sell boats up to
44 feet in length. We would lose close to $8 million, just with
my dealership alone. My fear is not losing new customers, but
previous customers' boat values would also drop dramatically.
This rule would not only kill my business, but other businesses
in the 7th Congressional District of South Carolina, from
charter captains, commercial seafood folks, and the tourism
business that accommodate many around here.''
Mr. Chairman, I request unanimous consent to enter into the
record an op-ed in the Charleston Post and Courier, ``NOAA's
proposed vessel-speed rule would devastate South Carolina's
coastal economy.''
Mr. Bentz. Without objection.

[The information follows:]

Commentary: NOAA's proposed vessel-speed rule would devastate SC's
coastal economy

The Post and Courier, June 6, 2024 by Tommy Hancock

https://www.postandcourier.com/opinion/commentary/noaa-vessel-speed-
rules-whales-sc-coastal-economy/article_9129f58c-233b-11ef-8361-
2f22c232917e.html

*****

In my 54 years of boating and fishing along South Carolina's coast,
I've not yet had the privilege of seeing a North Atlantic right whale.
Since I was 8, I've spent more than 500 days fishing these waters, yet
this elusive creature remains a rarity to be seen.

Now, the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration has proposed
expanding a rule that would cripple our coastal economy in the name of
protecting these endangered whales. As someone who loves the sea, I
support protecting our endangered marine mammals, but not in a way that
puts boaters in danger and destroys livelihoods across our state.

South Carolina's coastal recreation economy is a powerhouse. A study by
University of South Carolina economist Joey Von Nessen says boating and
fishing in our state have a $6.5 billion economic impact, supporting
29,000 jobs annually, with $1.6 billion in labor income that would not
exist without it. Our coastal communities thrive on recreational
boating and fishing, but NOAA's reckless proposal threatens to
dismantle this vital sector.

NOAA's proposed rule to limit all boats 35 feet and over to a speed of
10 knots--equivalent to a mere 11 mph--is illogical and dangerous. This
antiquated measure grossly ignores the realities of boating safety and
practical navigation. Imposing a 10-knot speed limit in open seas is
not just impractical; it endangers the lives of boaters.

Small recreational boats are not designed to cut through the choppy
waters of the Atlantic at such low speeds, which increase the
likelihood of capsizing or swamping. Further, limiting boats to 10
knots restricts their visibility and ability to maneuver effectively,
particularly in deteriorating weather conditions. Speed is a vital
safety asset during sudden weather changes, and boaters need the
capability to return to port quickly when storms approach. The proposed
speed restriction would hinder this ability, potentially trapping
boaters in dangerous situations.

Not only does the rule impose significant safety concerns, but it also
reeks of enforcement issues and blatant government overreach. Just last
year, a Charleston-based boat over 65 feet was hit with a $15,000 fine
from NOAA based on Automatic Identification System data from two years
prior. The penalty for speeding in a whale zone surpasses that for
speeding in a school zone and can be issued through the mail nearly two
years later. To put this in perspective, this would be as if you were
driving your vehicle down Interstate 26 and the government sent you a
ticket for speeding based on your GPS data two years later.

The facts simply do not support NOAA's heavy-handed approach. In more
than 50 years, there has been just one serious whale strike off South
Carolina's coast, and never by a vessel between 35 and 65 feet. This
rule is not only baseless but also misguided in its failure to
distinguish between small boats and enormous oceangoing vessels. Most
fatal whale strikes come from vessels over 260 feet, not recreational
boats. NOAA's blanket rule ignores these critical differences,
endangering South Carolina's boaters while failing to make a meaningful
impact on whale conservation

The fallout from this misguided rule would be catastrophic. It
threatens not only recreational boating and fishing but also jobs and
entire business sectors dependent on our Atlantic access, from
fisheries to coastal tourism and aquaculture. South Carolina's economy
cannot afford this ill-conceived intervention. My company, Sportsman
Boats, employs more than 450 people, a small fraction of the jobs
statewide that could be affected.

As a dedicated boating and fishing enthusiast, I understand the
irreplaceable value of our time, safety and commitment to conservation
on the water. This dedication led our industry to establish the South
Carolina Boating and Fishing Alliance nearly four years ago, aiming to
protect and enhance these experiences for future generations while
leading industry-driven conservation initiatives.

NOAA's one-size-fits-all rule not backed by science is a blunt
instrument that will do more harm than good, disregarding effective,
technology-driven solutions.

Protecting wildlife and the Atlantic Ocean's ecosystem will always be a
priority. But NOAA's proposed rule isn't the right approach. The
industry urges NOAA to rethink this rule by working with the
recreational boating and fishing industries to use the best technology
available to protect the North Atlantic right whale. The next 54 years
of South Carolina's coastal communities and economies depend on it.

______

Mr. Fry. Thank you.
Ms. Guyas, in your testimony, you provide the figure that
recreational fishing contributes $148 billion to the U.S.
economy annually. Many boaters in my district participate in
the South Carolina Wahoo series annually that runs from
February to April every year, which stands to be heavily
impacted by this proposed rule. If this rule were enacted
regarding the vessel strikes, is it feasible for this
tournament to continue in its current form?
Ms. Guyas. I don't think it would. I mean, folks that are
out Wahoo fishing, they have to run quite a ways out, similar
to the gentleman that you quoted in the article.
Mr. Fry. How much money do you think local tackle shops,
hotels, charter captains, and restaurants would stand to lose
if this rule was implemented?
Ms. Guyas. It is a lot. I would put it in the millions of
dollars, for sure.
Mr. Fry. Mr. Strong, I would like to ask you about the
initial regulatory flexibility analysis completed by NMFS that
found that the proposed rule would only have a $46 million
annual impact. In your testimony, you note that that would
actually be closer to $2 billion.
Similarly, the South Carolina Boating and Fishing Alliance
estimated that it would have a $77 million impact just in our
state alone in boat sale losses in their members' current
inventory. Can you explain some of the disparities between
these two findings?
Mr. Strong. I will do my best. How they arrived at the $46
million number, quite frankly, I don't know. I do know that,
again----
Mr. Fry. That might be like one city, right?
Mr. Strong. Yes. Our industry, the marine recreational
industry, was not involved in collaborative conversations. So,
our determination was from sampling our dealers along the East
Coast who would be directly impacted by this if it were to go
through, and we kind of came up with a number that seemed like
a conservative number of a $4 million revenue loss per dealer,
$4 million, I think it was $4.1 something, but rounded, $4
million times 500 dealers, $2 billion, we believe, is a
conservative loss number. And that is how we arrived at our
data.
And that is annual, that is not cumulative. That is annual.
Our fear is that it would actually become a lot worse than that
because, as Ms. Guyas said earlier, tournaments, things that
people invest a lot of money in to purchase a boat, because
that is part of what they really enjoy doing. They are going to
just get out. They are not going to do it because the time is
one aspect, but the safety is another.
Some people referenced they were avid boaters before.
Anybody who is an avid boater, if you know you are 80 miles
offshore and you are restricted to traveling 10 knots, and all
of a sudden the wind in the afternoon picks up to 25 knots, it
is totally dangerous and unsafe to travel in 10 knots 80 miles
off shore in a 25-knot wind.
Mr. Fry. Thank you for that.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Bentz. The Chair recognizes Congresswoman Porter for 5
minutes.
Ms. Porter. I yield my time to Mr. Huffman.
Mr. Huffman. I thank the gentlelady.
And the point about putting boaters in danger is exactly
why the draft language of NOAA's rule has an exception for any
situation that would risk the health or lives or property of
people. So, I hope we can kind of dispel that particular straw
man.
I want to come back to MRIP, though, and talk about state
data under Mr. Graves' bill, H.R. 8705. Dr. Howell, if the
triggers under this bill are met, and NOAA is forced to default
to state data, is there anything to ensure that that state
data, and the trigger would be if Federal data is more than 30
percent uncertain, right?
So, is there anything in the bill to ensure that the state
data that you are forced to default to using exclusively is
actually more certain than the Federal data that you have been
required under this bill to stop using?
Dr. Howell. Thank you for the question there.
There is nothing that would allow us, outside of the
current framework that we have. And in the regional teams, we
create frameworks that have the documentation and the
scientific process for how that data is collected. The states
aren't always in those, and are in varying forms of how well
they can do that. The Federal side, we have strived to be as
transparent as possible in our framework there. So, being
forced to use it, we would have to have the same documentation
and the same framework analysis that was done to ensure that we
had the PSEs, that 30 percent, and were done in the way that
was commensurate with what MRIP as a partnership----
Mr. Huffman. Thank you. And is there anything in the bill
to make sure that, if you are forced to default to state data,
that that state data is at least as certain, hopefully, more
certain, than the Federal data?
Dr. Howell. Not that I can see.
Mr. Huffman. And it is my understanding that Louisiana
certainly has very good state data. A few other states likely
have very good state data. My understanding is not every state
does, and that it is very foreseeable that under this bill, you
may be forced to use less certain data than the Federal data
you are being required to ignore. Is that fair to say?
Dr. Howell. I think it is fair to say. And to the fairness
to the states, they are all working hard for the continual
improvement that we strive for in the Federal side. There are
in varying degrees of where they are in that state. So, for us
to have to turn a switch and be able to use that data right
away, we can't guarantee of what state that would be in.
Mr. Huffman. Thank you.
Dr. Howell, are you familiar with the Pacific Recreational
Fisheries Information Network and MRIP Regional Implementation
Plan for the West Coast Recreational Fishery? It was referenced
earlier by Mr. Graves.
Dr. Howell. Yes.
Mr. Huffman. And he sort of left the mystery hanging. I had
tried to demystify it for him, but he had left the mystery
hanging that these West Coast states are using state data for
Federal fisheries management decisions. And I want to just
spend some time on that with you, if I could.
My understanding is that this is a cooperative system
developed by MRIP, by you guys, over many years with the states
that includes collaborations, historic baselines, MRIP survey
certification, and standards. Is that all correct?
Dr. Howell. Correct.
Mr. Huffman. And that when you switched over to the state
data, you also continued calibrating the Federal system and
running the Federal system side-by-side for over a decade to
continue calibrating. Is that fair?
Dr. Howell. That is fair.
Mr. Huffman. And that MRIP still reviews the data and
surveys it periodically.
Dr. Howell. That is correct.
Mr. Huffman. So, that is a high standard of collaboration,
of data integrity, of best practices, all leading to an outcome
where these states were allowed to use their data for Federal
fishery management decisions. It is a great model for Louisiana
and every other state to potentially follow, but they have
instead decided to do an end run around that rigorous process
and come to Congress and ask for an Act of Congress.
This outcome for the West Coast did not require an Act of
Congress at all, right? You did it all under your existing
authority, right?
Dr. Howell. Correct, and that is the spirit of our Federal-
State re-envisioning that we are going through right now, is to
try to look by region to emulate where things are working, and
to get to a Federal-State collective, where we are capturing
the information we need for the species of interest, and also
to get to the higher resolution data with lower PSEs.
Mr. Huffman. Well, you have done excellent work on the West
Coast. I am so glad that Mr. Graves brought it up, because I
think it shows us the right way forward on recreational fishing
data, and also makes a very strong case that this bill is the
wrong way forward.
I yield back.
Mr. Bentz. The Chair recognizes Congressman Beyer for 5
minutes.
Mr. Beyer. Mr. Chairman, thank you. And Ranking Member
Huffman, thank you for allowing me to waive on. It is fun to be
back.
I keep hearing from my Republican friends that everyone
wants to protect the North Atlantic right whale. It came up in
virtually every one of the conversations, and just with Mr. Fry
a minute ago. I am trying to reconcile everyone wanting to save
the American North Atlantic right whale with the fact that
there are fewer than 340 that exist, that 3 have been killed in
the last year, that the potential biological removal number is
0.7, and anything more than 0.7 per year is going to lead to
the extinction by 2037. And at 3 per year, that probably means
extinction by 2031. And the only thing we have figured out how
to do right now so far is slow the speeds down.
First, from the scientific perspective, Dr. Howell, how
confident are you as a scientist that if we don't do this, that
we are looking at a real extinction event some time in the next
15 years, if not the next 10 years?
Dr. Howell. Thank you for the opportunity to speak to that.
We are very confident. There were over 60 scientific studies
that were referenced in making this speed rule and the
determination for why we came up with the parameters for that
speed rule.
Mr. Beyer. Also, I have read in the literature that they
figure only one in three actual strikes is ever recorded. So,
the 3 that we know about is probably 9. It could be 7, could be
10.
Dr. Howell. That is correct. We estimate that we understand
about 36 percent of the mortalities from what we can see.
Mr. Beyer. I don't want to throw a hard existential
question at the industry people, because I have had a small
business for five decades. But do you feel there is some other
way to avoid the extinction?
Or how will you feel, personally, when you save your
industry and you made a whole species go extinct?
Mr. Strong?
Mr. Strong. Well, just a few facts to add to that. Right
now, it is my understanding the way the rule is currently
proposed is they are factoring that the draft of a 35- to 65-
foot boat is the same draft as that of a 300-foot vessel, and
that is just not factually accurate. The average draft range on
a 35- to 65-foot vessel is between 2 and 4 feet, and they
actually, when they are going slower, they actually draw more
water when they are going slower than when they are able to be
on plain, let's say, at a 20 knot speed, they are up on top of
the water. So, there are some assumptions there in the rule,
the way it is proposed, that are not factually accurate.
Going back to the earlier testimony on the technology side
of things, and our industry typically is about 20 years behind
the automotive industry in almost all aspects, and the auto
industry is way out ahead of us on the technology side of
things. A lot of the technology does exist, but it is not well
integrated, which is what some of the bills speak to.
So, with the grant monies that are proposed to help foster
the integration of that technology so it can get on the
dashboards of people's boats on real-time live data, there can
be warning areas, there can be some limited speed reduction
areas, much again, like Waze on a car.
Mr. Beyer. Yes, which sounds like it might be a good thing
to revisit the rule when that technology is actually in place
and working.
Dr. Redfern, one of the things Ms. Hageman talked about was
why do we do wind farms? Can you talk about North Atlantic
right whales and wind farms?
Dr. Redfern. I can. There is no evidence that links whale
deaths, and not just right whales, but humpback whale deaths,
to wind farm and the activities that are being done to develop
wind. There is no link there. What we do know is that vessel
strikes are killing whales.
You asked about the studies, and the studies that are
showing right whales headed towards extinction. I want to make
one point about those, because those studies also show that, if
we can eliminate human-caused mortality, the species can
recover. So, those studies give us hope. If we will remove
direct, human-caused mortalities, this species can come back.
And one of the ways we can do that is by slowing ships
down. And the New England Aquarium stands ready to partner on
technology, but your point is absolutely right. We have to make
sure the whales survive long enough to be able to benefit from
these new technologies. And you do that through the speed rule,
which is scientifically backed.
Mr. Beyer. Yes. We want to point out that we don't want
this to be a zero-sum game. We would love to have the industry
survive and thrive, but we also don't want to cause the
extinction of one of our charismatic species, and a fellow
mammal, too.
With that, I yield back.
Mr. Bentz. The Chair recognizes Congressman Magaziner for 5
minutes.
Mr. Magaziner. Thank you, Chairman. A number of very
important bills to Rhode Island are all being discussed today,
and it is hard to get them all in in the 5 minutes that we each
have allotted. So, let me just, as a high level, say that when
it comes to managing fisheries and protecting coastal
communities and waterways, we should be grounding our policy
decisions in independent, scientifically sound data, and I am
glad that many of the bills that are being discussed today do
just that.
The Resilient Coasts and Estuaries Act will help the
Narragansett Bay National Estuary. We have the MAPOceans Act,
which will also help Rhode Island fishermen access the
information that they need to fish responsibly. I just want to
call out and thank the sponsors of those bills for advancing
legislation that I think will be very helpful to Rhode Island.
There is one that I have concerns with in particular,
though, and I will just say too often, I think, Congress
undermines the independence of data collection in order to try
to achieve certain political results. And we have seen lots of
examples of that.
My colleagues across the aisle will often demand exhaustive
environmental impact studies to slow clean energy development,
but dismiss those same types of studies for assessing the
ecological harms of offshore oil and gas, for example. They
have pushed legislation to weaken the Endangered Species Act to
accelerate mining projects that have questionable environmental
impacts and economic validity. And, of course, while the SEC is
trying to better enhance climate disclosure so that investors
can make sound decisions for how to invest their money, there
are those who are trying to restrict the ability of investors
to get the information that they need to make informed
decisions.
And in that same vein, the so-called Fisheries Data
Modernization and Accuracy Act appears to be another attempt to
manipulate data to achieve a specific outcome. Now, the
existing MRIP process for collecting and disseminating data on
fishing stocks is flawed, and we all recognize that. But the
approach should be to try to fix it, not to replace it with a
patchwork, state-by-state model of different standards and
different methods of data collection that may vary in their
accuracy and their standardization.
There are some states that are running very good state
recreational catch and data collection programs, but other
states that seem to be running programs with methodological
biases that make it impossible for the data to be comparative.
So, we need a consistent approach, not a patchwork approach.
This is a view that is, I think, widely held in the
recreational fishing community in Rhode Island, which I
represent. Dave Monte, a fisherman, charter captain, from Rhode
Island, recently had an op-ed in the Westerly Sun in which he
stated that bills like this one that were being considered
today enabled over-fishing of the Atlantic cod to occur year
after year, to the point that the stock was decimated.
So, Dr. Howell, can you tell us a little bit more about how
NOAA is working with fishermen and with others on the ground to
improve the existing MRIP process in sort of a fix-it, as
opposed to replace-it approach?
Dr. Howell. Thank you very much, Representative Magaziner,
for the time to talk.
I spoke a little bit about our current Federal-State re-
envisioning process, which is us going out. We have held four
listening sessions so far with representatives from the
industry, councils, and recreational fishers to explain what
our intentions were to really try to continually improve the
data streams that we have. We believe it is important for us to
have the Federal and state data together, if available. The
more data we have, the better we can get our percent standard
error down to resolution to really understand what these 50
million anglers are doing in the country.
One of the main things that we are doing, as well, is we
know that we have our access point surveys that reach the
docks, talk to people. Those collect the information on what
they caught and where they caught it. And we also have our
Federal Effort Survey, which is a mail order survey that goes
to hundreds of thousands of people. That is the result where we
found that, if we did changes to that system, you could have a
30 to 40 percent reduction in the effort estimates. We reported
that last August.
This is what we have invested this year, 2024, a full year
of testing to ensure that that preliminary result is accurate.
When we find the results from that, then we will be able to
employ that back in, and that will allow us to improve the
framework.
Mr. Magaziner. Thank you. I am already just about out of
time, but I will just say we have 57,000 licensed saltwater
anglers in Rhode Island. It is an important part of our economy
and our quality of life, and we want to make sure that that
industry can continue for generations to come. So, the
importance of sound data and having policy decisions that focus
on the long term, and not just the short term is really felt in
my district. So, I thank you and your colleagues for your work.
And I will yield back.
Mr. Bentz. The Chair recognizes Congressman D'Esposito for
5 minutes.
Mr. D'Esposito. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you all
again for being here. My first question is for Mr. Strong.
I know that we are here today, we discussed the MAPOceans
Act. In your opinion, what are the biggest challenges that new
boaters and experienced boaters face?
Mr. Strong. When we sell a boat to somebody, first, you
have experienced boaters, you have novice boaters, and you have
people in between. Our concern and our industry's concern is to
make sure that they learn how to operate the boat safely. So,
safety is a big component.
The integration of any safe information that could be on
their screens, more so than it is today, would be a big benefit
for our industry and for our clients. And then you could take
that from safety information to potentially fishing
information, weather information. Integration, though.
Mr. D'Esposito. Obviously, I think that we would agree that
having access to the standardized information in digital form
that would be provided through this MAPOceans Act is critically
important to, really, all boaters.
Mr. Strong. It would be extremely helpful, for sure.
Mr. D'Esposito. And as a fellow Long Islander, we know
that, as was mentioned in my statement earlier, that
recreational boating and fishing supports our local economies.
And it is really just part of our culture. It is part of why
people love Long Island. It is why people generation after
generation, even though it is expensive to live there, they
find a way to stay because they love it so much.
And in your testimony, you mentioned that recreational
boating alone contributes a little over $230 billion into the
economy, supports more than 800,000 jobs, 36,000 businesses,
and that 95 percent of all boats sold in the United States are
American-made and family-owned. Do you see this bill, the
MAPOceans Act, as something that is pro-business?
And secondly, in what ways do companies like your company
benefit from legislation like this?
Mr. Strong. Thank you. We would construe it as pro-business
because it kind of supports our goals of having clients be
safer and more confident on the water.
And how the business part comes up, generally, if people
feel safer and they feel more confident with their investment,
they are going to use it more often, hopefully refer more
people, and continue to expand the sport. So, this would be
very supportive of that.
Mr. D'Esposito. OK. And recreational boating, recreational
fishing, and, of course, commercial fishing have an obligation
to be stewards to conservation efforts and protect marine
habitats. This bill, as we discussed earlier, will provide
information to users to disseminate information of the marine
life around them. For example, knowing where certain marine
species are, which I think is one of probably the biggest
challenges that we face not only on Long Island, but all over,
like you mentioned, novice and new boaters. I think we probably
saw the biggest change during COVID, when so many people went
out and decided that they were going to become boaters for the
first time.
Regardless of where you stand on the North Atlantic right
whale vessel strike reduction rule, do you believe that this
platform with the MAPOceans Act will provide people the ability
to mitigate the risk of vessel strikes to whales and other
marine life?
Mr. Strong. We do, and I would add that boaters are in full
support of the science and data. It is not like we are on the
opposite side of that. We are on the same side of that. We just
maybe would like to see a higher priority put on utilizing that
data. And part of both bills that you are referencing speak to
that.
So, we believe that, as conservationists, as people on the
water, yes, we are business people, but if we don't have clean,
safe water that people can use and recreate, we don't have a
business. So, it is totally in alignment, and that would be
supportive. Thank you.
Mr. D'Esposito. Thank you.
And Mr. Chairman, again, thank you for allowing me to waive
on. And I am thankful to see this bipartisan piece of
legislation.
Mr. Graves. Can I have your time?
Mr. D'Esposito. Oh, sure, I will yield my time to Mr.
Graves.
Mr. Graves. Thank you, Mr. D'Esposito, thank you for being
here and doing your legislation. I appreciate it. I want to
follow up on a couple of things real quick.
First of all, I wish Mr. Magaziner were still here, because
he mentioned how legislation like our bill is what led to over-
fishing of the Atlantic cod, which I would love to know what
bill he is talking about because Congress has never done
anything like this. And uninformed statements like that are
really unfortunate, and lead to, I think, outcomes that don't
make sense because people are confused by what they are talking
about in terms of causation.
But otherwise, Mr. Chairman, I would like to ask unanimous
consent to include in the record a letter from last year that
expresses concern about an over-fishing designation of a
species, and requests that National Marine Fisheries Service
work with a specific state to actually get better data because
the National Marine Fisheries Service data is not good, and
they need to work with the state to get better data that is
then peer-reviewed to make sure that the over-fishing
designation doesn't cause economic harm on some of the coastal
communities, which is virtually identical to the situation we
are facing in Louisiana that my friends across the aisle are
criticizing. Let me see if I can read that name on there, Jared
Huffman, yes. Jared Huffman.
If I could get that into the record, please. Thank you.
Mr. Bentz. Without objection.

[The information follows:]

CONGRESS OF THE UNITED STATES
Washington, DC

November 20, 2023

Dr. Richard Spinrad, Administrator
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration
1401 Constitution Avenue NW, Room 5128
Washington, DC 20230

Dear Dr. Spinrad:

I am writing to ask for your urgent assistance regarding a stock
assessment for the Northern California coast that prompted the closure
of a vital fishery and cause significant harm to coastal communities
for years to come. Following the November 2023 Pacific Fisheries
Management Council (PFMC) meeting, I would ask that the National Marine
Fisheries Service (NMFS) postpone issuing an ``overfished''
determination for quillback rockfish, the species at the heart of the
closure, until the assessment can be reviewed.
NMFS' 2021 assessment of quillback rockfish was used to conclude
that the species is overfished and a rebuilding plan should be adopted.
That conclusion prompted the mid-season closure of the nearshore
rockfish fishery in Northern California in 2023, which has had
devastating consequences. The assessment is considered ``data
moderate,'' which in this case means that there was no direct
information from the fishery used to draw the conclusion. Instead, data
was borrowed from other fisheries and extrapolated. The California
coastline in my congressional district is remote and contains vast
areas of quillback rockfish habitat that is never fished, but the
assessment nonetheless suggested that this stock is overfished.
Understandably, the PFMC and many stakeholders expressed concern
that the assessment would be used to adopt an overfished designation
for quillback rockfish with no independent review. Two experts the PFMC
called to review the assessment raised significant questions about the
assessment and its use to develop fisheries regulations. The council
asked its Science and Statistical Committee (SSC)--including NMFS'
Science Center--to review the assessment for consideration at the
PFMC's March meeting. NMFS, however, has indicated that it will
continue to complete its overfished stock determination, which would
force the PFMC to adopt a rebuilding plan that would trigger severe
restrictions to the nearshore rockfish fishery for years.

My request is twofold:

1.  Pause the development of the overfished determination until the
SCC and NMFS can reevaluate its assessment of quillback
rockfish and the PFMC can hear the results of that review
in March. No harm can be done to the species in the
meantime, as the season for the fishery does not start
until later in Spring.

2.  Immediately begin developing plans to assist the state of
California in collecting data from the fishery being
impacted. This should include hook-and-line surveys in
rocky nearshore habitat where quillback are most abundant,
and where rockfish associated with the stock are caught by
sport, charter, and commercial fishers. Rigorous data is
critical to understanding when and how regulations are
written to protect fish stocks from over-exploitation, and
in allowing sustainable, economically beneficial use of
fisheries as called for in the Magnuson-Stevens Act.

I ask that you consider this request urgently to allow the PFMC to
make an informed decision on the potential for adoption of a rebuilding
analysis for quillback rockfish. It is critical to consider all
available information and analysis when the stakes are so high for
coastal communities. Please contact my Senior District Representative
John Driscoll with any questions.

Sincerely,

Jared Huffman,
Member of Congress

______

Mr. Bentz. All right. So, I think there is----
Mr. Huffman. In the gentleman's remaining time, would he
yield?
Mr. Bentz. You have no remaining time.
Mr. Huffman. Because I would write the same letter for
Louisiana or any other state.
Mr. Bentz. Moving on, the Chair recognizes himself for 5
minutes.
There have been some remarks about the language in the rule
concerning the ability of someone with a ship or boat less than
I think it is 65 feet in length, having the ability to protect
itself in the event of weather. But the way the rule is
written, it talks about gale force winds, which are defined as
39 knots. So, the hypothetical that was presented earlier
suggested something far less than 39 knots. So, I am just
wondering why the rules are written in such a fashion as to put
people in danger for fear of violating these rules.
Dr. Howell. Thank you, Chairman, and I appreciate the
opportunity to speak to that.
I am on the science and technology side of the aisle, and
it is probably a question that is better raised with my
regulatory partners. What I can say today is that I will talk
with them and get more details about that. I don't think that
anything in that bill has the intention of affecting safety,
and that fisheries in NOAA does have a statutory requirement to
protect the endangered species right now.
Mr. Bentz. Well, of course they do, but not at the risk of
harming all kinds of people out on the water. This needs
attention.
I understand this is not the most recent draft. It is the
one that we have, but apparently there is another one. Please
check and make sure that folks aren't stuck out there on the
water, unable to speed up over 10 knots, waiting for the wind
to break over 39. That makes no sense. So, please check on
that.
Dr. Howell. I fully recognize that. Thank you. I will take
that back.
Mr. Bentz. Secondly, Dr. Howell, sticking with you for a
second, is there technology available today that people can
afford which will allow them to recognize where these whales
are?
And before you answer, how many of these whales are there?
Dr. Howell. The population is estimated at 340 whales at
this time.
Mr. Bentz. OK, great, 340 whales over what space?
Dr. Howell. The space of the Atlantic Ocean.
Mr. Bentz. Well, reaching from what point off what state to
what point off what state?
Dr. Howell. So, roughly off the coast of Maine down to the
bottom of Florida.
Mr. Bentz. OK, so how many miles is that ocean?
Dr. Howell. I don't have that at my fingertips.
Mr. Bentz. Give me a guess.
Dr. Howell. A thousand miles.
Mr. Bentz. OK, so 1,000 miles. So, we have 340 whales over
a 1,000-mile space. Is that correct?
Dr. Howell. Correct.
Mr. Bentz. So, what you have done is defaulted, I suppose,
to affect ships within that 1,000-mile space, in the hope that
we will somehow save these 340 creatures.
And by the way, it is difficult for me, when I hear
remarks, Dr. Redfern, where you say, we can save these whales
if we would just do something like get all the boats off the
ocean. And that would be true for almost any endangered
species. Just get rid of people. We would probably have no
problems at all. Well, that kind of a standard is,
unfortunately, not available. Or better put, fortunately, not
available.
Going back to you, Doctor, tell me. Is there a
technological device that will allow people to see some of
these 340 whales within that 1,000-mile space?
Dr. Howell. We are currently going through the technology
that is available. That is part of what we put the $20 million
from our Inflation Reduction Act funding into, to doing that
through a NFWF grant that they will fund 18 projects. The
technology workshop that was mentioned earlier, as well as this
investment is really to understand what technologies----
Mr. Bentz. Do we have something that works?
Dr. Howell. Not operational at this point.
Mr. Bentz. How close are we?
Dr. Howell. That I can't tell you right now.
Mr. Bentz. How much would it cost to get there?
Dr. Howell. That is another great question, and that is
what the investment in IRA is going to get us.
Mr. Bentz. And when will we have an answer?
Dr. Howell. That is another great question. I would bring
that back to the team.
Mr. Bentz. So, bring it back to the team and get us
something that shows us.
Let's shift to Mr. Strong.
Mr. Strong, do you have an answer of when this technology
might be available that people could afford to put on their
boats to see where one of these whales, whatever they are,
might be?
Mr. Strong. I can't speak from a scientific perspective,
but I can speak from a boater and a marinas perspective, and
the technology that we do see that is there right now. And I
wouldn't suggest that it is perfect or that they are going to
be able to pinpoint every one of the 340 whales that are out
there. But there are trends.
And, again, going back to the Waze application in cars, we
believe that technology does exist, and could be put, or not
even put, the machines wouldn't have to be changed, they could
just be updated through software to be able to have that be
applicable.
Mr. Bentz. I bet someone is working on this.
Well, I want to thank all of you for your testimony, a
very, very interesting hearing, a very important one.
The members of the Committee may have some additional
questions for the witnesses, and we will ask you to respond to
these in writing. Under Committee Rule 3, members of the
Committee must submit questions to the Subcommittee Clerk by 5
p.m. Eastern Time on Tuesday, July 2. The hearing record will
be held open for 10 business days for these responses.
I also ask unanimous consent to enter into the record a
letter from the Georgia Ports Authority; a letter from the
National Marine Manufacturers Association; and a letter from
the Congressional Sports Foundation submitted to NOAA on their
proposed Vessel Speed Restriction Rule.
Without objection, so ordered.

[The information follows:]

GEORGIA PORTS AUTHORITY
Savannah, GA

September 29, 2022

The Honorable Gina M. Raimondo
Secretary of Commerce
1401Constitution Ave NW
Washington, DC 20230

Dear Secretary Raimondo:

On behalf of the Georgia Ports Authority (GPA), I would like to
express our concern with NOAA's proposed ``Amendments to the North
Atlantic Right Whale Vessel Strike Reduction Rule.'' We believe that
NOAA is overlooking several critical factors as it seeks to implement
harmful changes to the existing rule. The proposed rule raises
considerable life and safety concerns and would cause further
interruptions to an already strained supply chain. If implemented in
its current form, this rule will exacerbate congestion at American
ports--resulting in detrimental effects on the nation's economy.
It is our hope that NOAA Fisheries will work closely with the
affected ports and other maritime industry stakeholders to determine an
accurate effect of any rule changes on port communities. We would
request that NOAA consider an adjustment of the proposed rule--
excluding Federal Navigation Channels and pilot boarding areas as well
as exempting pilot vessels from these speed restriction zones. This
modest alteration removes less than 1% of the total area covered by
NOAA's proposed rule while protecting the safe, efficient movement of
imports and exports through East coast ports.
The GPA appreciates the need for reasonable regulation to protect
the North Atlantic Right Whale and is committed to that effort. We have
implemented several voluntary measures throughout the years to help
protect the critically endangered species. In fact, CMA-CGM, in
partnership with the GPA, recently launched an acoustic monitoring buoy
off the coast of Savannah to increase North Atlantic right whale
detection efforts.
Furthermore, we agree that it is important to monitor the
effectiveness of vessel speed regulations to reduce vessel strikes.
However, it is also critical to find balance between our shared
conservation goals and ensuring America's economic vitality. The GPA
believes that present regulations are more than sufficient.
NOAA's recently proposed changes to the existing vessel speed rule
will negatively affect the safe transit of ocean-going vessels during
the designated seasonal management window. State-licensed pilots are
expected to act in the public interest, and to maintain a professional
judgment that comports with the needs of maritime safety. In addition,
state and federal licensing and regulatory authorities require
compulsory pilots to take all reasonable actions to prevent ships under
their navigational control from engaging in unsafe operations.
Local pilots must consider hydrological, meteorological and many
other factors for safe navigation. These considerations greatly affect
maneuverability and steering controls--particularly at slower speeds
for larger vessels when transiting our nation's harbors.
The NOAA-proposed speed restriction will lead to reduced service
capacity and ship delays along the entire Eastern seaboard. Without
speed as an effective tool to overcome navigational influences, ocean-
going cargo vessels will be unable to safely traverse our nation's
harbors. This will likely result in temporary port closures and
significant congestion outside the affected harbors.
NOAA's proposed changes to the deviation clause will place an
enormous burden on the ship's master and the pilot. The new rule would
require a vessel operator to complete and electronically submit a
deviation report to NOAA within 48 hours of deviating from the rule.
This reporting requirement would be burdensome and distracting during a
time when focus on safely navigating the vessel is most critical. Many
questions remain over the enforceability, potential criminality, and
due process for cases where there is disagreement in a deviation's
justification. These are not adequately addressed in the proposed rule
change.
Requiring the slower speeds of pilot boats will also lead to
additional delays in the movement of goods and increase port congestion
along the entire East Coast. East Coast pilot boarding areas can be as
far as 20 miles or more offshore. If implemented, the new speed rule
could double or even triple the amount of time it takes for a pilot
boat to reach a vessel. The economic impacts of these added delays and
the reduced efficiency on port operations were not factored into NOAA's
economic analysis.
It is highly unlikely that ships will wait at sea for weeks or
months for a berth and will seek alternative ports not impacted by this
rule, perhaps ports in South Florida, the Gulf Coast, or the West
Coast. These alternate gateways do not have the capacity to absorb 40%
to 50% of the affected ports' volumes and would quickly back up. In
short, the nation will again experience pandemic era supply chain
disruptions.
NOAA's economic impact assessment for the newly proposed rule does
not consider any additional negative impacts to ocean-going vessels
because they are already regulated under the existing rule. The changes
in deviation reporting and enforcement proposed under this rule,
however, greatly alter the enforcement and oversight of necessary
deviations, thereby greatly expanding the impacts on ocean-going
vessels.
The negative economic impact of this proposed rule equates to the
loss of up to an estimated 1,283 diverted cargo ships destined for
Georgia port facilities. Amongst the other cargoes, these diverted
ships would include up to 3.1 million TEUs, equating to an estimated
$3.8 Billion in revenue for Georgia businesses, 26,820 Georgia jobs,
$1.3 billion in personal income and $1.85 billion in GDP--far
surpassing the total negative economic impacts assumed by the 2022
Draft Regulatory Impact Review and Initial Regulatory Flexibility
Analysis of this proposed rule for the entire East Coast.
Normally, freight moves based upon connectivity and cost. NOAA's
proposed amendment, however, would require freight to move a greater
distance over land at a greater cost to the shipper. The resultant cost
increases would then be passed along to the consumer and cause
significant inflationary impacts to the American economy. This rerouted
cargo would also have an increased impact on the environment compared
to current operations.
The potential increases of greenhouse gas emissions from the
landside transportation of rerouted cargo are merely a fraction of what
the emission impacts of vessels anchored at sea, waiting for weeks for
a berth. As inbound vessels arrive and congestion sets in, cargo delays
will also continue to increase. In Savannah and Brunswick, maximum peak
days could see over 200 vessels per day waiting at anchorage. Over 1.8
million metric tons of GHG emissions may be emitted in Georgia alone as
a result of these vessels--3 times higher than the 2020 vessel
emissions totals for the Ports of Los Angeles and Long Beach combined.
The GPA requests that NOAA consult with appropriate federal
partners to assess the full scope of the safety, environmental and
economic impacts of their proposal. The United States Coast Guard is a
key partner of the maritime sector in protecting the safe and efficient
movement of cargo into and out of our nation's ports. The Environmental
Protection Agency can thoroughly assess the significant negative air
quality impacts that this rule amendment would generate. The
President's Supply Chain Disruptions Task Force can further consider
the administration's priorities regarding the massive economic
disruptions created by NOAA's proposition.
Once again, we would highly encourage NOAA to consider adjusting
their proposed rule to exclude Federal Navigation Channels as well as
the exemption of pilot vessels from these speed restriction zones. This
modest alteration removes less than 1% of the total area covered by
NOAA's proposed rule and would significantly reduce the negative safety
of life, environmental and economic disruptions described above. Thank
you in advance for your consideration of our request.

Sincerely,

Griff Lynch,
Executive Director

______

NATIONAL MARINE MANUFACTURER'S ASSOCIATION (NMMA)
Washington, DC

June 26, 2024

Hon. Cliff Bentz, Chairman
Hon. Jared Huffman, Ranking Member
House Committee on Natural Resources
Subcommittee on Water, Wildlife and Fisheries
1324 Longworth House Office Building
Washington, DC 20515

Dear Chairman Bentz and Ranking Member Huffman:

On behalf of the National Marine Manufacturer's Association
(``NMMA''), I write today to express our industry's strong support for
H.R. 8704, To require the Secretary of Commerce to establish a grant
program to foster enhanced coexistence between ocean users and North
Atlantic right whales and other large cetacean species, introduced by
Representatives Buddy Carter (R-GA) and Mary Peltola (D-AK). This bill
would prevent the finalization of the National Marine Fisheries
Service's (``NMFS'') proposed amendments to the North Atlantic right
whale (``NARW'') vessel speed regulations at 50 C.F.R. Part 224 (the
``Vessel Speed Rule'' or ``Rulemaking'') and would establish a grant
program to encourage development and deployment of emerging
technologies that would significantly reduce the threat of vessel
strikes to large cetaceans such as the North Atlantic right whale.
As you know, the final Vessel Speed Rule is currently under review
at the Office of Management and Budget (``OMB'').The purpose of this
letter is to reiterate certain technical and procedural shortcomings of
the Rulemaking, highlight information about technological solutions
that have emerged during the pendency of the Rulemaking, and to
underscore the benefit that the grant program established by H.R. 8704
would have on the continued recovery of the North Atlantic right whale.
As explained further below, the proposed Vessel Speed Rule failed
to consider currently available technology as a potential alternative
approach to reducing the risk of vessel strikes on the NARW. The NMMA
and other stakeholders raised this concern in comments on the proposed
Vessel Speed Rule and, since the close of the comment period, NMFS has
solicited and collected information on technological options. Yet, to
our knowledge, NMFS is not considering this information as part of its
Rulemaking process, even though the information would significantly
impact the agency's analysis of options to address risks from vessel
strike on the NARW. In fact, NOAA is obligated under the Administrative
Procedures Act to reopen the rulemaking process to consider new
information that significantly affects the Rulemaking. On May 15, 2024,
NMMA made a request to NMFS to reopen the docket for additional public
comment on technological options to achieve a performance-based vessel
strike reduction rule that can reduce whale strike risk without
significant safety, economic, and privacy consequences. This request
will be submitted in today's hearing record and is supplementary to the
public's responses to the August 1, 2022 Rulemaking, including comments
from NMMA that highlight the many technical and procedural flaws of the
proposal. In particular, the NMMA explained that NMFS had failed to
consider technology-based alternatives that would achieve the same (or
superior) results with regard to protecting the NARW, without the
drastic adverse economic and safety impacts.\1\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ See Comments of NMMA on the Vessel Speed Rule at 11-12,
available at https://www.regulations.gov/comment/NOAA-NMFS-2022-0022-
20629.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Since the close of the 2022 comment period, the NMMA and other
stakeholders have been actively involved in educating policymakers
within NMFS and the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration
(``NOAA'') regarding the benefits of leveraging marine technology
solutions to safeguard marine life and boater safety as an alternative
to NMFS's current approach. NMFS has welcomed this engagement and
hosted a NARW Vessel Strike Risk Reduction Technology Workshop on March
5-6, 2024 (the ``Technology Workshop'').\2\ In addition, the Whale and
Vessel Safety (``WAVS'') Task Force, a coalition of marine industry
stakeholders and experts in various disciplines, sent a white paper to
NMFS in advance of the Technology Workshop which set the stage to
discuss many available and developing technologies (``WAVS White
Paper'').\3\ The Technology Workshop made clear to all stakeholders
that NMFS is now well aware of the technologies currently available
that can be utilized alone or on a layered basis to reduce NARW vessel
strike risk.\4\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ See generally NOAA Fisheries, North Atlantic Right Whale Vessel
Strike Risk Reduction Technology Workshop, available at https://
web.cvent.com/event/7467a542-8d8d-4020-82d8-7cef9482a3d2/
websitePage:b2fe19ef-3416-4fa1-a7a6-1df5a28b9242. In addition to the
presentations and materials included on the Technology Workshop
website, all presentations and information developed and/or received in
connection with the Technology Workshop should be part of the docket
for, and considered as part of, the Rulemaking.
\3\ Letter from WAVS Taskforce to Mary Colligan, NOAA Fisheries,
dated October 30, 2023
\4\ For example, NMFS created a table to consolidate the categories
of various technologies that can be utilized to reduce the risk of NARW
strikes. See https://custom.cvent.com/8D2B15A58CD6472E897351F27F2DF309/
files/5cdb90075da041c894d0a21b32eed916.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Unfortunately, NMFS reverse engineered its Rulemaking process by
issuing a proposal without seeking or soliciting input from any
recreational boating or fishing interests or the marine industry at-
large. In fact, the Vessel Speed Rule is based on an archaic premise
that recreational boating, fishing, and marine industry are not
technology- or innovation-driven. The WAVS Task Force effort proves
otherwise and was developed based off a greater need to demonstrate
innovation leadership in this sector, especially as it relates to
advancing conservation and marine mammal management.
As discussed below, there are several technological alternatives
available today that, if deployed properly, would likely be more
effective at reducing NARW strike risk than expansive speed and routing
restrictions and avoid the severe negative impacts that would be caused
by the Vessel Speed Rule. NMFS is aware of these technological
solutions--it has actively solicited this information from
stakeholders. The agency cannot simply turn a blind eye to this
information as it undertakes this Rulemaking. Further, the agency is
well-suited to create a collaborative structure with all stakeholders,
including the marine industry, to implement technology solutions that
can successfully reduce risks of NARW vessel strikes. As contemplated
throughout the public comments submitted, recreational boating,
fishing, and marine industries support the protection of endangered
species but find serious fault with the data used to justify the
Rulemaking and the unrealistic approaches that would be required to
achieve compliance with the Vessel Speed Rule.
The Members of this Subcommittee, holding a significant
representation of the coastal districts that would be impacted by this
Rule, if it advances to a final stage as proposed, understand the
significant threat of this proposal. The recreational boating industry
is responsible for a $230 billion annual contribution to the United
States economy, and the outdoor recreation industry as a singular
entity contributes 2.2% of the country's annual gross domestic
product.\5\ There are jobs, livelihoods, homes, and communities at
stake if this Rule is allowed to continue forward toward finalization.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\ U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis. Outdoor Recreation Satellite
Account, U.S. and States, 2022. See https://www.bea.gov/news/2023/
outdoor-recreation-satellite-account-us-and-states-2022.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Technology holds significant advantages over other forms of risk
reduction tools such as speed reduction and re-routing. And because
collision avoidance (with any objects in the water, including marine
mammals) has been a priority for recreational boat and supply
manufacturers for decades, this technology is well-developed as the
private sector is incentivized to constantly improve and innovate. Each
of the technology alternatives discussed below--either alone or layered
together--provide a better alternative for reducing risks to NARW from
vessel strikes that NMFS must and should have considered as part of the
ongoing Rulemaking. These types of technologies are what can be become
immediately available for deployment with the funding provided by the
grant program that this bill establishes.

1.  Detection Technologies

A variety of detection technologies are readily available and
can be utilized, alone or in combination with other methods, to
reduce NARW strikes. These technologies include acoustic
detection, visual detection, satellite and drone imagery,
infrared cameras, forward-looking sonar, and heat signature
technology. These instruments generally can connect to the on-
board Multi-Function Display (``MFD'') to provide real-time
information regarding the boat's surroundings and thereby
reduce the risk of NARW strikes. One readily available example
already used for species protection is vessel-mounted
navigational radar that utilizes S and X band radar for vessel
avoidance and navigations. X-band radars are used for a sharper
image and better resolution, while S-band radar is used during
rain or fog and for identification.
Other countries recognize the importance of these technologies
to address NARW strikes. For example, the Tethys Research
Institute conducted a study in the Mediterranean Cetacean
Sanctuary (located along the Italian and French coast) that
analyzed how best to deal with threatened whale populations and
high levels of maritime traffic and nautical activities. Their
approach includes, among other things, drones and other
detection devices that notify vessels that they are likely to
encounter a cetacean on their route.\6\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\6\ As discussed in the WAVS White Paper, visual and infrared
images can be analyzed by artificial intelligence (``AI'') to detect
and classify objects in the water such as NARWs:

The benefit of AI is that it allows for immediate analysis of
information even in adverse conditions more effectively than can be
done by human observers, thereby allowing vessel operators to have
better situational awareness and to make better informed decisions for
the vessel and the whale. Whale Seeker, Space Whale, Awarion, Sea AI,
Sea Machines, and Avikus are but a few examples of companies that have
developed AI tools to scan images for the presence of whales. These
products are currently being trained with the intent of deployment for
field verification in the coming months.

2.  Automatic Identification System (``AIS'') and On-Board
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Electronics

As detailed at the recent Technology Workshop, AIS is already
in use by the Coast Guard for security and coastal management
purposes. This same technology is widely utilized among
recreational boaters as it is commercially available and
included on many new boats as standard equipment for safety
purposes. AIS technology is a viable alternative for
distributing real-time (or near real-time) monitoring
information to boaters regarding factors that are relevant to
NARW strike risk.

For example, utilizing existing technology, NOAA could issue an
acutely focused dynamic management area and a vessel's on-board
cartography would be updated in near real-time to reflect that
new zone.

``Dynamic regulatory polygons could be broadcast using AIS and
chartplotters on vessels of all sizes, and can be taught to
receive, display, and alarm based on those dynamic polygons.''
\7\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\7\ Id. at 5.

In addition, existing on-board technology allows users to share
their own data points in real time. Crowdsource infrastructure
and communities such as ActiveCaptain, Community, and Navionics
Community Edits allow a user's point-based data to be
distributed in real-time and loaded to a chartplotter through a
mobile application. As a result, NARW positions ``reported by
real-time monitoring programs and technology . . . can be
distributed to on-board marine electronics and displayed and
alarmed on screen in near real-time.'' \8\ Input of such data
would also enable NOAA and other research entities to augment
the volume of the agency's monitoring data.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\8\ Id.

---------------------------------------------------------------------------
3.  Technology for Aggregating & Disseminating Information

As boaters collect data through detection devices or other
instruments, technology exists to aggregate this information
and share it in near real-time with NOAA and other boaters. For
example, the WhaleReport Alert System (``WRAS'') aggregates
whale detection data from multiple sources and sends out
alerts. In fact, the U.S. Coast Guard recently launched a
Cetacean Desk in the Puget Sound region that utilizes WRAS to
aggregate data and disseminate notices to mariners.\9\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\9\ U.S. Coast Guard News, ``Press Release: U.S. Coast Guard
introduces cetacean desk, enhancing cetacean safety in Salish Sea,''
available at https://www.news.uscg.mil/Press-Releases/Article/3681963/
us-coast-guard-introducescetacean-desk-enhancing-cetacean-safety-in-
salish-sea.

The Coast Guard's pilot project is just one example of how
technology is being used to aggregate relevant information and
provide it to mariners to improve situational awareness. This
pilot program should serve as a national model to create
publicly accessible repositories of data points that can be
shared with the marine community in real time.
4.  Modeling/Predicting/Forecasting Whales

Data aggregation enables existing programs to create predictive
models that can be utilized for avoidance purposes. One example
is Risk Terrain Modeling (``RTM'') which is a tool used to
``diagnose environmental conditions that connect with spatial
patterns of whale-vessel strikes. RTM can help us identify and
prioritize the areas where these collisions are significantly
most likely to happen at the micro-level'' so that boaters can
take steps to prevent such strikes.\10\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\10\ WAVS White Paper at 5.

Similar predictive modeling was recently highlighted by Fathom
Science at a recent presentation to the bipartisan
Congressional Boating Caucus.\11\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\11\ WAVS Taskforce presentation to Congressional Boating Caucus
(April 11, 2024)

There is already work being done in this space to advance these
technology solutions. Adopting a similar model to the program that
would be authorized by H.R. 8704, the White House announced on May 22,
2024 that $6 million in Inflation Reduction Act (``IRA'') funding would
be made available to the National Fish and Wildlife Foundation
(``NFWF'') to support grants for projects that develop technologies
such as the approaches detailed above.\12\ Using this approach as a
pilot model, there will be critical evidence available to NMFS that the
recreational boating industry has the capability to advance and deploy
these new technologies.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\12\ National Fish and Wildlife Foundation Media Center, ``Press
Release: NFWF and NOAA announce Vessel Strike Avoidance Fund 2024
requests for proposals'', available at https://www.nfwf.org/media-
center/press-releases/nfwf-and-noaa-announce-vessel-strike-avoidance-
fund-2024-request.

This new grant program, entitled the ``Vessel Strike Avoidance
Fund'', has been established as ``a catalyst to foster promising
detection and communication technologies from development to
implementation.'' \13\ The funding of this program and the notice of
request for proposal in conjunction with NOAA demonstrates that there
is a understanding of the tangential benefit that deployment of
technology solutions can bring to the effort of NARW recovery. This
model, and the framework that would be established by H.R. 8704, will
bring the vision of these technologies to reality.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\13\ Id.

The approaches employed by H.R. 8704 are a steadfast way to ensure
that there is a real effort made to recover the depleted population of
NARWs present in the Nation's ocean access points, while protecting and
sustaining the way of life for mariners in communities up and down the
Eastern seaboard. The NMMA fully supports H.R. 8704, To require the
Secretary of Commerce to establish a grant program to foster enhanced
coexistence between ocean users and North Atlantic right whales and
other large cetacean species and urges a swift passage through the
House Committee on Natural Resources with bipartisan support. The NMMA
believes that all stakeholders with an interest in this rule should
fully embrace a modern, outcomes-oriented strategy to protect the NARW,
human lives, and our nation's economy--a strategy that embraces current
technology, quality data, and collaboration with public and private-
sector partners. This reasonable approach is far more likely to be
effective at reducing strike risk than the expansive, unenforceable,
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
and ill-conceived Vessel Speed Rule.

Sincerely,

Frank Hugelmeyer,
President and CEO

______

Marine Retailers Association of the Americas (MRAA)

and

Association of Marina Industries (AMI)

May 20, 2024

The Honorable Gina M. Raimondo
Secretary of Commerce
1401Constitution Ave NW
Washington, DC 20230

Re: Proposed Amendments to the North Atlantic Right Whale Vessel Strike
Reduction Rule (Docket ID No. NOAA-NMFS-2022-0022)

Dear Secretary Raimondo:

On behalf of the Marine Retailers Association of the Americas
(MRAA) and the Association of Marina Industries (AMI), we are writing
to request that the National Marine Fisheries Service (NMFS) withdraw
the rule and instead reopen the docket for additional public comment on
other means of mitigating the risk of vessel strikes. In particular,
technological options that can achieve a performance-based vessel
strike reduction rule that lower whale strike risk without the
extremely detrimental impact on boater safety and the coastal economy
that would be assured with the rule as proposed. We urge that the
current rule be reconsidered so more reasonable and more effective
protections for the North Atlantic Right Whale (NARW) can be crafted
with meaningful input and engagement from the impacted recreational
boating and fishing community.
The MRAA is the leading trade association of North American small
businesses that sell and service new and pre-owned recreational boats
and operate marinas, boatyards, and accessory stores. MRAA represents
more than 1,300 individual member retail locations and conducts
advocacy efforts on their behalf.
The Association of Marina Industries represents a diverse
membership of over 1000 marinas, boatyards, marine dealers, yacht
clubs, and public/private moorage basins across the United States and
around the world. These companies provide slip space for over 240,000
recreational watercraft and employ over 13,000 marine tradesmen and
women. Over 1 million boaters access the water through AMI member
marinas. AMI marina association member companies range from small
family-owned and -operated companies to large corporations. In addition
to facility operators and equipment manufacturers, membership
represents academic and government agency interests, consultants,
insurance and engineering firms, and many marine trade associations.
Our associations are adamantly opposed to the rule as drafted. The
rule as drafted does not represent a proven means of protecting the
critically endangered North Atlantic Right Whale (NARW) and NMFS has
consistently failed to take the consequences of this proposed rule into
consideration during the rulemaking process. Nor has NMFS considered
technology-based alternatives that may provide better protection for
the NARW while minimizing the impact on boater safety and the coastal
economy. Most critical for the membership of our associations, many of
which are defined as ``Small Businesses'' according to the definitions
set forth by the U.S. Small Businesses Administration, has been the
severe underestimation of the economic impact of the proposed rule.
NMFS's estimate that this rule would result in an economic impact of
only $46 million per year \1\ based solely on NMFS's estimate of the
number of ``delayed transit hours'' for impacted vessels \2\ is an
estimate of only a single and likely smallest facet of the vast
economic impact of the proposed rule. Numerous comments on the proposed
rule, including our own, made this underestimation abundantly clear to
the agency, however we have seen little effort to grapple with the true
impact of the proposed rule that will absolutely exceed an annual
impact of $100 million many times over. Lastly, the deficiency of the
IRFA is echoed by the United States Small Business Administration
office of Advocacy, who urged ``NMFS to consider all potential impacts
to small businesses from the proposed rule, and to update its IRFA to
better account for these small business impacts.'' \3\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ https://www.regulations.gov/document/NOAA-NMFS-2022-0022-0005
\2\ https://www.regulations.gov/document/NOAA-NMFS-2022-0022-0001
\3\ https://advocacy.sba.gov/wp-content/uploads/2022/11/Advocacy-
Vessel-Strike-Rule-Comment-Letter-2022.pdf
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
To be clear, given the safety impact of the proposed 10 knot speed
restriction, many recreational boaters, as well as commercial charter
captains, will not put the safety of their vessel, themselves or their
passengers at risk and will simply chose not to make the voyage at all.
From the perspective of our members who sell, service, and store these
impacted vessels, this proposed rule will have the real-world impact of
a seasonal closure of the designated areas, making their products and
services effectively useless for significant portions of the year.
Furthermore, aside from the many potential safety considerations and
concerns of traveling at only 10kts, the imposed 10kt speed limit will
also make a majority of offshore and long-distance trips simply
untenable due to the increased cost and time it will take to transit
operating only at 10kts. For example, Charter Captain Freddy Gamboa,
Owner, and Operator of Andreas' Toy Charters, an offshore fishing
charter located in Point Pleasant New Jersey highlighted in his June
6th, 2023, testimony to the House Natural Resources Committee,
Subcommittee on Water, Wildlife, and Fisheries, that ``in a typical
offshore charter, my primary objective is to cover a substantial
distance . . . [and] the imposition of a 10kts vessel speed limit would
render these trips impossible to conduct.'' \4\ Not only does this
apply to charter captains, but will indeed the ability of recreational
boaters as well, ultimately having negative impacts on MRAA and AMI
members as well as the broader coastal economy. To clarify what impact
our members are expecting to face if the rule is finalized as proposed,
we surveyed 65 of our members, both marine dealers and brokers, to
craft an estimated impact on their businesses.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\ https://republicans-naturalresources.house.gov/UploadedFiles/
Testimony_Gamboa.pdf
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
For background and to put our survey results and estimates in
context, we are including statistics on the overall impact of the
recreational marine industry on the American economy from the National
Marine Manufacturers Association's 2023 Economic Impact Study.\5\ The
study indicates an overall annual economic impact for the recreational
marine industry of $230.3 billion based on direct, indirect and induced
spending, $56.7 billion in annual sales of boats, marine products and
services. All of which supports over 800,000 jobs and more than 36,000
businesses of which, more than 90% are small businesses.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\ www.nmma.org/advocacy/economic-impact/recreational-boating
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
With this in mind, our survey results indicate that the average
dealer or broker typically sells just over 12 boats between 35 and 65
feet annually with the total amongst respondents representing 739 total
sales per year. The average revenue generated from sales of boats in
this size category is $3.7 million per year per dealer or broker with
the total reported annual revenue being $224,275,000. We then asked
respondents to estimate the number of sales they expect to lose if the
proposed rule is finalized as proposed as well as the corresponding
loss in revenue from those sales. Our respondents indicated an
estimated average loss in revenue of $3 million per business per year
and a total loss of sales revenue of more than $153.2 million.
In addition to the sale of a boat, many of our members support
their businesses by servicing, provisioning, and providing dock space
for boats between 35 and 65 feet, and.65 feet and above. Survey
respondents were asked to estimate their lost revenue if the proposed
rule is finalized as proposed and on average, they estimated a loss of
$1.1 million per year with a total loss of non-sales related revenue of
$15 million. The total lost sales revenue and lost revenue on service,
dock space, and provisioning together are estimated by respondents to
be worth more than $168.3 million per year.
This impact is only from a sample of 65 MRAA and AMI members, we
note that there are 496 marine dealers and brokers on the Atlantic
coast who face the same impact of the proposed rule. In order to
capture the entire impact of the proposed rule for marine dealers and
brokers on the Atlantic coast, we have used our survey results to
extrapolate the full impact of the rule on these nearly 500 businesses
on the Atlantic coast. Based on an estimated average loss of sales
revenue of $303,484 per boat per year in the 35-to-65-foot category and
an estimated average loss of 10.1 boat sales per year, the estimated
impact of the proposed rule on these 496 businesses is over $1.5
billion in lost sales revenue with an additional estimated loss in non-
sales revenue of more than $566 million for a full estimate of the
impact of the proposed rule of over $2 billion per year.
While these are estimates of the survey respondents, we later
followed up with respondents to ask for current inventories of boats in
the 35-to-65-foot category and those who responded to this follow up
indicated that on average dealers and brokers currently have 18.7 units
in stock worth an average of over $11 million. A table of our results
is included below.

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

In addition to our survey, we utilized data available through
Marinas.com to estimate the impact on marinas and boatyards. There are
over 4500 marinas along the East Coast, of which 1230 provide dockage
rental for vessels in the size range. This accounts for 2.6 million
available marina dock space rental nights per year. Like hotels, you
can think of renting marina dock spaces as booking a hotel room per
night. These ``room nights'' are rented primarily by vessels traveling
along the coast. Restrictions on the ability to navigate, like a 10-
knot speed restriction, would impact the total number of bookings and
rentals. The total revenue of this activity is roughly $169 million,
accounting for a total economic impact of approximately $600 million,
according to AMI's Economic Impact Calculator (developed by the
University of Florida). Even a small decrease in the total annual
bookings for these larger marinas would result in close to the $46
million per year total estimate by NMFS.

We will note that our estimates presented here are only for those
businesses that sell, service, store, and provide dock space for the
impacted class of vessels. This does not consider the impact on those
businesses that manufacture the vessels or the businesses that
manufacture and sell accessories, fishing equipment, and other related
goods, many of which are located far from the Atlantic coast, spreading
the impact far inland. Nor does it take into consideration the further
economic impact on the coastal communities that rely on recreational
boating to support their economies through accommodations, restaurants,
and other businesses that rely on recreational boaters for tourism
dollars.
Clearly, the economic impact of this proposed rule is orders of
magnitude more than NMFS has estimated and will have devastating
consequences for businesses across the United States. The vast
underestimation of the economic impact of the proposed rule should be
enough on its own to reconsider the rule, yet the proposed rule's
negative impact on boating safety as well as the availability of
technology-based alternatives makes a clear case for withdrawing the
rule and reopening the docket for additional public comment to address
alternatives that are free of the devastating impacts of the rule as
proposed. We urge that the current rule be reconsidered so more
reasonable and more effective protections for the North Atlantic Right
Whale can be crafted with more meaningful and substantive input from
the impacted recreational boating and fishing community.
Thank you for the opportunity to provide input on this important
process. We would be happy to discuss this issue with the agency or
provide additional information upon request.

Sincerely,

Michael Sayre,                Eric Kretsch,
Director of Government
Relations                     Legislative and Clean Marina
Program Manager
Marine Retailers
Association of the Americas   Association of Marina Industries

______

Mr. Bentz. And without objection, the Subcommittee stands
adjourned.

[Whereupon, at 1:01 p.m., the Subcommittee was adjourned.]

[ADDITIONAL MATERIALS SUBMITTED FOR THE RECORD]

Submissions for the Record by Rep. Bentz

VIKING MARINE GROUP
New Gretna, NJ

July 2, 2024

Hon. Cliff Bentz, Chairman
House Committee on Natural Resources
Subcommittee on Water, Wildlife and Fisheries
1324 Longworth House Office Building
Washington, DC 20515

Re: Comments on Legislative Hearing--June 27, 2024

Dear Chairman Bentz:

Please accept the following comments from the Viking Marine Group
regarding the legislative hearing in the Subcommittee on Water,
Wildlife, and Fisheries held on June 27, 2024. The hearing included
discussions on several important pieces of legislation, with our focus
on H.R. 8704.
We appreciate the opportunity to provide comments on this important
topic. As articulated by all the witnesses during the hearing, there is
a strong commitment to supporting the recovery of the endangered North
Atlantic Right Whale (NARW). Collaboration with the marine industry and
leveraging private sector innovation is expected to provide the
greatest opportunities for the species to recover.
Our comments relative to the legislative hearing are threefold:
first, to correct inaccurate statements regarding the lack of
technology that can detect NARWs to provide examples of risk reduction
tools currently in use, and to raise awareness of risk reduction tools
that were omitted from the hearing discussion.
Inaccurate Statements

It appears that the NOAA representative and the minority witness
failed to consider current literature on the topic of technology that
can mitigate the risk of vessel strikes to NARWs and other whale
species. A casual literature review indicates that there is ample
technology available today and installed on boats that can detect
objects in the water, including NARWs and other marine mammals. It is
critical to recognize that any technology that can detect objects in
the water improves situational awareness and allows the operator to
take necessary action to avoid a collision. Thus, having systems and
equipment on a boat that detects objects in the water also provides a
measurable reduction in the likelihood of hitting a NARW.
During the hearing, Dr. Evan Howell stated, ``However, as it
stands, there is no proven technology that can be adopted rapidly
enough to reduce lethal vessel strikes of North Atlantic right
whales.'' Not only is this statement incorrect but stokes a sense of
concern noting that the Director of the Science and Technology in the
federal agency charged with managing the NARW as not abreast of all
ways of reducing risk. It has been recognized that technology is
expected to play a role in preventing vessel strikes. As stated above,
we urge Dr. Howell to investigate the array of equipment that is
commonly installed on boats 35 feet and larger that can detect objects
in the water, including NARWs.
When asked about technology currently available and employed that
can save right whales Dr. Jessica Redfern stated, ``The technology is
not yet ready or available.'' This statement was also inconsistent with
scientific literature.
It is important to note that there is strong scientific evidence
supporting the existing and use of technologies to mitigate strike
risk. Recent research from researchers at the Woods Hole Oceanographic
Institution found, ``We also conclude that surface-based whale
detection may be very effective for whale-strike mitigation, and a
large-scale deployment on suitable vessels in high-risk areas could
effectively reduce whale strikes.'' \1\ This highlights the
effectiveness of surface-based detection systems, many of which are
already in use and installed on a broad range of vessels.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Baille, L.M.R. and Daniel P. Zitter Bart, Effectiveness of
surface-based detection methods for vessel strike mitigation of North
Atlantic right whales. Endangered Species Research Vol. 49: 57-69, 2022
Effectiveness of surface-based detection methods for vessel strike
mitigation of North Atlantic whales (int-res.com)
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Another 2024 peer-reviewed paper found that computer vision systems
are viable for widespread vessel-based application and at various near-
shore locations with high risks of physical disturbance to threatened
and endangered whales: ``Due to the relatively low acquisition cost
(
FLIR M364C-364C LR: Capable of detecting a 30-foot vessel
up to 3,700 meters and a human-sized target up to 1,030
meters.

Sionyx Nightwave: Capable of detecting a man-sized object
at 150m and a marine vessel-sized target at 450 meters.

Sentry Camera by SEA.AI: Capable of detecting a buoy at
700 meters and a dingy at 3000 meters.

AI-Ris Computer Vision Sensor by Sea Machines Robotics:
Provides advanced detection and classification capabilities
for small objects out 500 meters.

Noting that NARW and other whale species spend time both at the
surface and at depth, it is critical to recognize that there is below-
surface detection technology available that is also in use today. Below
are a few products that can detect objects far smaller than a NARW in
the water.

Argos 350 by FarSounder: 3D forward-looking sonar
providing real-time images of the seabed and objects in the
water column up to 35 meters ahead of the vessel.

Wavefront Systems: The system will detect moderate-sized
icebergs, submerged transport containers and whales across
the whole 1,500 meter range.

For reference, an average size NARW is 52 feet long and weighs
roughly 120,000 pounds.

A more mundane technology but one that is extensively in use by
both commercial vessel and pleasure craft fleets is marine radar.
Marine radar is an accepted and proven technology to improve
navigational safety and detect large marine mammals. Radar has been
used in biological research to monitor wildlife, such as detecting and
tracking fin whales and smaller mammals up to 5.5km or more at lower
sea states.\2\ This demonstrates radar's is a fully capability and
available tool widely employed by all manner and sized vessels for
detecting marine mammals. This also counters the statements of some
witnesses that technology is not available to detect NARWs.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ DeProspo, Douglas F., J, Mobley, W. Hom, and M. Carron ``Radar-
Based Detection, Tracking and Speciation of Marine Mammals from
Ships,'' Award Number: N00014-04-1-0729 2005.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Omission of SAT Tagging as a Risk Reduction Tool

The hearing witnesses failed to include any discussion the use of
Satellite Tagging (SAT), a proven tool to track NARWs and mitigate
strike risk. SAT tagging provides real-time positional information on
tagged individuals, allowing vessels to avoid whales on an extremely
fine scale when integrated into marine electronics. The Australian and
New Zealand government have had great success deploying SAT tags on
Southern Atlantic right whales, with some tags staying on for upwards
of a year and a half with no detrimental impacts to the individuals.\3\
In addition, a SAT tagging program carried out by the conservation
community in the South Atlantic is able to track Southern Right Whales
as they move across shipping lanes and oil/gas fields during their
annual migration.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ Tag retention, wound healing, and subsequent reproductive
history of southern right whale following satellite‐ (up.ac.za)
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
It was announced in 2023 that NOAA allocated $3.5 million from the
Inflation Reduction Act to deploy satellite tags on NARWs,
demonstrating its efficacy as a proven method used in southern right
whale management. Yet, no tags have been deployed as far as we have
been made aware. Satellite tagging can provide real-time tracks of
whale movements, offering a highly effective tool in reducing risk. In
simplest terms, if vessel operators know where NARWS are real time,
they will avoid them. Noting the urgency expressed by the witnesses in
taking action to reduce risk, it is unfortunate that this highly
effective technology tool is not being utilized.
Conclusion

The long-term conservation strategy for the NARW and its subsequent
management plan need to be firmly planted in a science and solutions-
based approach. There is no place for driven agendas given the
seriousness of the conservation challenge at hand with NARW. Any
successful approach includes acknowledgment that meaningful
conservation will only be achieved with through a multi-pronged
approach that considers all tools to reduce risk of vessel strikes.
Technology, in various forms and as supported by the facts, can and
must play a role in those efforts. Technology will have varying degrees
of effectiveness depending on a multitude of factors, including factors
attributed to the vessel. Again, referring to the scientific
literature, it has been found that ``when vessels have a high
maneuverability and the ability to change velocity quickly (e.g.
certain fishing vessels and ferries), vessel-based detection systems
would be very effective,'' \4\ The science clearly supports the
adoption of a comprehensive and nuanced approach that matches risk
reduction measures to the risk profile of the vessel. This type of
approach is expected to meet the conservation needs of the resource and
balance the operation needs of the industry.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\ Baille, L.M.R. and Daniel P. Zitter Bart, Effectiveness of
surface-based detection methods for vessel strike mitigation of North
Atlantic right whales. Endangered Species Research Vol. 49: 57-69, 2022
Effectiveness of surface-based detection methods for vessel strike
mitigation of North Atlantic whales (int-res.com)
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
As noted during the hearing, a minimum of a 20% reduction of risk
is likely to be achieved through a vessel speed rule. We believe that
level of reduction can be achieved through other approaches. We hope
members of the Subcommittee and NOAA understand that it is not expected
that this level of risk reduction shall be achieved through a single
piece of equipment or system but through a multimodal approach that
utilizes all technology. Recognizing that not all vessels possess a
suite of instruments that can achieve the desired level of reduction of
risk, basic communication systems allow detection information to be
share with other vessels when geographically relevant.
It is vital to acknowledge that there are multiple tools available
today to reduce the risk of vessel strikes to NARWs. A recent paper
authored by NOAA scientist, states that ``Consideration should be given
to multiple data sources, models, perspectives, sources of expertise,
and possible solutions, rather than to a single model output or
approach to mitigation.'' \5\ We urge NOAA to recognize the role of
these technologies alongside vessel speed regulations in mitigating
risk. Moreover, we hope HR8704 advances in the House of
Representatives, enabling the necessary resources to support the
private sector in carrying out the evaluation and implementation of
these tools.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\ Roberts et al. North Atlantic right whale density model, Marine
Ecology Progressive Series, Vol. 732: 167-192, 2024
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Dr. Evan Howell stated that NOAA remains fully committed to
minimizing the regulatory burden on ocean users by investing in and
adopting technology-based solutions. We hope that commitment includes
acknowledging the technology available today that allows boats to
detect whales while underway and take action to reduce the risk of
vessel strikes.
We are eager to work with the Subcommittee members, NOAA, and other
partners to advance the important work of quantifying risk reduction
that is taking place today. We also hope that HR8704 is advanced in the
House of Representatives so the necessary resources can be distributed
to the sector most capable of evaluating existing tools and bringing
new risk reduction tools to market.

Sincerely,

John DePersenaire
Director of Government Affairs and Sustainability

______

Submissions for the Record by Rep. Huffman

June 27, 2024

Hon. Cliff Bentz, Chairman
Hon. Jared Huffman, Ranking Member
House Committee on Natural Resources
Subcommittee on Water, Wildlife and Fisheries
1324 Longworth House Office Building
Washington, DC 20515

Re: Legislative Hearing on H.R. 8704 (Rep. Carter of GA), ``To require
the Secretary of Commerce to establish a grant program to
foster enhanced coexistence between ocean users and North
Atlantic right whales and other large cetacean species and
other bills''

Dear Members of the Subcommittee on Water, Wildlife, and Fisheries:

We write to you with serious concerns about H.R. 8704 and the
impact it would have on North Atlantic right whales by blocking agency
action on vessel speed rules for multiple years. Ship strikes and
fishing gear entanglement are the two leading causes for the ongoing
rapid collapse of the North Atlantic right whale population.\1\ Over
the past eight years, a documented 23 North Atlantic right whales have
fallen victim to ship strikes that led either to death, serious
injuries, or sublethal injuries; these strikes occurred in both U.S.
and Canadian waters and were caused by boats of all sizes.\2\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Amendments to the North Atlantic Right Whale Vessel Strike
Reduction Rule, 87 Fed. Reg. 46,921 at 46928 (August 1,2022); S.M.
Sharp et al., Gross and Histopathologic Diagnoses From North Atlantic
Right Whale Eubalaena glacialis Mortalities Between 2003 and 2018, 135
Diseases of Aquatic Organisms 1, at 1. 16 U.S.C. Sec. 1531(c)(1); 16
U.S.C. Sec. 1361(6)
\2\ 2017-2024 North Atlantic Right Whale Unusual Mortality Event,
Detailed Tables on Mortality, Serious Injury and Morbidity Cases
available at https://www.fisheries.noaa.gov/s3/2024-05/North-Atlantic-
Right-Whale-Causes-of-Death-for-Confirmed-Carcasses-SI-and-Morbidity-
Tables-Combined-02May2024-1-.pdf (Last accessed June 27, 2024).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
With respect to H.R. 8704, this bill would stop the National
Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) from being able to amend,
modify, update, or replace the current vessel speed rule regardless of
the best available science and harm caused to the species. This bill
would undermine the federal rulemaking process as well as the
scientific basis on which the agency operates. Further, this bill would
keep the agency from complying with species-saving statutes like the
Marine Mammal Protection Act (MMPA) and the Endangered Species Act
(ESA), among other relevant authorities. Additionally, the grant
program this bill would create already exists and was passed into law
at the end of the 117th congress. Creating a separate fund would be
both redundant and potentially harmful for previously enacted
legislation, including section 201 of division JJ of the Consolidated
Appropriations Act 2023 (16 U.S.C. 1393) and section 11303 of the James
M. Inhofe National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2023 (16
U.S.C. 1391). We oppose H.R. 8704 for these reasons and encourage you
to do the same.
The below provides background on NOAA's proposed rule and
emphasizes the dire threat ship strikes pose to North Atlantic right
whales. The 2022 proposed rule is based on the best available science
and evidence, as well as the agency's Congressionally-mandated
authority to protect species under its jurisdiction from injury, death,
and potentially extinction. When finalized, the rule will give this
species a fighting chance for survival.
The species has been in decline for over a decade, with only about
356 individual right whales remaining today.\3\ Collisions with vessels
are one of the two leading causes of injury and death for right whales.
Because they do not have a dorsal fin, and they spend much of their
time at shallow depths, right whales (especially mothers and calves)
are particularly susceptible to collisions with vessels. And the true
impact of ship strikes on right whales may be much higher, as
scientists estimate that observed deaths only represent around one
third of total right whale mortalities. With so few whales left, every
ship strike is detrimental to the potential recovery of this species.
In fact, NMFS has determined that less than one right whale can die
from anthropogenic causes per year for the species to reach its optimum
sustainable population.\4\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ With a slight stabilization, the overall North Atlantic right
whales' downward trend is still troubling as updated population numbers
released (October 23, 2023), New England Aquarium.
\4\ National Marine Fisheries Service (NMFS) 2024. Draft U.S.
Atlantic and Gulf of Mexico Marine Mammal Stock Assessment, available
at https://www.federalregister.gov/documents/2024/01/29/2024-01653/
draft-2023-marine-mammal-stock-assessment-reports#::text=updated%
20abundance%20estimates.-
,North%20Atlantic%20Right%20Whale%2C%20Western%20North
%20Atlantic,individuals%20as%20of%20December%202021 (Last accessed June
27, 2024).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Slowing vessels down in key areas and times is currently the most
effective management tool for reducing ship strikes. At high speeds,
vessels cannot safely maneuver to avoid right whales, leaving
insufficient time for vessel operators and whales to avoid a collision.
Should a collision occur, studies have found that slowing vessel speeds
to 10 knots reduces their risk of death from ship strikes by 80% to
90%. NMFS recognizes that mariner safety is extremely important and has
included safety deviation provisions since the initial rule in 2008.
Overall, the proposed regulatory changes continue to emphasize mariner
safety as well as preventing right whale injury and mortality.
It is absolutely vital to slow down vessels when mothers and calves
are nursing in the Southeast and migrating through the Mid-Atlantic
during calving season, and when the whales are aggregating in New
England during the foraging season. And many of these seasonal slow
zones fall outside of the heart of boating and recreational fishing
seasons.
In January of this year, a calf experienced severe propeller cuts
to the head and mouth after a ship strike, eventually succumbing to a
slow, painful death two months later. The vessel in question was
determined to likely be between 35-57 feet in length and thus not
subject to the current speed limits. In February 2021, another right
whale calf died from propeller wounds, broken ribs, and a fractured
skull, and the mother was seriously injured, after a collision with a
54-foot recreational fishing vessel. Although these captains were not
operating illegally, these collisions caused the tragic loss of a
mother and calf, which are vital to the future of the population.
Further, the 2021 collision resulted in the sinking of the $1.2 million
vessel, endangering all passengers on board.
Saving this species from extinction will take a collective effort
from the fishing, boating, and shipping industries to effectively
reduce the risk of deadly collisions. The federal government has an
obligation to protect these whales from this clear threat by
implementing stronger regulations and enforcement procedures. H.R. 8704
would hamstring the federal government's ability and responsibility to
protect the North Atlantic right whale and we ask you to oppose this
latest attempt to gut bedrock environmental laws.

Sincerely,

Animal Legal Defense Fund     NRDC (Natural Resources Defense
Council)

Animal Welfare Institute
(AWI)                         NY4WHALES

Center for Biological
Diversity                     Ocean Conservancy

Cetacean Society
International                 Ocean Conservation Research

Conservation Law Foundation   Ocean Defense Initiative

Defenders of Wildlife         Oceana

Earthjustice                  One Hundred Miles

Endangered Habitats League    Predator Defense

Endangered Species
Coalition                     Resource Renewal Institute

Environment America           Sanctuary Education Advisory
Specialists SEAS
Environment Massachusetts     Save Animals Facing Extinction

Environmental Investigation
Agency (EIA)                  Save the Manatee Club

Georgia Interfaith Power
and Light                     Seattle Aquarium

Great Old Broads for
Wilderness                    Shedd Aquarium

Healthy Ocean Coalition       Sierra Club

International Fund for
Animal Welfare (IFAW)         Southern Environmental Law Center

International Marine Mammal
Project of Earth Island
Institute                     The Maritime Aquarium at Norwalk

Kettle Range Conservation
Group                         Whale and Dolphin Conservation

League of Conservation
Voters                        Wildlife Conservation Society

Mystic Aquarium               World Wildlife Fund

Nevada Wildlife Federation
Inc.                          Zoo New England: Franklin Park
Zoo & Stone Zoo

______

Submissions for the Record by Rep. Levin

PORT GAMBLE S'KLALLAM TRIBE

Kingston, WA

July 10, 2024

Hon. Bruce Westerman, Chair
Hon. Raul Grijalva, Ranking Member
Committee on Natural Resources
1324 Longworth House Office Building
Washington, DC 20515

Hon. Cliff Bentz, Chair
Hon. Jared Huffman, Ranking Member
Committee on Natural Resources
Subcommittee on Water, Wildlife and Fisheries
1332 Longworth House Office Building
Washington, DC 20515

Re: H.R. 6841, A bill to establish a Coastal and Estuarine Resilience
and Restoration Program

Dear Chair Westerman. Ranking Member Grijalva, Chair Bentz, and
Ranking Member Huffman:

On behalf of the Port Gamble S'Klallam Tribe, I am writing to
express our support for the bipartisan Resilient Coasts and Estuaries
Act, H.R. 6841. However, we ask that the bill be amended to include
Tribal governments in the list of governments that can participate in
the Coastal and Estuarine Resilience and Restoration Program. There has
been too little attention to the growing needs of our nation's coastal
tribal communities in recent years. This is particularly true for the
Pacific Northwest, where coastlines are eroding at an alarming rate,
and essential salmon and shellfish species are steeply declining. The
Resilient Coasts and Estuaries Act revitalizes key federal programs
that aim to combat these challenges. In recognition of the urgency of
coastal decline, we urge you to amend the bill to include Tribal
governments in the Coastal and Estuarine Resilience and Restoration
Program and pass the Resilient Coasts and Estuaries Act out of
Committee, and we ask that Congress approve this bill during the 118th
Congress.
The Port Gamble S'Klallam Tribe is a sovereign nation of over 1,342
citizens located on the tip of the Kitsap Peninsula of Puget Sound in
Northwest Washington State. In our language, ``S'Klallam'' means ``the
Strong People,'' and despite having been displaced from our ancestral
homelands and faced with challenges that threatened our way of life,
our Tribe has survived, and thrived, because of the strength,
determination, and wisdom of our ancestors. In 1855, our ancestors
negotiated the Treaty of Point No Point, which, among other things,
reserved our hunting, fishing, and gathering rights. We rely on those
Treaty rights to this day for subsistence, commerce, and the
continuation of our traditions and culture. Yet, in recent decades, we
have seen a sharp decline in important fish and shell fish species,
particularly our salmon, due to environmental impacts such as habitat
degradation, pollution, and shifting ecosystems. Our people feel these
impacts every day as they eat away at our Treaty rights. Even as we
seek to implement restoration plans, we are hampered by a lack of
available funding and inadequate partnerships from federal agencies.
This is entirely inconsistent with the United States' obligations under
the 1855 Treaty of Point No Point and its other trust and treaty
obligations to protect our lands and resources and provide for the
health and well-being of our citizens. Respect for Tribal sovereignty,
like respect for the rule of law itself, requires more than mere
acknowledgment. It requires federal agencies to act in accordance with
our right to make decisions affecting our lands, resources, and
citizens. This includes our responsibility to govern on issues
affecting our environmental health, safety, and wellness.
The Resilient Coasts and Estuaries Act is essential to bringing the
federal government more in line with its trust and treaty obligation to
our Tribe. It would revitalize and improve two programs that are
essential to protecting and promoting the environmental resiliency of
Puget Sound. First, this bill reauthorizes the Coastal and Estuarine
Land Conservation Program (CELCP), which has been without funding since
2017. CELCP provides funds to state, regional, and other units of
governments to protect coastal and estuarine areas of ecological and
historic value. Funding from this program is needed to support
essential conservation activities. Coastal restoration projects in Port
Gamble Bay, Quilcene Bay, and other coastal embayments throughout our
usual and accustomed area will provide important nearshore habitat for
salmon, Pacific herring, and other species. Life stages of salmon are
tied to the shallow estuaries and nearshore habitats for refuge from
predation, abundant food sources, and an osmoregulatory transition
during juvenile migration. Impairments from shoreline armoring, fill,
and overwater structures inhibit the growth of aquatic vegetation and
degrade nearshore habitats. Funding for projects like the Port Gamble
shoreline restoration and the Quilcene Bay restoration will go a long
way to improve coastal processes and restore nearshore habitat for
salmon, herring, and shellfish that are critical for Tribal subsistence
and commercial harvesting.
Second, the Resilient and Coastal Estuaries Act directs the
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Agency to designate five new National
Estuarine Research Reserves in the next five years. The National
Estuarine Research Reserve System is a network of thirty coastal sites
designated to protect and study estuarine systems in collaboration with
and service to surrounding communities, including Tribal communities.
Tribal Nations are the original conservationists and stewards of the
land but are often excluded from federal-state conservation
partnerships. This program includes Tribal Nations, and as such, PGST
would welcome its expansion as an opportunity to work with the state of
Washington to designate and protect local estuaries near our lands.

We urge you to amend the Resilient and Coastal Estuaries Act to
include Tribal governments in the Coastal and Estuarine Resilience and
Restoration Program and secure its enactment in this Congress.

H.R. 6814, the Resilient and Coastal Estuaries Act, is a good bill
that will provide many benefits as set forth above. This bill, however,
underscores the need for Congress to enact the Tribal Coastal
Resiliency legislation, which has been introduced in several
congressional sessions. This legislation (H.R. 3976), would allow the
Department of Commerce to award competitive grants to Tribal Nations to
achieve tribal coastal zone objectives, including protecting,
restoring, or preserving areas in the zone that hold important
ecological, cultural, or sacred significance. The bill would not only
ensure Tribal governments are directly included in Coastal Zone
Management Act programs, it would also honor tribal sovereignty and the
Federal-Tribal government-to-government relationship and the Federal
government's trust and treaty obligations. We look to you to uphold
Congress' trust and treaty obligations by furthering long-term
conservation efforts and fortifying our efforts to protect and preserve
our people, our homelands, and our traditions.

Sincerely,

Amber Caldera,
Chair

[all]
