- OVERSIGHT HEARING ON ASSESSING DOMESTIC OFFSHORE ENERGY RESERVES AND ENSURING U.S. ENERGY DOMINANCE

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

ASSESSING DOMESTIC OFFSHORE
ENERGY RESERVES AND
ENSURING U.S. ENERGY DOMINANCE

=======================================================================

OVERSIGHT HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND
MINERAL RESOURCES

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON NATURAL RESOURCES
U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

Wednesday, March 20, 2024

__________

Serial No. 118-104

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Natural Resources

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.govinfo.gov
or
Committee address: http://naturalresources.house.gov

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
55-271 PDF                  WASHINGTON : 2024

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

COMMITTEE ON NATURAL RESOURCES

BRUCE WESTERMAN, AR, Chairman
DOUG LAMBORN, CO, Vice Chairman
RAUL M. GRIJALVA, AZ, Ranking Member

Doug Lamborn, CO Grace F. Napolitano, CA
Robert J. Wittman, VA Gregorio Kilili Camacho Sablan,
Tom McClintock, CA     CNMI
Paul Gosar, AZ Jared Huffman, CA
Garret Graves, LA Ruben Gallego, AZ
Aumua Amata C. Radewagen, AS Joe Neguse, CO
Doug LaMalfa, CA Mike Levin, CA
Daniel Webster, FL Katie Porter, CA
Jenniffer Gonzalez-Colon, PR Teresa Leger Fernandez, NM
Russ Fulcher, ID Melanie A. Stansbury, NM
Pete Stauber, MN Mary Sattler Peltola, AK
John R. Curtis, UT Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez, NY
Tom Tiffany, WI Kevin Mullin, CA
Jerry Carl, AL Val T. Hoyle, OR
Matt Rosendale, MT Sydney Kamlager-Dove, CA
Lauren Boebert, CO Seth Magaziner, RI
Cliff Bentz, OR Nydia M. Velazquez, NY
Jen Kiggans, VA Ed Case, HI
Jim Moylan, GU Debbie Dingell, MI
Wesley P. Hunt, TX Susie Lee, NV
Mike Collins, GA
Anna Paulina Luna, FL
John Duarte, CA
Harriet M. Hageman, WY

Vivian Moeglein, Staff Director
Tom Connally, Chief Counsel
Lora Snyder, Democratic Staff Director
http://naturalresources.house.gov
------

SUBCOMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND MINERAL RESOURCES

PETE STAUBER, MN, Chairman
WESLEY P. HUNT, TX, Vice Chair
ALEXANDRIA OCASIO-CORTEZ, NY, Ranking Member

Doug Lamborn, CO                     Jared Huffman, CA
Robert J. Wittman, VA                Kevin Mullin, CA
Paul Gosar, AZ                       Sydney Kamlager-Dove, CA
Garret Graves, LA                    Seth Magaziner, RI
Daniel Webster, FL                   Nydia M. Velazquez, NY
Russ Fulcher, ID                     Debbie Dingell, MI
John R. Curtis, UT                   Raul M. Grijalva, AZ
Tom Tiffany, WI                      Grace F. Napolitano, CA
Matt Rosendale, MT                   Susie Lee, NV
Lauren Boebert, CO                   Vacancy
Wesley P. Hunt, TX                   Vacancy
Mike Collins, GA
John Duarte, CA
Bruce Westerman, AR, ex officio

---------
CONTENTS

----------
Page

Hearing held on Wednesday, March 20, 2024........................     1

Statement of Members:

Graves, Hon. Garret, a Representative in Congress from the
State of Louisiana.........................................     1
Huffman, Hon. Jared, a Representative in Congress from the
State of California........................................     3

Statement of Witnesses:

Cruickshank, Walter, Deputy Director, Bureau of Ocean Energy
Management, Washington, DC.................................     6
Prepared statement of....................................     8
Zaman, Amir, Partner and Commercial Director, Americas,
Rystad Energy, New York, New York..........................    10
Prepared statement of....................................    12
Milito, Erik, President, National Ocean Industries
Association, Washington, DC................................    28
Prepared statement of....................................    29
Dryer, Joe, President and CEO, Fairfield Geotechnologies,
Houston, Texas.............................................    37
Prepared statement of....................................    38
Questions submitted for the record.......................    46
Dix, Kendall, National Policy Director, Taproot Earth,
Charlottesville, Virginia..................................    47
Prepared statement of....................................    49

Additional Materials Submitted for the Record:

Submissions for the Record by Representative Tiffany

Majority Leader Scalise, Statement for the Record........    65

Submissions for the Record by Representative Huffman

Nature Article, ``Unextractable fossil fuels in a
1.5 deg.C world, September 2021........................     5

Submissions for the Record by Representative Grijalva

``Principles for a Just Transition in Offshore Wind
Energy''...............................................    74

2024 Policy Agenda, America the Beautiful for All
Coalition..............................................    78

OVERSIGHT HEARING ON ASSESSING DOMESTIC OFFSHORE ENERGY RESERVES
AND ENSURING U.S. ENERGY DOMINANCE

----------

Wednesday, March 20, 2024

U.S. House of Representatives

Subcommittee on Energy and Mineral Resources

Committee on Natural Resources

Washington, DC

----------

The Subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 2:22 p.m. in
Room 1334, Longworth House Office Building, Hon. Garret Graves
[Member of the Subcommittee] presiding.
Present: Representatives Graves, Tiffany, Rosendale,
Duarte; Huffman, Mullin, Magaziner, and Velazquez.
Also present: Representative Carl.

Mr. Graves. The Subcommittee on Energy and Mineral
Resources will come to order.
Without objection, the Chair is authorized to declare a
recess of the Subcommittee at any time.
Under Committee Rule 4(f), any oral opening statements at
the hearing are limited to the Chairman and Ranking Minority
Member.
I ask unanimous consent the gentleman from Alabama, Mr.
Carl, be allowed to participate in today's hearing.
Without objection, so ordered.
And I now recognize myself for an opening statement.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. GARRET GRAVES, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF LOUISIANA

Mr. Graves. Good afternoon. I appreciate all the witnesses
being here. We are going to be talking today about assessing
domestic offshore energy reserves and ensuring U.S. energy
dominance.
It is no secret that just a few years ago, the United
States was effectively energy independent and well on our path
toward energy dominance. We have seen a significant shift in
energy policy over the last few years that has eroded that
superiority, independence, and dominance, that has resulted in
giving additional ground to countries like Russia, Iran,
Venezuela, and others that don't share America's values.
Much of the shift that we have seen in energy policy under
this Administration has been under the auspices of actually
reducing emissions, efforts to advance climate change
initiatives to, as you have heard, promote this energy
transition, where the reality is that energy emissions under
the Biden administration have actually increased, whereas under
the previous administration they went down.
And I will say that again: Despite the efforts and the
description of what is happening, and the impetus, the
justification for changes in energy policy, we have seen
emissions go up under the Biden administration, whereas they
went down under the Trump administration.
Let's look at other criteria to determine if this
Administration's energy policies have been successful. When
President Biden took office, in my home state of Louisiana,
gasoline prices were $1.74 a gallon, $1.74. Being home this
weekend, I think $2.90 was the cheapest that I saw. And we are
all aware that right now gasoline prices are trending upward.
We have also seen utility prices rise. This is having the
biggest impact on those who can least afford it, to where
families are literally having to choose among things like
groceries, health care, utility costs, filling up their car,
and other what I would call false choices. This is a direct
result of flawed energy policies out of this Administration.
Another factor is energy security. Have these policies
promoted or advanced America's energy security? The answer is
no. We have carried out policies that have helped countries
like Russia, Iran, Venezuela, and to a different degree, China,
actually fill the void that is being created by U.S. energy
policy. Let me give a few examples.
I have gone back and looked at energy leasing for onshore
and offshore energy development in the United States. If you
compared what has been leased under the Biden administration,
for example, to the Reagan administration, you had 357 times,
357 times, the acreage for energy production leased under the
Ronald Reagan administration than you have had under the Biden
administration.
Let's take a look at perhaps other Democrat Members of
Congress. Even under the Jimmy Carter administration, you had
100 times more acres of lands and waters leased than you have
had under this Administration.
I would like to remind my friends, I don't think I have
ever heard anyone in my life say, ``Please bring back the Jimmy
Carter energy policy,'' ever. Yet, at this point that looks
much more attractive than what we are seeing right now.
I will say one of the best opportunities that we have in
the United States is the offshore. And I am very sensitive to
the United States trying to continue a downward trend in
emissions. And the reality is that our energy production in the
United States is, on average, about 23 percent more efficient,
or said another way, less carbon intensive, than the
international average. In fact, offshore, what we are going to
be discussing today, is one of the least carbon-intense sources
of oil and gas in the world.
Now, if we simply take data like, for example, the Energy
Information Agency's data showing that oil and gas demand
globally is going to be increasing, increasing over the next
few decades, it is baffling to me, baffling to me why we would
actually stop or shut down energy sources that are the most
efficient in the world, or some of the most efficient in the
world. It simply is nonsensical.
Another policy out of this Administration was the LNG, what
they are referring to as a pause. Just to put things in
perspective, if we had simply taken one year, one year of
Russian gas that was being supplied to the European Union and
replaced it, supplanted it with LNG, with liquefied natural gas
coming out of the United States, it would have reduced
emissions globally to the tune of 218 million tons. That is for
one year of supplanting Vladimir Putin's gas with American LNG.
And that number blows away anything that my good friend from
California and others have proposed in regard to emissions
reduction, but it is just one example.
I look forward to hearing from our witnesses today to where
we can learn more about opportunities that are before us to
truly unleash America's energy economy, energy opportunities,
while continuing to improve energy security, affordability, as
well as reducing emissions.
With that, I yield back, and I recognize my friend from
California, Mr. Huffman, for an opening statement.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. JARED HUFFMAN, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA

Mr. Huffman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I am going to be
pinch hitting for Ranking Member Ocasio-Cortez today.
And it is always interesting to hear my friend from
Louisiana take us through the looking glass of the fossil fuel
industry, where things like liquefied natural gas exports that
we now know, the more we look, are huge net emitters, they are
part of the climate crisis in a big way, but they are described
as emission reduction strategies. So, it is always an
adventure, a factual adventure, at least, when we talk about
these things here in the Committee.
Now, we are going to be talking about offshore oil and gas
in this hearing. I guess it is about the sixth time in this
Congress that we have had this conversation. Meanwhile, right
now on the House Floor, Republicans are holding so-called
Energy Week, rehashing their tired polluters-over-people agenda
once again, instead of taking on the urgent problems facing our
nation like transparently funding our government. That stuff is
really hard for Team Extreme, so we do the performative
cheerleading for the fossil fuel industry.
The clock is ticking on another Republican-created crisis,
but the priority is to check more bills off Big Oil's wish
list. So, here we are, this hearing.
Long-term planning for our energy security is important,
but fossil fuels are not and cannot be the only solution. As
many of us have said over and over again, when we talk about
energy security we need to clarify: security for who?
The focus needs to be on our most vulnerable communities,
not Big Oil's profits. And they are rolling in profits, and the
world is awash in their fossil fuel right now. What is best for
the fossil fuel industry is not what is best for Americans.
U.S. oil and gas production and profits are at an all-time
high, but communities are facing high prices at the pump,
skyrocketing utility bills, constant climate disasters. It is
clear that Big Oil's so-called dominance isn't so good for
regular folks out there in America. Coastal communities closest
to where this oil is extracted are overburdened with pollution,
erosion from pipelines, processing, and other industrial
facilities.
The oil and gas workforce is facing an increasingly
volatile job market. The industry is laying off more and more
workers, having learned how to do more with fewer people,
making the remaining jobs more and more dangerous.
While Big Oil plans to drill for decades to come, it is
only planning for its own profits. A new report by the non-
partisan government watchdog, the GAO, found that the industry
is shirking important but expensive decommissioning
responsibilities at the end of its offshore operations, and
instead of cleaning up and taking down their infrastructure
when they are done using it, as they are required to do, they
have left over 2,700 wells and 500 platforms to corrode in the
Gulf past their decommissioning deadlines.
And Mr. Graves and I will have a conversation about rigs to
reefs. I believe there may be some situations where that makes
some sense. I don't want to be too categorical about it, but to
give a complete pass and liability relief and everything else
to the fossil fuel industry is just another huge giveaway to
folks who don't need it.
So, when Big Oil walks away from its responsibilities,
American taxpayers could be left holding the ballooning of the
debt and the ballooning billion-dollar bill. The GAO found that
the Department of the Interior only holds about $3.5 billion in
supplemental bonds for offshore oil and gas infrastructure, but
the total estimated costs are 10 to 20 times that, up to $70
billion. This is an unacceptable liability.
So, today's focus on oil and gas resource assessment and
energy security, air quotes around that, doesn't address any of
the costs the public pays so that Big Oil can continue to
profit from the increasing frequency of billion-dollar climate
disasters to the $70 billion in decommissioning liabilities
waiting to be cleaned up off the ocean floor.
Democrats support using the best available science to guide
our policies. I would like to enter for the record that the
best available science says that we need to leave most oil and
gas reserves in the ground to keep global warming below 1.5
degrees Celsius, and to contain the worst of the climate
crisis. With unanimous consent, I would like to ask that this
Nature magazine paper be entered into the record.
Mr. Rosendale [presiding]. Without objection.
Mr. Huffman. Thank you.

[The information follows:]
Submission for the Record by Rep. Huffman

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

*****

The full document is available for viewing at:

https://docs.house.gov/meetings/II/II06/20240320/116958/HHRG-
118-II06-20240320-SD007.pdf

------

Mr. Huffman. If we are going to discuss domestic offshore
energy reserves, we should also be talking about one of our
largest, most untapped energy sources: offshore wind. This has
a technical potential of roughly double the country's current
electric generating capacity, and could provide 90 percent of
our nation's electricity needs by 2050. But it is not on the
agenda today.
Offshore wind promises true energy security, reliable, low-
cost, clean energy delivered to American homes, not shipped
abroad to pat executives' pockets. It is time that we pursue an
energy future that puts people over polluters.
With that, I yield back, Mr. Chairman.

Mr. Rosendale. Thank you, Ranking Member, for your
statement. We will now introduce our panel of witnesses.
Let me remind the witnesses that under Committee Rules,
they must limit their oral statements to 5 minutes, but their
entire statement will appear in the hearing record.
To begin your testimony, please press the ``talk'' button
on your microphone.
We will use timing lights. When you begin, the light will
turn green. When you have 1 minute remaining, the light will
turn yellow. And at the end of 5 minutes, the light will turn
red, and I will ask you to please complete your statement.
I will also allow all witnesses to testify before Member
questioning begins.
Our first witness is Dr. Walter Cruickshank, and he is the
Deputy Director for the Bureau of Ocean Energy Management in
the Department of the Interior, and is stationed here in
Washington, DC.
Dr. Cruickshank, you are now recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF WALTER CRUICKSHANK, DEPUTY DIRECTOR, BUREAU OF
OCEAN ENERGY MANAGEMENT, WASHINGTON, DC

Dr. Cruickshank. Thank you, Mr. Chairman and Representative
Huffman. I am pleased to appear before you today to discuss the
Bureau of Ocean Energy Management's ongoing responsibility to
assess oil and natural gas resources on the nation's Outer
Continental Shelf.
Resource evaluation has been carried out by geologists,
statisticians, and economists for decades to offer insights
into petroleum supply. The resulting estimates provide critical
input to decision makers and inform various policy
alternatives.
Section 357 of the Energy Policy Act of 2005 directs the
Secretary of the Interior to conduct an inventory and analysis
of oil and natural gas resources contained within the submerged
lands of the Outer Continental Shelf. The Secretary is required
to submit this analysis to Congress every 5 years. As directed
by that statute, BOEM prepared and delivered the Comprehensive
Inventory of OCS Oil and Natural Gas Resources 2023 update to
Congress on January 17 of this year.
BOEM also publishes a formal national assessment of
undiscovered, technically-recoverable resources and
undiscovered, economically-recoverable resources every 5 years.
These national assessments inform the comprehensive inventory
reports to Congress. The undiscovered, technically-recoverable
resources are estimates of oil and gas that could be produced
from the subsurface using conventional extraction techniques.
Undiscovered, economically-recoverable resources are the subset
of the technically-recoverable resources that are assessed to
be commercially recoverable under particular economic and
technological conditions.
BOEM's most recent National Assessment of Undiscovered
Resources was finalized in 2021, and work is underway to
prepare the 2026 National Assessment. In developing these
assessments, BOEM considers recent geophysical, geological, and
technological information to estimate potentially recoverable
oil and gas resources. This information comes from multiple
sources, including wellbore data from the OCS, geophysical
data, and geologic play information from domestic and global
analogs. Economic parameters such as exploration and
development costs and oil and gas prices are also factored into
the assessment.
Since 1975, the Department of the Interior has completed 11
National Assessments of OCS Undiscovered Oil and Natural Gas
Resources. During this period, geological and geophysical
information available to BOEM has dramatically increased, and
industry's technological capabilities have expanded
considerably. Today, the oil and gas industry has the ability
to drill both exploration and production wells in water depths
exceeding 10,000 feet, and the use of three-dimensional and
other advanced seismic data and interpretation techniques has
served as a catalyst to transform the geosciences and petroleum
industry by providing more accurate subsurface imaging.
Resource assessment techniques have also become more
sophisticated over time.
Each National Assessment reflects a snapshot in time that
should not be reviewed as either an understatement or
overstatement when compared to later assessments that will
reflect additional information, changed circumstances, and a
better understanding of the OCS subsurface.
The 2021 National Assessment contains BOEM's most recent
oil and gas resource estimates, and served as a key input to
the 2023 Congressional Report. Compared to the 2018 report,
BOEM's estimate for undiscovered, technically-recoverable oil
resources decreased by 23 percent, and the estimate of
undiscovered, technically-recoverable gas resources decreased
by 30 percent. The overall decrease reflects recent exploration
results, and is due in part to improvements in BOEM's
assessment practices.
These advances have allowed BOEM to generate a clearer
picture of the OCS subsurface geology, particularly in the Gulf
of Mexico. As a result, BOEM refined the number and size of oil
and gas prospects within the assessment, resulting in decreases
in resource estimates.
BOEM's National Assessment is one of a number of
information sources used by policymakers for program planning,
and to consider energy policy options. A primary example of
this is the development of the National OCS Oil and Gas Leasing
Program. Under the OCS Lands Act, the Secretary of the Interior
is responsible for establishing a schedule of oil and gas lease
sales for a 5-year period by evaluating specified attributes of
OCS areas, including the potential for discovery of oil and
gas, which the Secretary must balance, to the maximum extent
practicable, with the potential for environmental damage and
adverse impact on the coastal zone.
Thank you again for the opportunity to be here today to
discuss BOEM's efforts to responsibly manage our nation's
energy resources on the OCS to meet the nation's energy needs
while minimizing impacts to the ocean, ocean users, and marine
life. And I look forward to answering any questions the
Committee may have.

[The prepared statement of Dr. Cruickshank follows:]
Prepared Statement of Dr. Walter D. Cruickshank, Deputy Director,
Bureau of Ocean Energy Management, U.S. Department of the Interior

Chairman Stauber, Ranking Member Ocasio-Cortez, and members of the
Subcommittee, I am pleased to appear before you today to discuss the
Bureau of Ocean Energy Management's ongoing responsibility to assess
existing oil and natural gas resources on the Outer Continental Shelf
(OCS). My name is Walter Cruickshank, and I am the Deputy Director of
BOEM, a bureau within the Department of the Interior (DOI).
Comprehensive Inventory of U.S. Outer Continental Shelf Oil and Natural
Gas Resources

Resource evaluations have been carried out by geologists,
statisticians, and economists for decades to offer insights into
petroleum supply. To tackle the challenge, increasingly complex
quantitative techniques and procedures have been developed in response
to the needs and uses for these assessments. Resource estimates provide
critical input to decision-makers and inform various policy
alternatives.

Section 357 of the Energy Policy Act of 2005 (EPAct) directs the
Secretary of the Interior to conduct an inventory and analysis of oil
and natural gas resources contained within the submerged lands of the
U.S. OCS. The Secretary is required to submit this analysis to Congress
every 5 years.

The statute mandates that the inventory and report meet the
following criteria:

1.  incorporate available data on oil and natural gas resources in
areas offshore of Mexico and Canada that are relevant to
estimate the resource potential of the OCS;

2.  use any available technology except drilling to obtain accurate
resource estimates;

3.  analyze how OCS resource estimates have changed over time in
relation to available data and exploration and development
activities;

4.  estimate the effect of understated oil and natural gas resource
estimates on domestic energy investments; and

5.  identify and explain how legislative, regulatory, and
administrative programs or processes restrict or impede
resource development and affect domestic supply.

As directed by the statute, BOEM prepared and delivered The
Comprehensive Inventory of OCS Oil and Natural Gas Resources: 2023
Update (Comprehensive Inventory Report) to Congress on January 17,
2024. The Comprehensive Inventory Report covered the years 2018 to
2023.
National Assessment of Undiscovered Technically Recoverable Resources
and Undiscovered Economically Recoverable Resources

BOEM publishes a formal national assessment of Undiscovered
Technically Recoverable Resources (UTRR) and Undiscovered Economically
Recoverable Resources (UERR) every 5 years. These National Assessments
inform the Comprehensive Inventory Reports to Congress. UTRR are
estimates of oil and gas resources that could be produced from the
subsurface using conventional extraction techniques. UERR are a subset
of UTRR that are assessed to be commercially recoverable under
particular economic and technologic conditions.
BOEM's most recent National Assessment of undiscovered resources
was finalized in 2021. The National Assessment is a component of energy
policy analysis and provides important information about the potential
of oil and gas resources on the OCS. Work is underway to prepare for
the 2026 National Assessment.
In developing the National Assessment, BOEM considers recent
geophysical, geological, and technological information to estimate
potentially recoverable oil and gas resources. This information comes
from multiple sources, including OCS operator subsurface geologic and
wellbore data, OCS geophysical and seismic data, and geologic play
information from domestic and global analogs. Economic parameters, such
as exploration and development costs and oil and gas prices, are also
factored into the assessment.
Improved Technology and Methodology

The 2023 Comprehensive Inventory Report assesses only technically
recoverable hydrocarbon resources, both discovered and undiscovered.
The interplay of technological advancement and changing economic
conditions has an important role in assessing discovered and
undiscovered technically recoverable resources, as well as the extent
of the commercial frontier of hydrocarbon resources.
Since 1975, DOI has completed 11 National Assessments of OCS
undiscovered oil and natural gas resources. During this period, the
geological and geophysical information available to BOEM assessors has
dramatically increased. These data have increased BOEM's knowledge
regarding OCS resource potential, particularly in the more mature areas
of the central and western Gulf of Mexico.
Over the period that the National Assessments have been conducted,
industry's technological capabilities expanded considerably. Today, the
oil and gas industry possesses the ability to drill both exploration
and production wells in water depths exceeding 10,000 feet. The use of
three-dimensional (3-D) and other advanced seismic data and
interpretation techniques has served as a catalyst to transform the
geosciences and the petroleum industry by providing more accurate
subsurface imaging. Resource assessment techniques have also become
more sophisticated during this period.
Each National Assessment reflects a snapshot in time that should
not be viewed as either understated or overstated when compared to
later assessments that will reflect additional information, changed
circumstances, and a better understanding of the OCS subsurface.
2023 Comprehensive Inventory Report Findings

The 2021 National Assessment contains BOEM's most recent oil and
gas resource estimates and served as a key input to the 2023
Comprehensive Inventory Report. Compared to the 2018 Comprehensive
Inventory Report, BOEM's estimate for undiscovered technically
recoverable OCS oil resources has decreased more than 23%, and the
volume estimate of undiscovered technically recoverable gas resources
decreased 30%.
The overall decrease reflects recent exploration results and is
due, in part, to improvements in BOEM's assessment practices, as well
as advances in technological capabilities for resource assessment,
which continue to align with industry standards. These advances have
allowed BOEM to generate a clearer picture of the OCS subsurface
geology, particularly in the Gulf of Mexico region. As a result, BOEM
refined the number and size of oil and gas prospects within the 2021
National Assessment, resulting in decreases of UTRR and UERR estimates.
Informing Decisions

BOEM's National Assessment is one of a number of information
sources used by policymakers for program planning and considering
energy policy options. A primary example is the development of the
National OCS Oil and Gas Leasing Program (National OCS Program). Under
Section 18 of the OCS Lands Act, the Secretary of the Interior is
responsible for establishing a schedule of oil and gas lease sales for
a five-year period by evaluating specified attributes of OCS areas. The
Secretary is authorized to select the size, timing, and location of
proposed OCS lease sales that best meet national energy needs while
balancing, to the maximum extent practicable, the potential for
environmental damage, discovery of oil and gas, and adverse impact on
the coastal zone.
Conclusion

Thank you again for the opportunity to be here today to discuss
BOEM's efforts to responsibly manage our nation's energy resources on
the OCS to meet the Nation's energy needs while minimizing impacts to
the ocean, ocean users, and marine life. BOEM's programs are essential
for the Administration's continued commitment to ensuring a clean and
secure energy future--one that is sustainable and benefits all
Americans. I look forward to answering any questions that this
Committee may have.

______

Mr. Rosendale. Thank you very much. I appreciate your
testimony.
Our next witness is Dr. Amir Zaman. He is the Partner and
Commercial Director of the Americas for Rystad Energy, and he
is stationed in New York, New York.
Mr. Zaman, you are now recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF AMIR ZAMAN, PARTNER AND COMMERCIAL DIRECTOR,
AMERICAS, RYSTAD ENERGY, NEW YORK, NEW YORK

Mr. Zaman. Thank you very much, Chairman, and thank you
very much to the Committee for having Rystad join today.
The United States is a world leader in hydrocarbon
reserves, demonstrating substantial untapped potential in our
offshore waters and shale plays. The nation ranks second in oil
and first in gas reserves globally, with significant
contributions from both conventional and unconventional shale
resources that have reshaped the energy landscape the past two
decades.
The growth of U.S. oil production since 2010 has played a
crucial role in balancing the global oil and gas market. The
shale revolution has been the primary driver, with the Permian
Basin leading the surge. However, deepwater supply has also
achieved very positive additions year over year in the past
decade.
Despite challenges, including headwinds that we potentially
see developing in exploration and development offshore,
offshore remains a key contributor to the oil and gas supply.
However, while the growth and resiliency that has been
demonstrated by the U.S. oil and gas sector during recent
downcycles and the COVID pandemic have been impressive, with
the country setting a new record for total production to close
out 2023, there are reasons to be wary about how long we can
continue on this current path, in particular given that the
market is so heavily weighted towards the shale market, which
is facing headwinds of its own.
Natural engineering characteristics to producing
hydrocarbons from shale formations leads itself to requiring a
much larger number of wells to be drilled than conventional and
offshore fields. As a result, the number of potential wells
that can be drilled in the future shrinks every single day. And
this drilling inventory is what we are going to talk about for
a second now.
There are estimates that can range from company to company,
from shale play to shale play anywhere from as small as 2 to 3
years' worth of drilling locations left to upwards of
potentially the mid-teens or maybe 20 years. But even that
number is very nuanced, and will require some digging into to
fully understand the grasp of what will happen if and when or
when the shale patch will begin to see its downside.
Regardless of what number applies, the second that that
saturation point for wells becomes apparent, we will start to
see a decline in production in the United States. And that will
reverse a lot of the progress that we have made in energy
security throughout this revolution.
But there is a way to help and, if you will allow me a
slight pun, we can stem the tide a bit by looking to our
coasts. The offshore United States presents an attractive
investment opportunity for exploration and production
companies, characterized by competitive break-even prices and
favorable fiscal terms. Stability and profitability offered by
the U.S. fiscal regime makes it an appealing destination for
global players seeking long-term investment opportunities, and
is evidenced by the sheer number of companies who are active in
the Gulf versus other places in the world.
As mentioned previously, the U.S. oil and gas industry has
one of the lowest upstream emission rankings in the world. And
of particular note, given today's topic, it is worth noting
that the nation's offshore sector comes out on top in emissions
intensity from production of hydrocarbons versus every other
country, according to Rystad Energy's Research. The only one
that comes close is Norway, and in a virtual dead heat. We can
talk a little bit more about some of the rankings of the United
States versus other countries throughout today's session.
However, one thing that is not talked enough about when we
talk about emissions is how much emissions are related to the
shipment of hydrocarbons from one location to another. I would
position that the amount of atmospheric gases that we are
putting into the atmosphere, plus the amount of fuel that is
burned to ship hydrocarbons from other parts of the world
versus using pipelines that exist here in the Gulf and other
parts of the United States is very significant.
While past decades have seen significant offshore
discoveries, recent trends indicate a decline in yearly
discovered volumes, posing challenges for future production
growth offshore. Renewed exploration efforts and timely awards
are crucial to unlocking undiscovered potential and sustaining
production levels where they are today, around 2.5 million
barrels of oil equivalent, let alone potentially needing to
grow significantly more to offset the future potential losses
in shale.
As older vintages of licenses contribute to a substantial
portion of the current offshore supply, the future growth
trajectory hinges on successful exploration and development
activities. The technical work and safety planning around
developing offshore oil and gas fields is significant, making
it a long cycle undertaking where it could take 3, 7, or even
more than 10 years in some cases from the time a license is
awarded to first production. And with this timeline in mind,
should the United States seek to ensure it is producing a
requisite level of hydrocarbons from its prolific and
prospective offshore regions alike, immediate action would be
needed to address declining discovery rates, beginning with the
licensing process.
Thank you very much.

[The prepared statement of Mr. Zaman follows:]
Prepared Statement of Amir Zaman, Partner & Commercial Director,
Rystad Energy

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

__

Mr. Rosendale. Thank you very much for your testimony, Mr.
Zaman.
Our next witness is Mr. Erik Milito. He is the President of
the National Ocean Industries Association, and is stationed
here in Washington, DC.
Mr. Milito, you are now recognized for 5 minutes. Thank
you.

STATEMENT OF ERIK MILITO, PRESIDENT, NATIONAL OCEAN INDUSTRIES
ASSOCIATION, WASHINGTON, DC

Mr. Milito. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The National Ocean Industries Association represents all
segments of the offshore energy industry, including offshore
oil and gas, offshore wind, offshore carbon sequestration, and
offshore minerals. We appreciate the efforts of the Committee
to consider the importance of offshore oil and gas resource
assessments so that we, as a nation, continue to improve our
understanding of our energy potential.
The long-term energy security, national security, and
economic security of the country depends upon policy decisions
that are grounded in our energy realities. Resource assessments
help serve to bridge the gap between our demand for energy and
the supplies necessary to meet that demand.
Even with significant growth in renewables, oil and natural
gas are expected to supply most of the energy consumed in the
United States and globally through 2050, according to long-term
forecasting from the EIA. For the past 40-plus years, each year
the global economy has increased demand for oil by about 1
million barrels per day. We continue to become more efficient
in our use of energy, but population growth and the rise of
developing countries out of conditions of poverty are expected
to lead to significant growth in demand for all sources of
energy, including oil and gas, over the coming decades.
Global oil demand was at a record level of 102 million
barrels per day in 2023, and it is expected to grow in the
years ahead. The fundamental question becomes where do we
secure this energy from? The answer should be simple and
straightforward. We should secure our energy from the United
States, and specifically the U.S. offshore region.
The U.S. offshore, and the Gulf of Mexico in particular,
have served as the backbone of U.S. energy production for
decades. The United States has been producing oil in the
Federal Gulf of Mexico waters since the 1940s, and production
from the Gulf has been steadily increasing over the past 30
years. In fact, this region has been producing more than 1
million barrels of oil a day since 1997, and hit its highest
level of production on record, just over 2 million barrels per
day, in August 2019, right before the onset of the pandemic.
When compared to other countries around the world, the U.S.
Gulf of Mexico would be the eleventh largest producer of oil
and gas in the global marketplace. In terms of energy
affordability, production from the U.S. Gulf of Mexico plays a
substantial role helping to meet global demand for our energy.
U.S. oil and gas production provides Americans with the
best product when it comes to low-carbon-intensity barrels of
oil. According to a study we sponsored with ICF International,
oil produced from the Gulf of Mexico has a carbon intensity per
barrel that is 46 percent lower than the foreign average.
Policies that restrict domestic offshore development require
imports to make up the shortfall, and that supplemental
production comes from higher-emitting operations in other
countries.
Policy decisions that restrict U.S. offshore energy
development result in dramatic adverse consequences for our
country by putting at risk many important benefits, benefits
that include thousands upon thousands of good-paying jobs,
funding for the Land and Water Conservation Fund, funding for
coastal resiliency and restoration for the Gulf Coast states,
funding for urban parks and recreation, and importantly, our
national security interests.
It is crucial that we continue to research and understand
our resource potential by updating our oil and gas estimates
for the U.S. OCS, and it is critical that Federal policy
promotes U.S. energy development in our offshore region through
consistent leasing and permitting, and through open access to
markets. This includes correcting the anemic OCS leasing
program finalized last year.
I also want to touch upon the vast potential for the U.S.
OCS for storing carbon dioxide. Our offshore region is uniquely
situated to emerge as a global hub for carbon capture and
storage. Along with the excellent geologic prospects for
storing carbon dioxide, the Gulf Coast is home to the full
supply chain of energy companies with the engineering
experience, expertise, and vision to deploy CCS projects with
the scale and efficiency necessary for success.
Congress passed the Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act
in November 2021. As part of that legislation, Congress set
forth the requirement for Interior to promulgate regulations
for offshore CCS by November 2022. Interior is nearly 2\1/2\
years past the deadline, and a proposed rule has yet to be
published. This puts the United States at a competitive
disadvantage to other parts of the world, where countries are
seizing the opportunity to approve and construct offshore CCS
projects.
Thank you, and I look forward to your questions.

[The prepared statement of Mr. Milito follows:]
Prepared Statement of Erik Milito, President, National Ocean
Industries Association

For the past 50-plus years, the National Ocean Industries
Association (``NOIA'') has represented the interests of all segments of
the offshore energy industry. Today this includes offshore oil and gas,
offshore wind, offshore minerals, and offshore carbon sequestration
companies. Our membership includes energy project leaseholders and
developers and the entire supply chain of companies that make up an
innovative energy system contributing to the safe and responsible
exploration, development, and production of energy for the American
people. The assessment of domestic energy reserves is highly
consequential for our nation's future energy security and should inform
our public policy moving forward. NOIA appreciates the efforts of the
committee for convening this hearing and promoting data-driven,
impactful energy policy.
The offshore energy sector is a proven leader in solving energy
challenges and delivering diverse sources of energy to the global
economy. For the foreseeable future, the offshore industry will play an
integral role in shaping an energy system that promotes the provision
of affordable and reliable energy while continuing to reduce
environmental impacts, including emissions. Importantly, for the coming
decades, oil and gas supplies will remain a vital energy source for
Americans and our allies around the globe, while we simultaneously
integrate and add lower carbon sources into the mix. The U.S. Gulf of
Mexico is firmly established as a highly prospective region with
abundant reserves of domestic oil and gas that will fuel our economy
for decades to come.
The Bureau of Ocean Energy Management (BOEM) has recognized a
promising future for oil development in the Gulf of Mexico. According
to its 2021 Assessment of Technically and Economically Recoverable Oil
and Natural Gas Resources of the Gulf of Mexico Outer Continental
Shelf,\1\ the region contains estimated undiscovered technically
recoverable resources in the range of 23.31 billion barrels of oil to
36.27 billion barrels of oil. According to experts at Energy and
Industrial Advisory Partners, ``A key requirement for continued Gulf of
Mexico oil and natural gas production is continued lease sales, which
enable operators to explore new acreage for previously undiscovered
resources, develop new projects, and underpin existing and planned
projects by allowing operators to backfill production into facilities
with declining production.'' \2\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ https://www.boem.gov/sites/default/files/documents/regions/
gulf-mexico-ocs-region/resource-evaluation/
2021%20Gulf%20of%20Mexico%20Oil%20and%20Gas%20Resource%20Assessment%
20%28BOEM%202021-082%29.pdf
\2\ https://www.noia.org/noia-one-pagers-infographics/#flipbook-
df_223664/1/, at page 3.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
THE U.S. OFFSHORE REGION WILL CONTINUE TO FUEL OUR ECONOMY

As with many other forms of energy development, oil and gas
production is contingent upon having acreage that can be explored and
produced. Federal leasing is requisite to securing the acreage to
develop and produce supplies of oil and gas for the country. Continued
lease sales at regular intervals will enable declining production to be
replenished and production levels to be increased when there are spikes
in demand. Simply put, the more acreage that is available, the greater
the potential for well-managed energy production.
According to Rystad Energy, global oil exploration activities must
ramp up to meet global demand through 2050. More than $3 trillion in
capital expenditure is estimated to be needed to add the undeveloped
and undiscovered resources necessary for the global market.\3\ Rystad
analysts expect deepwater areas to play a prominent role in building
essential energy supplies. According to Rystad Senior Upstream Analyst
Palzor Shenga, ``Upstream players may have to more than double their
conventional exploration efforts in order to meet global oil demand
through 2050.''
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ https://www.ogj.com/general-interest/article/14188745/rystad-
exploration-must-be-accelerated-to-meet-world-oil-demand
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The U.S. has been producing oil offshore in the federal Gulf of
Mexico waters since the 1940s and production from the Gulf has been
steadily increasing over the past 30 years. In fact, this region has
been producing more than one million barrels of oil per day since 1997
and hit its highest level of production on record of 2.044 million
barrels per day in August 2019, just before the onset of the pandemic:

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

.epsAlthough production dropped during the pandemic in response to
the related global economic downturn, the U.S. Gulf of Mexico has
recovered and averaged 1.868 million barrels per day in 2023. We know
from experience that technology advancements will continue to enable
the discovery and development of ever-increasing volumes, resulting in
a continuous upward trend over time in the estimated recoverable
resources in the Gulf of Mexico. One of the earliest federal resources
assessments, if not the earliest, was conducted by the U.S. Geological
Service in 1975, which estimated a mean of 6.25 billion barrels of
undiscovered crude oil in the Gulf of Mexico.\4\ The study reflected
the geologic realities as best it could and focused only on water
depths of less than 200 meters. Foreshadowing how dramatically
innovation and technology can revolutionize an industry, the first
deepwater oil field in the world was discovered in the Gulf of Mexico
the very same year.\5\ Federal assessments throughout the 1980s and
first half of the 1990s were expanded to include water depths up to
2,500 meters. In 1996, Interior's Minerals Management Service (MMS) did
not include any water depth limit in their assessment. Yet, by this
point deepwater production was eclipsing shallow water production in
the Gulf of Mexico.\6\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\ https://www.boem.gov/sites/default/files/documents/about-boem/
Historic%20Assessments_ 2021_fixed.pdf
\5\ https://www.offshore-mag.com/pipelines/article/14075106/cognac-
pipeline-stretched-the-boundary-of-deepwater
\6\ https://www.boem.gov/sites/default/files/documents/regions/
gulf-mexico-ocs-region/US%20OCS
%20GOMR%20Oil%20and%20Gas%20Production%20Forecast%202022-
2031.pdf#::text=The%
20plot%20is%20separated%20into,roughly%2090%25%20of%20total%20production

---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Today, cumulative historical production from the Gulf of Mexico is
well over 21 billion barrels of oil, and, as noted earlier, the federal
government estimates that there are still 23 to 36 billion barrels of
oil remaining.\7\ The offshore oil and gas industry is an exploratory,
prospective business and there is often a gap between what we think is
there based upon government estimates and what is actually there based
on industry's exploration efforts, especially when considering the
deployment of modern science and exploration techniques. Companies must
have the opportunity to continue to lease acreage and conduct
exploration activities through regular, formalized lease sales to close
the gap. Exploration activities from seismic exploration to exploratory
drilling add the necessary scientific data that is fundamental for more
accurate estimates and the ultimate production of energy. These
activities only occur once a company has secured a lease.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\7\ https://www.boem.gov/sites/default/files/documents/oil-gas-
energy/BOEM%202020-028.pdf#::
text=Cumulative%20Production%20from%20all%20fields,recoverable%20from%20
459%20active %20fields.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Oil is a global commodity, and investment in oil production
projects occurs on a global scale. Eliminating or reducing lease sales
in the U.S. federal offshore leasing program only serves to shift that
investment away from the U.S. Gulf of Mexico to other regions, both
offshore and onshore, throughout the world. Companies will naturally
invest where there is more certainty, and the U.S. Government can
increase certainty by continually updating resource estimates and
providing acreage for leasing. It is critical that the U.S. does not
cede ground in offshore energy production to other regions and that it
recognizes that it is in the best interests of Americans to encourage
and attract investment to U.S. offshore production opportunities. The
numerous adverse consequences of eliminating or scaling back offshore
oil and gas leasing negatively impact all Americans, most particularly
those struggling to cope with increased energy costs, which continued
to be threatened by geopolitical uncertainty. Offshore leasing is
requisite to replenishing and building new supplies of oil and gas for
Americans. It is only the first step in the process, but, without it,
our nation will be left without the energy that is vital for our
everyday lives, including transportation, manufacturing, agriculture,
groceries, education, and healthcare. Energy affordability is
fundamentally and directly tied to the supply and demand of energy
sources, and energy supplies are assured through continued leasing and
permitting.
ENERGY REALITIES

Energy lifts society. A system of reliable, abundant, and
affordable energy is essential for meeting basic societal needs,
including healthy living conditions, health care, education, and
mobility, economic or otherwise. Oil, gas, and petroleum products fill
the fuel tanks of passenger vehicles and airplanes. They are
transformed into the essential building blocks of smartphones,
clothing, and medical equipment. They are in so many products we use
every day that they underpin the conveniences of modern life.
Natural gas is recognized as a key energy source for providing
electricity, heating, cooling, and clean cooking. More than 750 million
people around the globe do not have access to electricity, which leaves
entire communities at a severe and fundamental disadvantage. According
to the World Health Organization (WHO), ``Access to energy is critical
when it comes to the functionality of health-care facilities and the
quality, accessibility and reliability of health services delivered.
Electricity is necessary for the operation of critically needed medical
devices such as vaccine refrigeration, surgical emergency, laboratory
and diagnostic equipment, as well as for the operation of basic
amenities such as lighting, cooling, ventilation and communications.''
\8\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\8\ https://www.who.int/activities/accelerating-access-to-
electricy-in-health-care-facilities
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Globally, 2.6 billion people do not have the means for clean
cooking and must use solid fuels such as wood, crop wastes, charcoal,
and dung in open fires and inefficient stoves. The WHO attributes 3.8
million premature deaths each year to indoor air pollution caused by
the fumes and soot generated by inefficient and dirty cooking. The
tragic impacts of energy insecurity are not only experienced abroad; 44
percent of low-income American households experience energy insecurity,
spending 10 percent to 20 percent of their income on energy
expenses.\9\ Energy insecurity has adverse consequences on both
physical and mental health. Millions of Americans are faced with the
``heat or eat'' dilemma, regularly having to choose between paying
utility bills and paying for food.\10\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\9\ http://large.stanford.edu/courses/2020/ph240/radzyminski2/
\10\ S. Jessel, S. Sawyer, and D. Hernandez, ``Energy, Poverty, and
Health in Climate Change: A Comprehensive Review of an Emerging
Literature,'' Front. Public Health 7, 357 (2019).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Currently, global oil consumption is approximately 100 million
barrels per day. Various scenarios forecast global oil consumption
volumes through 2050 and beyond, and nearly all of them predict
substantial oil production will be necessary through at least 2050. The
facts, data, and our experience make clear that we should focus on the
U.S. offshore region, and the Gulf of Mexico in particular, for
securing those vital resources.
Energy production in the U.S. Gulf of Mexico demonstrates that it
is possible to develop offshore resources while adhering to the highest
safety and environmental standards. A multitude of companies involved
in offshore energy development are working collaboratively to shrink an
already small carbon footprint. From electrifying operations to
deploying innovative solutions that reduce the size, weight, and part
count of offshore infrastructure--thus increasing safety and decreasing
emissions--the U.S. Gulf of Mexico hosts a high-tech revolution. Oil
produced from the U.S. Gulf of Mexico has a carbon intensity one-half
that of other producing regions.\11\ The technologies used in deepwater
production--which represents 92 percent of the oil produced in the U.S.
Gulf of Mexico--place this region among the lowest carbon intensity
oil-producing regions in the world.\12\ Policies that restrict domestic
offshore development require imports to make up the shortfall and
supplemental production may come from higher-emitting operations in
other countries. Foreign providers may employ less environmentally
conscientious production methods, which when combined with the added
emissions from transporting oil over great distances by tanker, can
increase the amount of carbon released into the atmosphere rather than
decreasing it.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\11\ Motiwala, and Ismail, ``Statistical Study of Carbon
Intensities in the GOM and PB,'' ChemRxiv, April 13, 2020.
\12\ https://www.woodmac.com/news/the-challenge-of-negative-
emissions/

McKinsey estimates production from the U.S. Gulf of Mexico could
decrease by about 800,000 barrels per day by 2040 without additional
projects beyond those that have already been sanctioned. In that
situation, McKinsey expects lost production would be made up by
substitutions from other parts of the world without much oil demand
destruction. The U.S. would be able to import sufficient oil, but it
would come from higher-emitting basins, resulting in an increase in
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
greenhouse gas emissions globally:

This supply reduction would have to be offset by alternative
sources to meet global demand, which could hinder net-zero
goals significantly. Because many other oil producing regions
globally have total unit costs similar to those in the Gulf of
Mexico, global oil price increases or substitution with other
energy sources wouldn't be expected, and global demand for oil
would remain unchanged. Instead, the reduced Gulf supply would
be offset by production increases from other sources, such as
other deepwater basins, shale, and OPEC. Based on the higher
emissions per barrel of this new supply, global emissions would
increase by 50 million to 100 million metric tons of CO2e
through 2040.\13\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\13\ Brown, Di Fiori, Smith, and Yanosek, ``Deepwater Gulf of
Mexico's role during the energy transition,'' McKinsey, September 2022,
at page 6.

In May 2023, NOIA released a report on emissions from global oil
production by ICF International, the GHG Emission Intensity of Crude
Oil and Condensate Production.\14\ According to the report, U.S. oil
production, and in particular, production from the U.S. Gulf of Mexico,
has lower greenhouse gas emissions intensity than much of the rest of
the world. According to ICF, increasing U.S. production (onshore and
offshore) to a level that offsets foreign crude or condensate would
result in a 23% reduction in the average international carbon intensity
of those displaced oil production volumes. This translates to a removal
of 5.7 CO2e kg/bbl from the global average outside of the U.S. and
Canada of 24.4 CO2e kg/bbl. ICF estimates that increasing U.S. Gulf of
Mexico production to offset foreign crude or condensate would lead to a
significant reduction in the average carbon intensity of the
substituted oil volumes. Specifically, they estimate a 46% decrease,
which translates to a removal of 11.3 CO2e kg/bbl from the global
average.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\14\ https://www.noia.org/wp-content/uploads/2023/05/NOIA-Study-
GHG-Emission-Intensity-of-Crude-Oil-and-Condensate-
Production.pdf?utm_source=Mailchimp&utm_medium=email&utm_
campaign=ICF+study+emissions+
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Offshore energy is a true story of accomplishing more with less--
creating more energy with less environmental impact. Offshore
production platforms are incredible edifices of continuously evolving
technology that allow enormous amounts of energy to be produced through
a relatively small footprint. Incredibly, 18 deepwater facilities,
which equate to about the size of only nine city blocks, produce about
the same amount of oil as the entire state of North Dakota.\15\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\15\ Director Scott Angelle, BSEE Director, BSEE Presentation to
the Deepwater Technical Symposium, November 13, 2020.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Emissions reduction is a global challenge. As analysts at Wood
Mackenzie explain, ``Removing or handicapping a low emitter hurts the
collective global average.'' \16\ Removing a proven, stable supplier
such as the U.S. Gulf of Mexico would be a poor choice with devasting
consequences. The better choice is to institute government policies
that promote cleaner and safer domestic production, less reliance on
higher-emitting foreign suppliers like Russia and China, and the
preservation of hundreds of thousands of American jobs.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\16\ https://www.woodmac.com/news/opinion/could-restricting-oil-
production-in-the-us-gulf-of-mexico-lead-to-carbon-leakage/

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Efforts to restrict U.S. energy development could eventually
lead to Americans of every walk of life having to contend with the
issues Europe has been experiencing as a result of disrupted supply
from Russia, including potential industrial curtailment and families
having to make difficult choices between heat and food. Our energy
reality makes it clear that U.S. energy policy should support U.S.
energy production of all types, including offshore oil and gas and
wind. Government policies play a substantial role in the ability to
develop energy in the U.S., whether onshore or offshore, and whether
the energy source is oil and gas, wind, hydrogen, or another resource.
Obstructive government policies inevitably lead to adverse consequences
for our energy security, national security, economic security, and
decarbonization efforts.
OFFSHORE ENERGY DEVELOPMENT ENHANCES QUALITY OF LIFE

Oil and natural gas touch every part of our daily lives.
Fundamentally, ``Everything that is fabricated, grown, operated or
moved is made possible by hydrocarbons.'' \17\ The U.S. Department of
Energy states:
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\17\ Mark Mills, Wall Street Journal, January 8, 2019

Oil and natural gas play an essential role in powering
America's vibrant economy and fueling a remarkable quality of
life in the United States. Together, oil and natural gas
provide more than two-thirds of the energy Americans consume
daily, and we will continue to rely on them in the future. In
addition to meeting our energy needs, oil and natural gas are
integral to our standard of living in ways that are often not
apparent. Several key advances in technology enabled a dramatic
increase in domestic oil and natural gas production over the
past 20 years. This increased production provides energy
security and economic benefits to the entire country, and
ongoing technology advances will help us to enjoy those
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
benefits into the future.

Oil and natural gas are used in many ways that are familiar to
consumers. Petroleum products power transportation, providing
fuel for cars, trucks, marine vessels, locomotives, and
airplanes. Natural gas generates more than one-third of the
electricity needed for dependable heating, air conditioning,
lighting, industrial production, refrigeration, and other
essential services, and tens of millions of Americans rely on
oil and natural gas to heat their homes directly and on clean
burning natural gas to cook their food. But petroleum products
do so much more than fuel our cars and power our homes and
businesses.

While perhaps less recognized, oil and natural gas also play
critical roles in supplying essential products and materials,
increasing agricultural productivity, and supporting the
expansion of new energy sources.

Oil, natural gas, and natural gas liquids are building blocks
for a range of modern materials used to produce life-changing
prosthetics, energy-efficient homes, safer cars that go farther
on a gallon of gasoline, and hundreds more consumer products
that Americans use every day. Plastics and chemicals derived
from oil and natural gas make our food safer, our clothing more
comfortable, our homes easier to care for, and our daily lives
more convenient.

Natural gas is also a key ingredient for chemical fertilizers,
helping increase crop production and yield per acre planted,
and powering many important operations on the farm like crop
drying.\18\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\18\ U.S. OIL AND NATURAL GAS: Providing Energy Security and
Supporting Our Quality of Life, U.S. Department of Energy, September
2020, p. 4.

According to the United Nations, access to affordable, reliable,
and sustainable energy is critical to achieving many international
development goals, specifically, the eradication of poverty through
continued improvements in education, health, and access to water.\19\
Oil and natural gas play a central role in eliminating poverty and
raising the standard of living for millions by serving as a key form of
abundant and affordable energy.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\19\ https://unstats.un.org/sdgs/report/2016/goal-07/
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
OFFSHORE ENERGY DEVELOPMENT IMPROVES ENERGY AFFORDABILITY

The cost of energy is fundamentally driven by supply and demand
and, over the past decade, global markets have been impacted by supply
disruptions in both the oil and natural gas markets. The energy
paradigm has shifted over the past decade, with the United States
rising to a position of energy power and emerging as the leading
producer of both oil and natural gas in the world.

Vice Chairman of IHS Markit (now S&P Global) Daniel Yergin explains
how things have changed:

According to the old script, United States oil production was
too marginal to affect world oil prices. But the gap today
between demand and available supply on the world market is
narrow. The additional oil Saudi Arabia is putting into the
market will help replace Iranian exports as they are
increasingly squeezed out of the market by sanctions . . .. But
if America's increase . . . [in oil production] . . . had not
occurred, then the world oil market would be even tighter. We
would be looking at much higher prices--and voters would be
even angrier.\20\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\20\ Daniel Yergin, ``America's New Energy Reality,'' The New York
Times, June 9, 2012

Mr. Yergin made this point in 2012 at the outset of the shale
revolution, but the significance of U.S. production for global energy
markets is as important as ever today. In fact, Mr. Yergin reiterated
this very point in February 2022 in the aptly title op-ed in the Wall
Street Journal, ``America Takes Pole Position on Oil and Gas.''
Analysts recognize that the downturn in the oil and natural gas
industry from 2014-2020, combined with ill-conceived policies and
investment approaches, led to significant underinvestment in oil and
natural gas exploration and infrastructure. According to Simon Flower,
Chairman, Chief Analyst at Wood Mackenzie and author of a weekly column
called The Edge, in 2021, ``Underinvestment in oil supply will lead to
a tight oil market later this decade. It's a narrative that's gained
increasing traction as capital expenditure on upstream oil and gas has
shrunk. Spend in 2021 is half the peak of 2014 after slumping to new
depths in [2021's] crisis.'' \21\ Mr. Flowers poses the question, ``How
much new oil supply does the world need?'' His answer is, ``A lot--we
reckon about 20 million b/d from 2022 to 2030.'' According to Flowers,
``This is the `supply gap', the difference between our estimate of
demand in 2030 and the volumes we forecast existing fields already
onstream or under development can deliver.'' \22\ If his numbers are
correct, a huge amount of new oil is needed to close the expected gap
between the supply and demand and help bring stability and
affordability to oil and petroleum product prices.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\21\ https://www.woodmac.com/news/the-edge/is-the-world-
sleepwalking-into-an-oil-supply-crunch/
\22\ https://www.woodmac.com/news/the-edge/is-the-world-
sleepwalking-into-an-oil-supply-crunch/

Saudi Aramco CEO Amin H. Nasser identified the crux of the energy
crisis in his remarks during the Schlumberger Digital Forum, on
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
September 20, 2022:

Unfortunately, the response so far betrays a deep
misunderstanding of how we got here in the first place, and
therefore little hope of ending the crisis anytime soon. So
this morning I would like to focus on the real causes as they
shine a bright light on a much more credible way forward.

When historians reflect on this crisis, they will see that the
warning signs in global energy policies were flashing red for
almost a decade. Many of us have been insisting for years that
if investments in oil and gas continued to fall, global supply
growth would lag behind demand, impacting markets, the global
economy, and people's lives.

In fact, oil and gas investments crashed by more than 50%
between 2014 and last year, from $700 billion to a little over
$300 billion. The increases this year are too little, too late,
too short-term.

Meanwhile, the energy transition plan has been undermined by
unrealistic scenarios and flawed assumptions because they have
been mistakenly perceived as facts. For example, one scenario
led many to assume that major oil use sectors would switch to
alternatives almost overnight, and therefore oil demand would
never return to pre-Covid levels.

In reality, once the global economy started to emerge from
lockdowns, oil demand came surging back, and so did gas.\23\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\23\ https://www.aramco.com/en/news-media/speeches/2022/remarks-by-
amin-h-nasser-at-schlumberger-digital-forum#

Mr. Nasser's remarks about the challenges ahead are similarly
profound, ``Oil inventories are low, and effective global spare
capacity is now about one and a half percent of global demand. Equally
concerning is that oil fields around the world are declining on average
at about 6% each year, and more than 20% in some older fields last
year. At these levels, simply keeping production steady needs a lot of
capital in its own right, while increasing capacity requires a lot
more.'' \24\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\24\ https://www.aramco.com/en/news-media/speeches/2022/remarks-by-
amin-h-nasser-at-schlumberger-digital-forum#
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
We are fortunate in the United States that our Gulf of Mexico
region is up to the task of delivering the oil and gas the economy
needs. Production numbers from the U.S. Gulf of Mexico place it among
the largest oil producing countries. If the Gulf of Mexico were its own
country, it would be one of the top 11 oil producing countries in the
world (source EIA):

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

OFFSHORE CARBON CAPTURE AND STORAGE

U.S. leadership in Carbon Capture and Storage (CCS) will help
ensure the availability of abundant, reliable, and affordable domestic
energy, while continuously driving down emissions. According to the
International Energy Agency:

Carbon capture, utilisation and storage (CCUS) technologies
offer an important opportunity to achieve deep carbon dioxide
(CO
2
) emissions reductions in key industrial
processes and in the use of fossil fuels in the power sector.
CCUS can also enable new clean energy pathways, including low-
carbon hydrogen production, while providing a foundation for
many carbon dioxide removal (CDR) technologies.\25\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\25\ https://www.iea.org/reports/the-role-of-co2-storage

As it relates specifically to the offshore, the National Petroleum
Council concluded that ``One of the largest opportunities for saline
formation storage in the United States can be found in federal waters,
particularly in the Gulf of Mexico.'' Meeting the Dual Challenge, p.
27. The U.S. Gulf of Mexico offshore region provides tremendous
advantages for an emerging U.S. CCS sector. The Gulf of Mexico is
characterized by vast geologic prospects for CO2 storage, extensive and
established energy infrastructure along the Gulf Coast and throughout
the outer continental shelf, a proximity to industrial centers for
capturing emissions, and an assessable engineering and energy knowledge
base and workforce, along with associated RD&D capabilities. The U.S.
Gulf of Mexico could very well soon be the global leader in CCS. Early
projections show that 50 million tons of CO2 annually could be stored
beneath the Gulf of Mexico by 2030, more than all the CCS currently
operating globally. The Gulf's storage capacity could double by 2040.
However, the build-out of the U.S. offshore carbon storage industry
will depend upon certainty and predictability in U.S. laws and
regulations. The Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act of 2021 (P.L.
117-58) included Sec. 40307, explicitly authorizing the Department of
the Interior to grant leases, easements, or rights-of-way on the outer
continental shelf for the purposes of long-term storage of CO2. It also
mandated the Secretary to issue regulations to that effect within one
year of enactment, or by November 2022. Our industry stands ready to
invest in federal offshore carbon sequestration projects but it cannot
be done without a regulatory framework. The regulations are more than a
year past the Congressional-mandated deadline and have not even been
proposed yet. This unnecessary, protracted timeline for the
finalization of the rules and for the initiation of leasing and project
development substantially impedes U.S. Gulf Coast investment and
efforts to decarbonize through offshore CCS.
CONCLUSION

Our national energy needs require continued supplies of oil and
natural gas and part of this national imperative is understanding the
resources with which our nation is blessed, particularly in the U.S.
offshore region. Continued U.S. offshore oil and gas development
provides vast benefits and a sensible pathway for energy security for
the next few decades. NOIA and its members stand ready to work with
policymakers to advance policies to ensure that Americans can rely upon
an affordable and reliable energy system built upon strong pillars of
energy, economic, national, and environmental security.

______

Mr. Rosendale. Thank you very much, Mr. Milito. Our next
witness is Mr. Joe Dryer, and he is the President and CEO for
Fairfield Geotechnologies, and is stationed in Houston, Texas.
Mr. Dryer, you are now recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF JOE DRYER, PRESIDENT AND CEO, FAIRFIELD
GEOTECHNOLOGIES, HOUSTON, TEXAS

Mr. Dryer. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I present this
testimony in my role as President and CEO of Fairfield, and as
a board member of the EnerGeo Alliance. EnerGeo was founded in
1971, and represents the geoscience companies, innovators, and
energy developers that use Earth science to discover, develop,
and deliver energy sustainably to our world. I appreciate the
opportunity to testify before this Subcommittee.
As the tip of the spear for nearly all energy sources,
energy geoscience provides invaluable information about the
resources beneath us that energy companies and policymakers can
use to identify and prioritize. The reality is, no matter the
preferred or prioritized energy source, virtually all sources
of energy needed to support the world's energy evolution
require eyes on something going in, out, or through the ground.
And that simply cannot happen without the innovation and
insight of the energy geoscience industry, which is why at
EnerGeo Alliance we proudly say we are making energy possible.
It is important to point out that seismic and other
geoscience survey activities are temporary and transitory. They
are the least intrusive and only commercially scalable way to
explore the Earth's geology. The only viable process for the
U.S. Government to understand the country's resource potential
is through geoscience surveys conducted by advanced technology
companies like Fairfield and those that comprise EnerGeo's
membership. These surveys inform BOEM's comprehensive
assessment of undiscovered oil and gas resources on the OCS.
[Chart.]
Mr. Dryer. The Gulf of Mexico is one of the least
emissions-intensive resource plays in the world, second only to
Norway, but according to my friend at Rystad, we are about
even. With every new leap in geoscience innovation, energy
sources broaden and energy discoveries, and subsequently,
production, significantly increases, as you can see on the
chart we provided.
The reality is the geoscience industry has a long track
record of safe, responsible operations around the world.
Unfortunately, the permitting of this activity, critical to
identifying the nation's energy supplies, is too often stalled
or impeded by extreme environmental advocacy organizations
exploiting existing, cumbersome regulatory processes, and
litigation aimed at outdated and vague statutes.
Permitting and authorization delays by both BOEM and NMFS,
respectively, will ultimately lead to a reduced interest in
pursuing energy projects in the United States. EnerGeo has
conveyed to Congress and the agencies the need for legislative
and regulatory efficiencies to meet future energy demands.
By 2050, the world population is estimated to increase to
almost 9.8 billion. Total energy use is expected to increase by
34 percent. With an expected steady growth in main stage
sources of energy, and even faster growth anticipated on all
other sources, the energy and geoscience industry is integral
to meeting policies of lower carbon economies, including in the
United States.
There are now 30 commercial operational CCS facilities
worldwide that have a capture capacity of 40 million ton per
annum. More than 20 have come on-line in the last 2 years. Over
half of these are in North America. An additional 141
facilities are in development or under construction and will
provide an additional 112 million ton per annum of capture
capacity by 2030. But to go net zero by 2050, these figures
would have to grow by 140X.
In March 2021, the Biden administration has set an
ambitious goal of deploying 30 gigawatts of offshore wind
electricity generation by 2030. Further, in April 2023, the
President highlighted new steps the United States was taking to
meet its 1.5 degrees Celsius-aligned goal of reducing emissions
50 to 52 percent by 2030. These goals are simply not possible
to meet without the geoscience industry.
The Alliance continues to call on BOEM and the current
Administration to propose long-overdue regulations for offshore
carbon capture. However, regulations should not be used to
differentiate between given energy sources when it comes to
permitting geoscience activities. Our members execute surveys
and use advanced technology to provide products to energy
developers and producers. Those activities employ the same
general techniques, regardless of whether clients are
developing gas and oil or offshore wind. The regulations should
not make a distinction either way.
At EnerGeo, we are advocating to ensure all policymakers
and energy companies have access to reliable data analysis to
support their forward-moving efforts. Thank you for the
opportunity to testify today.

[The prepared statement of Mr. Dryer follows:]
Prepared Statement of Joe Dryer, President & CEO, Fairfield
Geotechnologies
on Behalf of the EnerGeo Alliance

Chairman Stauber, Ranking Member Ocasio-Cortez, and Members of the
Subcommittee:
For the record, my name is Joe Dryer and I am the President & CEO
of Fairfield Geotechnologies. I joined Fairfield Geotechnologies in
1997 as Sales Manager for the Systems Division. I have held several
leadership positions of increasing responsibility within Fairfield
which included Vice President of the Data Licensing Division and Chief
Sales Officer. In 2021 I was promoted to President and Chief Executive
Officer. Prior to joining Fairfield I worked on various acquisition
crews around the globe. I graduated from Texas Tech University and
completed the renowned Advanced Management Program at Harvard Business
School. Since 2019, I have served on the EnerGeo Alliance Board of
Directors working closely with our members, regulators, and other
stakeholders around the world to ensure that energy resources are
identified and developed in a sustainable manner.
Privately held Fairfield Geotechnologies is a leading provider of
high-resolution multi-client seismic data and services in the United
States. Combining market-leading subsurface reflectivity and signal
imaging techniques with strategic partnerships, Fairfield
Geotechnologies delivers a superior solution for developmental
exploitation. More than 30 years ago, Fairfield Geotechnologies
established a standard for how we operate--a combination of innovative
solutions, discipline, and exceptional leadership.
I present this testimony in my role as President & CEO of Fairfield
Geotechnologies and as a Board Member of the EnerGeo Alliance. Founded
in 1971, EnerGeo is the global trade alliance for the energy geoscience
and exploration industry, the intersection where earth science and
energy meet. EnerGeo Alliance and its member companies span more than
50 countries, representing onshore and offshore survey operators and
acquisition companies, energy data and processing providers, energy
companies, equipment and software manufacturers, industry suppliers,
service providers, and consultancies. EnerGeo represents the geoscience
companies, innovators, and energy developers that are using earth
science to discover, develop, and deliver energy, sustainably, to our
world. Together, we are Making Energy Possible.
EnerGeo member companies, which operate in the U.S. both onshore
and offshore across the Outer Continental Shelf (OCS) and extensively
within the Gulf of Mexico (GOM), play an integral role in the
successful exploration and development of offshore hydrocarbon, wind
and low-carbon solutions such as carbon capture and storage (CCS)
resources through the acquisition and processing of geophysical and
geological data.
Through reliable science- and data-based regulatory advocacy,
credible resources and expertise, and future-focused leadership,
EnerGeo Alliance continuously works to develop and promote informed
government policies that advance responsible energy exploration,
production, and operations. As the U.S. and global energy demand
evolves, we believe that all policymakers and energy companies,
providing mainstay, alternative, and low-carbon solutions, should have
access to reliable data and analysis to support their forward-moving
efforts.
Geoscience Industry & Activities Overview

I appreciate the opportunity to testify before the Subcommittee on
Energy and Mineral Resources on Assessing Domestic Offshore Energy
Reserves & Ensuring U.S. Energy Dominance. As the tip of the spear for
nearly all energy sources and lower-carbon solutions, energy geoscience
provides invaluable information about the resources beneath us that
energy companies and policymakers can use to identify and prioritize
high-density, lower-carbon intensive energy sources, locate where
offshore wind facilities are best suited for harnessing the energy from
wind, prolong the life of existing natural gas and petroleum assets,
make it possible to store carbon beneath the surface, and more.
The reality is, no matter the preferred or prioritized energy
source, virtually all sources of energy needed to support the world's
energy evolution require ``eyes'' on something going in, out, or
through the ground, and that simply cannot happen without the
innovation and insight of the energy geoscience industry. Which is why
at EnerGeo Alliance, we proudly say, ``we are making energy possible.''
Seismic and other geoscience surveys have been safely conducted in
the U.S. and around the world for over 60 years. These geoscience
surveys are the critical first step to better understanding the
resource base of the Outer Continental Shelf (OCS) and providing policy
makers and regulators with the information they need to make informed
decisions about energy development and carbon capture based on the best
available data.
There is an increasing need to educate on the criticality of
exploration to ensure global access to energy in the future. By 2050,
the world population is estimated to increase to almost 9.8 billion.\1\
Total energy use is expected to increase 34%, with an expected steady
growth in mainstay sources of energy and faster growth anticipated in
all other sources.\2\ In this scenario, exploration will be critical
for the energy evolution. While about 5 billion barrels of oil were
discovered in 2023, by 2050 we will need to discover 17.56 billion
barrels per year to match the global energy demand.\3\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Source: 2023 Population Data Sheet--https://www.prb.org/wp-
content/uploads/2023/12/2023-World-Population-Data-Sheet-Booklet.pdf
\2\ Source: EIA International Energy Outlook--October 2023 https://
www.eia.gov/outlooks/ieo/
\3\ Source: RystadEnergy UCube; Rystad Energy U.CubeExploration;
Rystad Energy research and analysis
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The economic and technological advances over the last 200 years
have transformed how we produce and consume energy. See Figure 1,\4\
showing how the global energy mix has evolved since 1800.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\ Source: Elements.visualcapitalist.com; Vaclav Smil, BP
Statistical Review of World Energy

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Global oil demand has reached new records; 2.2-2.4mbd increase
in 2023 to 102mbd, compared to oil supplies only rising by about 1.4-
1.5 mbd. Over 108 mbd by 2030. Remarkable departure from scenario IEA
laid out in its Roadmap to Net Zero by 2050 roadmap just two years ago
where they had oil demand peaking in 2019 at 100 mbd and declining to
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
75mbd by 2030.

Access to exploration relies on government authorizations, so
policymakers' understanding of energy geoscience and exploration as the
key energy enablers is imperative to ensuring energy optionality and
security and meeting future energy demand.

The only viable process for the U.S. Government to understand the
country's resource potential is through geoscience surveys conducted by
advanced technology companies like those that comprise EnerGeo's
membership. According to BOEM's website, regarding resource evaluation,
``Every five years BOEM provides a comprehensive assessment of
undiscovered oil and gas resources on the OCS. The results are
presented as both Undiscovered Technically Recoverable Resources (UTRR)
and Undiscovered Economically Recoverable Resources (UERR). The
assessment utilizes a geologic play-based approach that incorporates a
complete analysis of geologic and petroleum system elements for the
UTRR, and an assessment of engineering and economic considerations for
the calculation of the UERR. DOI has released an Assessment of
Undiscovered Oil and Gas Resources on the US OCS regularly since
1975.'' This information is not possible and would not be available to
policy makers and U.S. citizens without the geoscience industry.
As an example of the usefulness of geoscience data, in 2017 BOEM
released a 1.4-billion-pixel map that will help scientists from
academia, environmental agencies, and governmental agencies further
understand the prolific Gulf of Mexico region. This once-impossible
feat was created by using more than 200 individual maps from
geophysical companies, all of which are EnerGeo members. The maps cover
135,000 square miles of the Gulf of Mexico with datasets spanning more
than 30 years.
The GOM is one of the least emissions-intensive resource plays in
the world, second only to Norway. The basin's success and incredible
production record is only possible with the innovation of the energy
geoscience industry, specifically, seismic surveys. With every new leap
in geoscience innovation, energy sources broaden, and energy
discoveries & subsequently production significantly increases. EnerGeo
members are investing millions in research and innovation, leveraging
technology to solve our most complex energy challenges. With each step
change in technology, there has been a commensurate increase in the
number of discoverable reserves (See Figure 2).

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Surveys do not necessarily lead to hydrocarbon development. In
fact, surveys determine both areas that are and are not likely to have
recoverable oil and gas resources, and are imperative to ensure those
basins that are developed are done so targeting the highest energy-
dense, and least emissions-intensive barrels, and with the lowest
environmental footprint. Energy geoscience does not only critically
prove barrels are produced with the smallest footprint, but our
industry is also committed to ensure our work is conducted with the
least emissions possible. In 2022, EnerGeo published ``Guidance for
Estimating and Reporting Greenhouse Gas (GHG) Emissions'', to provide
GHG emissions-based guidance and resources for the marine geoscience
survey industry. This ensures the appropriate focus on a ``transition''
to lower emissions, not away from energy when the world needs it most.
Meeting the growing demand for energy that is more accessible,
affordable, reliable, and cleaner will require greater collaboration.
At EnerGeo Alliance, we are proud of our unique collaborations between
industry, scientists, and governments to support energy access. EnerGeo
has implemented the Gulf of Mexico Proactive Regulatory Observational
Program (GOM-PROP) to provide a self-sustaining structure for the
continued successful implementation of, and compliance with, both
present and future Incidental Take Regulations (ITR), governing the
operation of geoscience surveys in the Gulf of Mexico (GOM). Our
industry has also created the Netuno environmental database program,
focused on Brazil and recently expanded to cover the Americas, to
compile data that has been collected since 2005 in a standardized
manner, make it accessible, and transform it into knowledge for
stakeholders--including the industry and regulators. Netuno is a
virtual portal containing public environmental data, derived from
project implementation required as part of the environmental
permitting.
Today's advancements in technology, which can pinpoint the most
fruitful areas for hydrocarbon potential, siting of wind turbines
offshore and locating areas for carbon storage, have contributed to
reducing the overall environmental footprint associated with energy
exploration. Advances in the technology we deploy have also helped to
decrease operational and safety risks associated with energy
development.
Seismic and geoscience surveying is a well understood and safe
industry practice, and informed policy decisions regarding offshore
energy development can only be made with the evaluation provided by
modern seismic survey technology. And it is for this very reason that
environmental advocacy groups have actively worked to politicize the
seismic survey permitting process, under the pretense of alleged harm
to marine mammals.
As the Bureau of Ocean Energy Management (BOEM) and the National
Marine Fisheries Service (NMFS) have continually stated time and time
again--throughout changing political administrations--to date, there
has been no documented scientific evidence of noise from acoustic
sources used in seismic activities adversely affecting marine animal
populations or coastal communities.\5\ They note that this technology
has been used for decades around the world, including in U.S. waters in
the Gulf of Mexico and offshore Alaska, with no known detrimental
impact to marine life populations or to commercial fishing.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\ BOEM stated in its August 22, 2014 Science Note
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Indeed, more than six decades of worldwide geoscience surveying and
scientific research demonstrate that the risk of direct physical injury
to marine mammals is extremely low, and there is no scientific evidence
demonstrating biologically significant negative impacts on marine life
populations. Because survey activities are temporary and transitory,
they are the least intrusive way to explore the earth's geology. In the
more than 60 years of seismic surveying in the Gulf of Mexico, there
has not been a single reported incidence of sound from seismic
operations injuring marine life.
The geoscience industry is committed to conducting its operations
in an environmentally responsible manner, and utilizes mitigation
measures, such as exclusion zones, soft-starts, and protected species
observers to further reduce any possibility of potential impacts to
marine life. The industry supports a process of developing and
implementing effective mitigation measures that are proportionate to
the level of potential risk and specific to the local population of
marine animals.
The reality is the geoscience industry has a long track record of
safe, responsible operations around the world. Unfortunately, the
permitting of this activity critical to identifying the nation's energy
supplies is too often stalled or impeded by extreme environmental
advocacy organizations exploiting existing regulatory and litigation
processes.
BOEM Permitting & NMFS Authorization Delays

In the Outer Continental Shelf Lands Act (OCSLA), Congress
expressly mandated the ``expeditious and orderly development'' of the
Outer Continental Shelf (OCS) ``subject to environmental safeguards.''
43 U.S.C. Sec. 1332(3). Courts have since confirmed that ``the
expeditious development of OCS resources'' is OCSLA's primary purpose.
California v. Watt, 668 F.2d 1290, 1316 (D.C. Cir. 1981). Congress
enacted OCSLA to ``achieve national economic and energy policy goals,
assure national security, reduce dependence on foreign sources, and
maintain a favorable balance of payments in world trade.'' 43 U.S.C.
Sec. 1802(1). Congress expressly intended to ``make [OCS] resources
available to meet the Nation's energy needs as rapidly as possible.''
Id. Sec. 1802(2)(A). Geoscience surveying has been and continues to be
essential to achieving OCSLA's requirements because it is the only
feasible technology available to accurately image the subsurface of the
OCS before a single energy source is developed.
Offshore geoscience surveys require authorizations from BOEM,
pursuant to OCSLA. See id. Sec. 1340. There is no requirement for an
applicant for an offshore survey permit under OCSLA to obtain an
incidental take authorization under the MMPA. However, unlawful
``takes'' of marine mammals incidental to lawful activities (such as a
permitted offshore seismic survey) may nevertheless be subject to MMPA-
based penalties. See 16 U.S.C. Sec. 1375. Accordingly, many applicants
for offshore survey permits from BOEM also request incidental (i.e.,
unintentional) take authorization under the MMPA from the National
Marine Fisheries Service (NMFS) and/or the U.S. Fish and Wildlife
Service (FWS).\6\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\6\ FWS has jurisdiction over polar bears, walrus, sea otters,
dugongs, and manatees. NMFS has jurisdiction over all other marine
mammals.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
In this context, it is important to recognize that the permit
issued by BOEM authorizes the seismic survey and the MMPA authorization
narrowly addresses the incidental take associated with the seismic
survey. NMFS and FWS do not have jurisdiction over the survey; their
authority under the MMPA extends only to the authorization of
incidental take. Notwithstanding the limited role of FWS and NMFS, MMPA
authorizations are often the primary cause of administrative delay in
the offshore geoscience survey permitting process.
Specific to BOEM geoscience permitting, EnerGeo members have
experienced certain ambiguities and identified areas that may make the
permitting process run more efficiently in the following suggestions:

1.  Industry finds the timeliness of the permit process for
geoscience activities to be open-ended and uncertain.
EnerGeo has recommended that BOEM establish a certain
timeline for permit review and approval. The timing
requirements for drilling permit review and approval is a
good example that BOEM should strive to achieve for
geoscience permits.

2.  Industry has encouraged BOEM to explore the creation of an
electronic permit application process. Efficiencies for
permit processing and man-hours may be realized through
electronic permit applications. Many countries around the
world utilize electronic permit application processes. This
allows the applicant to monitor the status of the permit
process and timely provide any information requests from
BOEM. This has been seen to drastically decrease the permit
process timeline.

3.  Geoscience operations are consistently utilizing the same vessels
throughout the offshore U.S. BOEM should take steps to
create a catalogue of vessel information and certificates
to reduce permitting costs and burden hours.

4.  Industry encouraged BOEM to develop a catalogue of equipment used
in offshore geoscience activities, including Ocean Bottom
Nodes, Ocean Bottom Cables, Streamers, etc. This would
reduce the time needed to collect pictures and physical
samples of all parts and equipment deployed in the water
column. Permit applications could then reference these
materials to reduce time spent.

Specific to NMFS MMPA authorization processes, EnerGeo members have
experienced extensive delays and note the following particularly
problematic areas:

1.  IHAs involving offshore oil and gas-related activities are
rarely, if ever, issued within the timing requirements of
the MMPA. NMFS even states on its website that the IHA
permitting process takes at least six to nine months to
complete. The process often takes much longer. The MMPA
provides no consequences for such delay, nor does it
provide any incentives to NMFS and FWS to avoid delay.

2.  Because the MMPA contains no timing requirements applicable to
ITRs, the regulatory process for the issuance of ITRs often
takes years and, in industry's view, is de-prioritized by
the agencies because other agency obligations are subject
to timing requirements and consequences.

3.  The ESA Section 7 consultation process is cumbersome and time-
consuming. The Section 7 process is also subject to
statutorily mandated deadlines, but those deadlines are
routinely ignored by NMFS and FWS without consequence. The
Section 7 consultation process is often a significant cause
of the delay in the issuance of an authorization under
Section 101(a)(5) of the MMPA, even though the substantive
standard governing the Section 7 process is less stringent
than the MMPA's ``negligible impact'' standard.

4.  Another significant source of delay in the issuance of MMPA
incidental take authorizations involves the estimation of
the number of ``takes'' that are expected to occur. Because
the MMPA's definition of ``take'' is extraordinarily broad
and ambiguous (more so than the ESA's definition of
``take''), FWS and NMFS struggle to determine what
activities actually cause ``take'' and, as a result, they
apply extremely conservative assumptions to ensure that
their ``take'' estimation modeling encapsulates all
conceivable ``take'' (and more). This process results in
estimates that are inaccurate and vastly exaggerate the
number of ``takes'' that will actually occur.

5.  The ``take'' estimation modeling exercises are considerably more
complicated and play an unduly important role in the
permitting process because the agencies are required to
demonstrate that the incidental take authorization will not
only have a ``negligible impact'' on the potentially
affected marine mammal stocks but also affect ``small
numbers'' of marine mammals. The term ``small numbers'' has
no biological significance whatsoever to the marine mammal
population and is a legal term of art that has notoriously
confused courts and regulators alike.
6.  All of these regulatory problems and inefficiencies create
fertile ground for legal challenges by advocacy groups that
will readily file any and all available lawsuits for the
sole purpose of impeding and preventing the energy
development of the OCS.

When it was enacted in the early 1970s (and subsequently amended),
the congressional intent behind the MMPA was cutting-edge and forward-
thinking. However, as described above, decades of regulation and
litigation have exposed some significant flaws in the MMPA. The primary
flaws in the MMPA stem from (i) poorly written statutory language that
creates ambiguity and uncertainty in the application of the MMPA's
legal standards, and (ii) procedural duplication and inefficiency.
These flaws result in agency delays, overly conservative and inaccurate
impact analyses, confusion by agencies and courts, and exploitation by
environmental advocacy groups. Fixing some of the obvious flaws in the
MMPA could result in tangible regulatory improvements that increase
efficiency, decrease uncertainty and risk, and ultimately benefit all
stakeholders and citizens and the implementing agencies.
The modeling exercises relied upon by BOEM and conducted by NMFS
for incidental take regulations and authorizations often use a
multiplicative series of conservatively biased assumptions for all
uncertain parameter inputs. These assumptions lead to accumulating bias
as the cumulative conservative assumptions add up to increasingly
unlikely statistical probabilities that are not representative of real-
world conditions. Consequently, the results are improbable worst-case
scenarios, not accurate representations of likely effects.\7\ Using
more realistic risk criteria and modeling assumptions, and taking into
account standard monitoring and mitigation practices employed by the
geoscience industry, the more likely estimate of potential Level A
takes is zero or a comparably small number. This more likely estimate
is corroborated by the best available information, which includes no
observations of any harm to marine mammal populations (in any region)
as a result of seismic exploration activities. Importantly, the DC
Circuit Court recently held that, ``. . . implementing regulations call
for an empirical judgment about what is ``likely.'' The Service's role
as an expert is undermined, not furthered, when it distorts that
scientific judgment by indulging in worst-case scenarios and
pessimistic assumptions to benefit a favored side'',\8\ agreeing that
agencies shall adhere to the best available science.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\7\ A technical critique of the agencies' flawed, overly
conservative approach, as reproduced in BOEM's ITR petition for Gulf of
Mexico activities, is provided in Attachment B.
\8\ Maine Lobstermen's Association v. National Marine Fisheries
Service, 70 F.4th 582 (2023) No. 22-5238
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Geoscience for Offshore Wind & Carbon Capture and Storage

The energy & geoscience industry is integral to meeting policies of
lower carbon economies, including in the U.S. There are now 30
commercial operational CCS facilities worldwide that have a capture
capacity of 40 (Million tons per annum), more than 20 have come online
in the last 2 years. Over half of these are in North America. An
additional 141 facilities are in development or under construction and
will provide an additional 112 Mtpa of capture capacity by 2030, but to
go ``net zero'' by 2050, these figures would need to grow 140X!

As these projects are developed it is critical that they are sited,
designed, and managed in a manner that ensures and demonstrates the
long-term technical and environmental integrity of the storage or
sequestration. A vibrant geoscience industry is integral in meeting
these lofty goals and well-defined efficient regulatory processes are
required by U.S. and other policy makers.

In March 2021, the Biden administration has set an ambitious goal
of deploying 30 gigawatts of offshore wind electricity generation by
2030.\9\ Further, in April 2023 the President highlighted new steps the
United States was taking to meet its ambitious 1.5+C-aligned goal of
reducing emissions 50-52 percent in 2030. Noting it would ``require
responsible deployment of carbon capture, utilization, and storage
(CCUS) and carbon dioxide removal (CDR) technologies . . . CCUS has a
critical role to play in decarbonizing the global economy, particularly
the industrial sector, where process emissions are more difficult to
address.'' \10\ These goals are simply not possible without the
geoscience industry and the current regulatory delays and litigation
impediments will disallow implementing the vast offshore wind and CCS
needed.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\9\ FACT SHEET: Biden Administration Jumpstarts Offshore Wind
Energy Projects to Create Jobs https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-
room/statements-releases/2021/03/29/fact-sheet-biden-administration-
jumpstarts-offshore-wind-energy-projects-to-create-jobs/
\10\ FACT SHEET: President Biden to Catalyze Global Climate Action
through the Major Economies Forum on Energy and Climate https://
www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-room/statements-releases/2023/04/20/fact-
sheet-president-biden-to-catalyze-global-climate-action-through-the-
major-economies-forum-on-energy-and-climate/
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Following this ambitious goal, the Administration mandated the
Department of Interior to publish CCS regulations by November 2022, a
deadline that was missed and is still outstanding. Policymakers should
prioritize now the infrastructure required, including ensuring the
efficient permitting of geoscience surveys needed for the
identification and monitoring of the storage areas.
EnerGeo continues to call on BOEM and the current administration to
propose long-overdue regulations for offshore Carbon Capture and
Storage (CCS). Further, EnerGeo recently commented on BOEM's efforts to
provide efficiencies in the regulations for development of offshore
wind on the U.S. OCS for geoscience permitting. We strongly encourage
BOEM to align regulations which currently exist or may be in
development, which are specific to certain energy sources or low-carbon
solutions; mainstay (gas and oil), alternative, carbon sequestration,
marine minerals, and hydrogen, so that geoscience activities are
analyzed and authorized under the same metrics.
Regulations should not be used to differentiate between given
energy sources when it comes to permitting geoscience activities. Our
members execute surveys and use advanced technology to provide products
to energy developers and producers--those activities employ the same
general techniques regardless of whether their clients are developing
gas and oil or offshore wind, the regulations should not make a
distinction either. There is currently estimated 6,300 square miles
available in the Lower Miocene of GOM for offshore carbon capture
capacity with capability to contain 100s of billions of tons of CO2
emissions.

The energy geoscience industry has recommended the following to
BOEM on development of offshore CCS regulations:

Permitting Certainty

Defined timelines on approving or denying requested
permits.

The process should not differ in a significant way from
existing geoscience permitting processes for hydrocarbons.

The geoscience industry has a long history of obtaining
permits with the expectation that science-based mitigation
measures will match the potential impacts from activities.

The geoscience industry supports a research and evaluation
phase, pre-leasing.

Lease Rounds

Regularly held, predictable and well-defined lease rounds
should be held for CCS, if existing hydrocarbon leases will
not be available for CCS. Clarity from the agencies is
required on how leasing will be conducted for CCS.

Recognition by BOEM and Federal Agencies of the critical
role of existing geoscience data available for licensing
and for bidding on CCS--and avoid disclosure of
confidential industry intellectual property.

Lease lengths should be consistent with hydrocarbon
leases.

On-Lease

Once leases have been awarded, or CCS work programs are
being developed, requirements for geoscience data to
confirm geological stability and for carbon injection
should be included.

Monitoring requirements throughout the lease term will
require geoscience activity to confirm safe injection and
stability of depleted reservoirs and/or aquifers.

Post-Lease

Following the expiration of a lease term, continued
monitoring of the injection site will be required.

Liability should be borne by the Federal Government, ie:
Plume Leaks. At no time should liability surrounding the
sequestration site be placed on geoscience companies
providing data to the leaseholders or the government.

Conclusion

By 2050 the world population will increase to 9.8 billion and total
energy use is expected to increase by 34 percent. The projected energy
mix to meet this demand; 22% natural gas, 20% coal, 28% petroleum and
other liquids, 4% nuclear, and 26% alternatives. With the current
global energy supply crisis, a growing population and inflation on the
rise, citizens around the world will need greater access to reliable
and affordable energy, including petroleum and natural gas, as well as
alternative energies.
The energy geoscience industry has always been in the business of
minimizing the footprint, by pinpointing where the resource is and
importantly where it is not, allowing companies and policymakers to
identify and prioritize high-density, low-carbon intensive energy
sources, closer to existing infrastructure and the end user, locating
where offshore wind facilities are best suited for harnessing the
energy from wind, prolonging the life of existing natural gas and
petroleum assets, and making it possible to store carbon beneath the
surface. Geoscience surveys provide the information governments and
policymakers need to make informed decisions in the best interest of
their citizens regarding accessing mainstay energy and alternative
sources, as well as developing low-carbon strategies. As nations
develop and implement their energy evolution goals to make reliable,
affordable energy available to their citizens and meet Net Zero
Emissions (NZE) policy ambitions, it is important to understand that
those goals cannot and will not be realized without the critical data
and technology the geoscience industry provides.

At EnerGeo we are advocating to ensure all policymakers and energy
companies have access to reliable data and analysis to support their
forward-moving efforts.

With an increasing need for energy from all sources, many predict
the energy industry is at the start of an ``international upcycle.''
Where the industry invests now will be influenced by where they have
access to insight (data), infrastructure and supportive regulatory and
policy structures.
We urge Congress to review the MMPA and pass meaningful reform,
that will rectify the existing delays for geoscience survey
authorizations and urge the administration to implement regulations to
provide for efficient carbon capture and storage projects on the OCS.
Streamlining the permitting process along with reducing the ability for
outside special interest groups to obstruct energy exploration is a
necessary step to ensure our continued development of energy resources
and low carbon solutions for future generations in the U.S.

Thank you for the opportunity to testify today.

______

Questions Submitted for the Record to Mr. Joe Dryer, President & CEO,
Fairfield Geotechnologies

Questions Submitted by Representative Fulcher

Question 1. Can you discuss the latest technological advancements
in seismic surveying and how they can improve the accuracy and depth of
offshore energy resource assessments?

Answer. The geoscience industry, through a global competitive
market, continually advances technologies to better image the
subsurface. Our industry is made up of technology companies that
utilize computer processing capabilities second only to the U.S.
military, allowing for ever faster processing times and delivery of
more accurate imaging of the globes subsurface.
In the recent past, the industry has been deploying ocean bottom
nodes (OBN) and at an increasing pace the industry uses remote operated
vehicles (ROV) or autonomous underwater vehicles (AUV) to place the
nodes. The use of nodes, to receive the sound refraction from below the
surface, allows for vast areas to be covered by data acquisition
through fewer vessels on the surface. Further, acquiring data through
use of nodes allows for larger offsets (wider angle) which has shown an
increase in image quality and accuracy.
The geoscience industry is conducting 4D (time) surveys at a higher
rate than in the past, allowing for the extension of the life of oil
and natural gas producing basins, ensuring the industry is targeting
energy dense resources with lowest footprint possible. Additionally, 4D
surveys are the only viable solution to monitoring sites for CO2
injection to ensure the carbon remains in the targeted location and
whether the plume is migrating over time.
Further, advances in geoscience sources (compressed air sources)
are allowing the industry to focus the sound produced at the lower
frequencies which removes various marine life species from possible
exposure to sound generated by our industry's activities. It is
important to note here, as I included in my testimony, more than six
decades of worldwide geoscience surveying and scientific research
demonstrate that the risk of direct physical injury to marine mammals
is extremely low, and there is no scientific evidence demonstrating
biologically significant negative impacts on marine life populations.
Geoscience survey activities are temporary and transitory, and are the
most effective way to explore the earth's geology. In the more than 60
years of seismic surveying in the Gulf of Mexico, there has not been a
single reported incidence of sound from seismic operations injuring
marine life.

Today's advancements in technology, which can pinpoint the most
fruitful areas for hydrocarbon potential, siting of wind turbines
offshore and locating areas for carbon storage, have contributed to
reducing the overall environmental footprint associated with energy
exploration. Advances in the technology we deploy have also helped to
decrease operational and safety risks associated with energy
development.

Question 2. From your perspective, what are the major hurdles in
conducting more comprehensive and up-to-date seismic surveys for the
OCS and how might these be overcome?

Answer. Without question, the major hurdle to conducting a more
comprehensive and up-to-date geoscience library evaluating the
resources for the U.S. OCS, is bureaucratic delays and duplicative
processes for permitting and environmental authorizations with little
to no benefit for the marine environment and marine life.
Unfortunately, the permitting of this activity critical to identifying
the nation's energy supplies is too often stalled or impeded by groups
opposed to the identification/imaged (mapped) energy source--whether
wind, petroleum or natural gas--exploiting existing regulatory and
litigation processes.
Starting at page 4 in my written testimony, ``BOEM Permitting &
NMFS Authorization Delays'', I provide detailed explanation of current
hurdles to permitting, and suggestions on how the processes could be
more efficient. Fairfield Geotechnologies, through our participation in
the EnerGeo Alliance, urges Congress to pass legislation to ameliorate
the redundant processes such as the duplicative authorizations/
consultation required within the Marine Mammal Protect Act (MMPA) and
Endangered Species Act (ESA), which have twisted those statutes into
something never intended resulting in ambiguity, uncertainty and costly
delays in the permitting process.

______

Mr. Rosendale. I thank Mr. Dryer for his testimony. Our
final witness is Mr. Kendall Dix, and he is the National Policy
Director for Taproot Earth, and is stationed in
Charlottesville, Virginia.
Mr. Dix, you are now recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF KENDALL DIX, NATIONAL POLICY DIRECTOR, TAPROOT
EARTH, CHARLOTTESVILLE, VIRGINIA

Mr. Dix. Hello. Thank you for inviting me here today to
testify in front of this Committee. I will read a brief
statement here, but have submitted a longer statement for
inclusion in the record.
My name is Kendall Dix. As a former career line cook in New
Orleans, I have vivid memories of my time as a low-wage worker
who was forced to work through hurricane evacuations while my
family begged me to leave. Through my later work as a
sustainable fisheries advocate, and then an organizer working
in the industrial corridor along the Mississippi River, an area
infamously known as Cancer Alley, I am all too aware of the oil
and gas industry's impact on the people and the environment of
the Gulf Coast. The oil and money flow out while the pollution
remains; the people get poorer and sicker; and the climate
disasters get worse every year.
I am now a policy specialist at Taproot Earth, a global
climate justice organization rooted in Slidell, Louisiana. We
work with communities across 18 states, from the Gulf south, up
through Appalachia, and across the globe. We evolved out of an
organization called the Gulf Coast Center for Law and Policy,
which was founded in the aftermath of Hurricane Katrina, a
climate disaster that killed thousands of people and changed
the Gulf south region forever. Taproot Earth is an organization
that works with communities to advance solutions around
essential resources such as water, energy, and land to ensure
that we can address climate change in an ecological and
holistic way.
I am honored, excited, and extremely nervous to testify in
front of you today, but I am also a bit tired. I am tired and
frustrated that somebody from the climate and environmental
world is again being asked to convince you that oil and gas
extraction is harming people on the planet, and that we should
actually do something to change it. I am exhausted from seeing
good people attend funeral after funeral of their loved ones in
Cancer Alley, while policymakers insist that nothing can be
done to permit their premature deaths.
At every stage of its life cycle, from when it is extracted
to when it is refined, burned, and/or transformed into forever
chemicals that may never break down, oil and gas is toxic to
human health and the environment. Not only are these impacts
making the planet unlivable, they are disproportionately
harming poor, rural, Black, Indigenous, and communities of
color who have already suffered under centuries of systemic
discrimination in this country. To continue leasing oil and gas
extraction in the Gulf of Mexico is to continue sacrificing the
region.
As an organization, Taproot Earth works for climate
justice. That does mean phasing out fossil fuels, but it also
means simultaneously addressing the legacies of racism and
domination. We are working for a world in which we can all
live, rest, and thrive in the places we call home. However,
most of the people I know and love in this world live in south
Louisiana. Between catastrophic storms, skyrocketing insurance
rates, poor water quality, extreme heat waves, and school and
housing closures, the climate crisis is displacing people right
now. The problem is even worse than we thought.
The good news is that we now have viable alternatives to
oil and gas, such as wind and solar, that will reduce our
energy system's impact on the environment and make our region
more resilient to climate disruption. However, oil and gas
infrastructure can directly compete with or block these
solutions. Simply put, you cannot build a wind turbine or run a
transmission cable through an active oil and gas pipeline
without risking another catastrophic oil spill.
More than 18,000 miles of pipelines lie abandoned in the
sea floor, in addition to 2,700 wells and 500 drilling
platforms. The Government Accountability Office recently
released two harrowing reports that show the Federal Government
has failed for years to stop polluters from littering our
public lands and waters with their garbage. While some parts of
energy policy can be technical or complicated, making sure
companies clean up their mess is not one of those issues.
The time has long passed for us to move away from energy
sources that poison our people and planet. We can build a world
that upholds the rights of everyone to have clean air to
breathe, clean water to drink, and no more abandoned wells and
pipelines in the oceans. However, that world does not include
additional fossil fuel extraction.
Thank you for the opportunity to testify.

[The prepared statement of Mr. Dix follows:]
Prepared Statement of Kendall Dix, National Policy Specialist,
Taproot Earth

Dear Committee Members, my name is Kendall Dix. As a former career
line cook in New Orleans, I have vivid memories of time as a low wage
worker who was forced to work through hurricane evacuations while my
family begged me to leave. Through my later work as a sustainable
fisheries advocate and then an organizer working in the industrial
corridor along the Mississippi River--an area infamously known as
Cancer Alley--I am all too aware of the oil and gas industry's impact
on the people and environment of the Gulf Coast. The oil and money flow
out, while the pollution remains, the people get poorer and sicker, and
the climate disasters get worse every year.
I'm now a policy specialist at Taproot Earth, a global climate
justice organization rooted in Slidell, Louisiana. We work with
communities across 18 states from the Gulf South up through Appalachia
and across the globe. We evolved out of an organization called the Gulf
Coast Center for Law and Policy, which was founded in the aftermath of
Hurricane Katrina, a climate disaster that killed thousands of people
and changed the Gulf South region forever. Taproot Earth is an
organization that works with communities to advance solutions around
essential resources such as water, energy, and land to ensure that we
can address climate change in an ecological and holistic way.
I am honored, excited, and nervous to testify in front of you
today, but I am also a bit tired. I'm tired and frustrated that
somebody from the climate and environmental world is again being asked
to convince you that oil and gas extraction is harming people and the
planet and that we should actually do something to stop it. I am
exhausted from seeing good people attend funeral after funeral of their
loved ones in Cancer Alley while policymakers insist that nothing can
be done to prevent their premature deaths.
At every stage of its life cycle from when it is extracted to when
it is refined, burned, and/or transformed into forever chemicals that
may never break down, oil and gas is toxic to human health and the
environment. Not only are these impacts making the planet unlivable,
they are disproportionately harming poor, rural, Black, Indigenous, and
communities of color who have already suffered under centuries of
systemic discrimination in this country. To continue leasing oil and
gas extraction in the Gulf of Mexico is to continue sacrificing the
region. As an organization, Taproot Earth works for climate justice.
That does mean phasing out fossil fuels, but it also means
simultaneously addressing the legacies of racism and domination, so we
can all live, rest, and thrive in the places we call home. Most of the
people I know and love in this world live in South Louisiana. Between
catastrophic storms, skyrocketing insurance rates, poor water quality,
extreme heat waves, and school and housing closures, the climate crisis
is displacing people now. The problem is even worse than we thought.
The good news is that we now have viable alternatives to oil and
gas, such as wind and solar, that will reduce our energy system's
impacts on the environment and make our region more resilient to
climate disruption. However, oil and gas infrastructure can directly
compete with or block these solutions. You cannot build a wind turbine
or run a transmission cable through an oil and gas pipeline without
risking another catastrophic oil spill.
More than 18,000 miles of pipelines lie abandoned in the sea floor,
in addition to 2,700 wells and 500 drilling platforms. The Government
Accountability Office recently released two harrowing reports that show
the federal government has failed for years to stop polluters from
littering our public lands and waters with their garbage.
1,2

While some parts of energy policy can be technical or complicated,
making sure companies clean up their mess is not one of those issues.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ U.S. Government Accountability Office, ``Offshore Oil and Gas:
Interior Needs to Improve Decommissioning Enforcement and Mitigate
Related Risks,'' January 2024, https://www.gao.gov/assets/d24106229.pdf
\2\ U.S. Government Accountability Office, ``Oil and Gas Pipelines:
Agencies Should Improve Oversight of Decommissioning,'' January 18,
2024, https://www.gao.gov/assets/d24106444.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The time has long passed for us to move away from energy sources
that poison our people and planet. We can build a world that upholds
the rights of everyone to have clean air to breathe, clean water to
drink, and no more abandoned wells pipelines in the oceans. That world
does not include more fossil fuel extraction.
Impacts of Oil and Gas Development on the Gulf of Mexico

The storm surge that made Hurricane Katrina so devastating was a
direct result of the damage caused by decades of oil and gas extraction
and its associated pipelines that destroy coastal wetlands and cause
sea level rise through the burning of fossil fuels. Emissions drive
ocean acidification as well as deadly methane and other toxic
pollution. Further, there are documented slow leakages and pipeline
accidents related to associated infrastructure, and property values
near these sites continue to decrease. Addressing climate change now by
ceasing to extract fossil fuels would be just the first step toward
repairing the harm the industry has wrought.

Abandoned Oil and Gas Infrastructure: Since the 1960s, the Bureau
of Safety and Environmental Enforcement (BSEE) has allowed the offshore
oil and gas industry to leave 97% of pipelines (18,000 miles) on the
seafloor when no longer in use.\3\ As mentioned above, this aging oil
and gas infrastructure inhibits the development of offshore wind.
Unfortunately, many companies who own offshore oil rigs at the end of
their life cycle are no longer financially solvent.\4\ To make sure
this doesn't happen in the future, the Department of Interior (DOI)
must end the practice of allowing lessees and Right of Way holders to
decommission pipelines in place. The DOI must require that all
pipelines be removed and operators clear the seafloor of all
obstructions created by the lease and the pipeline right-of-way
operations.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ U.S. Government Accountability Office, ``Offshore Oil and Gas:
Updated Regulations Needed to Improve Pipeline Oversight and
Decommissioning,'' March 19, 2021, https://www.gao.gov/products/gao-21-
293.
\4\ Wolf, Alex, ``Bankruptcies Fueling Environmental Crisis at
Abandoned Oil Wells,'' Bloomberg Law, September 2, 2021, https://
news.bloomberglaw.com/bankruptcy-law/bankruptcies-fueling-
environmental-crisis-at-abandoned-oil-wells.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
DOI should also complete and issue its financial assurance
rulemaking and require lessees to hold fully vested trust funds and/or
a sinking trust fund and supplemental financial assurance for all
infrastructure and wells. The recent Fieldwood Bankruptcy and the still
existing gap between the cost to decommission all associated
infrastructure reveals an eminent crisis if not met with appropriate
government actions. The government must require cash on hand to cover
asset retirement obligations if companies seek to profit from the
collective resources of the U.S.
For infrastructure in the ocean that has already been
decommissioned in place, the Secretary of Interior should order all
lessees to remove the pipelines immediately.\5\ 30 CFR Sec. 250.1754
establishes clear authority to the BSEE Regional Supervisor to order
the removal of a pipeline decommissioned in place if that pipeline
constitutes an obstruction. These pipelines provide no physical or
material benefit to the American public, but they do impose an
artificial limit on how much area can be available for offshore wind
development.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\ 30 CFR Sec. 250.1754.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
We recommend the establishment of an ``Idle Iron Pipeline'' program
to make this administratively feasible. The Department should identify
which of the 18,000 miles of decommissioned pipelines in place obstruct
future offshore wind, and prioritize their expedient removal. If the
lessees are not financially solvent, DOI should be funded to remove
this infrastructure itself, and Congress should fund this activity with
a tax on companies that benefit from offshore oil and gas drilling.
Anything less than aggressively removing oil and gas infrastructure no
longer in use delays the buildout of American offshore wind and
functions as a de facto subsidy to the oil and gas industry.
Unfortunately, offshore oil and gas infrastructure and proposed
development in federal waters hinder transition to renewable sources.
For example, oil and gas rigs require a 500-ft setback for and active
oil pipelines require a 200-ft setback as noted in a July 2022 memo by
Michael Celata, BOEM's Gulf of Mexico Regional Director.\6\ This makes
sense because interactions between turbines and oil rigs/pipelines
could cause oil spills or other dangerous disasters, but it also means
that you can't build anything--including offshore wind infrastructure
anywhere near oil infrastructure. With so much oil and gas
infrastructure in the Gulf of Mexico, otherwise viable wind energy
areas have been and will continue to be limited.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\6\ Celata, Michael, ``Request for Concurrence on Preliminary Wind
Energy Areas for the Gulf of Mexico Area Identification Process
Pursuant to 30 C.F.R. Sec. 585.211(b),'' Memorandum dated July 20,
2022, p. 13, https://www.boem.gov/sites/default/files/documents//
Draft%20Area%20ID% 20Memo%20GOM%20508.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
This is a map of oil and gas drilling platforms both historical and
active, pipelines, and active leases in the Gulf of Mexico: \7\ It
affirms that Southeastern Louisiana has far too much oil and gas
infrastructure for wind energy to be developed safely:
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\7\ Fracktracker, Oil and Gas Infrastructure in the Gulf of Mexico
https://maps.fractracker.org/latest/
?appid=0b3260e4417d4299b750b6b2447d7f33.

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT

---------------------------------------------------------------------------
For reference, here are the Wind Energy Areas that BOEM chose:

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT

Here is a map of industry interest from the July 20 Bureau of
Ocean Energy Management (BOEM) memo: \8\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\8\ Celata, Michael, ``Request for Concurrence on Preliminary Wind
Energy Areas for the Gulf of Mexico Area Identification Process
Pursuant to 30 C.F.R. Sec. 585.211(b),'' Memorandum dated July 20,
2022, p. 32, https://www.boem.gov/sites/default/files/documents//
Draft%20Area%20ID% 20Memo%20GOM%20508.pdf.

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT3

Comments by regional director Celata at an August 22, 2022
meeting hosted by BOEM confirm what these maps indicate. Celata was
asked directly whether oil and gas infrastructure that had been
decommissioned in place was inhibiting offshore wind development. He
answered that the proposed Wind Energy Areas (WEAs) were selected
because wind companies would be able to run new infrastructure
``around'' the existing oil infrastructure to the shore, unlike most of
the rest of the coast which is too thick with oil gear to make it
practicable.
Further, BOEM has made previous decisions to site oil and gas
infrastructure in southeast Louisiana, and we can only conclude that
these decisions are a direct cause of the region not being selected by
BOEM for offshore wind development. As BOEM may begin to permit
dangerous and unnecessary offshore carbon capture and storage
infrastructure, these pipeline conflicts will only continue to grow.
This is particularly troubling because the Gulf of Mexico has some of
the highest net technical wind energy potential of any region.\9\
Taproot Earth's view is that carbon capture and storage is a false
solution that will extend the life of fossil fuels and dump more
pollution in overburdened frontline communities.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\9\ Lopez, Anthony et al. ``Offshore Wind Energy Technical
Potential for the Contiguous United States, National Renewable Energy
Laboratory, August 15, 2022, https://www.nrel.gov/docs/fy22osti/
83650.pdf.

Ocean Acidification: The emissions from oil and gas extraction are
fueling the acidification of the ocean.\10\ The risks to marine goods
and services amplify with increasing acidification causing shifts to
macroalgal dominance, habitat degradation and a loss of biodiversity at
seep sites in the tropics, the sub-tropics and on temperate coasts.\11\
Based on this empirical evidence, scientists expect ocean acidification
to have serious consequences for all of us who are dependent on coastal
protection, fisheries and aquaculture.\12\ If we don't stop extracting
fossil fuels, we risk the collapse of ocean ecosystems.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\10\ Xiangfeng Zeng, Xijuan Chen, Jie Zhuang, ``The positive
relationship between ocean acidification and pollution,'' Marine
Pollution Bulletin, Volume 91, Issue 1, 2015, Pages 14-21, ISSN 0025-
326X, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.marpolbul.2014.12.001.
\11\ Jason M. Hall-Spencer, Ben P. Harvey; Ocean acidification
impacts on coastal ecosystem services due to habitat degradation. Emerg
Top Life Sci 10 May 2019; 3 (2): 197-206. doi: https://doi.org/10.1042/
ETLS20180117.
\12\ Id.

Drilling Disasters: Offshore oil drilling can lead to catastrophic
drilling disasters, such as the BP Drilling Disaster of 2010.\13\ The
BP disaster directly killed 11 human beings and millions of living
creatures that live in or around the Gulf of Mexico. In total, it
caused an estimated $17.2 billion in damage to the Gulf of Mexico
ecosystem.\14\ The BP drilling disaster is an example of the
catastrophic damage done when offshore drilling goes wrong, but even
without gross negligence and recklessness, offshore drilling has
negative impacts on the marine, coastal and human environments.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\13\ Department of Justice, ``U.S. and Five Gulf States Reach
Historic Settlement with BP to Resolve Civil Lawsuit Over Deepwater
Horizon Oil Spill,'' October 15, 2015, https://www.justice.gov/opa/pr/
us-and-five-gulf-states-reach-historic-settlement-bp-resolve-civil-
lawsuit-over-deepwater.
\14\ Bishop, R.C. et al.''Putting a value on injuries to natural
assets: The BP oil spill,'' Science 356(6335), 2017, doi:10.1126/
science.aam8124

Slow Leakage of Oil and Gas at Drill Sites: In 2018, scientists
discovered that a 14-year-old oil spill owned by Taylor Energy was
leaking much more oil than previously thought.\15\ Taylor had been
caused by a hurricane-induced mudslide. Taylor Energy tried to cover up
the spill, and it was mostly ignored by regulators until citizen
scientists visually documented the spill's oil sheen during a
monitoring flight in 2010. Oil spills caused by hurricanes are a
guaranteed outcome when you permit oil and gas infrastructure in the
Gulf of Mexico.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\15\ Dears, Darryl, ``A 14-Year-Long Oil Spill in the Gulf of
Mexico Verges on Becoming One of the Worst in US History,'' The
Washington Post, October 23, 2018, https://www.agricanto.org/uploads/5/
2/6/3/52634281/a_14-year-long_oil_spill_in_the_gulf_of_mexico.pdf.

Emissions from Normal Operations: Methane, a powerful greenhouse
gas, is an inevitable byproduct of oil and gas extraction. Each year,
oil and gas operations emit an amount of methane that is equivalent to
211 million metric tons of carbon dioxide, or about 4 percent of total
U.S. emissions.\16\ Even when operations are going well, the extraction
sector is a major contributor to the climate crisis before the fuels
are even burned.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\16\ United States Environmental Protection Agency, ``Estimates of
Methane Emissions by Segment in the United States (2020),'' https://
www.epa.gov/natural-gas-star-program/estimates-methane-emissions-
segment-united-states

Pipeline accidents: Offshore oil drilling requires the building of
pipelines to move the oil and gas onshore where it reaches refineries
and other pipeline networks. These pipelines leak and sometimes
explode. Over 2,600 hazardous gas pipeline leaks in the United States
caused more than $4 billion in damages and emergency services, killed
122 people, and released 26.6 billion cubic feet of fuel as methane or
carbon dioxide over a 10 year period.\17\ The only way to prevent these
accidents from happening is to stop extracting oil and gas and
transporting it via pipeline.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\17\ Dutzik, Tony, Abraham Scarr, and Matt Casale, ``Methane Gas
Leaks: Frequent leaks are resulting in death, injury and other damage
to our health and environment,'' U.S. PIRG, Environment America, and
Frontier Group, June 2022, https://publicinterestnetwork.org/wp-
content/uploads/2022/05/USP-EA-FG-Methane-Gas-Leaks-Jun22-screen_0.pdf

Other toxic emissions: After oil and gas is extracted from the Gulf
of Mexico, it arrives onshore for refining. The family of products
derived from oil and gas is vast. It includes gasoline, plastics,
fertilizers, and more.\18\ The factories where these products are
refined are located all over the country, but they are heavily
concentrated in the Gulf South and other places near the sites of
extraction.\19\ While Black and Hispanic people suffer nearly 48
percent of the pollution exposure from such sites, they receive barely
a fifth of the total jobs.\20\ The disparity is particularly pronounced
in the oil and gas industry, especially for Black workers, who hold
just 9 percent of the jobs in oil and gas extraction and earn 23
percent less than their white counterparts.\21\ Race--not poverty--is
the strongest predictor of exposure to PM 2.5, a health-damaging
particle created when fossil fuels are burned.\22\ Environmental racism
is baked into the fossil fuel extraction industry and its downstream
toxic affiliates.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\18\ Department of Energy, ``Products Made From Oil and Gas,''
https://www.energy.gov/sites/prod/files/2019/11/f68/
Products%20Made%20From%20Oil%20and%20Natural%20Gas%20 Infographic.pdf.
\19\ Shaw, Al, Lylla Younes and Ava Koffman, ``The Most Detailed
Map of Cancer-Causing Industrial Air Pollution in the U.S.,''
ProPublica, November 2, 2021, https://projects.propublica.org/toxmap/.
\20\ Neuhauser, Alan, ``Minority Communities Near Industrial Sites
Get Pollution, Not Jobs,'' US News and World Report, October 1, 2018,
https://www.usnews.com/news/national-news/articles/2018-10-01/minority-
communities-near-industrial-sites-get-pollution-not-jobs.
\21\ Id.
\22\ Mikati, Ihab et al. ``Disparities in Distribution of
Particulate Matter Emission Sources by Race and Poverty Status,''
American Journal of Public Health 108, 2018, p. 480-485, https://
doi.org/10.2105/AJPH.2017.304297.

Decreased property values: Home prices along the Gulf Coast are
already much lower than on the Pacific or Atlantic Coasts.\23\ This
makes sense given the amount of fossil fuel extraction along the Gulf
Coast.\24\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\23\ National Association of Realtors, ``County Median Home Prices
\24\ US Minerals Management Service, `` http://www.mms.gov/ld/PDFs/
OCSstatusMap8e(3).pdf

We know that fossil fuel development can cause property values to
fall. Applying a research design based on the openings and closings of
1,600 industrial plants to rich data on housing markets and infant
health, one study found that plant openings lead to 11 percent declines
in housing values within 0.5 mile.\25\ The same study found that a
plant's operation is associated with a roughly 3 percent increase in
the probability of low birth weight within 1 mile. It reasons that
people don't want to live near fossil fuel infrastructure because they
correctly associate it with poor health impacts. In order to protect
people's health and wealth stored in the value of their homes, BOEM
should cease permitting new fossil fuel infrastructure.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\25\ Currie J. et al. ``Environmental Health Risks and Housing
Values: Evidence from 1,600 Toxic Plant Openings and Closings.'' Am
Econ Rev. 2015 Feb;105(2):678-709. doi: 10.1257/aer.20121656. PMID:
27134284; PMCID: PMC4847734.

Land loss: Oil and gas extracted offshore must eventually come
onshore for processing and transportation via pipeline. The building of
pipelines requires digging up the earth to bury them. In coastal
habitats, this can lead to land loss. In Louisiana, Outer Continental
Shelf pipelines covered 480 square miles of wetlands and land, and the
navigation channels covered 137 square miles, representing about 11
percent of the Louisiana coast.\26\ The construction of pipelines
related to oil and gas production in the Outer Continental Shelf of the
Gulf of Mexico ``can cause locally intense habitat changes, thereby
contributing to the loss of critically important land and wetland
areas.'' \27\ Louisiana has now lost more than 2,000 miles of land,
roughly equivalent to the state of Delaware.\28\ The National OCS Oil
and Gas Leasing Program is directly responsible for a portion of this
land loss.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\26\ Johnston, James & Cahoon, Donald & La Peyre, Megan, ``Outer
Continental Shelf (OCS)-Related Pipelines and Navigation Canals in the
Western and Central Gulf of Mexico: Relative Impacts on Wetland
Habitats and Effectiveness of Mitigation.'' U.S. Dept. of the Interior,
Minerals Management Service, Gulf of Mexico Region, New Orleans, LA.
OCS Study MMS 2009-048. 200 pp.
\27\ Id.
\28\ United States Geological Service, ``Louisiana's Changing
Coastal Wetlands,'' July 12, 2017, https://www.usgs.gov/news/national-
news-release/usgs-louisianas-rate-coastal-wetland-loss-continues-slow
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Land loss makes the region more vulnerable to hurricanes, as we saw
during Hurricanes Katrina, Ida and others. When Hurricane Ida struck in
2021, it remained a Category 3 hurricane long after ``landfall''
because so little land was left to stop the storm.\29\ When those
hurricanes hit, they can cause spills at the toxic facilities that
process oil and gas. After Hurricane Ida, there were more than 2,000
chemical spills.\30\ New oil and gas extraction would only make future
impacts worse.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\29\ Pappas, Stephanie, ``Why did Hurricane Ida stay so strong for
so long?,'' Live Science, August 30, 2021, https://www.livescience.com/
hurrixacane-ida-brown-ocean.html.
\30\ Baurick, Tristan, ``Reports of Hurricane Ida oil, chemical
spills escalate in Louisiana waters,'' nola.com, September 8, 2021,
https://www.nola.com/news/environment/article_0d4b138c-10dc-11ec-8269-
cfc16666a808.html.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Fossil fuels are primarily extracted to be burned for energy. When
they are burned, they create toxic pollution. Exposure to this
pollution causes lung cancer.\31\ Like other forms of pollution, this
air pollution from burning fossil fuels disproportionately impacts poor
people and people of color.\32\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\31\ Chen G et al. ``Traffic-related air pollution and lung cancer:
A meta-analysis,'' Thorac Cancer, 2015 May;6(3):307-18. doi: 10.1111/
1759-7714.12185. Epub 2015 Apr 24. PMID: 26273377; PMCID: PMC4448375.
\32\ Park YM, Kwan MP. Understanding Racial Disparities in Exposure
to Traffic-Related Air Pollution: Considering the Spatiotemporal
Dynamics of Population Distribution. Int J Environ Res Public Health.
2020 Feb 1;17(3):908. doi: 10.3390/ijerph17030908. PMID: 32024171;
PMCID: PMC7037907.

Pollution from oil and gas derivatives: Oil and gas is used to make
plastics, which are harmful to human health at every stage of their
life cycles.\33\ Once plastic reaches the environment in the form of
macro or microplastics, it slowly fragments into smaller particles,
where it contaminates all areas of the environment (air, water, and
soil), accumulates in food chains, and releases toxic additives or
concentrates additional toxic chemicals in the environment, making them
bioavailable again for direct or indirect human exposure.\34\ This
affects cardiovascular, renal, gastrointestinal, neurological,
reproductive, and respiratory systems, impacts include cancers,
diabetes, neuro-, reproductive, and developmental toxicity.\35\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\33\ Azoulay, David et al. ``Plastic & Health The Hidden Costs of a
Plastic Planet,'' February 2019, https://www.ciel.org/wp-content/
uploads/2019/02/Plastic-and-Health-The-Hidden-Costs-of-a-Plastic-
Planet-February-2019.pdf.
\34\ Id.
\35\ Id.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Per- and polyfluoroalkyl substances (PFAS) are chemicals that are a
part of the plastics family. PFAS are synthetic substances that are
toxic in minuscule amounts and do not break down in the
environment.\36\ They end up in the water supply, eventually
accumulating in the human body over time and causing a range of serious
health effects.\37\ These ``forever chemicals'' are used in fracking
fluid for oil and gas, including in offshore oil drilling in the Gulf
of Mexico, where they escape to the broader environment.\38\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\36\ Kelso, Matt, ``Mapping Pfas: Forever Chemicals In Oil & Gas
Operations,'' Fractracker Alliance, July 15, 2021, https://
www.fractracker.org/2021/07/mapping-pfas-forever-chemicals-in-oil-gas-
operations/
\37\ Id.
\38\ Center for Biological Diversity, ``Toxic Waters: How Offshore
Fracking Pollutes the Gulf of Mexico,'' July 2021, https://
www.biologicaldiversity.org/campaigns/fracking/pdfs/Toxic-Waters-
offshore-fracking-report-Center-for-Biological-Diversity.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Chemical fertilizers are responsible for 2.4 percent of global
emissions, or more than the aviation industry.\39\ Fertilizers are
derived from oil and gas and processed in highly toxic and greenhouse
gas-intensive refineries.\40\ About 20 percent of these nutrients are
lost to runoff or leach into the groundwater.\41\ This nutrient
pollution eventually flows to the ocean where it fuels harmful algae
blooms that kill marine life through hypoxia and/or produce airborne
toxins that cause diseases in human beings.\42\ Meanwhile, the excess
nitrogen and phosphorus in the groundwater leads to a variety of human
health problems including blue baby syndrome.\43\ Nutrient pollution
threatens the future of wild capture fisheries and sustainable
aquaculture, endangering the nation's food security.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\39\ Huber, Bridget, ``Report: Fertilizer responsible for more than
20 percent of total agricultural emissions,'' FERN, November 1, 2021,
https://thefern.org/ag_insider/report-fertilizer-responsible-for-more-
than-20-percent-of-total-agricultural-emissions/.
\40\ Chai, R., Ye, X., Ma, C. et al. Greenhouse gas emissions from
synthetic nitrogen manufacture and fertilization for main upland crops
in China. Carbon Balance Manage 14, 20 (2019). https://doi.org/10.1186/
s13021-019-0133-9
\41\ Howarth, R. et. al, ``Ecosystems and Human Wellbeing: Policy
Responses,'' Millennium Ecosystem Assessment (MA), Volume 3. Chapter 9:
Nutrient Management: pp. 295-311.
\42\ National Oceanic and Atmospheric Association, ``What is a
harmful algae bloom?'' https://www.noaa.gov/what-is-harmful-algal-
bloom.
\43\ Knobeloch, L. et al. ``Blue babies and nitrate-contaminated
well water.'' Environmental health perspectives, vol. 108,7, 2000, 675-
8. doi:10.1289/ehp.00108675.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Pesticides are hazardous to human, biodiversity, and ecosystem
health.\44\ Many pesticides such as neonicotinoids, pyrethryoids, and
glyphosate formulants are produced from gas and oil. They cause cancer
in human beings.\45\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\44\ Demeneix BA. How fossil fuel-derived pesticides and plastics
harm health, biodiversity, and the climate. Lancet Diabetes Endocrinol.
2020 Jun;8(6):462-464. doi: 10.1016/S2213-8587(20)30116-9. PMID:
32445732; PMCID: PMC7239621.
\45\ Bassil KL, et al. ``Cancer health effects of pesticides:
systematic review,'' Can Fam Physician. 2007 Oct;53(10):1704-11. PMID:
17934034; PMCID: PMC2231435.

Ecosystem services: The Gulf of Mexico has multiple important other
uses of the sea and seabed, including fisheries, tourism and
recreation, shipping, and other anticipated uses such as offshore wind
or offshore carbon capture and storage. Offshore oil production
conflicts with all of them. The natural environment of the Gulf of
Mexico provides numerous valuable ecosystem services,\46\ including:
Supporting services (nutrient balance, hydrological balance, biological
interactions, and soil and sediment balance); Regulating services
(pollutant attenuation, water quality, gas regulation, climate
regulation, hazard moderation); provisioning services (air supply,
water quantity, food, raw materials, medicinal resources, ornamental
resources); and cultural services (aesthetics and existence, spiritual
and historic, science and education, recreational opportunities).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\46\ ``5 Ecosystem Services in the Gulf of Mexico.'' National
Research Council. 2013. An Ecosystem Services Approach to Assessing the
Impacts of the Deepwater Horizon Oil Spill in the Gulf of Mexico.
Washington, DC: The National Academies Press. doi: 10.17226/18387.

National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine. 2013. An
Ecosystem Services Approach to Assessing the Impacts of the Deepwater
Horizon Oil Spill in the Gulf of Mexico. Washington, DC: The National
Academies Press. https://doi.org/10.17226/18387.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
These ecosystem services are provided ``for free'' by nature but
provide economic benefit to other sectors. Some of these benefits such
as fisheries landings or the tourism industry can be more easily
quantified. In 2003, one study estimated that the Gulf of Mexico ocean
economy generated an estimated $32 billion, or more than $52 billion in
2022 dollars.\47\ Other estimates put the annual economic value of the
Gulf of Mexico at $2 trillion, or $2.73 trillion adjusted for
inflation.\48\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\47\ Colgan, Charles. 2008. ``The Ocean Economy of the Gulf of
Mexico in National Perspective'' in The Changing Coastal and Ocean
Economics of the Gulf of Mexico. Edited by Judith Kildow, Charles
Colgan, and Linwood Pendleton, University of Texas Press. (pp. 2, 3).
\48\ Shepherd, Andrew N., ``Economic Impact of Gulf of Mexico
Ecosystem Goods and Services and Integration Into Restoration Decision-
Making,'' Gulf of Mexico Science, 2013(1-2), pp. 10-27, https://
www.disl.org/assets/uploads/publications/goms-31-01-10-27.pdf
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Some ecosystem services such as spiritual value can be impossible
to quantify and are invaluable. Others such as the ocean's ability to
attenuate pollution or absorb carbon dioxide can be difficult to
quantify but the economic cost of reproducing them through mechanical
means would be astronomical. Whenever we choose to sacrifice some part
of the Gulf of Mexico for oil and gas production, we should account for
the accompanying decrease in ecosystem services.
Moving Forward

We now have viable alternatives to oil and gas, such as justly
sourced renewable wind and solar, that will reduce our energy system's
impacts on the environment and make our region more resilient to
climate disruption. However, oil and gas infrastructure directly
competes with or blocks these solutions such as offshore wind. This
does not have to be the case where the federal government can play a
major role in leading the energy transition.
For the people of the Gulf South, degrees of warming are not an
abstraction or a future problem. This year, we documented a full 12
months of global temperatures that were 1.5 degrees celsius above
historical measures, the warming threshold scientists had said we
should not exceed in 2030 to avoid the worst impacts of the climate
crisis. We need to act now.
Recommendations

Invest in Justly Sourced Renewable Energy. We now have
viable alternatives to fossil fuels that can meet our
national energy needs and do not accelerate the climate
crisis. Peer-reviewed studies have demonstrated viable
pathways to transition our energy system to 100 percent
renewable energy.\49\ This transition to renewable energy
would pay for itself in about 6 years.\50\ Renewable energy
is now less expensive than fossil fuels. Almost two-thirds
of newly installed renewable power in 2021 had lower costs
than the cheapest coal-fired option in the world's top 20
economies. Renewable energy is safer, cleaner, and cheaper
than offshore oil and gas drilling. Simply put, we can best
meet our national energy needs by transitioning away from
fossil fuels and transitioning as rapidly as possible to
renewable energy made from materials that are sustainably
sourced and respect Indigenous sovereignty. From
``Principles of a Just Transition in Offshore Wind
Energy'': \51\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\49\ Khalili, Siavash et al. ``On the History and Future of 100%
Renewable Energy Systems Research,'' IEEE Access. 10, 2022, 1-1.
10.1109/ACCESS.2022.3193402.
\50\ Jacobson, Mark Z. et al., ``Low-cost solutions to global
warming, air pollution, and energy insecurity for 145 countries,''
Energy Environ. Sci., 2022, 15, 3343
\51\ UPROSE, Rogue Climate, Taproot Earth, and Climate Justice
Alliance, ``Principles for a Just Transition in Offshore Wind Energy,''
March 2023, https://taproot.earth/wp-content/uploads/2023/03/
JustTransition-OffshoreWindEnergy_v2.pdf.

o
Supply Chains and Life Cycles compatible with
Zero Waste, Circular Economy Principles, and Ecological
Mindfulness: While offshore wind energy does not create
greenhouse gasses emissions, its production, transportation,
and maintenance can produce emissions and waste. We must
advocate for local manufacturing in existing industrial areas
to support, protect, and revitalize local production capacity
where applicable and in accordance with local frontline
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
community priorities to avoid transportation emissions.

Clean Up the Ocean:

o
Terminate the Rigs-to-Reef Program: The Rigs-
to-Reef program encourages platforms to be left in place (or
toppled or removed and moved to a predetermined reefing
location) and placed in a state-driven and funded rigs-to-reefs
program, as an alternative option to the requirement of
removal. Naturally this option has become attractive to oil and
gas operators because it is less expensive to ``reef'' a
structure instead of removing it. Today, there are more than
515 ``reefed'' rigs on the seafloor in federal waters, not
counting ``reefed structures'' in state waters. Because reefed
structures require a mandatory buffer of 500 feet per rig, we
strongly recommend the termination of this program so as to not
impede the buildout of domestic renewable energy.

o
Disclose Progress of Idle Iron: Idle Iron is
a policy established in Notice to Lessees (NTL) No. 2010-G05
\52\ and updated with NTL No. 2018-G03 \53\ to address
timelines associated with the completion of platform removal
requirements and well plug and abandonment. BSEE introduced
Idle Iron to prevent ``inactive facilities and structures from
littering the Gulf of Mexico by requiring companies to
dismantle and responsibly dispose of infrastructure after they
plug non-producing wells.'' The last known structural Idle Iron
list contained over 600 platforms as of 2010.\54\ It's critical
that there is a public disclosure of the progress of this
program. Idled platforms not only pose both a real time threat
with hazards, but with a mandatory buffer of 500 feet per rig,
substantially constrain the future scale of offshore wind.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\52\ US BOEMRE (2010). Notice to lessees and operators of federal
oil and gas leases and pipeline right-of-way holders in the Outer
Continental Shelf, Gulf of Mexico OCS region. NTL No. 2010-G05. https:/
/www.bsee.gov/sites/bsee.gov/files/notices-to-lessees-ntl/notices-to-
lessees/10-g05.pdf
\53\ US BOEM (2018). Idle Iron Decommissioning Guidance for Wells
and Platforms. NTL No. 2018-G03 https://www.bsee.gov/sites/bsee.gov/
files/notices-to-lessees-ntl//ntl-2018-g03.pdf
\54\ Keen, Elena. The Billion Dollar Brewing in the Gulf. https://
www.ecomagazine.com/in-depth/featured-stories/the-billion-dollar-
problem-brewing-in-the-gulf

o
Jobs: Legacy oil and gas infrastructure
litters the ocean floor, especially in the Gulf of Mexico. We
should increase federal funding to put people to work cleaning
up the ocean floor to make communities whole again and aid
transmission. For all future leases, when an oil and gas
operator signs a lease with BOEM, they should agree to remove
all equipment and clear the seafloor when the infrastructure is
no longer useful for operation.\55\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\55\ BOEM, ``OIL AND GAS LEASE OF SUBMERGED LANDS UNDER THE OUTER
CONTINENTAL SHELF LANDS ACT,'' Sec. 22(a), https://www.boem.gov/sites/
default/files/about-boem/Procurement-Business-Opportunities/BOEM-OCS-
Operation-Forms/BOEM-2005.pdf.

---------------------------------------------------------------------------
______

Mr. Rosendale. Thank you very much, Mr. Dix, I appreciate
your testimony. The Chair will now recognize Members for 5
minutes of questioning, and I now recognize myself for 5
minutes.
Our country's energy producers continue to face attacks
from every Federal regulatory angle. However, despite President
Biden and the radical left's continued desire to move away from
traditional fuel sources, our nation's power grid still relies
heavily upon these baseload energy sources. For example, the
model leftist state of California meets nearly 60 percent of
its electrical demand through natural gas due to the
inconsistency of their favored alternative sources like solar
and wind. More than 80 percent of today's energy use in the
United States comes from oil and gas, even as the climate
zealots do everything in their power to move our country to 100
percent renewables.
Offshore production is critical to the necessary all-of-
the-above approach to energy and a strong American future.
Offshore production helps ensure that our country does not
eventually become utterly reliant on foreign and adversarial
sources of energy to help meet our rising electrical grid
demands.
Under President Trump, this country achieved energy
independence and dominance. To see this Administration not walk
back, but run back the great work that President Trump and his
Administration had done on the energy front over these past 3
years is painful to watch, not only for the effects it has had
on our nation, but the effects it has had right in my backyard
with the cancellation of the Keystone pipeline and the
continued war on coal production.
We need to open back up these offshore leases and start
producing all we can right here in America. We must not rely on
foreign adversaries for energy, and we can no longer hamper our
important LNG exports, allowing these adversaries to increase
their global influence.
This Administration needs to start getting serious about
producing here, producing for the American people, and
producing for our economic and national security.
Furthermore, refusing to take advantage of this country's
vast offshore reserves puts increased pressure on the Interior
to produce.
Yet, Montana is also struggling to get the necessary
leases, and not for lack of trying.
This all-out assault on oil and gas and other traditional
baseload energy sources must stop. We, as a government, need to
focus on putting our citizens' energy needs first, rather than
placating the radical climate activists.
I thank you so much for your testimony, Mr. Cruickshank. As
an avid supporter of wind energy, are you not concerned about
the potential unreliability that comes with that energy?
I posted a video online about a month-and-a-half ago as I
was driving through north central Montana in a location called
Judith Gap, in the middle of a wind farm. The temperature was
about 30 degrees below 0, and it is on film that not a single
one of those turbines was turning. Does that not give you any
pause for concern?
Because I can tell you, the people that lived in that area
that were dependent on that energy, they needed it when it was
30 below.
Dr. Cruickshank. Mr. Chairman, I am not concerned. Offshore
wind has a long track record globally. I have been producing
energy for over 30 years, and have been doing so successfully.
One of the----
Mr. Rosendale. So, at what rate are they producing that
energy? Is it 100 percent reliable, as a coal facility would
be, or as a liquid natural gas facility would be, or are they
operating more at that 38 to 40 percent production level that I
see the wind farms across Montana?
Dr. Cruickshank. Something between 40 and 50 percent, I
think, right now, but the efficiencies are improving. And I
would note that offshore wind tends to blow at times----
Mr. Rosendale. OK, so if we have 40 to 50 percent of the
time that we can rely upon that energy, some quick math tells
us that that means 50 percent of the time we cannot rely on
that energy. So, what I have seen is the footprint that is
necessary in order to produce the energy that would be
supplanted, replaced by this wind energy covers, literally,
thousands and thousands of acres.
How about the environmental impacts? What is that doing to
the ocean beds?
And what is that also doing to all the seashore birds,
seabirds that are traveling around those areas, have you done
any research on the impacts?
Dr. Cruickshank. We have put tens of millions of dollars
into research on those impacts, Mr. Chairman, and the offshore
leases are sited in areas that avoid or minimize impacts,
staying out of migratory bird flyways, away from the----
Mr. Rosendale. ``Minimize'' is a very subjective word.
Does your agency hold any concerns relating to Russia's
increased Arctic Circle oil production and its increasingly
close drilling towards U.S. maritime borders?
Dr. Cruickshank. That question is better directed at the
State Department, sir.
Mr. Rosendale. OK, I have used my 5 minutes of time, so I
am going to yield back and recognize Mr. Mullin for 5 minutes
of questioning.
Mr. Mullin. Thank you very much, Mr. Chair.
Thank you all for being here. I believe that before we
discuss yet more offshore oil and gas development, we need to
talk about existing oil and gas infrastructure that is no
longer being used, and the danger it poses to coastal
communities, including my district in the San Francisco Bay
area.
Last year, a GAO report noted that there are over 2,700
wells and 500 platforms which are overdue for decommissioning.
And as I am sure you well know, the marine environment can
corrode this equipment over time, threatening oil spills and
gas leaks that would devastate our coastlines. I am concerned
that, although decommissioning has been estimated to cost
between $40 to $70 billion, your agency has only $3.5 billion
in supplemental bonding to cover this liability.
My question is for Dr. Cruickshank. What is your agency
doing to ensure that oil and gas companies fulfill their
responsibilities to close this aging infrastructure and protect
our coastal communities?
Dr. Cruickshank. Representative Mullin, our Bureau is in
the process of preparing a final rule to upgrade the
supplemental financial assurance that is required of companies.
That rule is currently undergoing interagency review through
OMB, and we expect to publish later this year. It will
strengthen and modernize the requirements we have in place for
supplemental financial assurance to ensure the American
taxpayer is not left having to pay the cost of decommissioning
oil and gas infrastructure.
Mr. Mullin. OK, thank you for that. A question about
offshore wind.
California in particular has very ambitious clean energy
goals, and offshore wind has enormous potential to help meet
these goals. When I was speaker pro tem of the California State
Assembly, we passed a bill requiring state agencies to develop
a plan for offshore wind while creating good jobs and
protecting California's unparalleled marine ecosystem. But
actual development still appears to be a number of years away.
So, again, Dr. Cruickshank, and I welcome comments from
others, what are the main hurdles slowing offshore wind
development in the Pacific region, and what are some ways that
Congress can help on that front?
Dr. Cruickshank. We just recently issued our first leases
offshore California in a sale at the end of 2022. And we are
currently doing a programmatic environmental impact statement
on development of those leases.
As far as some of the challenges on the West Coast, I
think, as elsewhere, one of them is transmission, how you get
the power to shore and move it from where it comes ashore to
where the demand is.
There is also need for investment in domestic supply chain
from ports and vessels all the way through to the components of
the wind farms themselves.
And we are also dealing with floating offshore wind, which
is a relatively new technology for the offshore wind industry.
The Biden administration has taken an all-of-government
approach to these issues. All agencies are working together to
try to support the development of this industry to provide
benefits to communities, good-paying jobs, and energy security
going forward.
Mr. Mullin. Thank you. I yield back.
Mr. Rosendale. The gentleman yields.
Ms. Velazquez.
Ms. Velazquez. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you all for your testimony. And Mr. Dix, I would like
to ask you. In your testimony, you highlighted how offshore oil
and gas drilling and refining disproportionately burden poor,
rural, Black, Indigenous, and communities of color in the Gulf.
Could you please elaborate and give one example of this
negative impact?
Mr. Dix. Yes. I think one of the best examples that we have
is, again, the area along the industrial corridor. This is the
area between Baton Rouge and Plaquemines Parish, which is
really the mouth of the Mississippi River. Everything is really
focused on the river because of the need for water resources.
So, if you can think about the whole supply chain, you have
the fracking fields in northwest Louisiana, where there are
significant water and air impacts from that activity, in some
cases, earthquakes. Those pipelines are then transferred over
private lands. Sometimes those lands are expropriated against
people's will, there are disruptions to the land and water
again.
Then they come to these large industrial facilities that
are often located on what were former plantation lands. And
with some of the people that I know there, their family has had
that land since the end of the Civil War. So, really, these
plants have come to them, and we really think that it is no
accident that the industry has found its way to places where
people who are too often seen as disposable, poor people, Black
people, people of color, live and have less political power.
So, when these companies come, there is air pollution,
there is water pollution, there is premature death. And I think
what is even harder sometimes is that people are not believed.
And then, on top of that, once these fuels are burned we
have climate change that creates the climate disasters, which
many times can cause these plants to explode during disasters.
So, people are waiting to be evacuated on their rooftops
breathing in toxic chemicals.
Ms. Velazquez. Thank you, and we are all very familiar with
the climate benefits of prioritizing offshore wind development.
But the local benefits to coastal communities are not often
part of the conversation.
Mr. Dix, how would transitioning from offshore fossil fuel
drilling to offshore wind benefit Gulf communities?
Mr. Dix. Yes, I think that that is exactly the type of
question that we are grappling with and working on, because I
think a lot of communities have questions. I think, on the one
hand, they understand the imperative to transition away from
dirty energy as quickly as possible, but they don't want to be
further dominated by a new industry that is coming in.
And I think the way that we can work through that and
create something better is through better processes, with
consultation with Indigenous communities, with frontline
communities. We think that there can be much better revenue-
sharing that is directed directly at frontline communities.
Right now, the offshore wind program, I believe, is not
included under Justice40. So, changing that would be at least
one step in the right direction.
Ms. Velazquez. And do you think it is important to fully
transition, and not simply develop both?
Mr. Dix. Yes, it is incredibly important to transition
because, as we were saying, climate change is one problem, but
the problems of the refinement from oil and gas byproducts like
fertilizers and plastics also have an incredible toll on our
environment, both from the people who live near the refining,
to the plastics, to the nitrogen pollution that creates the
dead zone off the Gulf of Mexico.
There are so many problems that we have to address at the
same time, and I would say nothing less than a full phase-out
is going to help get us there.
Ms. Velazquez. Thank you. And while we transition to
renewable energies like offshore wind, what are some
considerations policymakers should bear in mind so that we do
not accidentally replicate the injustices in our current energy
system?
Mr. Dix. Well, I have worked with environmental justice
groups in New York, Oregon, and a broad coalition called the
Climate Justice Alliance to create a document called Principles
of a Just Transition in Offshore Wind Energy. And as I see that
our time is running down, I would love to submit that for the
record or follow up via e-mail.
Ms. Velazquez. OK, thank you.
I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Tiffany [presiding]. The gentleman from Rhode Island is
recognized for 5 minutes,
Mr. Magaziner. Thank you, Chairman, and thank you all for
being here today.
Coming from Rhode Island, offshore wind is not a
hypothetical for us; it is a reality. My district is the home
of the first operational offshore wind farm in the country, the
Block Island Wind Farm that has been spinning for about 5 years
now. We are currently underway on building out the Revolution
One wind farm. When that is done, about a third of Rhode
Island's electricity will come from offshore wind, a third of
our entire state's electricity.
And then there is a second procurement, along with
Connecticut and Massachusetts, our neighboring states, that we
are working on. That has the potential to get us to close to
100 percent of our electricity needs just from offshore wind.
This is domestic energy, American-made, American jobs. And the
procurements we have had so far from Revolution One are
attractive to ratepayers, as well, and are roughly in line with
the market rate for electricity. So, good for ratepayers, good
for American jobs, good for American energy independence. And
we can speak from experience on this because it is actually
happening.
I will also note that the other wind farms that are
currently under construction in the area, in Massachusetts and
New York, a lot of that work is actually being done in Rhode
Island, so we are very familiar with that, as well.
We can say for sure in Rhode Island, offshore wind is a big
part of our energy future, a big part of how we maintain our
energy independence. And frankly, a lot of the myths and
fearmongering around offshore wind, we can tell you from
experience in Rhode Island, just is not true. And if you place
the wind farms in a thoughtful way, with stakeholder feedback
and stakeholder engagement, you can find a way to build out
offshore wind in an affordable way, in a fair way, and a just
way, and do it while meeting the concerns of other local
stakeholders, as we have done in Rhode Island.
So, let's dig into this a little more. Mr. Cruickshank, you
are with BOEM. NOAA also is a partner agency with you all in
figuring out where offshore wind is most appropriate to
develop.
One of the myths that I think we want to push back on is
this sense that it is the Wild West out there, and we are going
to be building wind farms in places where we shouldn't, it is
going to have an impact on wildlife and on local industries.
Can you just demystify this a little bit?
The regulatory process to get approval to build an offshore
wind farm is extensive. It takes years. And I know you are
trying to streamline that at BOEM, but can you just educate
everyone here a little bit?
What are the controls that are in place to make sure that
offshore wind is not being developed in places that will have
an excessive impact on marine life, on local industry, et
cetera?
Dr. Cruickshank. Yes, I would be happy to. We actually
start the process long before any lease sale is proposed,
creating an intergovernmental task force with state
governments, local governments, tribes, and other Federal
agencies to walk through a region of the ocean and understand
what is out there, how it is being used, what the environmental
resources are, and try to identify what areas might be most
suitable in terms of being able to provide wind while avoiding
most conflict.
We actually partner with NOAA's National Centers for
Coastal Ocean Science. They have a planning model that allows
us to look at all of that data for marine uses and
environmental resources and determine the least conflicted
areas where wind farms might fit.
Once we have this sort of information, we then go public
and have a multi-year process in which we are asking for public
input on the areas we are looking at. We have plenty of public
meetings, meet with individual stakeholder groups, ocean users
to get their input, refine the models, refine the data, and
eventually propose an area that, again, we continue to get
input on throughout until we get to a lease sale.
Mr. Magaziner. I thank you.
I have noticed that some of my colleagues don't seem to
care very much about impacts on marine life when we are talking
about offshore oil and gas, only when we are talking about
offshore wind. But the larger point is that we should always
care about marine life, but that there are significant
processes in place at BOEM and at NOAA to ensure that offshore
wind is only being developed in appropriate areas where that
impact can be mitigated.
And then just real quick, Mr. Milito, from the industry
perspective, can you talk a little bit about what you see as
the economic and job-creating potential from offshore wind
nationally?
Mr. Milito. Yes, it could be huge. We represent the entire
supply chain. We have vessel companies, marine construction
companies. We have cable-laying companies. Those companies in
our membership were active in Block Island and are going to be
active in a future upcoming project, so we view it as an
opportunity. They view it as a business investment opportunity.
And we are hopeful that, moving forward, they are going to be
able to continue to do the core oil and gas work they have been
doing, and add to it the offshore wind work that is on the
horizon.
Mr. Magaziner. I thank you all. I will yield back.
Mr. Tiffany. The gentleman yields. I now recognize the
gentleman from Louisiana, Mr. Graves.
Mr. Graves. Thank you all for being here, and I appreciate
your testimony.
I just continue to be a little bit baffled by what we are
seeing with energy policy right now. I am looking at the 2023
EIA, the Energy Information Agency projections that show that,
for example, global oil demand is going to increase 57 percent,
that global gas demand is going to increase 58 percent, and
that right now coal accounts for about 63 percent of China's
energy portfolio.
All right. So, look, I am from south Louisiana, I am just
looking at numbers. There is going to be a global increase in
oil and natural gas demand. All right? You look at the carbon
intensity of oil and gas. We have some of the most efficient
sources in the world in the Gulf of Mexico.
Mr. Milito, what am I missing? What am I missing? Why would
you not have lease sales, ban additional lease sales whenever
there is going to be increased demand globally, and we have
some of the least carbon-intensive sources in the world?
Mr. Milito. Yes, sir. You are not missing anything. It is
very straightforward. We have the resource base, we have the
demand surging, moving forward, and we need to provide
reliable, affordable supplies of energy to the American
consumer so we can maintain our high quality of life while we
are going to be competing globally with countries like China.
And we are going to see regions like the global south, India,
Africa, Southeast Asia continue to grow their economies, and it
is going to be a global competition. And we need to make sure
we are positioning ourselves for future energy security.
Mr. Graves. I know that we have had Department of the
Interior officials that have transcended or been through
various administrations that have sat right here in this
Committee and have told us that decreasing supply of oil and
gas production in the United States doesn't do a damn thing for
demand, doesn't do anything. It doesn't change demand. So, the
demand is just filled, voids are filled by other countries. In
this case, Iran, Russia, and then, of course, China, as well.
Now, China's economy is much less efficient than ours is.
While the United States has led the world in reducing
emissions, for every 1 ton of emissions we have reduced, China
has gone up by 5. Gone up by 5. Today, China emits more than
all of the industrialized countries combined. So, you have a
country that has less efficient economy in terms of economic
activity per emissions unit. Why does it make sense to continue
to cede ground to China?
I mean, again, I am just trying to understand this
Administration's energy policies.
Mr. Milito. It doesn't. And it is interesting, because this
week at the big energy conference, CERAWeek, we heard the
Secretary of the Department of Energy, Jennifer Granholm, make
the point that I found very interesting. She said our passivity
is their opportunity. She was talking about clean tech in
China, but that applies just as much to oil and gas, CCS, even
offshore wind.
Mr. Graves. It applies to everything.
Mr. Milito. When we have passive or intentionally failing
policies on the energy side here in the United States, that
creates the opportunity for other countries around the world
like Russia, China, Venezuela to seize that opportunity and get
that economic benefit and that energy security and take it away
from us.
Mr. Graves. I just can't understand this Administration's
energy policy, as hard as I have tried to rationalize. Higher
prices, more dependence upon unfriendly countries, higher
emissions. All day long, it makes no sense at all. It makes no
sense. And watching this Administration, higher royalties,
pipeline fees, all of these different regulatory burdens, and
stopping or preventing any new production, all it does is
further curtail supply. It drives up prices and makes us
dependent upon foreign countries. It is just a baffling thing
to me.
Mr. Cruickshank, I appreciate you being here. I wanted to
change gears a little bit. I know that you and I have had the
chance to talk about financial assurance a good bit. Could you
quickly just give the Committee an update on where that stands?
Dr. Cruickshank. Yes, that draft final rule is with OMB's
Office of Information and Regulatory Affairs, undergoing
interagency review. And we expect to be able to publish it
later this year.
Mr. Graves. Can you talk at all about how BOEM is going to
try to strike the right balance in the regulation in sort of
fulfilling their decommission liability and ensuring the Gulf
of Mexico remains competitive for new investment?
Dr. Cruickshank. Yes. I can't actually speak to what is in
the final rule, but based on the proposed rule, we took an
approach of trying to really focus, asking for supplemental
financial assurance of those companies that pose the greatest
risk of defaulting on their lease obligations.
The majority of the liability that is out there, we
believe, are covered by companies that have strong financial
credit ratings and will not be asked to provide supplemental
financial assurance.
Mr. Graves. Thank you.
I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Tiffany. The gentleman yields.
I ask unanimous consent to enter into the record a
statement from Majority Leader Scalise. His district is home to
Port Fourchon, which services 90 percent of our country's
offshore energy development.
Without objection, so ordered.

[The information follows:]
Statement for the Record
Congressman Steve Scalise

Thank you to Chairman Stauber for hosting this important hearing
and to our witnesses for taking the time to share their testimony.

America's offshore resources--including the nearly 15% of America's
domestically-produced oil and natural gas that comes from the Gulf of
Mexico--are critical to our nation's energy, economic and national
security. My district is home to Port Fourchon, which services over 90%
of the energy exploration and development activity in the deepwater of
the Gulf, and the valuable energy and maritime industries that call
Southeast Louisiana home.

The Biden Administration has waged a war on American energy, and my
constituents are situated at Ground Zero in this battle. And families
and small businesses across the country are feeling the pain from the
failure of this Administration to understand that their radical ``Green
New Deal'' agenda has real-world, devastating impacts on hard-working
taxpayers. This Administration's failed energy policies are not only
killing American jobs and shipping them overseas, but are also
jeopardizing the energy and national security of our country and
leading to higher costs on everything from gasoline to groceries.

Whether it's delaying the 5-year offshore lease plan, attempting to
illegally cancel lease sales or issuing radical regulations from myriad
agencies that make developing American energy costlier, this
Administration seems intent on shutting down American energy
exploration and development at every turn. Look no further than
President Biden's own comments in the past--he said during his campaign
in 2020: ``No more drilling on federal lands. No more drilling,
including offshore. No ability for the oil and gas industry to continue
to drill. Period. It ends.''

That's all we need to know about what this Administration is trying
to accomplish. And to be clear: Joe Biden's radical policies are
killing American jobs, increasing costs on families and small
businesses, and emboldening our enemies abroad.

I applaud the Committee for holding this hearing to examine the
vast potential of our nation's offshore resources--and what that means
America's economic, energy and national security--and for the important
work that the Committee continues to do to hold this Administration
accountable for their devastating policies.

______

Mr. Tiffany. Dr. Cruickshank, we heard about the offshore,
what was it, the Block Island project off in Rhode Island? Do
those projects receive any Federal subsidies?
Dr. Cruickshank. There are tax credits that are available
to offshore wind developers, much like they are to many other
industries.
Mr. Tiffany. Are those tax credits significant?
Dr. Cruickshank. I believe they are significant in putting
the financial package together to build the wind farms.
Mr. Tiffany. Without the tax incentives, would those
projects be able to be built in a competitive marketplace?
Dr. Cruickshank. I believe some would, some others might
not. It really depends on which region of the country you would
be operating in.
Mr. Tiffany. The three gentleman in the middle, do you care
to comment on that at all? Would they be built without tax
credits?
Mr. Milito. It is going to be project-specific, depending
on the financing, and the company, and the location. There are
going to be a lot of variables that go into that. But it would
depend on the project.
Mr. Tiffany. Because I know, where I sit in Wisconsin,
those projects would not get built for wind and solar, the
intermittent sources of power, without the rich subsidies that
are given to developers in order to be able to build those
projects.
Mr. Dix, does your organization have a plan to have China
and India cut down on their emissions?
Mr. Dix. Well, as you probably know, the United Nations
process is quite complicated because it is entirely voluntary,
and the United States plays a large role in how those
negotiations play out.
But I have heard various testimonies today about that we
are competing with China. And one way that I think that would
be better for the world and for the environment would be if we
were competing to help other countries transition to renewable
energy. I think that would increase the energy security that
people are here today saying that they want, and I think that
it would address our climate crisis at the same time.
So, there are a number of things, I think, that we could do
to help speed the transition in other countries so that
everyone can enjoy energy security and energy independence.
Mr. Tiffany. So, we should be trying to convince India and
China to use windmills and solar panels?
Mr. Dix. Well, I think that international diplomacy when it
comes to climate change means that we do have to do a lot of
convincing for other countries in the world for a great number
of things.
Mr. Tiffany. But China keeps fending us off. They say, yes,
we will sign on to those accords, but it doesn't apply to them
until some date in the future, whereas we accept those burdens
now, and we have actually been the best country in terms of
reducing our carbon footprint, if you believe that is actually
a problem. That is actually quite a success story, yet they
keep telling us that, no, give us until 2030, and then we will
comply.
Mr. Dix. Yes, and we have also heard a lot today about the
amount of oil and gas that the United States is producing, and
we are a net exporter. We are also continuing to approve large
projects like the Mountain Valley Pipeline. So, as a net
exporter of oil and gas, I think there is a lot that we could
do. And I think one of the best things that we can do is lead
by example.
Mr. Tiffany. So, lead by example by shutting down using
carbon sources of energy?
Mr. Dix. I think developing clean energy is going to be
good for people and the planet, and I think it is going to be
good for creating jobs, because in the Gulf of Mexico we have
certainly seen automation and other market forces actually
decrease the number of jobs in the offshore oil and gas sector
for quite a long time now, even as production of barrels has
gone up.
Mr. Tiffany. Does Taproot Earth have subsidiaries in China,
India, anywhere around the world, other than the United States?
Mr. Dix. We don't have subsidiary offices, but we work
globally. So, a lot of what we do is work with people across
what we call the African diaspora, which are countries in
Africa and places where African-descended peoples live, to talk
about climate justice. We really are thinking about this from a
global perspective, not really in terms of having one country
participating in energy dominance, but more like energy
cooperation.
Mr. Tiffany. But, you are not in China or India.
Mr. Dix. Currently, no.
Mr. Tiffany. The number of climate-related deaths in the
last 100 years, what direction has that gone?
Mr. Dix. I think climate-related deaths, I would have to
know more about how that is categorized.
Mr. Tiffany. It is a really interesting chart that
highlights, and I can show it to you afterwards. They actually
went down 98 percent as a result of the advancements in
technology. It is no different than life expectancy. What was
it, like 52 years old in the year 1900? One in ten babies died
here in America in infancy, and life expectancy is so much
higher now. Infant mortality is so much better. Climate-related
deaths are significantly less, 98 percent less, over the last
100 years. Wouldn't you call that a success story?
Mr. Dix. Well, I was just in Louisiana 2 weeks ago for some
other meetings, and I participated in a coastal tour and a tour
of Cancer Alley, areas that I have seen many times, and I find
it very difficult to talk to people who are losing their land
and being forced to evacuate, and watching their friends and
neighbors die of cancer, and telling them that they should be
grateful for how good it is.
I think we can do a lot better. I think we have solutions.
I think we have a lot of expertise in this country, and I think
we could do a lot more to make sure that the poor people in
this country have a much better life.
Mr. Tiffany. Wouldn't you say poor people are far better
off than they were 100 years ago?
Mr. Dix. I think that there are a lot of different ways
that you can measure better off or worse off. I just really
think that we could do a lot better than we are. And it really
pains me to see people suffer.
Mr. Tiffany. You talked about renewables earlier. Does your
organization support any new mining projects in America?
Mr. Dix. What we support, and I would love to share with
you a platform produced by the America the Beautiful for All
Coalition. I am actually here to participate in meetings with
them. This is a group of people that are focused on public
lands and Justice40, and we call for mining----
Mr. Tiffany. Does Taproot Earth support any new mining
projects in the United States of America?
Mr. Dix. Well, I would say that we are an organization that
is focused on looking at the costs and benefits of energy
sources, providing that information to frontline communities,
and making sure that frontline communities are at the decision-
making table so that we can plan our energy system and our
environmental impacts together, and share the benefits much
more easily----
Mr. Tiffany. What would you say to a frontline community
like the Iron Range of Minnesota, which is a neighboring
district to mine, what would you say to those folks that would
like to expand mines and build new mines up on the Iron Range,
and yet you see these out-of-staters, oftentimes, or
interlopers from hundreds of miles away who would not be
impacted, and they fight tooth and nail to stop those projects
and oftentimes are successful in stopping them, when local
people, by and large, would like to have them built? Do you
call that local control?
Mr. Dix. I would never advocate for an energy project in a
place that I don't live, and that I am not from, and that I
haven't talked to the community that is in there. And our
organization is dedicated to redistributing the power to make
those decisions.
So, I would welcome a dialogue with this Committee, with
the communities up in Minnesota, and the communities all across
the country about how we can reform our mining laws and how we
can reform governance of our energy system to make it much more
inclusive.
Mr. Tiffany. You should take a look at the mining laws.
When I was in the State Legislature, I rewrote our mining laws
and modernized them, made them the toughest mining laws in the
United States of America, but also allowed it to happen,
whereas previously we simply had a moratorium, which I think is
ridiculous. When you have something that is legal to be done,
there shouldn't be a moratorium. There should at least be a
regulatory process.
I see Taproot Earth, on their website, it talks about you
practice anti-capitalism. What is anti-capitalism?
Mr. Dix. Well, I think that you can ask people about what
the definition of capitalism is and get a million sort of
different responses.
But I think what we are talking about is a shorthand for,
again, sort of the system that I described in Louisiana, where
a few large, private companies are allowed to extract resources
that are natural, that weren't created by anyone, sell those
for a profit, and then pass on the pollution, again, back to
our public waters and public air, so that these externalities
aren't factored into their prices. The money tends to flow----
Mr. Tiffany. But haven't we reduced emissions significantly
here in the United States of America?
I don't live on the Gulf Coast, but I just think about the
electrical generation plants that we have in Wisconsin from the
early 1990s. So, that would be 30 years later. We have reduced
sulfur dioxide, nitrous oxide, various emissions like that by
as much as 90 percent. Isn't that a success story?
Mr. Dix. I think that you are right. I think what you are
getting at is that we can, in fact, reduce pollution and not
necessarily experience a decrease in quality of life. And I
just think that we need to go further. I think that when we
have cleaner energy, cleaner air, cleaner water, everyone can
benefit, and it is just----
Mr. Tiffany. Are you talking zero emissions when you say go
further? Are you saying you expect zero emissions?
Mr. Dix. I definitely----
Mr. Tiffany. Because there is no human being or human
enterprise that has been created that is zero emissions.
Mr. Dix. Well, I think when we are talking about net zero,
we are sort of talking about the net aggregate emissions for
the entire globe. So, what we are trying to do is get our
energy system in balance, where we are not emitting----
Mr. Tiffany. Have you studied the entire life cycle chain
for wind and solar? Because we are seeing wind turbines now
being buried in coal mines out in Wyoming. Is that the best way
for us?
I mean, are you doing the full measurement of the life
cycle?
Mr. Dix. I think there are some really good life cycle
assessments out there, and I do think that renewable energy
compares quite favorably to fossil fuel energy, from what I
have read.
But I think that we are in complete agreement that there
are costs and benefits to every energy source. And what we are
trying to do is evaluate those, and then make sure that the
costs and benefits are being shared much more equally, so that
frontline communities in places like the Gulf Coast aren't
receiving most of the pollution and very few of the benefits.
I think you are absolutely right that we need to have a
dialogue, and eventually a policy shift, to make sure that
costs and benefits of the energy system are being shared much
more equally. And I think that that absolutely includes
renewable energy, as well as fossil fuels. I just think
renewable energy compares favorably to fossil fuels when you
look at the entire life cycle and all of the impacts.
Mr. Tiffany. I went far over my time. And to the three
gentleman in the middle, sorry that I was not able to address
more questions to you. We appreciate the work that you do.
Production of energy is one of the most important things
that we can do. I do have to say, though, I have a bill that
would eliminate the subsidies for wind and solar, intermittent
sources of power, if they are put on productive farmland. I do
believe there is one thing more important than producing
energy, and that is growing food. And I think taking our food-
producing areas like in Wisconsin, where we are now sidelining
thousands of acres, turning it into these wind and solar farms,
by the way, industrial facilities, they are not farms, where we
are eliminating farms at this point, I think, is very
shortsighted in terms of the public policy front here in the
United States of America.
I yield back and I turn to Mr. Duarte for his 5 minutes.
Mr. Duarte. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Cruickshank, thank you for coming here today. In Santa
Barbara, California there are about 10 oil platforms that are
going to be decommissioned over the next 10 years because the
regulatory environment is just too severe for them to remain
profitable. Is this part of the regulatory scheme that you
oversee?
Dr. Cruickshank. BOEM is responsible for determining where
lease sales are held, looking at the resources that are
available, and looking at the plans that companies submit. We
don't oversee the actual operations.
Mr. Duarte. Got you, thank you.
When you look at new oil leases, and there are a lot of
opportunities for new offshore oil leases up and down the
California coast, some of them that could be onshore access to
offshore oil reserves through horizontal drilling. Is that
within your jurisdiction?
Dr. Cruickshank. We would have jurisdiction over leasing of
the offshore resources. We would not have jurisdiction over any
onshore activities that support.
Mr. Duarte. Some of these oil reserves are so abundant.
They are under such pressure that they are literally seeping
oil into the ocean environment because they are not tapped.
Does that fall into some of your assessments as to whether you
issue leases on these types of reserves?
Dr. Cruickshank. We provide the Secretary of the Interior
information on the resources that are available in all OCS
areas, and the Secretary looks at the various factors that the
OCS Lands Act requires, and she looks at and makes a
determination of what areas she believes would best meet the
energy needs of the nation over a 5-year period.
Mr. Duarte. Is relieving of pollution by natural seepage
one of those parameters?
Dr. Cruickshank. Well, I suppose we could have a
conversation around whether a natural seep is pollution or not,
but I think there have been some areas where they have shown
where production does reduce the flow from natural seeps.
Mr. Duarte. OK. But it may not be seepage. I mean, seepage
may not be pollution because it is naturally occurring? Even if
the volumes are far greater than any kind of contamination from
actually offshore oil drilling itself?
Dr. Cruickshank. I can't speak to the comparison of the
volumes. I would just say things were occurring in nature
before man was doing any activity there. I personally would
have a hard time considering that to be pollution.
Mr. Duarte. OK, so some oil on the beach is OK, as long as
it is not anything to do with anthropogenic activity.
I will just throw it out to the other panelists. Do you
have knowledge in this area? Would any of you like to chime in?
Mr. Milito. I would just point out that there is an
organization out of California called SOS, Stop Oil Seeps, and
they were campaigning to have additional offshore drilling to
ease the seeps and help prevent them in the future because of
the pressure in the formation.
So, anecdotally, there was at least one organization out of
Santa Barbara that was trying to get us to get out there and
drill more wells to ease up on that pressure.
Mr. Duarte. Is it true that a lot of this pressure can be
relieved not from offshore drilling, but from onshore drilling
with current technology?
Mr. Milito. I don't know. We have a geologist maybe who
could speak better to that than me.
[Laughter.]
Mr. Dryer. Yes, I think it would just be proximity to land
as to how far out they could go. But certainly, the technology
today can drill down to 40,000 feet in the Gulf of Mexico. So,
it is very likely that could be the case. I am not that
familiar with the geology in California, but----
Mr. Duarte. Mr. Zaman, do you have comments on this?
Mr. Zaman. Yes. So, I think, generally, anything over 6
miles offshore would probably be problematic. It will be a
determination as to where exactly the formations that are
seeping are located.
Mr. Duarte. Would you agree that oil seepage can be
relieved by offshore drilling?
Mr. Zaman. It is not my technical expertise area, but
anecdotally I have heard that, yes.
Mr. Duarte. Thank you. Do any of you have opinions as to
whether natural seepage has a different pollutant value than
incidental leak from oil exploration rigs?
Do the fish care? Do the birds care? Do the turtles care?
Mr. Milito. No oil is oil, and there is substantial oil in
the water from natural seeps throughout the world.
Mr. Duarte. I read one article that natural seeps in the
Santa Barbara area are actually 50 to 100 times more than the
entire history of oil platform leaks since they have been
active down there. Do you have any perspective on that, Doctor?
Dr. Cruickshank. I would have to look at the numbers. And
certainly, over the time periods, there is a different impact
from seepage that is coming out regularly at low amounts every
day, every hour, versus a very large spill where everything
sort of hits the water at once.
Mr. Duarte. Last question. Have you recommended any new
offshore oil leases to the Secretary during this
Administration?
Dr. Cruickshank. The Secretary just issued a National OCS
Oil and Gas Leasing Program that does include three lease sales
over the course of that 5-year period.
Mr. Duarte. Over the next 5 years?
Dr. Cruickshank. Yes.
Mr. Duarte. There are three lease sales approved. And how
does that compare to the previous 5 years?
Dr. Cruickshank. There are a fewer number of lease sales
than we have seen in earlier programs.
Mr. Duarte. Is that because we have less oil, or we are
just approving less oil lease sales?
Dr. Cruickshank. It is the Secretary's determination that
the number of lease sales she proposes in the program would
best meet the nation's energy needs for the next 5 years.
Mr. Duarte. We are depleting our petroleum reserve with no
plan to refill it, and we are going to cut our leases, and you
still believe that would meet the nation's petroleum needs in
the next 5 years?
Dr. Cruickshank. When we look at the OCS, almost 99 percent
of the production is coming from the Gulf of Mexico. These
lease sales would be in the Gulf of Mexico, and make all of the
acreage that is legally available part of the lease sale
process. So, I think that companies will have access to the
acreage that they have been traditionally looking to have
access to.
Mr. Duarte. That is not a market assessment, it is just
what lands are legally available by your assessment that you
are basing this on. You are not saying that this is going to
meet our energy needs; you are saying that is all the land that
is available.
Dr. Cruickshank. Well, no one has ever looked at the OCS to
meet 100 percent of the nation's energy needs. So, it is a
matter of what role the OCS plays in the nation's energy
portfolio.
Mr. Duarte. And does your group have anything to do with
the pipeline permitting and pipeline processes around the
country?
Dr. Cruickshank. We do not.
Mr. Duarte. Thank you, Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Tiffany. Mr. Duarte, if I may ask, did I hear that it
is three lease sales over the next 5 years?
Mr. Duarte. That is what I heard. Yes, sir. Yes, Mr.
Chairman.
Mr. Tiffany. Mr. Milito, do you know how many we had the
previous 5 years?
Mr. Milito. The last program, I believe, had 11, 1 in Cook
Inlet and 10 in the Gulf of Mexico.
Mr. Tiffany. There were 11. And do you know what the
previous to that was?
Mr. Milito. I think 15, and then 16, and then 20, and then
20, and it has been declining since the 1980s with each
program.
Mr. Tiffany. So, it is a steady decline.
Mr. Milito. Correct.
Mr. Duarte. If the Chairman will permit me, is it a steady
decline in production volume or does the decline also----
Mr. Milito. Production volume is at almost its highest
levels in the history of the offshore leasing program, or
nearly 1.9 million barrels per day now, which is a significant
amount of production.
Mr. Duarte. So, we are getting more per lease.
Mr. Milito. We get much more production with far less
acreage. We are much more efficient as an industry.
Mr. Duarte. Will these three oil leases match the
production of the previous 10, 12, 15, 16 oil lease awards?
Mr. Milito. That is very hard to speculate, as to how it
will play out. But fewer leases and only having three sales
will likely lead to a shift in investment to other parts of the
world, because the companies that are investing in these
offshore projects have to decide where to send their capital,
and this likely will lead to decisions where, because they
don't have opportunities annually, they will have to shift that
capital to other parts of the world.
In addition, under the Inflation Reduction Act, in order
for there to be an offshore wind lease issued, there has to be
an oil and gas lease sale the year before. So, they are
creating gaps of 2 years between oil and gas, which means there
is going to be at least 3 years where they cannot issue wind
leases, which is also a big problem for our organization.
Mr. Duarte. Thank you.
Mr. Tiffany. The gentleman yields. I want to thank the
witnesses for your testimony and Members for your questions.
The members of the Subcommittee may have some additional
questions for you, and we will ask you to respond to those in
writing. Under Committee Rule 3, members of the Committee must
submit questions to the Committee Clerk by 5 p.m. on Monday,
March 25. The hearing record will be held open for 10 business
days for these responses.
If there is no further business, without objection, the
Committee stands adjourned.

[Whereupon, at 3:46 p.m., the Subcommittee was adjourned.]

[ADDITIONAL MATERIALS SUBMITTED FOR THE RECORD]

Submissions for the Record by Rep. Grijalva

[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

*****

The full document is available for viewing at:

https://docs.house.gov/meetings/II/II06/20240320/116958/HHRG-
118-II06-20240320-SD009.pdf

[all]
