- OVERSIGHT HEARING ON BIDEN'S BORDER CRISIS: EXAMINING EFFORTS TO COMBAT INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL CARTELS AND STOP ILLEGAL DRUG TRAFFICKING TARGETING INDIAN COUNTRY

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

BIDEN'S BORDER CRISIS: EXAMINING
EFFORTS TO COMBAT INTERNATIONAL
CRIMINAL CARTELS AND STOP ILLEGAL
DRUG TRAFFICKING TARGETING
INDIAN COUNTRY

=======================================================================

OVERSIGHT HEARING

before the

SUBCOMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT AND
INVESTIGATIONS

of the

COMMITTEE ON NATURAL RESOURCES
U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION
__________

Tuesday, June 4, 2024
__________

Serial No. 118-128
__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Natural Resources

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.govinfo.gov
or
Committee address: http://naturalresources.house.gov
______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

55-913 PDF                  WASHINGTON : 2024

COMMITTEE ON NATURAL RESOURCES

BRUCE WESTERMAN, AR, Chairman
DOUG LAMBORN, CO, Vice Chairman
RAUL M. GRIJALVA, AZ, Ranking Member

Doug Lamborn, CO                     Grace F. Napolitano, CA
Robert J. Wittman, VA                Gregorio Kilili Camacho Sablan,
Tom McClintock, CA                     CNMI
Paul Gosar, AZ                       Jared Huffman, CA
Garret Graves, LA                    Ruben Gallego, AZ
Aumua Amata C. Radewagen, AS         Joe Neguse, CO
Doug LaMalfa, CA                     Mike Levin, CA
Daniel Webster, FL                   Katie Porter, CA
Jenniffer Gonzalez-Colon, PR         Teresa Leger Fernandez, NM
Russ Fulcher, ID                     Melanie A. Stansbury, NM
Pete Stauber, MN                     Mary Sattler Peltola, AK
John R. Curtis, UT                   Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez, NY
Tom Tiffany, WI                      Kevin Mullin, CA
Jerry Carl, AL                       Val T. Hoyle, OR
Matt Rosendale, MT                   Sydney Kamlager-Dove, CA
Lauren Boebert, CO                   Seth Magaziner, RI
Cliff Bentz, OR                      Nydia M. Velazquez, NY
Jen Kiggans, VA                      Ed Case, HI
Jim Moylan, GU                       Debbie Dingell, MI
Wesley P. Hunt, TX                   Susie Lee, NV
Mike Collins, GA
Anna Paulina Luna, FL
John Duarte, CA
Harriet M. Hageman, WY
Vivian Moeglein, Staff Director
Tom Connally, Chief Counsel
Lora Snyder, Democratic Staff Director
http://naturalresources.house.gov

------

SUBCOMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT AND INVESTIGATIONS

PAUL GOSAR, AZ, Chairman
MIKE COLLINS, GA, Vice Chair
MELANIE A. STANSBURY, NM, Ranking Member

Matt Rosendale, MT                   Ed Case, HI
Wesley P. Hunt, TX                   Ruben Gallego, AZ
Mike Collins, GA                     Susie Lee, NV
Anna Paulina Luna, FL                Raul M. Grijalva, AZ, ex officio
Bruce Westerman, AR, ex officio

------

CONTENTS

----------
Page

Hearing held on Tuesday, June 4, 2024............................     1

Statement of Members:

Gosar, Hon. Paul, a Representative in Congress from the State
of Arizona.................................................     1

Stansbury, Hon. Melanie A., a Representative in Congress from
the State of New Mexico....................................     3

Statement of Witnesses:

Panel I:

LaCounte, Darryl, Director, Bureau of Indian Affairs,
Department of the Interior, Washington, DC.................     5
Prepared statement of....................................     6
Questions submitted for the record.......................    11

Panel II:

Roberge, Joshua, Chief of Police, Fort Belknap Indian
Community, Harlem, Montana.................................    21
Prepared statement of....................................    23

Zinn, Stacy, Former Resident in Charge, Rocky Mountain
Division, Drug Enforcement Administration, Billings,
Montana....................................................    25
Prepared statement of....................................    27

Nores, John, Jr., Lieutenant (Retired), Special Operations,
Marijuana Enforcement Team, California Department of Fish
and Wildlife, Morgan Hill, California......................    28
Prepared statement of....................................    30

Additional Materials Submitted for the Record:

Submissions for the Record by Representative Gosar

Oglala Sioux Indian Tribe, Statement for the Record......    51

OVERSIGHT HEARING ON BIDEN'S BORDER
CRISIS: EXAMINING EFFORTS TO COMBAT
INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL CARTELS AND
STOP ILLEGAL DRUG TRAFFICKING
TARGETING INDIAN COUNTRY

----------

Tuesday, June 4, 2024

U.S. House of Representatives

Subcommittee on Oversight and Investigations

Committee on Natural Resources

Washington, DC

----------

The Subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 2:07 p.m. in
Room 1324, Longworth House Office Building, Hon. Paul Gosar
[Chairman of the Subcommittee] presiding.
Present: Representatives Gosar, Rosendale, Collins,
Westerman, Hageman, Crane, Bentz; and Stansbury.

Dr. Gosar. The Subcommittee on Oversight will come to
order.
Without objection, the Chair is authorized to declare a
recess of the Subcommittee at any time.
The Subcommittee is meeting today to hear testimony on
Biden's border crisis, examining the efforts to combat
international criminal cartels and stop illegal drug
trafficking targeting Indian Country.
Under Committee Rule 4(f), any oral opening statements at
the hearing are limited to the Chairman and the Ranking
Minority Member. I, therefore, ask unanimous consent that all
other Members' statements will be part of the hearing record if
they are submitted in accordance with Committee Rule 3(o).
Without objection, so ordered.
I ask unanimous consent that the following Members be
allowed to sit and participate in today's hearing: the
gentleman from Oregon, Mr. Bentz; the gentleman from Alabama,
Mr. Carl; the gentlewoman from Wyoming, Ms. Hageman; and the
gentleman from Arizona, Mr. Crane.
Without objection, so ordered.
I now recognize myself for my opening statement.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. PAUL GOSAR, A REPRESENTATIVE
IN CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF ARIZONA

Dr. Gosar. First of all, I would like to take a moment and
give a very special thanks to our witnesses for coming before
the Committee today.
A few months ago, before this very Subcommittee, tribal
leaders bravely spoke about death threats, yes, death threats,
they received from the international criminal cartels. Tribal
leaders received death threats for daring to testify in front
of Congress about the very real dangers their constituents are
facing on a daily basis because of the cartel activity present
in their communities.
Let that sink in for just a moment. International criminal
cartels, not something you read about in the paper, not actors
in movies, are actually threatening American citizens for
testifying before Congress. The threat is real, and it is
ongoing. It is imperative that we continue this conversation
and move forward with some solutions.
Today, we will discuss how law enforcement is currently
working with these tribes to focus on these threats, and better
understand the opportunities for improving interagency
communications and operations in the future.
I do want to mention that both the FBI and the Department
of Homeland Security were invited to testify today, and both
agencies declined. While I would have preferred to hear from
them in person, as their presence is key to resolving this
matter, it is my understanding they are offering briefings in
the near future. Without cooperation between the tribes and
these agencies, it will be nearly impossible to move forward.
During our last hearing, President Jeffrey Stiffarm of Fort
Belknap Indian Community stated, ``One thing you really seem to
overlook all the time are the threats, death threats we get
from the cartel members. The threat of the cartels is real for
our tribal communities, and it is imperative that we work to
address it.'' However, the Biden administration has presented a
seismic challenge to addressing the issue at the border. From
Day 1, the Administration has rolled back Trump administration
policies such as Remain in Mexico, and allowed for open border
policies to resume.
Since President Biden assumed office, the Border Patrol has
lost a quarter of its workforce. This can be at least partially
attributed to President Biden's catch-and-release policy, which
allows illegal immigrants to remain in the United States while
they await processing.
The reduction in CBP agents exacerbates the border crisis,
allowing the influence of the international criminal cartel
activity to flourish nationwide. They have moved from a
southern border nuisance to a nationwide pandemic, targeting
tribal communities who can least afford to fight the scourge.
Aside from the Biden administration's lax immigration
policies, this crisis is intensified by the jurisdictional
confusion among law enforcement agencies. During the prior
hearing, the Committee received alarming information regarding
the working relationship between the tribes and law
enforcement.
President Stiffarm informed the Committee that on one
occasion he spoke with the FBI agents patrolling the
reservation. Reportedly, agents assigned to the area were
unable to identify the tribes they were actually working for.
During his testimony, he mentioned the lack of assistance from
Federal agencies such as the FBI, DEA, BIA, and the Border
Patrol. According to this testimony, the lack of communication
and cooperation among entities is one of the key reasons
cartels target tribal lands.
Simply put, they know the laws won't be enforced, and they
can simply over-run by some sheer force.
Jurisdiction in Indian Country is exercised by Federal,
state, local, and sometimes tribal criminal justice agencies,
depending on the crime and the local agreements. However,
different laws, rules, and court cases have been made
clarifying jurisdictional boundaries difficult in some cases,
or sharing jurisdiction nearly impossible in others. This has
impacted the ability of law enforcement to respond to calls in
and out of Indian Country. In other areas, recruitment and
retention of law enforcement officers is a primary barrier to
success.
Aside from all the barriers that may exist, the goal here
that I believe we can all agree on, no matter what side of the
aisle, is to ensure that we eliminate the influence of the
cartel activity on tribal lands, and ensure that tribes have a
path forward for justice in their own communities.
I look forward to hearing from the witnesses today to learn
more about what is working and what is not. We will continue to
work with partner agencies to identify solutions to help ensure
that Federal law enforcement agents and the tribal police
forces are able to work together and have the resources that
they do so need.
I now recognize the Ranking Member, Ms. Stansbury, for her
opening statement.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. MELANIE A. STANSBURY, A REP-
RESENTATIVE  IN  CONGRESS  FROM  THE STATE OF NEW
MEXICO

Ms. Stansbury. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Director, thank you so much for joining us today.
This is the second of a series of hearings that the
Majority has called on this topic. And as I said in our April
hearing on the same topic, I think it is clear to anyone who is
working on issues around public safety and behavioral health in
our tribal communities that it has been truly devastating to
see the ways in which the fentanyl crisis has touched down in
our tribal communities. In fact, the data that we do have
available shows us that just last year over 1,590 fatal
overdoses happened in our tribal communities from
methamphetamine and fentanyl alone.
But I think it is important that we not just sit here in
Washington, DC and talk about these issues, but actually
address them through the tools that we have available to us.
Over the last several months we have been working with tribal
leaders, tribal organizations, law enforcement, and others to
really understand. How do we stem the tide of these substances
ending up in our communities? How do we help our Tribal Nations
and empower our tribal law enforcement to tackle these issues
on the ground? And how do we help those individuals who are
suffering from addiction, and struggling with the daily
challenges of what it means to be an addict? It means investing
in our communities.
While I appreciate and understand very deeply the
challenges that it presents on the ground in terms of keeping
these substances out of our communities, in fact, I just spent
much of the last week talking to Border Patrol in New Mexico
and Homeland Security, and it is true, in fact, we do need to
have more law enforcement, more resources, more technology, and
more manpower to keep these substances out of our communities.
The solutions within our tribal communities are well known.
Our Tribal Nations have been asking the U.S. Government not
just for years, but for generations to make good on their
treaty and their trust responsibilities by the U.S. Government
to properly fund tribal law enforcement. It was literally
written into the treaties that the United States signed with
many of our Tribal Nations, that safety and protection would be
provided.
So, I do want to take today to actually talk about
solutions, since we have the benefit of having our Director of
the Bureau of Indian Affairs here. And I want to put on the
table what I hope that we can get behind in a bipartisan basis,
which is that we need to take seriously our responsibilities as
a Federal Government to appropriately fund and support these
programs.
So, Mr. Chairman, I hope that I can ask for your support
and others on this side of the aisle, as well, as we put
forward an endeavor to work with our tribes to try to put
together a comprehensive law enforcement and drug interdiction
bill. Over the next few months, we will be talking more to our
Tribal Nations, doing consultation, working hopefully with all
of you to talk about what is actually needed.
First of all, we know that our tribes need funding. Whether
they are direct service and receiving tribal law enforcement
services from the BIA, or whether they are contracting and have
their own law enforcement programs, we know that these programs
are severely underfunded. In fact, Bryan Newland, who is our
Assistant Secretary, stated that the underfunding is on the
order of at least $3 billion across our 570-plus Tribal
Nations.
We also know from our tribes that mandatory funding would
help them address the deficiencies that they face year to year.
And I know that it is one of the significant things that
Congress could do, in addition to other efforts to pass
mandatory funding for water rights, for our other programs that
support health care, like IHS and contract support costs.
Secondly, we need to help our law enforcement officers. Our
tribes are struggling to recruit and retain tribal law
enforcement. There is already a Republican bill that Mr. Dan
Newhouse has put forward which would provide for parity for our
tribal law enforcement. I strongly support this bill.
Finally, we need a significant and substantive investment
in addiction treatment and prevention services. And the only
way we are going to get there is if we properly fund the Indian
Health Service and BIA and other contract services that tribes
use to help support their communities.
So, in closing, I do hope that we can keep this hearing
focused on the substance. I hope we can keep it focused on what
our tribal leaders have told us. And I hope that we do not turn
this into a partisan dog and pony show that takes our tribes
for granted.
With that, I yield back.
Dr. Gosar. I will now introduce our witness for the first
panel. Mr. Darryl LaCounte with the Bureau of Indian Affairs.
Let me remind the witness that under Committee Rules, you
must limit your oral statements to 5 minutes.
You will see when you first get started the light will be
green, then it will go to the yellow. Once you see that yellow,
you have 1 minute to wrap it up. Regardless, your whole
testimony will be placed in the record. If you go much past the
red light, we will ask you to kind of sum it up.
I now recognize Director LaCounte for his 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF DARRYL LaCOUNTE, DIRECTOR, BUREAU OF
INDIAN  AFFAIRS,  DEPARTMENT  OF  THE  INTERIOR,
WASHINGTON, DC

Mr. LaCounte. Thank you. Good afternoon, Chairman Gosar,
Ranking Member Stansbury, and members of the Subcommittee. My
name is Darryl LaCounte. I am the Director of the Bureau of
Indian Affairs at the U.S. Department of the Interior. Thank
you for the opportunity to discuss the Department's efforts in
stopping illegal drug trafficking in Indian Country.
The United States has a trust relationship with each of the
574 federally recognized tribes. With that trust relationship,
we have a responsibility to protect the continued existence of
Indian tribes and the safety of their communities. The
Department and BIA plays a crucial role in upholding this
responsibility through interagency coordination.
Coordination with tribes and other Federal law enforcement
agencies leads to successful investigations that disrupt and
take apart drug trafficking organizations. On May 27, just
recently in 2024, the Division of Drug Enforcement, under the
Office of Justice Services, BIA, stopped a vehicle for speeding
on Interstate 40 in the Pueblo of Laguna, New Mexico. The DDE
officer searched the vehicle and discovered 311,800 fentanyl
pills valued at $12,472,000.
Our investigations also target conspirators in and outside
of Native communities to dismantle drug trafficking
organizations. We also develop more cohesive responses to drug
trafficking within Native communities, and train tribal law
enforcement officers on how to spot and root out illegal drug
traffickers.
Our operations have successful outcomes, but we need to
strengthen our efforts and address the structural challenges
that affect the safety of Native communities. These structural
challenges are documented in many reports commissioned by
Congress to investigate the public safety concerns in Native
communities. Each report reaches the same conclusion: We need
to address these big, structural challenges to guarantee the
safety of people in Native communities.
The big structural challenges are increasing funding,
addressing jurisdictional complexities, as you so pointed out,
Chairman Gosar, and providing other needed resources for tribal
justice personnel.
Our 2021 Tribal Law and Order Act report estimates the
total cost for public safety and justice programs in Indian
Country is over $3 billion: $1.7 billion of that $3 billion for
law enforcement programs, including tribal programs; $284.2
million for existing detention centers; and $1.5 billion for
tribal courts. In that same report, the data shows that the BIA
spent $246.3 million on tribal law enforcement; $123.1 million
for detention facilities; and $62.8 million for tribal courts,
with only a small amount reaching tribes in public law, 280
states. This means that public safety and justice programs in
Indian Country are funded at just 13 percent of the total need.
And the BIA is forced to heavily prioritize where funding
is spent, leaving some areas underfunded, and that our first
responders are forced to use outdated or minimally functional
equipment. With our current budget, the BIA has focused on pay
parity to increase our recruitment of qualified law enforcement
officers. We are continuing to reduce the time to hire for the
Bureau's officers, but the lengthy background investigation
process is one of the biggest obstacles to officer recruitment.
Expediting the background investigation process would greatly
help us recruit and hire qualified law enforcement candidates,
which is why the BIA supports the passage of the BADGES Act.
Qualified law enforcement officers must also understand the
complex jurisdiction in Indian Country before starting an
investigation. The complex matrix depends on who owns the land
and the tribal status of those involved. If these issues are
not resolved, investigations can be stalled and eventually
overlooked. The patchwork of jurisdiction adds transaction
costs to tribal policing that other agencies do not have to
deal with. Congress has legislated several times to ensure
tribes can protect their communities by reaffirming tribal
jurisdiction over crimes committed within Indian Country.
However, these jurisdictional mazes still exist.
Reaffirming tribal jurisdiction is consistent with the core
principle of self-determination and demonstrates our
understanding that tribal governments are best situated to meet
the health, welfare, and safety of their citizens.
Reaffirming jurisdiction is not enough. We have to make
sure that tribal law enforcement officers have access to
housing and improved roads. Old communication equipment must be
modernized. Internet service gaps need to be closed. Law
enforcement gear such as license plate readers, facial
recognition software, and the MX-908 multi-mission portable
mass spectrometers are needed to keep investigations effective
at stopping illegal drugs from entering Native communities.
Chair Gosar, Ranking Member Stansbury, and members of the
Subcommittee, thank you for the opportunity to provide the
Department's views. We look forward to working with Congress to
affirm and support tribal sovereignty and public safety within
tribal communities.
I am happy to answer any questions you may have.

[The prepared statement of Mr. LaCounte follows:]

Prepared Statement of Darryl LaCounte, Director, Bureau of Indian
Affairs, U.S. Department of the Interior

Good afternoon, Chair Gosar, Ranking Member Stansbury, and members
of the Subcommittee. My name is Darryl LaCounte, I am the Director of
the Bureau of Indian Affairs (BIA) at the U.S. Department of the
Interior (Department). Thank you for the opportunity to discuss how the
Bureau is addressing illegal drug trafficking in Native communities.
The United States has a trust relationship with each of the 574
federally recognized Tribes, and their Tribal citizens. Through these
relationships, the United States has charged itself with obligations of
the highest responsibility and trust--including the obligation to
protect the existence of Indian Tribes and their citizens. This
obligation is at its highest when it comes to protecting the physical
safety and well-being of Indian people within Indian Country.
The BIA plays a crucial role in meeting this obligation on behalf
of the United States and partnering with other Federal agencies to
continue meeting this important obligation.

Current Actions

Interagency coordination is key to eradicating the presence of
illegal drug trafficking. The BIA currently works with other Federal
agencies, such as the Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA), Federal
Bureau of Investigation (FBI), Department of Homeland Security, Border
Patrol, and the High Intensity Drug Trafficking Area task forces to
combat illegal drug trafficking in Tribal communities.
Our interagency investigations often target conspirators on and off
Indian lands to effectively dismantle drug trafficking organizations.
The BIA leverages internal intelligence analysis in cooperation with
other Federal, State, and Tribal law enforcement agencies to combat the
increasing amounts of controlled substances being trafficked into
reservations through the United States Mail, Federal Express, private
shipping companies, and Amtrak.
The Division of Drug Enforcement (DDE) under the Office of Justice
Services (OJS) has conducted numerous marijuana eradication operations
working with state and federal agencies in California. In previous
years, the DDE assisted with the eradication of hundreds of thousands
of illegally grown plants and the dismantling of grow operations.
OJS/DDE also conducts Mobile Enforcement Team (MET) operations on
Reservations across the country. These deployments are in cooperation
with the Tribes, States, and other Federal agencies. They involve the
deployment of additional resources to a particular area to focus on the
specifically identified issue in that area. These resources include
additional agents, K9 teams, and specific equipment used to identify,
gather, and present the necessary evidence to disrupt and dismantle
drug trafficking in that area. Agents and officers conduct covert and
overt drug investigations as appropriate for the area to remove the
individuals involved and the drugs from the communities. The DDE also
operates the largest nationwide network of drug enforcement agents
dedicated solely to Indian Country. Table 1 and Table 2 demonstrate the
impact that OJS DDE is making by intercepting illicit drugs in Indian
Country.
To maximize effectiveness, we also increased our involvement with
individual Tribal law enforcement agencies to develop more cohesive
responses to drug trafficking and drug enforcement needs. Drug
trafficking and drug-related crime, including the ongoing opioid and
methamphetamine crises, continue to escalate throughout Indian Country.
Tribal officials have consistently called for action toward addressing
an increasingly common cause of Indian Country crime by strengthening
drug enforcement capabilities throughout the Nation.
The BIA has partnered with Tribes to step up enforcement operations
to combat the trafficking of illicit drugs in communities on
reservations across the nation. We also train Tribal law enforcement
officers on how to spot and root out drug traffickers that are living
within their communities.
The DDE assists Tribes with specific requests as well as general
narcotics enforcement operations for individual Tribes. For Tribes that
are located within Public Law 83-280 (P.L. 280) states, the State has
primary jurisdiction for enforcement, but this has not stopped the BIA
from working with states and Tribes to reduce the presence of drug
trafficking organizations operating in Indian Country. As part of our
cohesive response to combatting drug trafficking, BIA maintains close
contact with the United States Attorney Offices responsible for
prosecuting the complex criminal organizations affecting Indian Country
to strengthen each case's credibility with the prosecutorial staff and
strengthen relationships with local law enforcement.
Our partnership with Tribes has led to the successful seizures of
illegal drugs, including illicit fentanyl. On the morning of May 27,
2024, a BIA-DDE law enforcement officer stopped a vehicle for speeding
on Interstate 40 on the Pueblo of Laguna, New Mexico. On probable
cause, the DDE officer searched the vehicle and discovered
approximately 311,800 fentanyl pills, valued at $12,472,000.
Interagency coordination with Tribal law enforcement leads to
successful operations.
These operations have been successful in combatting illicit drug
trafficking in Native communities, but Tribal law enforcement continues
to face structural challenges. Specifically, the President's FY 2025
Budget includes additional funding that would allow us to further
strengthen these efforts and address these structural challenges.

Structural Challenges

Jurisdiction

Drug trafficking organizations, exploiting the myriad of
jurisdictional issues surrounding Indian Country, target Native
communities as delivery sites and for distribution of illegal drugs.
The jurisdictional framework between Indian Tribes, the federal
government, and states is complex, especially with respect to
determining criminal jurisdiction. Congress and the courts have tied
criminal jurisdiction to several factors to determine who exercises
jurisdiction. These factors include type of crime, Indian or non-Indian
status of the defendant and the victim, and whether or not the crime
scene lies within Indian Country. Determining these factors is often a
complex element that must be resolved before beginning an
investigation. These factors impose significant transaction costs on
officers, policymakers, attorneys, judges, and advocates working to
address public safety challenges in Indian Country.

Congress has legislated to clarify criminal jurisdiction in Indian
Country over the years. These enactments include:

The 1968 amendments to P.L. 83-280 (P.L. 280), which
required states to obtain the consent of the Indian Tribe
prior to exercising criminal jurisdiction in Indian Country
and permitted states to withdraw from the jurisdictional
arrangement;

The 1991 amendments to the Indian Civil Rights Act, which
affirmed Indian Tribes' inherent criminal jurisdiction over
non-member Indians;

The 2010 Tribal Law and Order Act, which enhanced the
criminal sentencing authority of Tribal courts;

The 2013 reauthorization of the Violence Against Women
Act, which recognized and affirmed Indian Tribes' inherent
jurisdiction to prosecute non-Indians for certain crimes
committed in Indian Country; and

The 2022 reauthorization of the Violence Against Women
Act, which expanded and reaffirmed Indian Tribes' inherent
jurisdiction to prosecute non-Indians for additional crimes
committed in Indian Country.

The successful implementation of these laws demonstrate that Indian
Tribes and their law enforcement agencies are best suited to meet their
public welfare needs. Despite these successes, additional
jurisdictional cases have added more complexities to the framework.
In McGirt v. Oklahoma, the U.S. Supreme Court held that the
Muscogee Creek Nation continued to have criminal jurisdiction over all
the land reserved for the Tribe in an 1866 Treaty. This decision was
complicated by the Court's decision in Castro-Huerta v. Oklahoma. In
Castro-Huerta, the Supreme Court determined that the federal government
and states have concurrent jurisdiction over non-Indians who commit
crimes against Indians in Indian Country. This recognition of states'
expanded jurisdiction occurred without the consent of sovereign
federally recognized Tribes, and without regard to the weight of the
historical understanding of the limits on state authority in Indian
Country, which Congress has relied upon in enacting legislation
involving Indian Country jurisdiction, including 18 U.S.C. Sec. 1152.
These decisions combined with P.L. 280 jurisdiction make Indian Country
jurisdiction more complex, confusing, and ripe for unintended
consequences.

Several reports, such as the Not Invisible Act Commission Report,
provide recommendations on how to address the jurisdictional
complexities within Indian Country. These recommendations include:

1.  Amending P.L. 280 to allow Tribes to opt out of state
jurisdiction; and

2.  Restoring jurisdiction to Tribes to be able to prosecute all
crimes that occur on Tribal lands.

Time and time again, Tribes have demonstrated that they can best
meet the public welfare and safety needs of communities on their lands.
As highlighted above, Congress has paired its legislation affirming
Tribal jurisdiction and sovereignty with increased investments in
Tribal justice systems. The Department supports energized investment in
Tribal justice systems to address the structural challenges many Tribes
face.

Staffing

Congress has commissioned many reports to investigate the public
safety concerns of Native communities and each report reaches the same
conclusion: we need to address big structural challenges, such as
staffing, to guarantee the safety of people in Tribal communities.
Presently, the Department funds public safety and justice services
for only 198 out of the total 574 federally recognized Tribes. On March
4, 2024, the Department issued the ``Report to the Congress on
Spending, Staffing, and Estimated Funding Costs for Public Safety and
Justice Programs in Indian Country, 2021'' (2021 TLOA report) \1\ which
contains funding cost data for law enforcement in Indian Country. In
2021, total BIA spending for law enforcement was $256.4 million, $125
million for detention facilities, and $65.3 million for Tribal courts.
The 2021 TLOA report estimates the total cost for public safety and
justice programs is $1.7 billion for law enforcement programs, $284.2
million for existing detention centers, and $1.5 billion for Tribal
courts. Thus, the total estimated unmet obligations identified in the
2021 TLOA report for Tribal law enforcement, detention, and courts
funding are just over $3 billion. The total estimated public safety and
justice staffing need for Indian Country is 29,436 full time equivalent
personnel. These numbers demonstrate the continued need for additional
investment to improve the ability of Tribal public safety systems to
fully serve their communities.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ U.S. Dep't of the Interior, Bureau of Indian Affairs, Office of
Justice Serv., Report to the Congress on Spending, Staffing, and
Estimated Funding Costs for Public Safety and Justice Programs in
Indian Country, 2021 (Feb. 2024), https://www.bia.gov/sites/default/
files/media_document/2021_tloa_report_final_508_compliant.pdf
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Congress provided an additional $131.2 million for public safety
and justice programs in Indian Country for fiscal years 2022 and 2023.
However, the additional resources only moved the needle four percentage
points above the 13 percent of the total need cited in the 2021 TLOA
report.\2\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ See 2021 TLOA report, footnote 1, p. 1.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
With our current budget, BIA is working to improve law enforcement
operations by focusing on recruitment incentives like pay parity. To
accomplish this, we completed an upgrade to our uniformed police
officer positions during FY 2023, which increased career advancement
opportunities, along with corresponding pay increases up to an
additional $30,000 annually for BIA law enforcement officers. We are
also utilizing available hiring flexibilities and recruitment and
retention bonuses to increase current staffing levels and better
support those interested in fulfilling the Department's unique mission
in Tribal communities. However, to support the additional pay raises in
2024 and 2025 plus increases in other fixed costs, the additional
funding included in the 2025 Budget is critical.
At the requested level for fiscal year 2025, the DDE currently
funds 53 BIA criminal investigator positions and eight K-9 officer
positions that are strategically located throughout the country to help
mitigate the jurisdictional complexities and prosecutorial challenges
that make Indian communities disproportionately vulnerable to
systematic infiltration by trafficking organizations. Our drug agents
also work alongside other federal partners on task forces pursuing
highly technical investigations such as court ordered Title III wire
intercepts, Organized Crime Drug Enforcement Task Forces cases,
Racketeer Influenced and Corrupt Organization cases, High Intensity
Drug Trafficking Area cases, synthetic cannabinoid cases, and multi-
jurisdictional cases.
Despite these coordinated efforts, there is still a shortage of law
enforcement on the ground. Understaffing results in a lack of timely
responses to incidents, a perception that Tribal law enforcement does
not care about the community, and it negatively impacts Tribal
economies. Staffing shortages also have a notable impact on mental
health and the overall well-being of Tribal law enforcement, which lead
to resignations.

Equipment and other resources

International drug trafficking organizations often have access to
sophisticated equipment and military-grade weapons to protect their
operations. Accordingly, ensuring that Tribal law enforcement officers
have the resources to address these issues, such as updated equipment,
access to technology resources, and housing, is a top safety priority
for Tribal law enforcement. Specifically, guaranteeing Tribal officers'
access to reliable, top-tier equipment like the MX908 multi-mission
portable Mass spectrometer for the roadside identification of illegal
drugs, as well as technology like license plate readers and facial
recognition software, can greatly contribute to their effectiveness in
the field.
Adequate housing and infrastructure is a challenge in many Tribal
communities. We ask Tribal law enforcement officers to live within the
communities they serve, but they face housing challenges such as cost,
or they are unable to bring their families due to the size of the
available residence. This is a barrier to retaining law enforcement
employees. Furthermore, many Tribal communities and homes are located
in remote areas with unpaved roads, thus public safety vehicles
accumulate greater wear and tear and need more frequent routine
replacement.
Due to the remote nature of many Tribal communities, Tribal law
enforcement officers often respond to high-risk calls alone and face
greater rates of death in the line of duty. They heavily rely on field
communications, like land mobile radios, to respond to calls and
maintain officer safety. But many Tribal areas do not have sufficient
radio coverage which delays response times, investigations, and
jeopardizes officer safety. Expanded radio coverage to minimize ``no
coverage'' areas and include video and data capabilities is vital to
increasing officer safety.
A number of reports commissioned by Congress affirm that these
structural challenges make it harder to keep people safe in Indian
Country. While the data conveys the seriousness of illegal drug
trafficking in Indian Country, we are unable to measure the resulting
impact to victims, affected families, and the already strained Tribal
justice and social service systems in these communities. Addressing
these challenges requires coordination across the federal government
and with Tribal leaders to fulfill our trust responsibility.
The Department continues to prioritize and reinforce Tribal
sovereignty and self-determination by providing support and resources
to improving public safety and combat illegal drug trafficking in
Indian Country.
Chair Gosar, Ranking Member Stansbury, and members of the
Subcommittee, thank you for the opportunity to provide the Department's
views. We look forward to working with Congress to affirm and support
Tribal sovereignty and public safety within Tribal communities. I am
happy to answer any questions that you may have.

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

------

Questions Submitted for the Record to Mr. Darryl LaCounte, Director,
Bureau of Indian Affairs, Department of the Interior

Mr. LaCounte did not submit responses to the Committee by the
appropriate deadline for inclusion in the printed record.

Questions Submitted by Representative Gosar

Question 1. Tribes have expressed the lack of trust between tribes
and federal law enforcement. How has the BIA been working to address
this, and what more can be done to improve working relationships?

Question 2. In the last hearing, the tribal leaders expressed
disappointment with the apparent lack of interest in their needs and
concerns by their federal partners, even a desire to learn about the
tribes they were assigned to support. Do you think that a program to
recruit tribal members into Federal Law Enforcement would improve the
relationship between Federal agencies and the tribes?

Question 3. During our April 10, 2024, hearing, President Jeffrey
Stiffarm of Fort Belknap Indian Community stated that ``what little
officers we do have, they have been trying to be proactive without any
help from the BIA, without any help from the FBI, without any help from
the Border Patrol or the DEA.'' Are you satisfied with the current
level of federal law enforcement activity across Indian Country? Please
explain.

Question 4. During that same hearing Councilman Bryce Kirk of Fort
Peck Tribes, that BIA has repeatedly failed to meet their federal trust
responsibility to provide sufficient funding for law enforcement for
Fort Peck Tribes. How is BIA working to meet the trust responsibilities
with Tribes across the nation, so they have the necessary law
enforcement resources to push back against the cartels?

Question 5. During the Committee's FY25 Budget Hearing for BIA,
Assistant Secretary Newland briefly described the `jurisdictional maze'
that exists between the different levels of law enforcement. Can you
provide some examples of when this `jurisdictional maze' has hindered
law enforcement efforts on Indian lands?

Question 6. What suggestions does BIA have for resolving long-
standing jurisdictional issues to bolster the authority of tribal law
enforcement agencies to address the cartel activity on their lands?

Question 7. As you know, Special Law Enforcement Commission (SLEC)
agreements from BIA are required for tribal or local law enforcement
officers to enforce federal criminal laws in Indian Country. However,
the long process of obtaining and renewing an SLEC agreement is
reportedly a barrier for Tribes to gaining this tool. Does the
burdensome process for obtaining and renewing an SLEC agreement hamper
tribal law enforcement's ability to address the cartels' invasion onto
tribal lands?

Question 8. What steps do you believe are necessary for the SLEC
process to be improved?

Questions Submitted by Representative Carl

Question 1. Could you provide an update for the Committee on BIA's
pay parity initiative, that intends to bring BIA law enforcement pay
levels in line with other federal law enforcement agencies? And how
else is BIA working to address the recruitment and retention issue?

Question 2. How has the recruitment and retention of federal law
enforcement, not just BIA but across all agencies, impacting the
ability of Tribes to address the cartel's presence and the fentanyl
crisis on Indian lands?

______

Dr. Gosar. Thank you, Director. I am now going to recognize
Members for their questions. First, the gentleman from Montana,
Mr. Rosendale.
Mr. Rosendale. Thank you very much, Mr. Chair, and thank
you for holding this hearing today.
The Biden administration's open border policies are
wreaking havoc across the entire nation. And this isn't
political, this is just a fact. This is especially evident by
the surge in addiction and crime in Montana's reservations
fueled by cartel activities.
I want to thank our Montana-based witnesses for this panel
and then coming forward to share their insights and firsthand
experiences regarding this alarming trend.
The continuing cycle of addiction, crime, and loss of life
in Indian Country must be halted, and I hope that this hearing
will force this Administration to protect our nation and work
with our tribes to repel these dangerous cartels and their
impact.
Moreover, I hope the fact we are having yet another hearing
on this issue of vital importance will serve as a much-needed
wake-up call to my colleagues across the aisle, helping them to
recognize the unconscionable effects of President Biden's open
border policies. These policies have impacted not only border
communities, but the entire nation.
Mr. LaCounte, how many agents do you currently have working
in Montana?
Mr. LaCounte. Congressman, we have numerous tribes that
have contracted the program: Fort Peck, Fort Belknap,
Blackfeet. So, our agents are basically focused on Crow and
Northern Cheyenne, with a presence at the regional office there
in Billings.
It is a tough number to come to, but I would say roughly 40
that aren't tribal at this point.
Mr. Rosendale. How many of these agents' main priority is
preventing cartel activities or drug trafficking in Indian
Country?
Out of the 40, how many of them is it their exclusive job
to work on drug trafficking or the cartels?
Mr. LaCounte. They are not focused specifically on cartels,
but they are focused on drug activity. That would be roughly
five agents.
Mr. Rosendale. OK. What specific actions is your agency
taking to ensure that these communities remain safe from cartel
activities?
Mr. LaCounte. We are doing any and everything we can with
the resources we have to stop drugs from getting there and
making arrests where applicable, if we can do that. And we are
assisting tribes as best we can to do the same things with the
programs I mentioned, Congressman, that are contracted.
Mr. Rosendale. Do you believe that more cooperation between
Federal law enforcement and the tribal law enforcement would
help with effective enforcement and reduction in crime?
Mr. LaCounte. I do.
Mr. Rosendale. OK. What can be done to create more
cooperation between the tribal community and the Federal law
enforcement agencies in order to help this relationship?
What can we do to improve that relationship so that these
folks are working together?
Mr. LaCounte. I don't know if I am supposed to go down this
road as the director, but additional funding would always help.
The pushback between BIA and oftentimes tribal programs is
they don't think we are funding them enough, while in fact we
have limited resources, and we fund as best we can.
And other than that, address the jurisdictional issues that
the Chairman brought up earlier, to where it is much easier for
officers on the ground to know whether they have jurisdiction
or not.
I recently met with the cadets at our training facility in
Artesia, New Mexico. And my message to them was, look, I know
it is a scary thing, and you are not lawyers, but when there is
a crime committed, I am going to back you if you do the right
thing as a law enforcement officer, even if you are somewhat
out of your jurisdiction. But that is a real serious issue, the
jurisdictional issue, Congressman.
Mr. Rosendale. Couldn't we help resolve some of these
jurisdictional issues by, again, having some kind of better,
closer cooperation between the Federal agencies and the tribal
agencies so that they are communicating well?
Mr. LaCounte. Absolutely.
Mr. Rosendale. And that doesn't cost money. That takes
time. That takes commitment. That is not about money. And if
there are any agreements that need to be put in place, those
are the kinds of things that we need to be talking about.
Mr. Chair, I see my time has expired, I yield back.
Dr. Gosar. I would just like to add, we have to find the
money somewhere. And I would ask you specifically, where should
that money go? What specific account would that money go to?
Mr. LaCounte. That money would be spread across all of law
enforcement throughout Indian Country, including drug
enforcement, but we have serious problems on reservations, as
well, with domestic violence. And drugs are a serious issue.
And as Congressman Rosendale probably knows, I used to be
the regional director in the state of Montana. And when I left
to take this job in 2018, over 60 percent of the babies born
were meth babies. And I don't know if throwing money at that is
going to solve it, but not throwing money at it certainly isn't
going to.
Dr. Gosar. Right. The gentleman from Oregon, Mr. Bentz, is
recognized for his 5 minutes.
Mr. Bentz. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thanks for the
invitation to participate today in this important hearing.
There is no doubt at all about the horrific consequences of
the open border policy. This is just one of them.
One of the situations back in Oregon where I am from is the
inability of local law enforcement, such as the sheriff's
office, within the county where certain ones of the
reservations might be located, for them to exercise power or
authority over those on the reservation. And I am pretty sure
this is kind of what you were hinting at on page 3 of your
testimony, where you say exploiting the myriad of
jurisdictional issues is a challenge. And I agree.
I called my brother, who used to be the county sheriff back
in Oregon in the county in which I live, a big county. The one
he was in was 10,000 square miles, and there were actually two
reservations there. But they were not welcome to help on the
reservations. The tribal police, you would think, would take
care of the problem, but there are two issues there.
One you have kind of alluded to, the numbers of tribal
police is modest. I think the national average is about one
tribal police person, actually, it is 0.7 per 1,000. And
nationwide, it should be three. So, there are too few.
The other problem that appears to be a challenge is keeping
those people that do become tribal police officers working. And
there seems to be a lack of stability sometimes in tribal
government that leads to those folks not sticking around.
Perhaps you can address that issue. Do you have a study or
something that indicates how long tribal police officers remain
employed?
And I am going to hope that you don't go back to money
every time there is a problem. So, tell me, does anything that
I have said ring any bells of recognition?
Let's start with the lack of recognition, perhaps, by
tribes of other law enforcement agencies who are driving
around, deputy sheriffs perhaps, or state police, and those
folks not having appropriate jurisdictional authority to step
in. Thus, the cartels see tribal reservations as opportunity
locations because there is not enough law enforcement there.
So, comment on that first, if you could.
Mr. LaCounte. At your wishes, I will not mention funding.
Mr. Bentz. Well, wait, look, you mentioned the word. Last
year, or the year before last, I think there was $700 million
allocated to the tribes. I know it is not the $3 billion
mentioned. Congress simply appropriated funds. Tribes should be
allowed flexibility on how to utilize and invest those funds in
their communities. It is not for DOI to now restrict how tribes
use those funds.
It says here, the bill's language, $772 million almost $800
million, is designated for tribal government services such as
public safety and justice. Where did that money go? As long as
we are talking about funding.
Mr. LaCounte. It went to the tribes.
Mr. Bentz. OK, that was almost a billion dollars. About
$800 million. Did that do no good?
Mr. LaCounte. Well, every little bit does good, but----
Mr. Bentz. Wait, wait. A little bit? $800 million. You
spread it across the nation. How much did each tribe get?
Mr. LaCounte. I don't know exactly. I would have to do the
math. There are 198 facilities where we or the tribes provide
Federal----
Mr. Bentz. OK, well, did it help?
Mr. LaCounte. Of course it helps.
Mr. Bentz. How much did it help?
Mr. LaCounte. As much as that amount can possibly help.
Mr. Bentz. Let's go back. And maybe the simplest question
would be, have you or are you aware of the fact that certain
tribes are not enthusiastic about allowing local law
enforcement to enforce laws on reservations?
Mr. LaCounte. Yes.
Mr. Bentz. And does this allow, then, less law enforcement
activity than perhaps should be there?
Mr. LaCounte. Tribes are sovereign nations.
Mr. Bentz. Well, let's stop there. Are you saying, then,
that the tribes have made a decision to allow less law
enforcement than could be the case by simply saying to those
who were already there, engaged in the law enforcement business
to help? Is that what you are saying?
Mr. LaCounte. I am saying I don't know the specifics of the
situation, but if it is a tribal law enforcement agency and
they said you are not welcome, that would be the tribe making
that decision. That certainly would not be the Bureau of Indian
Affairs.
Mr. Bentz. And I think you said that that indeed is the
case in different reservations across the nation, where they
are not welcoming in an already available law enforcement help
because they don't want it. Is that correct?
Mr. LaCounte. That would be my assumption. I don't ask them
why they choose not to do that. We encourage them to actually
enter into MOUs and MOAs with the local law enforcement to
where they can do cross-jurisdiction. Whether they choose to do
it or not, that is up to the tribe.
Mr. Bentz. It is up to them.
Thank you, I yield back.
Dr. Gosar. I thank the gentleman. The gentleman from
Arizona, Mr. Crane, is recognized.
Mr. Crane. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. LaCounte, thank you so much for coming today. We
appreciate it.
I am proud to represent over half the tribes in Arizona. I
also serve on the House Homeland Security Committee. And I hear
every single day about the crime and tragedy in my district
that are a direct result of this Administration's border
policies.
BIA's Office of Justice Service has law enforcement
authority on tribal lands in my district. Sir, is it true that
OJS currently has a vacancy rate of 30 percent for all
positions?
Mr. LaCounte. That is roughly close, yes.
Mr. Crane. Why do you think that is, sir?
Mr. LaCounte. Recruitment is hard, very hard. And the
background investigations that I spoke to take time.
Oftentimes, we select somebody and by the time we get through
that, they have found another job because they need to go to
work.
But we are not the only ones suffering from lack of law
enforcement officers. That is a nationwide crisis at the
moment. But we are certainly doing everything we can to combat
it because we recognize more bodies, more cops on the ground is
a good thing.
Mr. Crane. Yes, absolutely, sir. Do you think that the
Biden administration has their priorities straight when it
comes to protecting the homeland and fulfilling government's
trust and responsibility to protect the tribes and their
citizens?
Mr. LaCounte. The Administration has deferred to me on just
about everything, and I have been doing this 36 years. I would
like to think that is letting us do what we need to do.
Mr. Crane. My question is, do you think that the Biden
administration is doing a good job prioritizing the safety of
everyone in this country, including the tribes, especially when
it comes to the southern border, sir?
Mr. LaCounte. I am not a border expert, No. 1.
I can't speak to the rest of the nation, but through the
BIA they have been nothing but supportive. And the budget
increases that we have received lately have all been for public
safety and justice.
Mr. Crane. Sir, I know you claim that you are not a border
security expert, and I can appreciate that. But I can also
tell, just by listening to you talk today, that you do have
common sense. You know what has been going on at the southern
border since this Administration took control. And I know you
know that is affecting tribes all across the nation. Would you
say that is correct, sir?
Mr. LaCounte. I would say that it is correct, but it was
also an issue before.
Mr. Crane. Yes, sir.
Mr. LaCounte. We have been dealing with cartels long before
this Administration, long before the last administration.
Mr. Crane. Absolutely. We have always had things coming
over the border that are unsavory. But I think everybody in
this chamber knows that it has been skyrocketing under this
Administration.
Are you aware that, I think it was today, Joe Biden signed
an Executive Order that will dramatically tighten the border?
Mr. LaCounte. I saw it on the news this morning.
Mr. Crane. Do you think that is interesting, seeing as how
this Administration has been saying that they couldn't do
anything about it, and it was Congress that wouldn't do
anything about it? Do you find it interesting that Biden
reversed Trump's Executive Orders? That was one of the first
things he did when he got into office. And now that it is right
before an election year, he just signed an Executive Order to
tighten up how many people were allowed to come through that
southern border?
Mr. LaCounte. I haven't even seen the Executive Order. I
will say that, if it helps us in my lane, which is Indian
affairs, I am very happy. But I haven't read it. I can't speak
to it.
Mr. Crane. Yes, well, let's speak about generalities. Do
you think it is interesting that President Biden just signed an
Executive Order right before an election, when this whole time
he has been saying, oh, it is Congress, it is Congress, they
need to act and secure the southern border?
Mr. LaCounte. I really try to stay out of politics. I have
served in both administrations, and it doesn't serve the
director well to go down any of those roads.
Mr. Crane. I hear you, sir, and I appreciate that. I just
do think it is rich, though, that when I listen to Ms.
Stansbury and I listen to you, and you talk about how we need
increased funding and resources, I noticed that you guys didn't
mention the policies. You guys didn't mention the policy
changes that are driving up the amount of resources and funding
that have to go into combating the fentanyl.
The MS-13 gang members coming over the southern border, the
millions of extra illegal aliens, the vast increase of
individuals on the terror watch list that have come over this
Administration. So, it is kind of hard for us to have a real
conversation when we are not having a real conversation about
everything that is going on.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Dr. Gosar. I thank the gentleman. The gentlelady from New
Mexico is recognized, Ms. Stansbury.
Ms. Stansbury. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I find it extraordinarily distasteful and disrespectful
when we call hearings about tribal issues and Members of
Congress use the space to talk about policy and political
issues that are not about the issue at hand. I think it is
disrespectful to our tribes. I think it is disrespectful to the
leaders. I think it is disrespectful to the folks who serve our
tribal governments. And I would like to, for one, actually get
back to the issue at hand.
I have heard some comments, questions about how tribal law
enforcement works this morning. And Mr. Chairman, I would love
to work with you on a bipartisan basis to maybe do a teach-in
for Members about how tribal law enforcement works. There have
been a lot of questions about how funding works, about
jurisdictional issues work, about how legal issues work. These
are incredibly complex issues, and it is important to have a
hearing about it. But I think a setting in which we could
really get in the weeds would be very helpful.
But I do want to make a comment because there have been a
few comments this morning that said, tell us how we can fix the
issue without talking about funding. Well, that is like saying
how do we stop a fire without talking about water. Because the
real issue is that we have been underfunding law enforcement
and support for our tribes since treaties and trust
responsibilities began between the U.S. Government and these
Tribal Nations.
So, we hear it literally every single day. Those of us who
work with tribal governments, who work with our Tribal Nations
are telling us, ``We need water to put out the fire.'' And the
water in this case is the resources. So, I am going to just use
a few quick examples of tribes that I interact with on a day-
to-day basis.
The Navajo Nation, their Tribal Council just came to visit
me a few days ago. They would like to renegotiate their law
enforcement contract because they are underfunded. They do not
have enough money through their contract to pay enough officers
to patrol each of the areas that they need. That is, in part,
just the history of that contract, but also because the
population is growing because the need is growing. You need
water to put out the fire. That is how tribes use the money.
They need it to hire law enforcement.
But I also think it is important that we talk a little bit
about these jurisdictional issues. Tribes are sovereign
nations. They decide what happens on their lands. And I think
it is important to take a moment because, Director, you brought
it up a couple of times here today. It is up to a Tribal Nation
if they decide they want to do direct service, they want to
contract for the money, they want to hire their own officers,
they want to have extra BIA officers on tribal lands. It is
really up to each of these sovereign nations and their
relationship with you all.
But it is also up to them to decide whether or not they
want to cross-deputize, whether they want to work with county
law enforcement, they want to work with local municipals
outside the reservation, they want to invite state police onto
their reservation because they are their lands.
And what we have seen, I think, because there is a lack of
understanding of tribal sovereignty, is that there has been a
systematic effort for the last several decades to undermine
tribal sovereignty, especially around law enforcement. And it
is dangerous, and resulted just 2 years ago in the Castro-
Huerta decision that the Supreme Court handed down, and which
tribes across the country are asking us to address right now.
So, I wonder, Director, I am grateful to hear that you
served at a regional level. Talk to us a little bit about, at
the regional level, working in the BIA bureaucracy with our
Tribal Nations, about these sovereignty and jurisdictional
issues. What can we do to: (1) make sure more resources are
reaching tribes at the ground; and (2) that BIA is doing its
part to address these jurisdictional issues and help support
tribes as they seek help and accountability?
Mr. LaCounte. I would say that BIA and tribal law
enforcement agencies are at the bottom of the pecking order on
the Federal law enforcement. We don't get the respect that we
deserve, and the tribes certainly don't get the respect they
deserve. We are oftentimes up to their whim, what they want to
pursue, not what the tribe wants to pursue and not what we want
to pursue, but what they think is important because we don't
take these cases to Federal court. That is another agency
within the government. So, that makes it difficult.
As for putting the fire out, you are absolutely correct. I
have been around a long time, and I figured out early in my
career here is what I am going to get. I am going to have to
figure out how to make it work. It would be great at one time
to not have to think that way, and maybe I am not the right guy
for the job because I have always thought that way, and it is
like, yes, we are at 13 percent, what the hell can we do? And I
will leave it at that.
Ms. Stansbury. Thank you, Director, and thank you, Mr.
Chairman. I hope we can work together to put the fire out.
Dr. Gosar. See, that is why we wanted the FBI and Homeland
Security here, because we are chasing our tail around and
around and around we go. Because if you can't talk to each
other, you can't come up with solutions. Would you agree with
that, Director?
Mr. LaCounte. Yes.
Dr. Gosar. I think the other thing is we have to streamline
the process, but we also have to have a conversation. What does
sovereignty mean? How is it enacted? All those have to have
some similarities in regards to the tribes. Yes, they own their
land, but they have to also have to be held to stewardship of
those funds, even better than even the Federal Government. The
Federal Government is horrible at that.
A question: What role on these reservations do the drug
traffickers play in this crisis?
Mr. LaCounte. The drug traffickers?
Dr. Gosar. Yes.
Mr. LaCounte. I am not quite sure I understand your
question, but I am going to give it a shot.
Regardless of whether they are a cartel or a local mom-and-
pop organization trying to contaminate their own damn
communities, deadly drugs on Indian reservations are horrible.
But when you get an organized cartel, for instance, they are
pretty good at what they do. And it has a serious impact on
many reservations. I can't say all, but you never hear a tribe
say, hey, we don't have any cartel problems. You hear them say
we have a problem.
So, it plays a significant role. But, again, drugs can come
from anywhere. They just come in normally larger volumes from
the cartels.
Dr. Gosar. Right. So, now you see somebody possibly coming
into this country legally, and they travel all the way through
and deliver drugs. Does Homeland Security or the FBI have a
watch list of known traffickers? They have something. And do
they share it with the local authorities?
Mr. LaCounte. I do not know the answer to that,
Congressman.
Dr. Gosar. OK. Would you get that for us?
Mr. LaCounte. Yes.
Dr. Gosar. I think it makes a big difference, because if we
can preclude people to look for these individuals, it makes it
a whole lot easier than trying to figure out if you remember
that person.
Can identified drug traffickers be banned from entering the
United States?
Mr. LaCounte. I think I heard your question, and certainly
any drug trafficker should be banned from the United States.
Absolutely.
Dr. Gosar. What are the protocols across Federal law
enforcement agencies to ensure that the information each has
about a missing person is shared with tribal law enforcement?
Mr. LaCounte. [No response.]
Dr. Gosar. How do we make sure that people that are
kidnapped or taken, how do we share that information?
Mr. LaCounte. [No response.]
Dr. Gosar. See, we get the same disconnect. I mean,
Director, no pun to you, but you should have had two other
partners here. You should have had the FBI and Homeland
Security right here. The briefing does us no good just by
themselves. I want to see the interaction between you, the
tribes, them, and the Homeland Security. That makes more sense
to me. Put everybody in a room and figure out what the problem
is.
But this doesn't make a lot of sense, because we are going
around, and around, and around, and I feel sorry for you
because you are put in a position where there is no winning.
When you don't have winning, you don't have any hope. And I am
sad to say that that is kind of what we apply on to our Native
friends, is exactly that.
I think this is a Catch-22, but I also think there is a
light at the end of the tunnel. I think the tribes can show us
a way to get back to a healthy community, a law-abiding
community. And I think they have the ability to do that. Now we
have to figure out how do we get those resources to them. How
do we develop that?
It may take some streamlining of the process. We may have
to hire some within. I don't know what the whole answer is, but
I think what we have you and the tribes in a pickle with,
ultimately, is this around and around and here we go again, I
am sad to say. I would love to work with you, and I think there
will be plenty of things to be able to do.
So, I want to ask you one more question. What was the one
question that you wanted to have asked of you, and what was the
answer?
Mr. LaCounte. I didn't approach it in that direction. If
you are on this side of the table, you come in trying to
anticipate what you are going to get. I appreciate your
statement that you have hope, because I too have hope, even as
dire as it looks right now.
I guess if there were one question I would like asked, it
would be what can we do to further strengthen or embellish this
notion of tribal sovereignty, and how can we get the tribes the
respect that they deserve policing their own communities,
making them safer? If you have a home you don't feel safe in,
that is not a home. So, I don't know what the answer would be,
but I would love to have that question.
I guess my answer would be you have to help us. We have
tried. Public Law 93-638 has been around a long time, and I
have been through it in my 36 years, the progression of it. And
it is better, but it still needs to give these tribes the
respect that they deserve, just like states are given that
respect. It is their home. It is their land. Who are we to tell
them how to act and what is best for them?
So, I hope that answers that question.
Dr. Gosar. It does. I appreciate your candor. I thank the
witness, Director, for your candor and your answers and your
valuable testimony, and Members for their questions.
We will now take a brief recess before beginning our second
panel. During that time I invite all the witnesses to sit and
get ready at the table for the hearing to proceed. And with
that, there will be questions, Director, coming to you from the
Members, and we will have them on a timely basis. Thank you
very much. We adjourn temporarily.
[Recess.]
Dr. Gosar. I will now introduce the witnesses for our
second panel. We have Mr. Joshua Roberge, Chief of Police, Fort
Belknap Indian Community, Harlem, Montana, thank you for
coming; Ms. Stacy Zinn, former Resident in Charge, Rocky
Mountain Division, Drug Enforcement Administration, Billings,
Montana; and Lieutenant John Nores, Jr., retired, Special
Operations Marijuana Enforcement Team, California Department of
Fish and Wildlife, Morgan Hill, California. An amazing story
here.
Let me remind the witnesses that under Committee Rules, you
must limit your oral statements to 5 minutes, but your entire
statement will appear in the record.
I will now recognize Mr. Roberge for your 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF JOSHUA ROBERGE, CHIEF OF POLICE, FORT
BELKNAP INDIAN COMMUNITY, HARLEM, MONTANA

Mr. Roberge. Chairman Gosar, Ranking Member Stansbury,
Congressman Rosendale, and members of the Subcommittee, my name
is Josh Roberge. I have previously served 8 years in the United
States military. And after being honorably discharged, I now
serve as the Chief of Police for the Fort Belknap Indian
Community. I am a member of the Assiniboine Nation, and
appreciate the opportunity to testify about the impacts of drug
cartels targeting Indian Country, and specifically the Fort
Belknap Indian Community.
The Fort Belknap Indian Reservation is located in north
central Montana. It is comprised of 652,000 acres, almost as
large as the state of Rhode Island. We have nearly 7,000
members living on or near the reservation. The reservation is
40 miles south of the Canadian border, and we have Federal
funding for nine, that is pushing it, law enforcement officers.
With nine, that offers two to three officers per shift on a
good day, covering 1,014 square miles.
As a combat veteran, I can attest to you guys right now
that we have a war going on on U.S. soil. We are fighting these
people. Whether that is directly or indirectly, they are
committing violent acts against tribal citizens and U.S.
citizens here. So, with that, I am here to offer six
recommendations to possibly find a solution to this:
(1) Expand tribal criminal jurisdiction in Indian Country.
(2) Increase funding. I know it keeps getting brought up
quite a bit, but the reality of the situation that we are in,
we don't see any other way. We literally receive $1.3 million a
year for our budget. That is ridiculous. It has been the same,
give or take $100,000, since 1997. We are fighting a war that
we are severely losing.
Anyway, back to our recommendations. Increased funding for
law enforcement and U.S. attorneys. There is a lot of
frustration with U.S. attorneys. Do they prosecute? They don't
prosecute. They want to keep their successful conviction rate,
so they decline. The fact of the matter is we have two U.S.
attorneys covering seven federally recognized Indian
reservations in Montana. You imagine the cases that they are
getting on their desks.
We average 100 felony, not misdemeanor, arrests a month on
our reservation out of 7,000 people, four murders in 3 months
for our population. All of this stuff can be directly
correlated, the increase in violent crime you see everywhere
can be directly correlated to dangerous drugs and drug
trafficking, human trafficking, child sex crimes, adult sex
crimes, murders, all of that stuff. It is all directly
correlated to dangerous drugs.
These drugs, because of the stop of the sale of over-the-
counter Sudafed and stuff like that, these drugs are produced
in superlabs across the border, and then they are brought here
to the United States. So, we are seeing this increase in
violent crime and all of this bad stuff that is happening:
dangerous drugs, drug distribution, and an unsecure southern
border.
Moving on, (3) Coordination of Federal services.
And obviously, (4) Secure the southern border. It is coming
across the border freely. This is ridiculous. We are 40 miles
south of the Canadian border, and we have individuals up there
who are associated with either the Jalisco or the Sinaloa that
can't speak a lick of English that are carrying firearms,
trafficking humans, and committing murders as recently as 2
months ago, 40 miles south of the Canadian border for drug-
related crimes.
(5) Congress needs to pass legislation for more severe
punishments on drugs, such as fentanyl and methamphetamine.
Nobody is getting prosecuted on this stuff. And if we work
together to take somebody down, another one pops up. This thing
is like a hydra. You cut the head off of one, another one pops
up.
The biggest thing is the Federal system hasn't caught up
with fentanyl yet. They have with methamphetamine. The
mandatory sentencing minimum or the threshold for a 5-year
minimum for sentencing on the Fed side would be 5 grams of
methamphetamine. It is still 10 grams, to my understanding, for
fentanyl. There are about 10 fentanyl pills, you guys are
familiar with fentanyl pills, there are about 10 fentanyl pills
per gram. It is about 100 fentanyl pills before you get a 5-
year mandatory minimum, so there needs to be legislative action
to figure out some solutions here.
(6) Implement the 2023 Not Invisible Act Commission Report
recommendations.
I have about a minute 20 left, so I will kind of specify a
little bit more on some of the things that I am talking about
here.
Once again, congressional funding, increased law
enforcement funding, increased United States Attorney's Office
funding, Indian Country aid to protect our homeland and save
lives.
Two, secure that southern border. Tighten international
borders. Stop the drugs. There is more that is coming across
than that. There is a war going on right here, right now on
U.S. soil. And I think that, as citizens of the United States,
we need to open our eyes. There is stuff happening here that we
are losing, and it is not just in Montana and Fort Belknap. It
is everywhere. They are targeting Indian communities because of
a jurisdictional loophole.
And I would like to comment on a few things where we choose
not to allow other law enforcement agencies, but with us in
Montana, we welcome it. We have MOUs and we work well with the
Montana Highway Patrol in our surrounding counties and other
state agencies. The problem with this jurisdictional loophole,
and this will be the last thing, is the county and the state,
where we ask for their help, and these cartel members or non-
Indian members are coming in and victimizing or committing
felonious offenses on the reservation. We are calling the state
for help, the county for help. We are bringing them out, and
they are arguing that it is the FBI's jurisdiction.
The problem with that is the FBI doesn't arrest. They don't
PC arrest, and the AUSA isn't allowing these PC arrests or
these offenses to be complained in. So, what we are running
into is we are seeing months while we wait for a warrant of
arrest to be issued for either a grand jury indictment or an
indictment, whatever, and these people are allowed to continue
to victimize members of our community.
There is a jurisdictional loophole, and they know that, and
they are exploiting it, and that is why they are at
reservations first, along with everything else that you guys
have been hearing. This is an issue.
Thank you for your time.

[The prepared statement of Mr. Roberge follows:]

Prepared Statement of Joshua Roberge, Chief of Police, on behalf of the
Assiniboine and Gros Ventre Tribes of the Fort Belknap Indian Community

Chairman Gosar, Ranking Member Stansbury, Congressman Rosendale,
Congressman Zinke, and Members of the Subcommittee. My name is Josh
Roberge, I previously served 8 years in the United States Army, and
after being honorably discharged, I now serve as the Chief-of-Police of
the Assiniboine (Nakoda) and Gros Ventre (Aaniih) Nations of the Fort
Belknap Indian Community. I am a Member of the Assiniboine Nation and
appreciate the opportunity testify today about the impacts of drug
cartels targeting Indian Country- and specifically the Fort Belknap
Indian Community.
The Fort Belknap Reservation is located in north central Montana
and is comprised of 652,000 acres (1,014 square miles) almost as large
as the State of Rhode Island, and has nearly 7,000 members living on or
near our Reservation. Fort Belknap is 40 miles South of the Canadian
Border. We have federal funding for 9 Law Enforcement Officers which
offers 2-3 Officers per shift.

As a Combat Veteran, I can attest: Fort Belknap is at war with
drugs! I am here to offer 6 recommendations:

1.  Expand Tribal Criminal Jurisdiction in Indian Country

2.  Increase Funding for Law Enforcement and U.S. Attorneys

3.  Coordination of Federal Services

4.  Secure the Southern Border of the United States

5.  Congress needs to pass legislation for more severe punishments on
drugs such as fentanyl and methamphetamine

6.  Implement the 2023 Not Invisible Act Commission Report
Recommendations

The U.S. Supreme Court's Oliphant decision limits the ability of
Native Nations to prosecute non-Indians. Oliphant v. Suquamish Indian
Tribe, 435 U.S. 191 (1978). Currently Tribal Governments across Indian
Country do not have criminal jurisdiction over non-Indians committing
drug-related crimes in Indian Country. When a non-Indian commits a
crime, our law enforcement is required to contact either the county
and/or the FBI.
A few weeks ago, we had a non-Indian drug dealer dealing and living
on our Reservation. In the course of the Tribal Law Enforcement
investigation, this non-Indian drug dealer was found with a large
amount of methamphetamine. He had a scale, drug paraphernalia, had
beaten a Tribal Member, and has a history of committing other drug-
crimes. The local County was called, as well as the FBI. Due to the on-
going criminal behavior of this non-Indian drug dealer, the Tribal
Court issued a preliminary Order to Exclude him from our Reservation as
per the Fort Belknap Indian Community's Constitution. The non-Indian
Drug Dealer violated this within the week of the issuance of the order.
On May 22, 2024, our Tribal Council had an Exclusion Hearing to
require the non-Indian drug dealer to be excluded from our Reservation
indefinitely. During the Hearing, the non-Indian drug dealer stood
before our Tribal Council and boasted: ``YOU HAVE NO JURISDICTION OVER
ME. THE COUNTY MIGHT, THE FEDS MIGHT, BUT YOU DON'T.'' He further
boasted that when he violated the Court's Order, he did so by driving
onto our Reservation on a ``State Highway'' implying that our Tribal
Council had no authority to exclude him because he was on a State
Highway driving on our Reservation.
As this situation demonstrates, these drug cartels have targeted
reservation communities because of the rural terrain, history of
community addiction, and limited law enforcement resources. Cartels are
specifically targeting Indian Country because of a dangerous
combination of under-resourced law enforcement, legal loopholes,
sparsely populated communities, and exorbitant profits, and it is
devastating Tribal reservations. Profits for these cartels soar the
farther they get from the southern border. A fentanyl pill that costs
less than $1.00 in Mexico and southern states, can go for over $100 on
our Reservation.
As the drug cartels seep deeper into Indian Country, they know of
the limited resources that we have. Montana is 147,040 square miles--
slightly larger than Japan. It is the 4th largest State in the United
States behind, Texas, Alaska and California. In 2024, it is reported
that only 20 DEA Agents cover the entire state. The DEA sends drug
testing to their Crime Lab located in California and the test results
are not known for 8 months or more after the crimes are committed,
which also limits speedy-trials. The cartels know this--so it is easy
for them to attempt to take-over reservations.
On April 23, 2024, our Tribal Council met with Jesse Laslovich and
Amanda Myers with the United States Attorney's Office. The Fort Belknap
Indian Community Council requested that Mr. Laslovich and the DEA
attempt to work with the Montana State Crime Lab in order to receive
faster drug test results and more prosecutions. As to the Montana
United States Attorney's Office, currently there are a total of 6
Assistance United States Attorneys (AUSA) in Montana--3 are located in
Great Falls (4 hours from Fort Belknap), 2 in Billings (3 hours from
Fort Belknap), and 1 in Helena (4 hours from Fort Belknap)--2 of these
6 ASUAs are assigned to serve all of Indian Country in Montana. And the
last federal budget cuts blocked a proposed AUSA Prosecutor from
Montana.
It was reported to our Tribal Council that prior to AUSA Jesse
Laslovich's appointment in Montana, there was 1 violent crime case
prosecuted from Fort Belknap prior to his arrival, 3 violent crimes
prosecuted the year he arrived, 11 violent crimes prosecuted the next
year and it was reported that they currently have 7 violent crime cases
pending prosecution. While the United States Attorney's Office attempts
to meet with our Law Enforcement monthly, our Tribes very rarely see
any FBI presence. There appears to be an ongoing disconnect between the
FBI and AUSA and Fort Belknap Law Enforcement as to the evidence
gathering and prosecution of cases. Our Law Enforcement reports crime
to the federal agencies and yet we get limited to no feedback from the
FBI as to the status of any pending case. On April 23, 2024, our Tribal
Council made a specific request through Mr. Laslovich to have the FBI
present at the Council Meeting Discussions and the on-going monthly
case-staffings.
Our Tribes are finding that the FBI is reactive not proactive. And
this is frustrating. The FBI has jurisdiction over non-Indians and our
Tribal Law Enforcement Officers' hands are tied because we only have
jurisdiction over Tribal Members. So we get into situations where if
the FBI has jurisdiction over a criminal case and that person is not
immediately arrested, the County Sheriff won't arrest because they say
the FBI has jurisdiction. So the suspects are not arrested and are
allowed to continue to victimize members of our Community. Further, the
federal punishment is less severe on the federal-side for drugs than it
is for the State/County. And the Border Patrol on the other hand cannot
initiate contact with anyone that they believe may be illegal unless
there is a local law enforcement agency that makes contact first and
requests them. This further slows the process when the Northern Border
is within 40 Miles of our Reservation.
The National Congress of American Indians authored a Report to
Congress in 2006 which put the federal government on notice that drug
cartels were moving onto the Reservations but nothing has been done.
The other government arm that fails us is the Border Patrol. They know
Mexican or other illegal aliens are on Reservations but do nothing. Our
People get harassed when they cross the Border with sacred objects even
though our Border-crossing rights are protected by the Jay-Treaty, yet
the cartel seem to be able to get right through.
Fort Belknap Law Enforcement is seriously underfunded by the
federal government and by BIA. Recall: our Reservation is the size of
Rhode Island and we have total BIA funding for 9 Law Enforcement
Officers. Officers lack equipment and are untrained to handle this
crisis. The Fort Belknap Indian Community contracts the Law Enforcement
through the 638-contracting process. In 1997 the federal government
offered $1.2 Million dollars to Fort Belknap for Law Enforcement--and
27 years later offer $1.3 Million. Due to the funding disparity, the
Fort Belknap Community has a pending federal lawsuit against the United
States government due to its breach of contract and trust
responsibilities owed to our People.
BIA Law Enforcement Training is located in Artesia, New Mexico,
which is located 1,279.5 Miles away from the Fort Belknap Indian
Community. If Law Enforcement applicants are trained by state law
enforcement, they are required to receive the additional federal
training in Artesia, New Mexico. Our Law Enforcement recruitment and
retention challenges are hard enough with the basic requirements of
needing the training. BIA needs to be on-board with finding Law
Enforcement Training locations in the Great Plains Region or work with
state law enforcement trainings to implement federal law enforcement
requirements.
It is repeatedly reported to us that drug cartels are targeting our
Native women and using homes on reservations as safe houses and
distribution hubs. They are able to operate with impunity because of
complex jurisdictional rules and the fact that Tribal law enforcement
agencies have been under-resourced and under-staffed for decades. This
problem is directly connected to our War on Drug Crisis, our
communities are reporting more instances of sexual abuse, human
trafficking, child abuse and domestic violence. And it creates a
frightening environment of lawlessness. President Stiffarm previously
asked: Why should we be afraid in our own Country? And as a Combat
Veteran, I concur with his assessment that Congress funds billions in
federal aid to foreign countries to protect their borders and to kill
their enemies. The Fort Belknap Indian Community needs funding to
protect our own borders in order to live peacefully.
As recently as November 2023, the Not Invisible Act Commission
congressional report found made specific recommendations for Congress
after detailing Indian Country's lack of law enforcement, lack of
federal coordination and cooperation with Tribal and Local Governments,
lack of training of Law Enforcement, lack of jurisdictional
understanding, and of course, lack of funding. Fort Belknap Indian
Community agrees with the Not Invisible Act Commission's
recommendations and urges Congress to implement the recommendations.
Congress and Indian Country have proven, through these Commission
Reports, that in order to protect ourselves, Tribal governments need to
have the financial resources and the ability to exercise Tribal
Criminal jurisdiction over all People and all crimes that occur within
our Reservations. (See also Commission Reports from the Tribal Law and
Order Act of 2010 (``TLOA'') and the Violence Against Women
Reauthorization Act (VAWA) of 2013 and its 2022 Amendments.)
We cannot continue to allow cartels to take advantage of the holes
in our justice system and we cannot win this violent war by ourselves.
I encourage you to do everything possible to ensure we have the tools
and resources we need to keep our communities safe.
In Conclusion, 100 Years Ago, thru the Indian Citizenship Act of
June 2, 1924, Congress wanted United States Citizenship to all Native
Americans born in the United States. You wanted Us to be Citizens of
the United States: now You have a duty to protect all of us--including
the Protection of Our Borders of our Reservations.

I thank you for your time and am happy to answer any questions.
______

Dr. Gosar. Thank you. I thank the gentleman for his
testimony. I now recognize Ms. Zinn for her testimony.

STATEMENT OF STACY ZINN, FORMER RESIDENT IN CHARGE,
ROCKY MOUNTAIN  DIVISION,  DRUG ENFORCEMENT ADMIN-
ISTRATION, BILLINGS, MONTANA

Ms. Zinn. Thank you. My name is Stacy Zinn. I am the former
Resident Agent in Charge for the DEA of Montana. I am going to
give you a little bit of history and why we are at where we are
at.
Back in 2014, as a new group supervisor for the Eastern
District of Montana Tactical Diversion Team, my job was to
oversee the teams that were developing investigations targeting
those that were diverting prescription pills like OxyContin and
other opioids. A single 30 milligram of oxy would cost
approximately $35 on the streets in Billings. You take that
pill up to Rocky Boy's Reservation, they could charge $67 for
that one pill. You shift over to the Fort Peck Reservation,
that one pill cost $89 back then.
The pill prices were extremely profitable for nefarious
drug organizations, and this caught the attention of the
Mexican cartel. While the cartels had a reputation of
exploiting the Native American communities with the meth sales,
it wasn't until the explosion of fentanyl that the cartels
became overt. Rumors of the Sinaloa Cartel distributing illegal
drugs on the Crow and Northern Cheyenne Reservations have
always surfaced, and while there was some evidence of this
being the case, we were unable to prosecute these
investigations because we could not get enough evidence.
Fast forward to 2019. The Sinaloa Cartel was making their
move from the southwestern portion of the state, Butte,
Montana, and then traveling all the way across to Fort Peck
Reservation. An investigation led to the successful
prosecution, but it resulted in the seizure of 65 pounds of
meth, more than 2,000 pills, fake pills, 3 pounds of heroin.
The agents also confiscated over $32,000 and 19 firearms. Post-
arrest statements indicated that the Sinaloa Cartel was
expanding into the reservations.
In 2022, rumors of cartel presence was taking place on the
Crow Reservation. Once it was learned that the cartel, believed
to be Nueva Generacion Cartel, CJNG, was operating and moving
freely on the reservation, I directed my Billings team to
hyper-focus on this investigation. DEA, along with FBI and BIA,
teamed up and started long-term investigation. The
investigation centered on the Crow Indian Reservation, where
cartels' associates took over at least two properties and used
them to distribute meth to people on the reservation, as well
as nearby Northern Cheyenne Indian Reservation, Fort Belknap
Reservation, Rocky Boy's Reservation, Flathead Reservation, and
up into the town of Billings. This cartel was based in
Washington State, near a separate reservation.
The New York Times later wrote in their Montana Cartel
expose, ``A second Federal drug investigation in Montana has
led to charges against more than two dozen people, and includes
allegations of Mexican cartel members using Native Americans as
pawns in their operation. This investigation is still being
adjudicated, and current public information is limited in order
for the last of the defendants to have a fair trial.''
While the above investigation has left a temporary cartel
void in the reservations, a lot of intelligence was learned.
The cartels do not want to give up this territory where they
can have such control. The price markup of these drugs being
purchased in Montana is tripled, compared to larger cities in
the surrounding states. This is a huge attraction to those that
are manufacturing and selling the drugs, mainly the Mexican
cartels.
Due to the lack of law enforcement at both the local and
Federal levels, the Mexican cartel is taking full advantage.
Members of the cartel will prey on the Native community by
giving small amounts of drugs for free, or have the individuals
start selling for the cartels in order to get a payout in
drugs. However, time and time again, we will see that the
Natives will start using the drugs they are supposed to be
selling, which leads to them getting into debt with the
cartels. At this point, the cartels have muscled their way into
the collective groups and monies are now owed. A vicious cycle
occurs, and eventually individuals are so far into debt they do
not know how to get out from underneath the cartels. The cycle
is only broken when that seller is arrested by law enforcement
or killed.
So, why do we have this problem in Montana? A lack of law
enforcement at both the local and Federal level has created a
vacuum. Montana local law enforcement, to include the Montana
Criminal Division's investigations, do not have the authorities
to conduct law enforcement activities on the reservation
without a signed MOU with the tribe. These MOUs have become
rare.
Tribal police, while currently on most of the reservations,
are lacking in manpower, investigative tools, and sometimes are
compromised. Federal agencies such as the DEA and FBI are
limited in their resources. A four-man enforcement drug team
for the DEA, the ones in the eastern district of Montana, is
beyond unbelievable, especially when they have to cover
Gallatin County and Bozeman, where there are two cartels
present, and also Yellowstone County, where the cartels and
gang members are establishing territories. The FBI had their
hands tied up with both assault investigations, and their
numbers of agents are limited, too.
The BIA has its own issues: lack of manpower to cover the
reservations, hiring issues, and an inability to keep drug
agents employed in certain reservations due to harsh working
conditions.
Before COVID, a review was conducted by representatives of
the DOJ pertaining to the lack of law enforcement presence on
the reservations and the need for more BIA representation. It
was at these meetings where it was openly discussed that the
cartel presence would only get worse if actions were not taken.
Unfortunately, with all these above issues combined, the
Mexican cartel has taken full advantage of the USA's inability
to man the reservations and the surrounding areas. At some
point, we need to take the cartel presence seriously.
Whether it is the reservations, Bozeman, Butte, Billings,
or Great Falls, the need for change is real. We cannot continue
to be idle and sit on our hands.

[The prepared statement of Ms. Zinn follows:]

Prepared Statement of Stacy Zinn, Former DEA Group Supervisor for the
Eastern District of Montana's Tactical Diversion Group

In 2014, I, Stacy Zinn, was a new DEA Group Supervisor for the
Eastern District of Montana's Tactical Diversion Group. My job was to
oversee the teams that were developing investigations targeting those
that were diverting prescription pills like Oxycontin and other
opioids. A single 30 mg of Oxy pill would cost approximately $35.00 on
the streets of Billings, Montana but you could sell that same pill for
approximately $67.00 on the Rocky Boy Reservation and $89.00 on the Ft.
Peck reservation. The pill prices were extremely profitable for
nefarious drug organizations and this caught the attention of the
Mexican Cartels. While the cartels had a reputation of exploiting the
Native American communities with meth sales, it wasn't until the
explosion of fentanyl that the cartels became overt.
Rumors of the Sinaloa Cartel distributing illegal drugs on Crow and
Northern Cheyenne reservations have always surfaced, and while there
were some evidences of this being the case, investigators were unable
to put together a prosecutorial case. Fast forward to 2019, the Sinaloa
Cartel was making their move from the southwestern portion of the
state, Butte, Montana, across to the Ft. Peck Reservation, which is
located in the northeastern portion of Montana. Ultimately, the multi-
agency investigation resulted in the seizure of 65 pounds of meth, more
than 2,000 counterfeit OxyContin pills laced with fentanyl and 3 pounds
of heroin. The agents also confiscated more than $32,000 in cash and 19
firearms. Post arrest statements indicated that the Sinaloa Cartel was
expanded into the reservation.
In 2022, rumors of cartel presence were taking place on the Crow
Reservation. Once it was learned that the cartel, believed to have been
Jalisco New Generation Cartel or CJNG, was physically moving onto the
Crow Reservation, I directed my Billings team to hyper focus on this
investigation. DEA, along with FBI and Bureau of Indian Affairs (BIA),
teamed up and started a long-term investigation. The investigation
centered on the Crow Indian Reservation, where cartel associates took
over at least two properties and used them to distribute meth to people
on the reservation as well as the nearby Northern Cheyenne Indian
Reservation, Ft. Belknap Reservation, Rocky Boy Reservation, Flathead
Reservation and in the town of Billings. This cartel was based in
Washington state near a separate reservation. The New York Times later
wrote in their Montana cartel expose, ``A second federal drug case in
Montana has led to charges against more than two dozen people and
includes allegations of Mexican cartel members using Native Americans
as pawns in the operation.'' This investigation is still being
adjudicated and current public information is limited in order for the
last of the defendants to have a fair trial.
While the above investigation has left a temporary cartel void in
the reservations, a lot of intelligence was learned. The cartels will
not want to give up territory where they can have such control. The
price mark up of drugs being purchased in Montana is tripled compare to
larger cities located in the surrounding states. This is a huge
attraction to those that are manufacturing and selling the drugs,
mainly, the Mexican Cartels. Due to the lack of law enforcement at both
the local and federal levels, the Mexican Cartel is taking full
advantage. Members of the cartel will prey on the Native Community by
giving small amounts of drugs for free or have the individuals start
selling for the cartels in order to get a payout in drugs. However,
time and again, we see that the natives will start using the drugs they
are supposed to be selling which leads to them getting into debt with
the cartels. At this point, the cartels have muscled their way into the
collective group and monies are now owed. A vicious cycle occurs and
eventually the individuals are so far into debt, that they do not know
how to get up from underneath the cartels. The cycle is only broken
when that seller is arrested by law enforcement or is killed.
So why do we have this problem in Montana? A lack of law
enforcement at both the local and federal level has created a vacuum.
Montana local law enforcement, to include the Montana Criminal Division
of Investigations, do not have the authorities to conduct law
enforcement activities on the reservation without a signed MOU with the
tribe. These MOUs have become rare. Tribal police, while currently on
most of the reservations, are lacking in man-power, investigative tools
and sometimes are compromised. Federal agencies such as the DEA and FBI
are limited in their resources. A four-man enforcement drug team for
the Eastern District of Montana is beyond unbelievable especially when
they have to cover Gallatin County (Bozeman) who is known for their
cartel activities and Yellowstone County (Billings) where cartels and
gang members are establishing territories. The FBI have their hands
tied up with both assault investigations and their numbers of agents
are limited too. The BIA has its own issues: lack of man power to cover
the reservations, hiring issues and the inability to keeping drug
agents in employed in certain reservations due to the harsh working
conditions. Before COVID, a review was conducted by representatives
from DOJ pertaining to the lack of law enforcement presence on the
reservations and the need for more BIA representation. It was at these
meetings where it was openly discussed that the cartel presence would
only get worst if actions were not taken.
Unfortunately, with all of these above issues combined, the Mexican
Cartel has taken full advantage of the U.S.A's inability to man the
reservations and the surrounding areas. At some point, we need to take
the cartel presence seriously. Whether it is the reservations, Bozeman,
Butte, Billings or Great Falls, the need for change is real. We cannot
continue to be idle and sit on our hands.
______

Dr. Gosar. Thank you, Ms. Zinn. The gentleman from
California, Mr. John Nores, Jr., is recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF JOHN NORES, JR., LIEUTENANT (RETIRED),
SPECIAL OPERATIONS,  MARIJUANA  ENFORCEMENT  TEAM,
CALIFORNIA   DEPARTMENT  OF  FISH  AND   WILDLIFE,
MORGAN HILL, CALIFORNIA

Mr. Nores. Good afternoon, Chairman Gosar and esteemed
Members of Congress. It is an honor to speak with you all again
today in our nation's capital. I was a game warden in
California for 28 years, part of our nationwide thin green line
of conservation officers protecting our nation's wildlife,
waterways, and wild lands.
The Mexican cartels, along with other worldwide
Transnational Criminal Organizations, or TCOs, have become the
biggest domestic public safety threat and some of the greatest
destroyers of our natural resources, especially on tribal
lands.
Our first violent encounter with the cartels was during an
allied agency cartel Cannabis Grow raid on pristine public land
in the Silicon Valley foothills. When ambushed by cartel
gunmen, my young warden partner was near fatally shot through
both legs by an AK-47. This was the first time we had learned
of the highly toxic EPA-banned poisons, neurotoxins like
carbofuran, Furadan, metaphos, being smuggled into the United
States through our southern border, the massive amounts of
water stealing and water pollution, the anti-personnel traps
like Vietnam-era punji pits throughout many of these
clandestine grow sites, and killing of numerous wildlife
species.
These public and tribal land grow sites can be as remote as
10 miles into pristine tribal back country, or as close as a
few hundred yards from a children's summer camp and Silicon
Valley hillside homes.
After four more officer-involved shootings, I was honored
to co-develop and lead the Marijuana Enforcement Team, the MET,
in 2013, a specialized game warden unit comprised of lifesaving
apprehension canines, a sniper observer unit, and skilled
operators dedicated to this fight.
Through 800 missions, we eradicated 3 million cannabis
plants, most of them toxically tainted with EPA-banned
chemicals, destroyed 29 tons of processed cannabis for sale,
and made 973 felony arrests on growers, many classified as
deportable felons with extensive criminal histories.
On the environmental damage front, our team removed 450
tons of gross site waste, 455 miles of water diversion pipe,
756 gallons of illegal and toxic chemicals, and dismantled and
restored waterways being diverted by 793 dams, accounting for
millions of gallons of water being stolen from pristine public
and tribal land tracks.
With Tribal Nations throughout California outnumbered and
understaffed, our MET was honored to team up with the Northern
California's Hoopa Valley and Yurok Tribal Police to assist in
their fight to stop cartel destruction of their waterway,
wildlife, and wildland resources.
Over the last 11 years, we have collaborated with these
tribes on numerous cartel cannabis grow operations, and
witnessed the egregious impacts to their pristine tribal
waterways, specifically the Trinity River. The Trinity is the
lifeblood of both tribes, and relied upon for drinking water,
ceremonies, salmon, their main food source, and steelhead
trout, a state and federally listed endangered species.
It was a privilege to work alongside tribal police officers
dedicated to stopping the destruction of their sacred waterway
and wildlife resources while protecting their communities.
During operations we encountered hundreds of historical grow
sites, found numerous EPA-banned toxic poisons, dismantled
countless water diversions, removed hundreds of tons of grow
site waste and pollutants, and restored hundreds of waterways
with our tribal partners.
While I have highlighted the destruction of our wildlife
and waterway resources engendered by these criminal groups, we
must remember that these cartels are polycriminals that engage
in numerous other public safety crimes, even in the most remote
regions of my home state now in Montana.
As my dedicated colleagues from Montana have just
testified, the fentanyl black market has become a cartel cash
cow, with their deadly product killing, on average, 200
Americans a day, 73,000 of our citizens each year, with a
skewed percentage of those being on tribal lands.
Given that a single fentanyl tablet can yield up to $90 on
the black market on remote tribal lands, the cartels have moved
in and taken over the fentanyl trade while engaging in human
trafficking, theft, and other public safety crimes. These
vulnerable communities are being targeted, with crime and
overdoses surging throughout Tribal Nations in the most remote
and vast parts of Montana. Mexican cartels have targeted the
Crow, Cheyenne, and Blackfeet Tribes, leaving them strung out,
addicted, and decimated.
Tribal police officers are simply vastly outnumbered,
making it nearly impossible to hinder any cartel operations
within their districts. These examples illustrate the
pervasiveness of cartel operations throughout America,
especially in tribal lands. Our people and our wildlife and
waterway resources are being destroyed, and stopping the
cartels from poisoning our tribal communities must be a top
priority.
Thank you, and I am happy to answer any questions you have.

[The prepared statement of Mr. Nores follows:]

Prepared Statement of Lieutenant John Nores Jr. (ret.), California
Dept. of Fish and Wildlife, Marijuana Enforcement Team (MET), Special
Operations

My name is John Nores, and I am a retired special operations game
warden Lieutenant from the California Department of Fish and Wildlife
(CDFW). It was an honor to be a game warden and serve 28 years
protecting our nation's wildlife, waterway and wildland resources and
stopping wildlife and environmental protection law violators was a
privilege.
California game wardens are statewide police officers while also
being federally deputized to enforce Federal wildlife protection laws.
I began my journey with the police training academy in 1992 and at that
time I could never have anticipated that the end of my operational
career two decades later would be spent leading a specialized unit of
game wardens dedicated to combating Transnational Criminal
Organizations (TCO's), aka ``cartel'' infiltration of our nation's
pristine public and rural private lands to grow toxically tainted
black-market cannabis for nationwide distribution.
This proved to be true as drug cartel operations within California
and every other state in our nation have become some of the most
egregious environmental and wildlife resource crimes and public safety
threats we have seen throughout America.
Through their use of US EPA banned chemical insecticides and
rodenticides (carbofuran, Metaphos, Q-Furan, etc.) and massive amounts
of water theft (especially alarming during recent peak drought years in
the country) throughout tens of thousands of clandestine cannabis grow
sites on both public and private land, cartel cells are poisoning
waterways, killing numerous wildlife species, destroying wildland
trees, vegetation and grass lands while posing a severe threat to our
public's safety.
The public safety threats posed by these criminal cells are evident
in cartel grow sites we have encountered with firearms, stabbing
blades, and various anti-personal traps (i.e., Vietnam war era punji
pits) as well as toxic poisons and other public safety threats common
throughout these sites.
The cartel's propensity for violence, however, was first witnessed
on a deadly cannabis grow arrest and eradication mission in the Silicon
Valley foothills we conducted with the Santa Clara County Sheriff's
Office on August 5th, 2005.
While entering the grow site, our allied agency enforcement team
was ambushed by cartel gunmen defending their multi-million dollar
complex and a gunfight ensued. A near-fatal bullet from a grower's AK47
struck our young warden teammate, penetrating both of his legs before
an agonizing 3 hour wait for his helicopter evacuation to the hospital.
That incident was the first time a law enforcement officer in
America had been hit and nearly killed by a clandestine marijuana
grower's bullet, and our first violent encounter with tactically savvy
cartel operatives from Mexico running their operations in the US, in
this case within the Silicon Valley.
We would have four more officer involved shooting incidents and
numerous other violent encounters with cartel grower groups defending
their black-market cannabis operations throughout California before I
was tasked with co-developing and leading a special operations group of
game wardens within our agency called the Marijuana Enforcement Team
(MET).

Comprised of officers with extensive tactical experience,
wilderness fieldcraft, (stalking, apprehension, and survival skills),
amazing lifesaving apprehension and detection K9 partners, a sniper
unit, national guard, and allied agency law enforcement helicopter
teams, the MET's mission was clear:

Apprehend and prosecute illegal and dangerous growers to
protect our public.

Eradicate their black market (in many cases poisonous and
highly toxic) crop before reaching the national black
market.

Environmentally restore illegal outdoor trespass grow
sites by removing water diversions, restoring waterways,
removing grow site poisons, encampments, and other waste to
reclamate the site back to its natural state on pristine
public and private lands.

I led the MET until operational retirement in December 2018 and
between July 2013 and December 2018, our documented production levels
paint an ominous picture during those first five years:

800 arrest, eradication, environmental reclamation
missions.

Destroyed three million toxically tainted cannabis plants.

Destroyed 58,677 pounds (29 tons) of toxically tainted
processed cannabis for sale and distribution.

Made 973 felony arrests (approximately 90% of those
arrests made on cartel or cartel affiliated Mexican
nationals operating in the US illegally).

Seized and destroyed 601 firearms.

Removed 899,945 pounds (450 tons) of grow site waste and
other pollutants.

Removed 2.35 million feet (455 miles) of irrigation pipe.

Removed 91,728 pounds (46 tons) of fertilizers.

Removed 756 gallons of illegal toxic chemicals.

Dismantled 793 water stealing dams from these clandestine
grow complexes with these dams (and many other illegal
cannabis water diversions) depleting billions of gallons of
water during California's peak drought period.

These figures represent only a fraction of the extent of damage
cartels generate throughout the US with a significant amount of these
clandestine grow sites occurring on our most vulnerable communities,
remote tribal lands.

Given an estimated hundreds of thousands of cartel operatives that
have infiltrated reservations across the American West, and the
extremely limited number of tribal enforcement personnel responsible
for covering massive territories, tribal police forces cannot
effectively combat this problem alone. Outnumbered, understaffed and
underfunded, Northern California's Hoopa Valley and Yurok tribes
reached out to our MET for assistance.

Between 2013 and 2018 we committed to working directly with both
tribes being impacted by large numbers of cartel marijuana grow
operations on their forests. Of most concern were the egregious impacts
to pristine tribal waterways, specifically the Trinity river. The
Trinity is the lifeblood of both tribes and relied on for drinking
water, ceremonies and their main food source--salmon. And near and dear
to us game wardens, the Trinity river also hosts steelhead trout, a
state and federally listed endangered species.

It was a privilege to work alongside tribal police officers
dedicated to stopping the cartel's destruction of their sacred waterway
and wildlife resources while protecting their communities. During these
allied agency operations, we encountered hundreds of historical cartel
grow sites, found numerous EPA banned toxic poisons throughout those
clandestine grows, dismantled numerous water diversions, removed
hundreds of tons of grow site waste and pollutants and restored
hundreds of waterways.

While I have outlined the wild land, waterway and wildlife resource
crimes engendered by these criminal groups and the associated dangers
to our public's safety from my operational experience, we must remember
that these TCO's are poly-criminals whose organizations engage in
numerous other public safety crimes beyond toxically tainted black
market cannabis production.

DEA officials point out that the Mexican cartels are now partnered
with the Chinese cartels to the benefit of both organizations. Chinese
crime groups supply the pre-cursor chemicals the Mexican cartels need
to produce and distribute fentanyl and meth-amphetamine now killing
hundreds of thousands of Americans annually, while the Chinese have
virtually taken over the black market cannabis trade using America as
the middle man to launder billions of untraceable cash dollars (https:/
/youtu.be/xMsLDv4M0VM?si=Bkk8IqHS5F4DEZsH).

Once again, our most vulnerable communities are being heavily
targeted with crime and overdoses surging throughout tribal nations. In
my home state of Montana for example, the Mexican cartels have targeted
tribal communities in the most remote part, of the most remote state,
in our nation.

Given that a single deadly fentanyl tablet can yield up to $100 on
the black market, the cartels have moved in and taken over the fentanyl
and meth-amphetamine trade, while engaged in numerous other crimes
throughout these communities including human trafficking, theft and
more. Tribes like the Crow, Cheyenne and Black Feet are being decimated
as cartel operatives are leaving reservation communities strung out,
addicted or worse.

Given the vastness of this part of Montana, tribal police officers
are even more outnumbered with an average of two BIA officers
responsible for approximately 440,000 remote acres making it nearly
impossible to hinder any cartel operations within their jurisdiction.

These examples from my past and present home states illustrate how
effective and efficient the cartels are operating throughout all of
America, especially on our tribal lands. None of us are immune to the
dangers these criminal groups present throughout our homeland as our
public and our pristine wildland, waterway and wildlife resources
continue to be poisoned and destroyed. Given everything we have seen
while combating this issue, stopping the cartels from operating within
America to poison our tribal communities must be a top priority.

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

------

Dr. Gosar. Thank you, Lieutenant. I will now go to the
Members for some questions. Right off the bat is the Chair of
the Full Committee, Mr. Westerman.
You are up for 5 minutes.
Mr. Westerman. Thank you, Chairman Gosar, and thank you to
the witnesses for being here today.
This is a topic that is not getting nearly enough
attention. It is something that has come up in other hearings
that we have had, but I think the American public needs to be
made aware of what is happening on our tribal lands. It is
happening all across our country, but especially the egregious
things that are happening on the tribal lands here.
We did a hearing in southern Arizona, in Cochise County,
and it was on damage to public lands and illegal immigration.
And Sheriff Mark Dannels there made a statement where he said
it is not an immigration problem we have. He said it is an
organized crime problem. And it got me really thinking a lot
about, you know, he is right. These are Mexican cartels. And
they are not just operating along the border in southern
Arizona, they are in Montana, they are in California. They are
all across our country. And the cartels have to have a presence
to be able to cash in on the human trafficking when they are
basically enslaving people. It is a massive problem that is not
getting nearly enough attention.
But Chief Roberge, as you know, the cartels obviously
present an extreme danger to Indian communities all across
America. Eradicating the cartels and their fentanyl from Indian
Country should be a major priority for the FBI and other
Federal law enforcement. But we know this is not always the
case. How present is the FBI on the Fort Belknap Reservation,
and how would you describe your relationship with the FBI Salt
Lake City Field office, which I believe covers your area?
Mr. Roberge. Yes, Mr. Westerman. We have a pretty good
relationship with the FBI of that Salt Lake City field office.
We are mandated by Federal law. Any felonious type offense,
I guess I wouldn't say any felonious type offense, it would be
any serious offense: murder, any unattended death, most drug-
related crimes, we have to call or report it to the FBI.
Essentially, what happens is, I have my criminal
investigator here sitting behind me, he will put the case
together. Kind of in tandem with the FBI, a lot of times he
hands it over to the FBI. The FBI then does a cross-memo, I
believe, to submit that to the AUSA, and then they prosecute.
So, we do have a pretty good working relationship with
them. But as far as dangerous drugs go, we use the BIA Drug
Enforcement Division a little bit more because we are getting
more results out of them. It is hit or miss. They take a
reactive approach, the FBI I am speaking of, as far as
proactive.
Mr. Westerman. And we had a hearing earlier this year, and
a tribal leader was talking about death threats from the
cartels. And now you testified that there were four murders in
3 months in a community of 7,000 people, and directly because
of drugs coming from the southern border. Would you like to
elaborate on that?
Mr. Roberge. I will elaborate, I apologize. The four
murders weren't a direct cause and effect from drugs being
trafficked across the southern border. Our rise in violent
crime and everything else, from what we are seeing, if we track
data, is caused from dangerous drug trafficking. I mean, we
haven't seen this type of violent crime in a while. And with
that, we haven't had a murder in years. And then all of a
sudden this year, with an uptick in fentanyl and
methamphetamine, we have four of them.
Mr. Westerman. Yes. And I used a lot of time there but, Ms.
Zinn, I found your testimony extremely compelling because you
have extensive experience working with tribes in Montana. Can
you describe some instances in which the DEA successfully
worked with tribes to dismantle cartel distribution networks?
Ms. Zinn. Oh, absolutely. When I was the head of DEA, that
is what we worked, was the large drug cartel that we took off
throughout the state of Montana on the reservations. They were
coming from Omak, Washington, traveling to Flathead, dropping
off, going all the way to Great Falls, dropping off in Rocky
Boy, going up through Havre, dropping off in Fort Belknap, and
then coming and laying their heads down in Crow Agency.
When we teamed up with FBI and BIA, we were successful in
our investigation. It took 8-11 months to actually work. But I
can actually say the Mexican cartel, the members that we
arrested, they were all illegals that had come across our
southwest border. So, the problem that we have is that some of
them have fled, and we hear the rumors they are back into the
United States, but they are going to be under a new
identification, so we are going to be having to retract that
all over again.
Mr. Westerman. I was going to ask you to identify any
existing barriers that complicate DEA's mission to eliminate
illegal drug distribution and to prosecute drug traffickers. It
sounds like this new identification may be one of those
barriers. Are there other ones in Indian Country?
Ms. Zinn. Oh, absolutely. We need more drug agents in
Montana. When I was saying we have four enforcement drug agents
to cover Havre, Bozeman, Ekalaka, and Plentywood, four guys
can't do it. Cannot do it.
Mr. Westerman. Again, I am way out of time, but thank you
all so much for your testimony. And this is something we have
to follow up on.
I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Dr. Gosar. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The gentleman from
Montana, Mr. Rosendale, is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Rosendale. Thank you very much, Mr. Chair.
Ms. Zinn, thank you for attending today. Mr. Roberge and
Mr. Nores, when you start naming the cities, though, Ms. Zinn,
and you say Havre and Bozeman, these folks have no idea the
distance that we are talking about that is between those areas,
which would take about a 2-day trip and many meals to get you
to all four of those cities.
Ms. Zinn. Maybe I need to say 4 hours, 5 hours, 3 hours and
4 hours.
Mr. Rosendale. Exactly.
Mr. Roberge, I am going to start with you. There is concern
regarding cartel associates forming close relationships with
Indigenous women on the reservations to establish themselves
within the communities. Is your community taking any steps to
ensure that your community members don't fall into these traps
with the cartel members, that they are educated of what is
going on?
Mr. Roberge. We try to put some education out there, and
social media, movies, and TV. People see this all the time. But
short of violating civil rights, we can't really tell them who
to be with. They do a pretty good job. I mean, we all look the
same. They blend in well. It is pretty tough to tell.
Mr. Rosendale. OK. Have you noticed or experienced any of
your tribal members protecting cartel members when Federal
agents do come to investigate?
And if you do, do you think that is out of fear for
retribution from the cartels, or is it out of financial
incentive because they are actually benefiting from having
these relationships?
Mr. Roberge. Yes, it is a multitude of reasons, everything
you just named. The biggest thing would be fear. Everybody
knows these guys will cut somebody's head off, or hang them
from an overpass, whatever. Everybody has seen it.
There is that. There is a financial incentive. And
everybody that they connect with are addicted to their product.
So, there is that, as well. A lot of times we won't hear about
it. They will protect them, and house them, and do their
bidding, and gone.
Mr. Rosendale. Ms. Zinn, you were talking about the value
of the drug on the reservations and how much greater it is than
it is just even in Billings itself. Why is that? Why is it that
it jumps from $35 or $38 up to $65, and then all the way over
by Fort Peck you are $100 for that same pill?
Ms. Zinn. Distance. In order to transport the drugs, the
farther you go away from the southwest border the higher the
markup of the drugs.
Mr. Rosendale. OK. So, can we come to an agreement with our
panel here that the open border is increasing the amount of
drug and criminal activity that we see on these reservations?
Ms. Zinn. Absolutely.
Mr. Roberge. A hundred percent.
Mr. Rosendale. OK. I do appreciate that candor.
Ms. Zinn, why do you believe that the Bureau of Indian
Affairs has been so ineffective at protecting these tribes from
the cartel activities?
Ms. Zinn. Several reasons. There are not enough of them.
They need double the amount of agents. They need more tools.
And, unfortunately, when you have an operation in the area, you
have only a small portion of drug cops in Montana. If the state
of Washington is doing an actual operation, all those agents
are shifted over to travel to the other state, and then they
are shifted over to another state, then they come back to
Montana.
Mr. Rosendale. Let me ask one more thing before I run out
of time here. I asked Mr. LaCounte the same question on the
last panel, but I have been to other states where the
reservations and the tribes had really strong agreements with
the Federal law enforcement and the local law enforcement so
that they could actually work together.
What do you think could be done to strengthen agreements,
or even get some agreements in place with the tribes in Montana
to make sure that we can have that collaboration?
Ms. Zinn. The Tribal Council has to have the MOU in place.
But because they overturn every 4 years, a lot of times they
don't honor the MOU that is in place. It is building
relationships.
By the time the people start trusting each other, then time
has passed, and they are elected out of office. That is the
problem with the local law enforcement, the DCI, and the tribe
itself. FBI, DEA, and BIA have full range to go on the
reservations, but we just have a lack of law enforcement.
Mr. Rosendale. OK. Thank you very much. Thank you all for
joining us here today.
Mr. Chair, I yield back.
Dr. Gosar. I thank the gentleman from Montana. The
gentlewoman from Wyoming is recognized for her 5 minutes.
Ms. Hageman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
According to the House Budget Committee report,
international cartels are reaping unprecedented profits from
human and drug smuggling and trafficking, upwards of $30
million a day or nearly $1 billion a month. International drug
cartels have been purposely targeting rural Native American
reservations, both for the sale of meth and as distribution
hubs for fentanyl. Indian Country has also borne the brunt of
the horrific rise in human sex trafficking.
Even before the recent influx of fentanyl use and
overdoses, an older DOJ study from 2006 estimated that 40
percent of violent crimes are attributable to methamphetamine,
which we know is disproportionately trafficked in and bought
and sold on Indian reservations. Since then, this problem has
gotten much worse, not better.
Chief Roberge, in your testimony you mentioned a report
that was authored by the National Congress of American Indians
and sent to Congress in 2006. This report included damning
information on the rise of violent crime on Indian
reservations, and essentially predicted the situation we find
ourselves in today if we didn't do anything back then to
address it. In your own words you state, ``Since then nothing
has been done.'' That is a very sad state of affairs.
Secretary Mayorkas disagrees with you, however, and in
2023, in a judiciary hearing, he actually stated that our
approach to managing the border securely and humanely, even
within our fundamentally broken immigration system, is working.
Would you agree with Secretary Mayorkas that they have secured
the border and their approach to the immigration is working? Do
you agree with him?
Mr. Roberge. Currently?
Ms. Hageman. Yes.
Mr. Roberge. That he has secured the border and his
approach to immigration is working?
Ms. Hageman. That is what he testified to before the
Judiciary Committee.
Mr. Roberge. No.
Ms. Hageman. That is not what your experience has been, has
it?
Mr. Roberge. Not at all.
Ms. Hageman. What about you, Ms. Zinn, or you, Mr. Nores,
do you believe that the current Administration has secured the
border, and that their approach is working?
Ms. Zinn. No. Our southern border is wide open, and our
northern border is wide open.
Mr. Nores. Absolutely not.
Ms. Hageman. And many Indian communities have been and will
continue to be devastated by the overflowing of fentanyl that
is crossing our border. In my home state of Wyoming, over
23,700 pills were seized in 2023 alone.
Ms. Zinn, you have highlighted some of your successful
operations, including a multi-agency operation where you seized
tremendous amounts of meth and OxyContin laced with fentanyl.
Can you explain how, in this particular instance, you were able
to work effectively across agencies?
Ms. Zinn. You have to have a leadership in place that is
willing to do that. You have to have that olive branch and say,
hey, we can do this together if we work together as a team. It
is called communicating. And the end goal is to take care of
the community.
Ms. Hageman. Do we have that leadership in place with the
Biden administration?
Ms. Zinn. At which level?
Ms. Hageman. Right now.
Ms. Zinn. I would say in the state of Montana we do have
that relationship in place.
Ms. Hageman. We are hearing from other witnesses today that
these kinds of seizures are very difficult to accomplish,
however. And as someone working very closely on these issues,
in your opinion, what tends to cause interagency disputes?
Ms. Zinn. Territory. Yo tengo mio. I have my case, you have
your case. This case won't get prosecuted in the U.S.
Attorney's Office. Maybe it will. All that comes into play.
Ms. Hageman. Ms. Zinn, in your work you have seen mass
migration across the southern border, and all three of you just
stated that the southern border is wide open, and whatever they
are doing down there is not working, and it is having a
devastating effect on our reservations.
We are now looking at unprecedented numbers crossing the
border every single day. And the announcement that was made by
President Biden just today in terms of his Executive Order is
not going to stem that flow. Our colleagues on the other side
of the aisle are desperate to cover up the real-life
consequences of the wide-open border that has occurred over the
last 3 years.
As someone who has worked on these issues across various
administrations, Ms. Zinn, is it safe to say that the southern
border is in the worst shape it has ever been under President
Biden?
Ms. Zinn. Absolutely. I have worked on the southern border.
I know what the border looks like.
Ms. Hageman. Would you agree, Mr. Nores?
Mr. Nores. Absolutely.
Ms. Hageman. And what about you, Chief Roberge?
Mr. Roberge. Yes.
Ms. Hageman. OK. With that, I want to thank you three for
being here. I will echo what Chairman Westerman has stated. We
have now had a couple of hearings on this particular topic. And
as the Chairman of the Subcommittee on Indian and Insular
Affairs, I take this extremely seriously, and it is breaking my
heart, what we are seeing happening on our reservations.
I just had the opportunity to question the Attorney General
of the United States, Merrick Garland, on this very issue. And
I have demanded that they attempt to do something to address
the open southern border so that we can provide some relief to
our tribes and our tribal members. We are going to continue to
fight this issue because it is so incredibly, critically
important to our tribal members, to our tribes, and really, to
the future of our country. So, thank you for being here.
Dr. Gosar. I thank the gentlewoman. The gentleman from
Georgia, Mr. Collins, is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Collins. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I know I am going to
sound like a broken record, but I am a freshman up here, as
well, and I spent my entire career in the private sector, so I
have never been elected. And I have been appalled at what we
have been hearing in these hearings. It is very upsetting.
And just like the Chairman of the Full Committee said, I
don't think 99 percent of the American people have a clue, or
know anything about what is going on in our tribal lands.
Chief Roberge, you gave out six points that you would like
to see done when you were giving your opening statement, and I
would love to hear you expand on them in a written form, if you
could, just so that I could get a better understanding of
something. I know you are busy, but I would love to see if you
have an expanded version of that.
And I would also like to know, if the border was secure,
would these still be the six things that the tribal lands need?
Mr. Roberge. Absolutely, Mr. Collins.
Mr. Collins. Thank you. And with that, I am going to yield
back the remainder of my time to the gentlewoman from Wyoming,
Ms. Hageman.
Ms. Hageman. Well, thank you, Mr. Collins.
Picking up where I kind of left off, Chief Roberge, in your
testimony, you highlighted some of the jurisdictional
challenges that you face. You also suggested that it is common
for local law enforcement to run into jurisdictional holes in
our justice system that make it harder to punish cartel members
and drug dealers. Has it become more common or less common for
cartels and drug dealers to take advantage of these various
loopholes?
Mr. Roberge. More common. Significantly more. We are
reaching out to the state or our surrounding counties, I can't
say the state, for help, and they are arguing that it is the
FBI's jurisdiction. And I explained the FBI, well, the AUSA,
won't allow a probable cause arrest right now or a complaint.
Rather, when they commit an offense, we have to wait for this
warrant of arrest to be issued before we can place them in
jail. We don't have that criminal jurisdiction over them.
We only have criminal jurisdiction over Indians, tribal
members of a federally recognized tribe. And the county won't
take them because they are arguing that these guys will commit
a felonious type offense, not go to jail for it, can't kick him
off the reservation unless we have an exclusion hearing, which
that doesn't matter to them, either, and I have some examples
that I submitted in written testimony of that.
Ms. Hageman. If you would give some of those examples, and
I guess what you are saying is they have become incredibly,
what would I say, sophisticated at understanding our laws,
these loopholes, these holes, how to exploit them. And
essentially, they are tying everyone's hands, including, most
specifically, you, as well as the local law enforcement.
But the FBI is also one of the problems, it sounds like, in
terms of being able to provide you with the necessary
enforcement that you need to ensure that these people are
actually held criminally accountable.
Mr. Roberge. I would say the U.S. Attorney.
Ms. Hageman. From the Department of Justice?
Mr. Roberge. Yes.
Ms. Hageman. OK. Could you give us some of the examples
that you have included in your written testimony?
Mr. Roberge. Yes. Would you like me to give them now?
Ms. Hageman. Please.
Mr. Roberge. Absolutely. Give me 1 second here.
Ms. Hageman. I believe that you gave an example of a drug
dealer who was very familiar with the laws and jurisdiction of
the FBI and tribal law enforcement, that being one of the
examples.
Mr. Roberge. Yes, this would be the one example. A few
weeks ago, we had a non-Indian drug dealer dealing and living
on our reservation. In the course of the tribal law enforcement
investigation, this non-Indian drug dealer was found with a
large amount of methamphetamine. He had a scale, drug
paraphernalia, and all the precursors for sale or distribution
of dangerous drugs.
The reason we had contact with him is he had beaten a
tribal member, which was a female, with a firearm. He didn't
shoot her, but he beat her with a firearm. And then this
individual has a history of committing other drug-related
crimes.
The local county was called, as well as the FBI. Due to the
ongoing criminal behavior of this non-Indian drug dealer, the
court issued a preliminary order to exclude him from our
reservation, as per the Fort Belknap Indian Community's
Constitution. The non-Indian drug dealer violated this within
the week of the issuance of this order.
So, prior to this exclusion order being issued, the county
refused to take him. And he just beat a woman, left her for
dead out in a rural area. She thought he was going to kill her.
Nobody took him to jail. We didn't have jurisdiction over him,
and we violated civil rights if we did anything about it.
That brings me to the point of we need legislative action,
and a simple fix would be to overturn the Oliphant decision and
give us criminal jurisdiction.
Ms. Hageman. That is one of the solutions right there.
Mr. Roberge. Yes, ma'am.
Ms. Hageman. OK. I very much appreciate that. That is a
good example to give.
I am out of time. Again, I want to thank you for being
here, and your bravery, and being willing to work with us to
try to find a fix and some solutions to these horrific problems
that we are facing. Thank you.
Dr. Gosar. I thank the gentlewoman from Wyoming. The
gentlewoman from New Mexico, Ms. Stansbury, the Ranking Member,
is recognized.
Ms. Stansbury. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you all for
traveling to be here with us today.
Mr. Roberge, did I pronounce your name correctly?
Mr. Roberge. You are the only one, yes.
Ms. Stansbury. Oh, good. Excellent.
[Laughter.]
Ms. Stansbury. Let me, first of all, just say thank you for
your service two times, both to our nation and to the tribe. We
appreciate your service. I want to follow up on some of the
recommendations that you made. I found them extremely helpful.
You mentioned that your current agency is funded at around
$1.5 million, and that funding really is a limiting factor. And
I think it is relevant to this conversation. I think you may
have seen the first panel and some of the Members are saying,
well, what would you do if you had more money? So, please tell
us, Chief, what would you do if you had more money?
Mr. Roberge. Oh my gosh, that would be a game-changer.
Excuse my lack of better terms, that would be life-changing for
our department and our community.
Right now, we are scraping the bottom of the barrel with
$1.2, maybe $1.3 million since 1997, with no account to
inflation or anything else. If I am going to keep wages at a
competitive standard to recruit and retain officers, can't buy
equipment, can't pay for training, I mean, can't do any of
that. Even if we increased it by several hundred thousand, a
few hundred thousand, it would potentially change the lives of
people in that community, having a greater law enforcement
presence out there, having better equipment, community
policing, community policing events, restoring trust in the
community of law enforcement. It would be monumental.
Ms. Stansbury. So, it sounds like Fort Belknap is a
contract. So, you guys 638 for your funding?
Mr. Roberge. Yes.
Ms. Stansbury. So, the funding that you all would contract
for would include increasing funding for salaries, recruitment,
retention, hiring more officers. I am going to assume more
vehicles, law enforcement, crime equipment, technology, et
cetera. That is the kind of things you guys would use it for?
Mr. Roberge. Yes, positions. We need boots on the ground.
We need men or women that are going to stand ready to commit
acts to protect and serve their community.
Ms. Stansbury. Thank you.
Mr. Roberge. That is what we need.
Ms. Stansbury. And I will just say that we hear this from
every single tribe across the country. I mean, it is literally
the thing that we hear. So, I do urge my colleagues to
understand that this is really a funding issue, that if tribes
had the capacity to hire more folks, if they had the capacity
to take on more technology, it would be a game-changer for a
lot of our communities.
The other piece I wanted to dig in a little bit on, and
again, I think it is a resources issue, I am really grateful
that you brought up U.S. attorney coordination and prosecution
because this is another issue that we hear in multiple
jurisdictions. And I was actually just home in New Mexico this
week, which is the state that I represent, and we also have a
severe shortage within the Federal Government, within the
Department of Justice of U.S. attorneys, especially in certain
regions.
And I think your testimony really spoke to the reality that
the number of prosecutions that you are seeing is both a
jurisdictional issue, but also it is a bandwidth issue, because
these U.S. attorneys are also prosecuting all Federal crimes,
not just crimes that involve tribal lands.
Mr. Roberge. Yes.
Ms. Stansbury. So, I wonder if you could just speak to that
in the region that you all coordinate with the U.S. attorney
and DOJ. Do you see it as a lack of available attorneys to be
able to prosecute the cases?
Mr. Roberge. Yes, ma'am. I believe they are completely
overwhelmed. Two attorneys to seven Indian reservations in
Montana with, I mean, I gave examples of the scope of our crime
rate, and kind of what is on the table there for them. And
imagine that with their plate too full. They need help.
Ms. Stansbury. Yes.
Mr. Roberge. They do.
Ms. Stansbury. Well, I appreciate that. And I did want to
just make sure we flagged that today because I think it is
important to understand that those resources do sit not in BIA,
but at the Department of Justice, and that that is in the
direct line of duty under DOJ, and that they are an important
component of being able to help address tribal needs.
And then finally, I do want to just make a comment to
address to the Committee. Today is primary day in New Mexico.
So, happy Election Day. But it is also in Montana. And I
thought it was a bit odd that we were having a witness join us
who is running for office. And using official resources here in
the Committee today to promote a candidate, I do not feel is an
appropriate use of official resources. So, I did want to just
address that, Mr. Chairman. And I do appreciate the expertise
that was brought here today, but we do need to be cognizant
that we are not to use taxpayer dollars for unofficial
purposes. Thank you.
Dr. Gosar. Thank you.
Mr. Nores, you have had a lot of experience within our
national forests, and the growing of cannabis throughout, and
the use of toxic chemicals. How much more decimated does the
landscape become on these tribal entities?
Mr. Nores. Well, with tribal lands in general, Congressman,
it is more severe simply because our tribal police officers are
so limited. When we work with, say, the Hoopa, as I gave
examples, and also the Yurok Tribes, we were going into
historical grow sites that had been there 10 years.
When we would attack a grow site that we would find in
other public land or, say, a private ranch, we have our entire
MET team, we have the sheriff's office at our disposal, we have
Federal agents from DEA, from FBI. We can rally the troops. But
our tribal partners with that division, not being able to get
the local, Federal, and state help they need to on their lands,
leave a lot of those sites untampered. They just can't get to
them.
So, when we did collaborate, we were finding historical
grows that went back, like I said, a decade. So, instead of
removing those poisons on the day of the raid, eradicating
those toxically tainted plants that are slated for the black
market and poisoning consumers for cannabis, let's say, now
those poisons are out there for multiple years before they are
cleaned up. Usually, we will reclimate a grow site the day we
raid it because of the lasting, egregious environmental effects
on the waterways, on the wildlife, drinking water sources for
our tribal partners and their communities. But some of that
just goes continual what we call cumulative effects because
they just don't have the resources.
So, I consider it far more severe, damaging, what these
cartels are doing to our forests on tribal lands than in
general what we can attack outside of those districts.
Dr. Gosar. They are smuggling in known poisons, I would
say, into and onto these public lands and into tribal areas. Is
that true?
Mr. Nores. Yes, Congressman, they are. And these are
poisons that were basically developed, some of the neurotoxins
were literally in some of the Nazi chemical weapons they
developed in World War II. They are very effective
rodenticides, insecticides like carbofuran, metaphos, Furadan,
all those trade names I mentioned. Yet, EPA, 20 or 30 years
ago, got their study data together to realize they were too
toxic for us to use in America on our crops. And one 12-ounce
canister of this crystalline substance, one of these poisons,
is made to be diluted with 5,000 to 6,000 gallons of water,
then put on crops to keep everything off of them.
Well, these growers, the Chinese cartels are doing this,
and indoor grows like we talked about in last testimony, and
the Chinese are bringing their own highly toxic insecticides
and rodenticides that are sometimes even more deadly than the
Mexican importation of the substances I just mentioned. But we
can't use them in this country, but they are available in
Tijuana. They are sold in other parts of the of the world,
primarily third-world countries. And they are very effective at
keeping anything off of that cash crop or, in the case of
indoor grows, more cannabis, as well.
Dr. Gosar. Do you find the cartels more aggressive on
tribal lands?
Mr. Nores. Absolutely, simply because they know the
likelihood of getting any type of arrest or even being
contacted, again, because our tribal partners are dealing with,
as my partner said today up here, so many other crimes, public
safety crimes, domestic violence, murders, missing people,
human trafficking, the cartels like to target areas like that
because they may not be contacted at all. And if they are, they
are not going to have as big of a team, they are not going to
have as many threats to being apprehended and/or arrested and
prosecuted.
So, absolutely, that is what we have seen in California as
one example. And as we are seeing in my new home state of
Montana on the fentanyl crisis, human trafficking crisis, as my
colleagues have testified today, as well.
Dr. Gosar. Got you. Now, I am going to ask this question of
all three of you. Hopefully, I can ask it pretty quick, what
would be your idea, and I know you brought up about some money,
but creatively, so I am looking at the military experience. You
have these SEAL teams, you have these Ranger teams that are
hotshots. You fly them in. And could that be an option,
something like that, where you are bringing in hotshot law
enforcement, and you are bringing an attorney with them, a
couple attorneys or whatever? Do you think that could work?
Or, you know, it would definitely kind of throw things off
the ball. But Chief Roberge, what do you think? Or is there
something in your mind you see differently?
Mr. Roberge. Yes, Chairman Gosar. I don't believe dropping
an operational detachment alpha into our area and having them
infiltrate would suffice at this point. We are kind of seeing
them come in, do their operation, and then go out. Very rarely
nowadays do we have them actually establishing that foothold in
Fort Belknap. They are in Crow and other reservations like
that.
I think if they were infiltrated, and I don't want to give
up a covert-type operation like that over the public or media,
but if they were infiltrated with one of their own, that is the
only way we are going to take them down. I don't know if we
will ever really take them down, but we could put a cap on
them. That is how we are going to do it, is infiltration.
Ms. Zinn. That would work for our places like Billings and
Bozeman because we have cartels there. So, you can do that type
of operation in that type of city. But on the reservations, he
is correct. They are touch and go, except for my last case,
they were actually more overt and trying to grow roots in the
Crow Reservation.
But DEA has done those types of operations, and it is hit
and miss. What you do need is more permanent boots on the
ground for all the three little alphabet soup that is going to
be there permanently so they know the players and they know
when and where and how.
Dr. Gosar. John?
Mr. Nores. I agree, we need more boots on the ground that
are staying in place. We noticed that when we formed up the
Marijuana Enforcement Team. We had had so many officer-involved
shootings, so many near-death experiences as officers. When we
dedicated a unit of 12 special operators as game wardens, and
we could stay dedicated to just that fight throughout the whole
state of California, now we are making a much bigger dent. We
were going home safe, first and foremost, but we were
documenting the damages.
We need that type of presence, like my partners just said,
embedded throughout Montana and really any other state having
this problem. We know it is border to border, left, right,
east, west, north, south. But with that, I think we need the
counseling, the education, educating our children on the
fentanyl crisis, what to detect, human trafficking, target
indicators because these polycriminals are dealing in so many
crimes that threaten every American from one threat or another,
whether it is fentanyl, whether it is tainted cannabis, human
trafficking on tribal lands and beyond. It is the No. 1
national priority I think we need to deal with administratively
from all levels, but especially keeping enough enforcement
embedded in all of our states to have a real presence and have
an actual deterrence on these cartels and the evil they
present.
Dr. Gosar. This also shows that Canada is not all the
friendlies that we think they are.
Mr. Nores. Correct.
Dr. Gosar. I thank the witnesses for their valuable
testimony and the Members for their questions. The members of
the Committee may have additional questions for the witnesses,
and we will ask you to respond to these in writing. Under
Committee Rule 3, members of the Committee must submit
questions to the Subcommittee Clerk by 5 p.m. on June 7. The
hearing record will be held open for 10 business days for these
responses.
If there is no further business, without objection, the
Subcommittee stands adjourned.

[Whereupon, at 3:55 p.m., the Subcommittee was adjourned.]

[ADDITIONAL MATERIALS SUBMITTED FOR THE RECORD]

Submission for the Record by Rep. Gosar

Statement for the Record
Frank Star Comes
President of the Oglala Sioux Tribe

My name is Frank Star Comes Out, and I am the President of the
Oglala Sioux Tribe (OST). The OST home, the Pine Ridge Reservation, is
the third-largest reservation in the United States, stretching over 3.1
million acres, similar to the State of Connecticut. As of February 14,
2023, the Tribe has an enrolled membership of 51,460, an on-reservation
law enforcement service population of more than 40,000, and 52 separate
residential communities.
I am a former Marine, so forgive me, but my comments tend to be
rather blunt. The time for politically correct statements has long
since passed. I have human beings who are being killed and seriously
hurt, and as the duly elected leader of the Tribe and a former military
officer, I take that very seriously. So, for me, this is not just about
a federal program; it's about American citizens. For this reason, I
would like to focus my testimony on the impact that twenty-five years
of federal neglect, coupled with the influx of illegal drugs and the
violence that comes with them, have had on my community.
In FY 2021, we had around 138,000 calls for police service and only
33 officers to respond to those calls over an area spanning 3.1 million
acres, which is larger than the states of Delaware and Rhode Island
combined. That was around 5-7 officers per shift, covering 24 hours a
day, 7 days a week, 365 days a year, because we have exclusive federal/
tribal criminal jurisdiction over our Pine Ridge Indian Reservation.
Things have only gotten worse since then. For example, in FY2023,
we had over 165,799 calls for police service, and we had only 30 patrol
officers. Along with other crimes, these calls reported 1133 assaults,
449 cases of child abuse, 1,245 cases of domestic violence, 589 gun-
involved crimes, and 343 cases of the most serious drugs. Just between
October 1, 2022, and February 2023, we have had 8 homicides, 8 violent
rapes, and another 299 serious cases of child abuse. Now I ask you, how
would you deploy those 3-5 officers per shift to cover the area I just
described, especially under those circumstances?
Due to our extreme shortage of officers, our average response time
is and has been, between 30 minutes and an hour. Not to mention, our
officers continue to work alone, with backup being around 30 minutes
away, even when the alleged perpetrator has a loaded weapon. To quote
my Chief of Police, ``30 minutes is a long time when you are alone and
facing a group of well-armed criminals who are trying to kill you.''
Our tribal officers' experiences are consistent with Director
LaCounte's testimony; they are often alone, outmanned, and outgunned.
Mr. Chairman, to answer one of your questions, we already have a
good working relationship with the FBI, but the reality is that they
are over 90 miles away, and they openly admit that they are not
organized to be first responders.
Further, to answer your question about more US Attorneys,
additional US Attorneys will help with federal criminal prosecutions.
But please remember that in order to bring a successful criminal
prosecution in federal court, you also need federally acceptable
evidence and the ability to fully investigate a crime. Experience has
taught us that this generally does not happen when the police response
is 30 minutes or longer like ours is: witnesses have left the scene,
the victims have been transported, and the perpetrators are long gone.
Many well-intended people regularly suggest more protective orders
and banishments, and I fully support the theory behind both.
Unfortunately, without the practical police power to enforce those
orders, it is like asking a group of armed bank robbers to please leave
the bank. It is not likely to happen.
I am also aware of this Subcommittee's discussions about
jurisdictional issues, and I, and the other Great Plains Tribes,
strongly support legislation to return full criminal jurisdiction to
our local tribal police by fixing the Oliphant Decision. I also
supported the recently enacted VAWA, child protection, and domestic
violence legislation, which increased tribal jurisdiction. However,
without the federally backed funding to implement them, for us, these
additional authorizations are merely unfunded mandates.
Finally, when you think about law enforcement jurisdiction
challenges, I would like to make three important points: First, I defy
anyone in this room to tell by a person's voice, or many times even by
their appearance, if they are or are not Indian. Second, the FBI, DEA,
or Homeland Security cannot travel the 90 miles from their headquarters
in Rapid City, South Dakota, to Pine Ridge in less than an hour, no
matter what they are driving. Third, as Mr. LaCounte pointed out,
Congress thinks that jurisdictional complexities are implemented before
an investigation, but that is not true; they come after an assault or
weapon-related attack, not before. Tribal law enforcement does not ask
a victim if they are a tribal member before responding to a crime; they
act. It is that simple.
Finally, Congress and the Bureau of Indian Affairs (BIA) have
already attempted a strike force approach to resolving this problem,
but while it sounds good, I ask you to please look at the actual data
collected at the Standing Rock Reservation a few years ago. Congress
sent in a large group of well-trained officers, and crime went down.
Then the money ran out, and they left, and crime went right back up
again. Drug dealers are not stupid; they know how to wait out a strike
force. It is like putting a band-aid on a cancer lesion; it may feel
better temporarily, but it is not a solution.
Many members of this Committee, specifically Congressman Bentz,
have discouraged tribal leaders from requesting more resources because
you may think boots on the ground will not solve the problem or a
problem with turnover. At Oglala, several officers have served in our
tribal law enforcement services for over 20 years. It is important to
emphasize that the cheapest part of a tribal law enforcement program is
officer salaries. It is federally mandated equipment, gas, insurance,
vehicles, and vehicle maintenance, which costs around $175,000 per
officer/year at government procurement rates that must be acknowledged
and covered. Believe me, our officers are not overpaid. Most make
between $60,000-$70,000 a year, working 60 hours a week in extremely
dangerous conditions with virtually useless benefits.
Last year, we presented the House Appropriations Subcommittee with
our federally mandated law enforcement equipment list and the prices we
faced. Nothing on that list is not a critical law enforcement item
(car, gas, vest, gun, handcuffs, etc.). The OMB and Congress set these
prices, competitive bid processes, and mandates, so we cannot do
anything about them. Under your rules, we must buy from the public
market, just like the other federal agencies do. Believe me, we stretch
every penny. So, we either pay or go without gasoline, police car
repairs and upkeep, and federally required insurance. I certainly
cannot send an officer 40 miles on a bicycle. So, when you talk about
not increasing resources, please consider that we do not drive our
associated costs; OMB and congressional mandates do.
In the mid-1980s, the federal government provided enough resources
to the Oglala Sioux Tribe to employ 130 officers before cartels,
opioids, and fentanyl; we are now down to 30. So, how many resources do
you want to underfund? So, when you ask how much the Tribe received
from that $700M law enforcement increase you referenced last year, my
answer is simple. After the BIA and the private sector took their cut
and inflation kicked in, it was just barely enough to keep going at the
current level and a little more.
Our officers can easily drive around 30,000 miles a month. That is
over double what an average driver adds to their odometer in a year. To
understand our situation, please consider what you paid for a new car
20 years ago and what you would have to pay for that same car today.
That is our very practical problem.
If you look at the BIA's annual reports to your Subcommittee, you
will see its admission that we are funded at 15% of actual need. That
is fifteen (15%), not 50%. That is why we ask for a budget correction
to bring us up to par with what we had 25 years ago. When Director
Lacounte said that BIA is at the bottom of the pecking order of federal
law enforcement services, I 100% agree. It is time for Congress to put
its wallet where its mouth is and commit to funding public safety and
law enforcement services in Indian Country.

How did tribal law enforcement become so underfunded?

In the late 1990s, this Congress, in fact, this Committee, passed
the first Indian Law Enforcement statute. That statute mandated the
creation of the BIA Office of Justice Service (OJS) and afforded it
certain mandatory responsibilities. Other federal laws have been added
to this mandate. Those responsibilities were not, and are not
discretionary; they are established by existing federal law.
Unfortunately, when these mandates were established, neither
Congress nor any Administration calculated what these additional
mandates would cost to fulfill. One mandate in particular, the federal
mandate of 2.8 officers per 1,000 service population necessary to
fulfill the essential governmental function, was never calculated.
Instead, the BIA created the OJS with just the money it was spending in
1999, ignoring the fact that most larger tribes, like ours, were
receiving 70% of law enforcement funding from grants provided by the
Department of Justice (DOJ).
When those DOJ grants expired after OJS was created, Congress never
replaced that funding to BIA to fulfill the now underfunded law
enforcement programs for tribes. The result is that we lost 70% of our
funding in the three years that it took to sunset those grants. After
that, inflation took over, and OST law enforcement went from the 130
federally funded officers it had at the end of the 1990s to the 30
patrol officers it has today. Nothing will change unless and until
Congress fixes that base funding and supplements the funding formerly
provided to tribes by the DOJ to BIA. We know a budget correction can
probably not be done in the next year, but without it, you will
continue to see a rise in crime because of the lack of officers on the
ground.
As to federal strike forces, the Standing Rock Tribe strike force
and the US military have both demonstrated that more enforcement leads
to less crime. Passing more unfunded mandates will not have that same
impact at Pine Ridge. I, for one, am tired of hearing federal witnesses
testifying at your hearings about how seriously they take their treaty
and trust responsibility to keep us safe. I ask you if what I described
about my reservation--the amount of police calls; the amount of crime--
is this a safe community for any American.
I will close by saying this. This House will make up the FY 2025
budget in less than 60 days, so the ball is in your court. I
respectfully ask you to please raise that base budget from 15%
currently funded to at least 50% of the $3.2 billion needed. While more
hearings and better planning are important, my people are being injured
and killed today, and quite honestly, we need to address what is
already on the ground. As was evidenced by our brother tribes in
Montana, both Democratic and Republican Administrations have studied
this issue to death; now, we need Congress to fully fund tribal law
enforcement programs.

Thank you, Wopila.

[all]
