- OVERSIGHT HEARING ON OPPORTUNITIES AND CHALLENGES FOR IMPROVING PUBLIC SAFETY IN TRIBAL COMMUNITIES

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

OPPORTUNITIES AND CHALLENGES
FOR IMPROVING PUBLIC SAFETY
IN TRIBAL COMMUNITIES

=======================================================================

OVERSIGHT HEARING

before the

SUBCOMMITTEE ON INDIAN AND INSULAR AFFAIRS

of the

COMMITTEE ON NATURAL RESOURCES
U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

Tuesday, November 14, 2023

__________

Serial No. 118-76

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Natural Resources

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.govinfo.gov
or
Committee address: http://naturalresources.house.gov
______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

54-101 PDF                WASHINGTON : 2024

COMMITTEE ON NATURAL RESOURCES

BRUCE WESTERMAN, AR, Chairman
DOUG LAMBORN, CO, Vice Chairman
RAUL M. GRIJALVA, AZ, Ranking Member

Doug Lamborn, CO                     Grace F. Napolitano, CA
Robert J. Wittman, VA                Gregorio Kilili Camacho Sablan, CNMI
Tom McClintock, CA                   Jared Huffman, CA
Paul Gosar, AZ                       Ruben Gallego, AZ
Garret Graves, LA                    Joe Neguse, CO
Aumua Amata C. Radewagen, AS         Mike Levin, CA
Doug LaMalfa, CA                     Katie Porter, CA
Daniel Webster, FL                   Teresa Leger Fernandez, NM
Jenniffer Gonzalez-Colon, PR         Melanie A. Stansbury, NM
Russ Fulcher, ID                     Mary Sattler Peltola, AK
Pete Stauber, MN                     Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez, NY
John R. Curtis, UT                   Kevin Mullin, CA
Tom Tiffany, WI                      Val T. Hoyle, OR
Jerry Carl, AL                       Sydney Kamlager-Dove, CA
Matt Rosendale, MT                   Seth Magaziner, RI
Lauren Boebert, CO                   Nydia M. Velazquez, NY
Cliff Bentz, OR                      Ed Case, HI
Jen Kiggans, VA                      Debbie Dingell, MI
Jim Moylan, GU                       Susie Lee, NV
Wesley P. Hunt, TX
Mike Collins, GA
Anna Paulina Luna, FL
John Duarte, CA
Harriet M. Hageman, WY

Vivian Moeglein, Staff Director
Tom Connally, Chief Counsel
Lora Snyder, Democratic Staff Director
http://naturalresources.house.gov
------

SUBCOMMITTEE ON INDIAN AND INSULAR AFFAIRS

HARRIET M. HAGEMAN, WY, Chair
JENNIFFER GONZALEZ-COLON, PR, Vice Chair
TERESA LEGER FERNANDEZ, NM, Ranking Member

Aumua Amata C. Radewagen, AS         Gregorio Kilili Camacho Sablan, CNMI
Doug LaMalfa, CA                     Ruben Gallego, AZ
Jenniffer Gonzalez-Colon, PR         Nydia M. Velazquez, NY
Jerry Carl, AL                       Ed Case, HI
Jim Moylan, GU                       Raul M. Grijalva, AZ, ex officio
Bruce Westerman, AR, ex officio

------

CONTENTS

----------
Page

Hearing held on Tuesday, November 14, 2023.......................     1

Statement of Members:

Hageman, Hon. Harriet M., a Representative in Congress from
the State of Wyoming.......................................     1
Leger Fernandez, Hon. Teresa, a Representative in Congress
from the State of New Mexico...............................     3

Statement of Witnesses:

Newland, Hon. Bryan, Assistant Secretary, Indian Affairs,
U.S. Department of the Interior, Washington, DC............     6
Prepared statement of....................................     7
Questions submitted for the record.......................    12
Klatush, Hon. Dustin, Chairman, Confederated Tribes of
Chehalis Reservation, Oakville, Washington.................    13
Prepared statement of....................................    14
Questions submitted for the record.......................    17
Goggles, Hon. Lloyd, Chairman, Arapaho Business Council,
North Arapaho Tribe, Ethete, Wyoming.......................    17
Prepared statement of....................................    19
Questions submitted for the record.......................    21
Chaudhuri, Jonodev, Ambassador, Muscogee Creek Nation,
Okmulgee, Oklahoma.........................................    23
Prepared statement of....................................    25

Sutter, Chris, Police Chief, Tulalip Tribes, Tulalip,
Washington.................................................    26
Prepared statement of....................................    28
Questions submitted for the record.......................    29

Additional Materials Submitted for the Record:

Submissions for the Record by Representative Carl

Coalition of Large Tribes, ``COLT Chairman Echoes Senate
Alarm on Foreign Illicit Tobacco Threats Amid FDA
Prohibitory Rulemakings on Menthol and Nicotine in
Cigarettes''...........................................    45

Submissions for the Record by Representative Leger Fernandez

NOT ONE MORE, Findings & Recommendations of the Not
Invisible Act Commission, November 1, 2023.............     4

Cato article, ``Fentanyl Is Smuggled for U.S. Citizens by
U.S. Citizens, Not Asylum Seekers''....................    34

OVERSIGHT HEARING ON OPPORTUNITIES
AND CHALLENGES FOR IMPROVING PUBLIC
SAFETY IN TRIBAL COMMUNITIES

----------

Tuesday, November 14, 2023

U.S. House of Representatives

Subcommittee on Indian and Insular Affairs

Committee on Natural Resources

Washington, DC

----------

The Subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 2:14 p.m., in
Room 1334, Longworth House Office Building, Hon. Harriet
Hageman [Chairwoman of the Subcommittee] presiding.
Present: Representatives Hageman, LaMalfa, Carl; and Leger
Fernandez.

Ms. Hageman. The Subcommittee on Indian and Insular Affairs
will come to order. Without objection, the Chair is authorized
to declare a recess of the Subcommittee at any time.
The Subcommittee is meeting today to hear testimony on
opportunities and challenges for improving public safety in
tribal communities. Under Committee Rule 4(f), any oral opening
statements at hearings are limited to the Chairman and the
Ranking Minority Member. I therefore ask unanimous consent that
all other Members' opening statements be made part of the
hearing record if they are submitted in accordance with
Committee Rule 3(o).
Without objection, so ordered.
I will now recognize myself for an opening statement.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. HARRIET M. HAGEMAN, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF WYOMING

Ms. Hageman. The purpose of today's hearing is to hear from
tribal leaders and from the Bureau of Indian Affairs about the
opportunities and challenges for public safety in tribal
communities. Everyone deserves to feel safe in their community,
yet that is not the case for so many tribal reservations.
Adequate public safety should not be seen as a privilege, it
should be considered the status quo.
Adequate public safety and law enforcement in Indian
Country has been a long-standing issue. Native people
experience violence at a higher rate than other communities
with four and five Alaska Native and American Indian adults
having reported facing some form of violence in their
lifetimes. That is an overwhelming 83 percent.
We all have a responsibility to see what we can do to
better these circumstances. Today, we will look at three main
issues that affect public safety and tribal communities:
recruitment and retention of law enforcement officers,
jurisdiction over crimes in Indian Country, and how external
issues such as the influx of illegal drugs have an impact on
Indian Country.
The BIA and tribal law enforcement agencies have faced
long-standing challenges to recruit and retain qualified law
enforcement and public safety personnel. In fact, in meeting
with various tribal members over the last 10 months, this has
been one of the primary issues that they have raised with me as
Chairman of this Subcommittee. There are many factors that
drive this trend, but many of the people who have talked to me
cite a lack of parity for pay and benefits compared to other
Federal law enforcement agencies, the long background check
approval periods, the number of qualified applicants that they
are receiving, and the remote locations of many of these
positions.
Ensuring barriers are removed so that everyone is on a
level playing field is strongly needed. Jurisdiction over
crimes in Indian Country is also complicated and could
implicate tribal, Federal, state, or local authorities,
depending on the perpetrator's identity and the nature of the
crime. When there is a question over which government is able
to investigate or prosecute, it is oftentimes that the period
of investigation may be lost. When concurrent jurisdiction
exists, there may be lengthy discussions over which government
should prosecute a particular crime, and if only one government
can prosecute and declines to do so for various reasons,
justice may be denied.
The need for jurisdictions to work together on information
sharing is also important. External factors that affect
communities across the United States, like the influx of
illegal drugs, can have an outsized impact on Indian Country. I
am sure our witnesses will touch further on this devastating
topic, but I do want to share a few statistics with you today.
The Albuquerque Area Southwest Tribal Epidemiology Center
found that the Alaska Native and American Indian mortality rate
for opioid use was 38.7 deaths per 100,000 in 2021, while the
national average was 20.1 deaths per 100,000. So, it was almost
double in Indian Country.
This past August, the U.S. Customs and Border Control
reported seizures of 25,500 pounds of fentanyl from October
2022 to August 2023. That is an 800 percent increase from
Fiscal Year 2019 and it demonstrates the problems associated
with an open border. It is obvious that this is an epidemic-
level issue for tribal communities, and this only touches on
the influx of illegal drugs and does not cover the other
external issues that can flow into tribal reservations and
Native communities, particularly the crisis regarding missing
and murdered Indigenous people.
The outsized impact on tribes is due to challenges they
already face, like jurisdiction and the lack of law enforcement
in their communities. There are opportunities to improve
collaboration and coordination between enforcement agencies. We
can work to find ways to recruit and retain qualified law
enforcement officers and ease the impact of external issues on
Indian Country.
We must do better, and I believe this conversation is the
first of many to find solutions that it can improve public
safety in Indian Country. Thank you to all of the witnesses for
being with us today, and I look forward to our discussion.
With that, the Chair now recognizes the Ranking Minority
Member for her statement.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. TERESA LEGER FERNANDEZ, A REPRESENTATIVE
IN CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF NEW MEXICO

Ms. Leger Fernandez. Good afternoon and thank you to our
witnesses for joining us here today.
The timing of this hearing is particularly important as we
are only 3 days away from yet another government shutdown.
Republicans are fighting with each other while Democrats are
committed to keeping our government open and serving our tribal
communities. Democrats will provide the bipartisan votes to
ensure the government stays open so tribal law enforcement is
paid on time while they protect their communities.
Congress has chronically underfunded programs designed to
promote and support the social and economic well-being and the
safety of Native Americans for decades. We must remember that
these are all intertwined. Tribes need the security that comes
with consistent funding and when it comes to public safety,
that couldn't be more important.
According to the Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention, murder is the third leading cause of death among
American Indian and Alaska Native women. The third leading
cause. American Indian and Alaska Natives are 2.5 times more
likely to experience violent crime than other races. On
November 1, Congress received important findings and
recommendations from the Joint Department of Justice and
Department of the Interior's Not Invisible Act Commission,
which is dedicated to the victims, survivors, and all those
impacted by the crises of missing and murdered Indigenous
persons.
One of the top findings of the Commission is how reliable
and consistent funding is critical to address their safety
needs in their communities. I encourage my colleagues to read
the report which lays out steps Congress must take to improve
public safety. I support the Commission's call for a decade of
action and healing. Congress must systematically address the
need for sustained action to address this crisis, not just with
law enforcement but with a full range of social and economic
programs needed to combat the deeply rooted issues that
underline violence against Native people.
Madam Chair, I would like to enter the Not Invisible Act
Commission's Report into the record. It is over 200 pages well
worth reading.
Ms. Hageman. Without objection.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

.epsThe full report is available for viewing at:

https://docs.house.gov/meetings/II/II24/20231114/116535/HHRG-
118-II24-20231114-SD004.pdf

------

Ms. Leger Fernandez. BIA has seen a 30 percent vacancy rate
across all law enforcement positions. This is partly because of
the remote location of tribal communities, lack of housing, and
an overall lack of resources. To add to these challenges, BIA
OJS is looking at recruitment and retention incentives,
including pay parity for BIA law enforcement, so that it could
be in line with other Federal law enforcement levels.
I support legislation for pay parity and retention
incentives. But BIA needs sufficient funding. I would like to
thank our appropriators, like Tom Cole, Rosa DeLauro, and Betty
McCollum, and many more, who have seen and shepherded a growth
in appropriations in recent years. However, we still have a
funding shortfall of $717 million. The Fiscal Year 2024
Interior appropriations bill provides $618 million. That is
$100 million short of what our tribal communities need.
I just came from the Rules Committee where we discussed the
Republican Commerce, Justice, and Science bill which decreases
funding for improving tribal law enforcement by $2.5 million. I
recently met with the FBI who let me know that there are only
70 congressionally-funded agents across the country working in
Indian Country, 14 of which are in New Mexico. Only 14 in New
Mexico, only 70 nationwide.
Well, guess what the CJS appropriations bill would do to
the FBI. It would cut it by $400 million. As the main
investigative body for crimes in Indian Country, this would be
devastating. Our law enforcement is overworked, from the BIA to
the FBI. They don't have the resources or manpower to protect
sacred sites like in my district, the Petroglyphs at the Caja
del Rio, or across Indian Country. I know every single tribal
representative here knows of instances of tribal sacred sites
that are being pilfered, and we must stop it.
The tribes here today, you are the ones who are the first
to respond to a crisis in your community, but you have to cover
hundreds of miles, often without the right and proper vehicles.
So, we know we need to do better and I look forward to hearing
from you today so that we can address the multiple causes of
this crisis that is facing Indian Country.
Thank you very much, Madam Chair, and I yield back.

Ms. Hageman. Wonderful. I will now introduce our witnesses
for our panel.
The Honorable Bryan Newland, Assistant Secretary, Indian
Affairs, U.S. Department of the Interior, Washington, DC; the
Honorable Dustin Klatush, Chairman, Confederated Tribes of the
Chehalis Reservation, Oakville, Washington; the Honorable Lloyd
Goggles, Chairman, Arapaho Business Counsel, Northern Arapaho
Tribe, Ethete, Wyoming; Mr. Jonodev Chaudhuri, Ambassador,
Muscogee Creek Nation, Okmulgee, Oklahoma; and Mr. Chris
Sutter, Police Chief, Tulalip Tribes, Tulalip, Washington.
Let me remind the witnesses that under Committee Rules,
they must limit their oral statements to 5 minutes, but their
entire statement will appear in the hearing record. To begin
your testimony, please press the ``talk'' button on the
microphone. We use timing lights. When you begin, the light
will turn green. When you have 1 minute left, the light will
turn yellow. And at the end of 5 minutes, the light will turn
red, and I will ask you to please complete your statement. I
will also ask all witnesses on the panel to testify before
there is any Member questioning.
The Chair now recognizes the Honorable Bryan Newland for 5
minutes.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. BRYAN NEWLAND, ASSISTANT SECRETARY, INDIAN
AFFAIRS, U.S. DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR, WASHINGTON, DC

Mr. Newland. Thank you, Madam Chair and Ranking Member
Leger Fernandez. Good afternoon. I want to thank you for the
opportunity to testify this afternoon on behalf of the
Department on tribal public safety.
My name is Bryan Newland and I serve as Assistant Secretary
for Indian Affairs. The United States has a trust obligation to
protect the existence of Indian tribes and also to protect the
physical safety of their citizens, and at the Bureau of Indian
Affairs, we play a crucial role in meeting this trust
obligation.
Our work to protect tribal communities through law
enforcement activities falls into three broad categories:
policing, detention, and supporting tribal courts. The BIA
provides law enforcement services through one of two paths,
either direct law enforcement services or funding tribal law
enforcement programs under self-determination contracts or
self-governance compacts. Currently, we employee 352 uniformed
police officers and criminal investigators that serve over 200
tribal communities across the United States.
This past March, the Department issued a report to Congress
on law enforcement needs in Indian Country pursuant to the
Tribal Law and Order Act. In that report, we explained that the
BIA spends $246 million on law enforcement, $123 million for
detention facilities, and $62.8 million for tribal courts. But
that report highlights the total estimated needs for public
safety and justice programs in Indian Country are at $1.4
billion for law enforcement, $247 million for existing
detention centers, and $1.2 billion for tribal courts.
It is clear that there is a massive gap between present
funding levels and needs for public safety in Indian Country
and the Department has been working to address that gap. We
have worked to improve our law enforcement recruitment efforts
and to cut our attrition rate within our law enforcement
officer ranks. One of the ways we have done this is to ensure
BIA law enforcement officers have pay parity with their
counterparts in other Federal agencies, and we are also working
to reduce the time to hire for our own officers and to utilize
all the hiring tools available to us under the law.
Correctional facilities are another important component of
tribal justice systems. The BIA presently operates 26 detention
facilities in good condition across the country, but we also
have 23 facilities in poor condition. Replacement of those
facilities will cost at least $590 million.
The third way that we support public safety in Indian
Country is through funding tribal justice systems. Tribal
courts are an essential aspect of tribal sovereignty and there
are approximately 400 tribal justice systems across the country
today. Many tribes are working to establish healing to wellness
courts to address substance abuse and mental health issues that
drive recidivism. As a former tribal court judge myself, I have
seen just how valuable these wellness courts can be.
Protecting and enhancing public safety in Indian Country is
a difficult task, especially with the complex challenges facing
both tribes and Federal agencies. Three of the biggest
challenges we face today are jurisdiction, illegal drugs, and
lack of resources. For most law enforcement agencies in most
circumstances, questions about jurisdiction and authority to
act are relatively simple and straightforward.
In Indian Country, these questions are complicated. The
authority to act often depends on a matrix of the ownership
status of land and the tribal status of the individuals
involved. This leads to transaction costs on officers working
in Indian Country, which are often incurred before police work
even begins.
Drug-related activity in tribal communities imposes health
and economic hardship and is a major contributor to violent
crime. The BIA conducts investigations on narcotics, gangs,
human trafficking, and border violations in Indian Country and
has a specialized national drug enforcement division.
As I also noted above, the availability of funding and
other resources presents challenges to law enforcement in
Indian Country. Many tribal communities are in rural areas. We
ask law enforcement recruits to relocate to these communities
where they are often hindered by a lack of available housing.
Many officers also identify updating equipment and technology
as one of the top priorities needed to support their safety.
Due to the remoteness of these communities and poor roads, we
often have to replace vehicles more quickly, and communication
equipment is even more important for officer safety because
these areas are remote, and these officers often work alone.
Addressing these challenges requires coordination across
the government with tribal leaders, and it is a challenge we
must meet to fulfill our trust responsibilities. I want to
thank you again, Madam Chair, for having me back. It is always
a pleasure to testify here. And Ranking Member and members of
the Committee, I look forward to answering your questions.

[The prepared statement of Mr. Newland follows:]
Prepared Statement of Bryan Newland, Assistant Secretary for Indian
Affairs, U.S. Department of the Interior

Aanii (Hello)! Good afternoon, Chair Hageman, Ranking Member Leger
Fernandez, and members of the Subcommittee. My name is Bryan Newland,
and I am the Assistant Secretary for Indian Affairs at the U.S.
Department of the Interior (Department). Thank you for the opportunity
to discuss the opportunities and challenges of Tribal public safety.

Background

The United States has a trust relationship with each of the 574
federally recognized Tribes, and their Tribal citizens. Through these
relationships, the United States has charged itself with obligations of
the highest responsibility and trust--including the obligation to
protect the existence of Indian Tribes and their citizens. This
obligation is at its highest when it comes to protecting the physical
safety and well-being of Indian people within Indian country.
The Bureau of Indian Affairs (BIA) plays a crucial role in meeting
this obligation on behalf of the United States. Our work to protect
public safety through law enforcement activities in Indian country
falls into three broad categories: policing, detention, and supporting
Tribal courts.

Policing in Indian Country
The BIA--Office of Justice Services (OJS) provides law enforcement
services directly to Tribes by OJS personnel or through self-
determination contracts or compacts, also known as 638 contracts. BIA
employs 352 uniformed police officers and criminal investigators
serving over 200 Indian communities across the country.
OJS has several supporting operations and functions, which include
the missing and murdered unit, victim assistance, drug enforcement,
emergency management, internal affairs, land mobile radio program,
Indian highway safety, Tribal justice support, and operation of the
Indian Police Academy.
OJS also functions as a lead Federal stakeholder and advocate for
public safety and justice matters affecting hundreds of Tribal
communities across the country. We engage regularly with other federal
stakeholders and Tribal governments to collaborate on how best to help
address the unique public safety challenges faced by Tribal
communities.
On March 24, 2023, the Department issued the Report to the Congress
on Spending, Staffing, and Estimated Funding Costs for Public Safety
and Justice programs in Indian Country, 2020.
This report contains data for funding costs in Indian Country.
Total BIA spending for law enforcement was $246.3 million, $123.1
million for detention facilities, and $62.8 million for Tribal courts.
The total estimated costs for public safety and justice programs is
$1.4 billion for law enforcement programs, $247.7 million for existing
detention centers, and $1.2 billion for Tribal courts. These numbers
demonstrate the continued need for investment to improve the ability of
Tribal public safety systems to fully serve their communities.
The recruitment and retention of law enforcement officers and staff
for Tribal law enforcement agencies continue to face unique challenges.
These challenges include pay parity, the length of background
investigations, lack of applicants, and officer wellness. Currently,
our foremost strategy is addressing pay parity by increasing BIA law
enforcement pay levels to match with other Federal law enforcement. To
accomplish this, we completed an upgrade to our uniformed police
officer positions during FY 2023, which increased career advancement
opportunities, along with corresponding pay increases up to an
additional $30,000 annually for BIA law enforcement officers. We are
also utilizing available hiring flexibilities and recruitment and
retention bonuses to increase current staffing levels and better
support those interested in fulfilling DOI's unique mission in Tribal
communities.
The Department's Law Enforcement Task Force (Task Force) also
recently released their 2023 report, which includes a list of findings
and recommendations to improve all the Department's law enforcement
programs. That list includes a finding from all Bureaus within the
Department citing the length of time to complete background
investigations as an impediment to filling open positions in a timely
manner. The Task Force recommends streamlining the background
investigation process to increase the timeliness of the hiring process.
Our team meets on a weekly basis to ensure the hiring process and
background checks move as quickly as possible.
The Task Force recommendations also include mentorship programs for
new hires and ongoing culturally appropriate training opportunities.
These two recommendations would assist incoming hires with retention
and engagement with the community and visitors. The report also
highlights the importance of wellness programs for law enforcement
officers.
Law enforcement officers have a duty to protect and serve their
communities, but that service exposes officers to a significant amount
of stress and trauma. The past few years have been especially
challenging with the COVID-19 pandemic. Combining these challenges with
job demands, staffing challenges, and responding to high-risk calls
requires an investment in resources such as culturally appropriate
training and mentorship programs to assist in officer wellness and will
increase officer retention.

Detention Centers

There are over 90 detention centers throughout Indian Country, and
OJS staffs and operates a quarter of these facilities. The other
detention centers are operated by Indian Tribes through 638 compacts,
and there are a few that are fully funded and operated by Indian
Tribes. Each facility is unique in operation and location.
Correctional facilities are important components of Tribal justice
systems. The ultimate mission of OJS corrections is to ensure Indian
Country facilities are operated in a safe, secure, and humane manner.
To ensure these operation goals are met, the Department has requested
additional funding to address critical infrastructure needs.
The Indian Affairs Division of Facilities Management and
Construction and OJS regularly meet to determine detention facility
center needs. The Facility Condition Index (FCI) rates detention
facilities in good, fair, and poor conditions to determine which
facility has the highest deficiency repair needs. To determine the FCI
rating, the deferred maintenance total is divided by the current
replacement value and if the result is >.10, the location is given an
FCI condition of poor.
The deterioration of facilities negatively impacts the health and
safety of its occupants and impairs the use of the facility. When these
facilities don't receive the proper maintenance, they fall into
disrepair and ultimately become unsafe to use. This results in reduced
service levels and have a detrimental impact to the safety of the
Tribal community.
The average cost of facility replacement is $26 million (bed count
and location are primary factors) and there are currently 23 facilities
considered in poor condition. BIA currently estimates that it will cost
at least $590 million to replace those facilities. There are currently
eight detention facilities in one of the following stages: pre-
planning, planning design, design-build or construction.
The Department supports the continued investment in Tribal justice
systems, infrastructure, and law enforcement.

Supporting Tribal Courts

The OJS, Tribal Justice Support provides training, technical
assistance, and funding for the operation, maintenance, and support of
Tribal Justice Systems. Tribal courts are an essential aspect of Tribal
sovereignty and are an opportunity for Tribes to run their own justice
systems. There are approximately 400 Tribal justice systems throughout
the Nation. These courts are partially funded through Public Law 638
Tribal Priority Allocations (TPAs). In addition to the TPA funds, the
OJS/Tribal Justice Support Directorate provides ``supplemental''
funding to Tribal Justice Systems.
Tribal Courts are funded through several appropriations line items
including: Violence Against Women Act special tribal criminal
jurisdiction training and implementation; Tiwahe which primarily
handles child dependency cases; Public Law 83-280 (P.L. 280) which
provides funding to P.L. 280 jurisdictions; and the general operation
and maintenance for all Tribal justice systems in the United States.
For example, in 2023, 440 new Tribal justice positions were funded
through the Tribal Court Assessment process. The Tribal Court
Assessment process is articulated in 25 U.S.C. Sections 3611, 3612, and
3613 and allows Tribes the ability to identify and seek funding for
their specific and unique needs. Of the 440 positions funded, 42
positions were funded to address domestic violence issues within Tribal
Justice systems, along with 260 positions in P.L. 280 jurisdictions,
and 20 new positions in Healing to Wellness Courts. The remaining
positions were for the operation of Tribal courts, including clerk
positions, probation positions, case manager positions, among others.
Healing to Wellness courts have provided positive results in
healing and strengthening Tribal communities. For example, Penobscot
Nation has not incarcerated a defendant this year, but in fact has
graduated individuals from the Healing to Wellness court and provided
participants with options for higher education and resulted in
commitments to work to create a safer and better community. The same
can be said for other Tribes, such as Saginaw Chippewa Healing to
Wellness court.
Through these Healing to Wellness Tribal Courts many Tribes are
reforming or creating judicial systems which incorporate traditional
and cultural aspects to create a more effective measure to address the
trauma induced circumstances within their communities. In addition to
dealing with narcotics issues, Healing to Wellness courts also address
child dependency and family matters brought by the Tribal Social
Service Directorate and play an essential role in family reunification
by providing support and services needed for parents to complete within
the reunification plan. Tribes have seen an improvement in the
reunification process when relatives and community members provide
encouragement and support to those families needing assistance.
Reunification is more successful through the Healing to Wellness court
process, as is addressing addiction issues, which often go hand in hand
with child dependency cases.
In addition, the Tiwahe funding has also provided positions not
only for Tribes participating in the demonstration project but provided
essential positions for Tribes seeking to have representation in state
court on Indian Child welfare matters. BIA has funded 10 attorney
Tribal justice positions focused on transferring children from state
court to Tribal court under the Indian Child Welfare Act which
solidifies the intent of the Act to bring Native Children home.
In addition to providing Tribal justice positions, the BIA supports
peer-to-peer trainings and provides Tribes the ability to share best
practices with others. In an effort to support Tribal self-
determination, Tribes are better suited to provide best practices and
discuss challenges with their peers. To that end, over 1,000 Tribal
justice personnel were trained in 2023. For instance, Choctaw Nation is
holding a VAWA special tribal criminal jurisdiction training next week
and though the event is funded by the BIA, it is hosted and conducted
by the Tribe.
Tribal Courts solidify sovereignty and work to address underlying
aspects causes of individuals who become missing and murdered in their
community. The focus of all these courts is to address issues
``upstream'' instead of dealing with ultimately tragic issues which
debilitate our communities.

Challenges to Public Safety in Indian Country: Jurisdiction, Illegal
Drugs, and Resources

Protecting public safety in Indian country is a difficult task,
given the complex challenges facing both Tribes and federal agencies
responsible for meeting our obligations to Tribes and their citizens.
We've highlighted three of the biggest challenges we are facing:
jurisdiction, illegal drugs, and resources.

Jurisdiction

The jurisdictional framework between Indian Tribes, the federal
government, and states is complex, especially regarding criminal
jurisdiction. Congress and the courts have tied criminal jurisdiction
to several variables to determine who exercises jurisdiction. These
variables include type of crime, Tribal affiliation of the defendant,
Tribal membership status of the victim, and land status of the crime
scene. These variables impose significant transaction costs on
officers, policymakers, attorneys, judges, and advocates working to
address public safety challenges in Indian country. In most other
jurisdictions, resolving these issues before beginning the work of
policing and adjudicating is a simple task. In Indian country, it is a
necessary complexity.

However, Congress, has legislated to clarify and affirm criminal
jurisdiction in Indian Country. These enactments include:

the 1968 amendments to P.L. 280, which required states to
obtain the consent of the Indian Tribe prior to exercising
criminal jurisdiction in Indian Country and permitted
states to withdraw from the jurisdictional arrangement;

the 1991 amendments to the Indian Civil Rights Act, which
affirmed Indian Tribes' inherent criminal jurisdiction over
non-member Indians;

the 2010 Tribal Law and Order Act, which enhanced the
criminal sentencing authority of Tribal courts;

the 2013 reauthorization of the Violence Against Women
Act, which recognized and affirmed Indian Tribes' inherent
jurisdiction to prosecute non-Indians for certain crimes
committed in Indian Country;

the 2019 enactment of Savanna's Act, which improved the
federal response to missing or murdered Indigenous persons
by increasing coordination among Tribal, Federal, State,
and local law enforcement agencies.

the 2019 enactment of the Not Invisible Act, which created
a Commission to make recommendations to the Department of
the Interior and Department of Justice to improve
intergovernmental coordination and establish best practices
for state-Tribal-federal law enforcement to combat the
epidemic of missing persons, murder, and trafficking of
Native Americans and Alaska Natives; and

the 2022 reauthorization of the Violence Against Women
Act, which expanded and reaffirmed Indian Tribes' inherent
jurisdiction to prosecute non-Indians for additional crimes
committed in Indian Country.

These enactments demonstrate that Indian Tribes themselves can best
meet the public welfare and safety needs of communities within their
jurisdiction.

Illegal Drugs in Tribal Communities

Drug related activity in Tribal communities is a major contributor
to violent crime and imposes health and economic hardship. As a
response, OJS has a specialized national drug enforcement division, the
Division of Drug Enforcement (DDE), to investigate the distribution of
illegal narcotics in Indian Country. OJS also conducts investigations
on narcotics, gangs, human trafficking, and border violations in Indian
Country. The DDE provides investigations that focus on disrupting drug
distribution networks and analytical support to track drug cases that
directly impact Indian Country. The DDE provides drug related training
and technical assistance to law enforcement programs that operate in
Indian Country.

Current Drug Seizure Totals
Each year, our DDE plans and executes multiple undercover narcotic
and highway interdiction operations throughout Indian Country. The
operations will typically range from 4 to 14 days, during which the
assigned special agents and police officers focus efforts solely on a
specific reservation. The number and success of these operations is the
strongest driver of our annual illegal drug seizures. During FY 2023,
twenty-two such operations were completed, leading to seizure totals
of:

Methamphetamine: 1,846 lbs.

Fentanyl Powder: 98 lbs.

Fentanyl Pills: 1,097,671

Marijuana: 11,411 lbs.

Heroin: 23 lbs.

Cocaine: 1,418 lbs.

Current Drug Threats and Impact on Tribal Communities
Nationwide activities of our drug enforcement team are identifying
methamphetamine and fentanyl as the prevalent emerging drug threats to
the safety of Tribal communities. Tribes reported 1,590 fatal overdoses
in FY 2023 and 899 non-fatal overdoses. While the data conveys the
seriousness of these threats, we are unable to measure the resulting
impact to victims, affected families, and the already strained Tribal
justice and social service systems in these communities.

Resources

Many resources are needed to help fully staff Tribal public safety
agencies. This includes housing, updated equipment, and the improvement
of Tribal public safety data collection.
Housing for Tribal public safety staff is important for recruitment
and retention. Many Tribal communities are in remote areas and law
enforcement recruits often must relocate to those communities for their
jobs. It's no secret that housing needs within Tribal communities are
very high. Housing conditions vary from community to community, but
homes are often overcrowded, lack running water and heat, and need
replacement. Combined with traveling long distances from home to work
contributes to fatigue on Tribal law enforcement staff and the faster
deterioration of public safety equipment.
The Task Force report stated that Department law enforcement
officers identified having updated equipment and technology resources
as one of the top priorities needed to support their safety. Because
many Tribal communities and homes are located in remote areas with
unpaved roads, public safety vehicles accumulate greater wear and tear
and need to be routinely replaced. Tribal law enforcement officers
often respond to high-risk calls alone and face greater rates of death
in the line of duty. Ensuring all Tribal officers have access to
reliable top-tier equipment can contribute to their safety in the
field. Law enforcement heavily rely on field communications, like land
mobile radios, to respond to calls and maintain officer safety.
Expanded radio coverage would minimize ``no coverage'' areas and should
include video and data capabilities to increase officer safety and
reduce the stress of uncertainty of whether assistance will be
available.
Another component to ensuring Tribal law enforcement officer safety
is access to law enforcement data systems. State and federal law
enforcement agencies utilize their own data systems to track important
information like warrants, missing individuals, unsolved crimes,
evidence, and the level of danger a criminal poses. These systems often
do not communicate with each other and contribute to data gaps in
Tribal communities. Tribal law enforcement agencies also do not always
have access to these systems and if they do, individuals must be
trained to use federal systems and many agencies often do not have the
staff to utilize that training. Consolidating those existing law
enforcement systems would improve the capture of public safety data and
allowing Tribal law enforcement agencies to have access to that
consolidated system can also ensure Tribal officer safety in the field.

Conclusion

The Department continues to prioritize and reinforce Tribal
sovereignty and self-determination by providing support and resources
to improving public safety in Indian Country.
Chair Hageman, Ranking Member Leger Fernandez, and members of the
Subcommittee, thank you for the opportunity to provide the Department's
views. We look forward to working with Congress to affirm and support
Tribal sovereignty and public safety within Tribal communities. I am
happy to answer any questions that you may have.

______

Questions Submitted for the Record to the Hon. Bryan Newland, Assistant
Secretary-Indian Affairs, U.S. Department of the Interior

Mr. Newland did not submit responses to the Committee by the
appropriate deadline for inclusion in the printed record.

Questions Submitted by Representative Westerman
Question 1. Can you please provide further details, including any
positive or unforeseen outcomes, of the Bureau's recent strides towards
pay parity among law enforcement, specifically in the Bureau's upgrade
to the uniformed police officer positions in FY 2023?

Question 2. Can you provide further details on what the Bureau has
done to address the lengthy background checks process, and any further
steps the Bureau intends to take?

Questions Submitted by Representative Hageman

Question 1. Assistant Secretary Newland, during the hearing we
discussed issues the Bureau of Indian Affairs is facing with
recruitment and retention of law enforcement officers. In your answer
detailing Bureau efforts to address these problems, you discussed your
willingness to work with the Subcommittee to develop other tools, such
as location pay and special incentives and bonuses, to recruit, hire,
and retain candidates to positions in remote locations.

1a) What are some other tools Congress could consider providing the
Bureau?

Question 2. We noted in the hearing that BIA has received
additional money and resources in recent years from Congress to address
these issues.

2a) What can Congress do to ensure these growing resources are
having the greatest impact possible? By this I mean, what else, besides
providing more resources, can Congress do to help BIA?

Question 3. Congressman Jerry Carl cited the concerns raised by the
Coalition Of Large Tribes (C.O.L.T.) about the pending Food and Drug
Administration (FDA) ban of menthol cigarettes in America.\1\
Specifically, C.O.L.T. is concerned that this ban will create illicit
markets for foreign cartels and criminal interests from China, the
Middle East, and Mexico. C.O.L.T. notes that trafficking channels
already exist on reservations because these cartels know how to use the
jurisdictional gaps and underfunded law enforcement to their advantage.
Therefore, C.O.L.T. believes this proposed ban will have significant
public safety concerns, such as placing further strains on tribal law
enforcement and exposing Native American consumers of these products to
unregulated cigarettes.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Tobacco Product Standard for Menthol in Cigarettes, 87 FR 26454
(Proposed May 4, 2022)

3a) Assistant Secretary Newland, during the hearing you responded
that you were not aware of the FDA proposed rule. Have you had the
chance to familiarize yourself with the proposal? And have you since
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
consulted with the FDA?

3b) Do you share these concerns about the unintended consequences
this proposed rule could have on tribal public safety should it go into
effect?

3c) Numerous tribes and tribal reservations in our nation,
especially in the West and Southwest, are already burdened by the
increasing flow of fentanyl and other iliicit products over the
southern border. Could this FDA proposed rule further strain resources
tribes have had to dedicate to this national issue?

(i) Could this proposed rule damage BIA efforts to assist
tribal law enforcement deal with the influx of illicit products
and criminal organizations using reservations for their own
advantage?

Question 4. It is our understanding that the final rule has been
sent to the White House Office of Management and Budget for review.

4a) Will you commit to consulting with the FDA and White House to
raise these tribal concerns before a final rule is published?

______

Ms. Hageman. Thank you very much.
The Chair now recognizes the Honorable Dustin Klatush for 5
minutes. Welcome back.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. DUSTIN KLATUSH, CHAIRMAN, CONFEDERATED
TRIBES OF CHEHALIS RESERVATION, OAKVILLE, WASHINGTON

Mr. Klatush. Good afternoon, Chair Hageman, Ranking Member
Leger Fernandez, and members of the Committee. My name is
Dustin Klatush. I am the Chairman of the Confederated Tribes of
the Chehalis Reservations. My testimony will focus on
challenges that the Chehalis Tribe has experienced providing
effective law enforcement services to our community and provide
some recommendations for the Committee to consider.
The Chehalis Reservation is located halfway between Seattle
and Portland off Interstate 5 in Southwest Washington State.
The Tribe's 5500-acre reservation land base is checkerboarded
and portions of the reservation are in three different
counties.
Recruitment challenges in Washington State. Many Indian
tribes, including Chehalis, have recruited and trained law
enforcement officers only to see them leave for more
competitive pay and benefits in neighboring jurisdictions. As
explained in my written statement, the state of Washington has
the lowest number of law enforcement officers per 1,000
residents of any state in the United states. This has resulted
in aggressive recruiting efforts by our neighboring state and
local jurisdictions for tribal officers. My Tribe pays salaries
on par with our neighbors, but it is not able to provide the
same retirement benefits that our neighboring jurisdictions can
provide.
The Tribe fully supports the Parity for Tribal Law
Enforcement Act, a bipartisan bill introduced by Congressman
Dan Newhouse, that would allow tribal law enforcement officers
to begin accruing the same retirement, injury, and death
benefits that Federal law enforcement officers currently enjoy.
If enacted, H.R. 4524 will provide Indian tribes nationwide
with a critical tool to address law enforcement, recruitment,
and retention challenges.
The Tribe encourages the Committee to move this bill
quickly. Fentanyl has put an increased burden on tribal law
enforcement in Washington State. As I mentioned in my written
statement, fentanyl has become one of the Chehalis Tribe's
biggest law enforcement challenges.
In 2021, the Washington State Supreme Court ruled that the
state's primary criminal drug possession law was
unconstitutional. The Washington State Legislature responded by
enacting a new law that made possession of hard drugs like
fentanyl a misdemeanor. The new law also required that
offenders be diverted to treatment in lieu of arrest for, at
the least, the first two arrests. This effectively meant that
state law enforcement would not make arrests for fentanyl
possession.
Fentanyl usage has surpassed heroin and methamphetamine
usage on the Chehalis Reservation and in Southwest Washington.
Most arrests that the Tribe's officers make involve fentanyl.
While the Tribe's neighboring jurisdictions are effectively
unable to arrest the drug possession crimes due to lax state
laws, our U.S. Attorney's Office wants to see airtight cases
with large amounts of drugs before it will take up cases.
All of this has meant that the Chehalis and other tribal
law enforcement agencies must fend for ourselves. Congress
should consider using the special domestic violence
jurisdiction in the Violence Against Women Act as a model and
provide authority for Indian tribes to arrest and prosecute
non-Indians for possession and distribution of fentanyl and
other hard drugs. This type of authority is the only real
enforcement mechanism for tribes to get fentanyl-related
perpetrators off the streets.
We are aware that law enforcement is only a part of the
solution to the fentanyl problem. Next month, the Tribe will
host a grand opening of its Hope and Healing Clinic, a facility
that will provide inpatient and outpatient treatment for
substance abuse, including opioids. The Tribe also has a 38-
foot mobile clinic that will be used to provide treatment at
remote locations. The Tribe intends for the Hope and Healing
Clinic to fill a critical void in our area by providing
treatment options not only for the Tribe but our non-Indian
neighbors as well.
Moving forward, the Tribe urges the Committee to ensure
that Indian tribes are included in larger Federal initiatives
and legislation that provide resources to government to arrest
and prosecute fentanyl-related offenses and to provide
treatment options.
Thank you for allowing me to provide testimony today. I
look forward to answering any questions the Committee may have.

[The prepared statement of Mr. Klatush follows:]

Prepared Statement of the Honorable Dustin Klatush, Chairman,
Confederated Tribes of the Chehalis Reservation

Thank you, Chair Hageman, Ranking Member Leger Fernandez, and
members of the Committee for holding this oversight hearing. My name is
Dustin Klatush, and I am the Chairman of the Confederated Tribes of the
Chehalis Reservation (the ``Tribe''). My testimony will focus on
challenges that the Chehalis Tribe has experienced providing effective
law enforcement services to our community, and provide some
recommendations for the Committee to consider.

The Chehalis Reservation was created by Executive Order in 1864 and
is located between the confluence of the Chehalis River and the Black
River. Geographically, the Tribe is located approximately halfway
between Seattle and Portland off Interstate 5. Large assemblages of the
Tribe's 5,500-acre reservation land base are checkerboarded and are
situated throughout southwestern Washington state in three different
counties. Approximately forty percent of Chehalis tribal members are
under the age of 18.
I. RECRUITING AND RETAINING TRIBAL OFFICERS HAS NEVER BEEN MORE
DIFFICULT

According to data published annually by the Washington Association
of Sheriffs and Police Chiefs,\1\ the state of Washington has the
lowest number of law enforcement officers per 1,000 residents of any
state in the United States. Washington's average of 1.12 officers per
1,000 residents is below every other state and the District of
Columbia. The national per capita average is 2.31 per 1,000 residents,
so Washington state has less than half as many officers proportionately
than the national average. The number of officers in Washington state
has been decreasing despite aggressive recruitment efforts by local
jurisdictions, such as increased pay and hiring bonuses.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ See Crime in Washington 2022 Annual Report, Washington
Association of Sheriffs and Police Chiefs, available at https://
www.waspc.org/assets/CJIS/Crime%20in%20Washington%202022-
compressed.pdf. The statistics cited in this prepared statement were
taken from this report.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The Tribe's Police Department (PD) carries out law enforcement and
detention services under a contract with the Bureau of Indian Affairs
(BIA) under the Indian Self-Determination and Education Assistance Act
of 1975. The Tribe's PD has thirteen commissioned officers who are
certified under state law to enforce state and local criminal laws, in
addition to Chehalis tribal criminal laws. The PD currently has two
vacant positions. Next year, the Tribe intends to add two new officer
positions and hopes that it will be able to find suitable candidates to
fill them.
Many Indian tribes have experienced recruiting and training law
enforcement officers only to see them leave for more competitive pay
and benefits in neighboring jurisdictions. The Chehalis Tribe is no
exception, and this problem has been aggravated by the shortage of
officers statewide and the aggressive recruiting efforts of our
neighboring jurisdictions.
There are other factors that the Tribe believes have contributed to
the shortage of police officers, including a negative political climate
in recent years toward law enforcement generally. We are seeing fewer
young people who are interested in pursuing careers in law enforcement.
Historically, the Tribe could rely on officers from neighboring
jurisdictions who retired with pension benefits from their respective
state and local departments to seek employment with the Tribe as tribal
officers. Today, however, we are now seeing these individuals leaving
the law enforcement profession altogether.
The decrease in the number of law enforcement officers in
Washington state over the past five years has unfortunately
corresponded with an increase in the number of assaults against police
officers. In 2018, there were 1,676 reported assaults on law
enforcement officers in the state. In 2022, there were 2,375 reported
assaults against police officers, which represented a 20 percent
increase over 2021. These statistics highlight the obvious: law
enforcement is a critical, yet dangerous, profession in any community.
While the Tribe pays salaries commensurate with our neighbors, it
is not able to provide the same retirement benefits that our
neighboring jurisdictions can provide. State governments and
municipalities can fund pension and more generous retirement benefits
by collecting various types of real estate, income, and sales and
excise taxes on individuals and businesses. Indian tribes, on the other
hand, have a very limited ability to collect taxes--particularly from
non-Indian businesses--because of the so-called ``dual taxation''
problem where federal courts have generally allowed state and local
governments to impose and collect taxes on non-Indians in Indian
country, even where a tribal tax applies. For tribes to impose tribal
taxes under these circumstances means that non-Indian businesses will
simply not do business on tribal lands because of the dual system of
taxation.
The Tribe fully supports the Parity for Tribal Law Enforcement Act
(H.R. 4524), a bipartisan bill introduced by Congressman Dan Newhouse
that would allow tribal law enforcement officers to begin accruing the
same retirement, injury, and death benefits that federal law
enforcement officers currently enjoy. The Tribe has worked closely with
the Department of the Interior on this bill and is confident that the
bill will have a minimal impact on the federal budget. If enacted, H.R.
4524 will provide Indian tribes nationwide with a critical tool in
addressing their law enforcement recruitment and retention challenges.
The Tribe encourages the Committee to move this bill quickly.

II. FENTANYL AND ENFORCEMENT GAPS IN STATE LAW HAVE PUT AN INCREASED
BURDEN ON TRIBAL LAW ENFORCEMENT IN WASHINGTON STATE

In 2021, the Washington Supreme Court struck down Washington
state's primary drug possession law as unconstitutional in a case
called State v. Blake.\2\ The state law that was invalidated by that
decision had made possession of controlled substances a felony.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ State v. Blake, 197 Wash.2d 170, 481 P.3d 521 (2021).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The Washington State Legislature responded to the Blake decision by
enacting a law that made drug possession, including hard drugs like
fentanyl, a misdemeanor with a requirement that offenders be diverted
to treatment in lieu of arrest for at least the first two arrests. The
Legislature's response meant that, for practical purposes, law
enforcement could not arrest individuals for possessing or using
fentanyl or other hard drugs because the law enforcement agencies had
no effective way of tracking whether a perpetrator had been offered
services the requisite two times before an arrest was allowed.
This year, the Washington State Legislature amended the law again
to remove the mandatory diversion requirements, but possession and
public use of fentanyl or other hard drugs are still only misdemeanors.
Further, the new law ``encourages'' law enforcement officers to divert
offenders for treatment in lieu of jailing them. The new law went into
effect this past summer and widespread confusion still exists among law
enforcement in the state about what to do with drug possession
offenders.
The state of Washington's evolving approach to drug possession has
caused a ripple effect for tribal police departments, including the
Tribe. Most arrests that the Tribe's officers make involve fentanyl
possession. Fentanyl usage has surpassed heroin and methamphetamine
usage on the Chehalis Reservation and in southwest Washington.
While the Tribe's neighboring jurisdictions are unable to arrest
for drug possession crimes due to lax state laws, the U.S. Attorney's
Office has other challenges. Federal law enforcement priorities vary
with administrations and the current federal prosecution priorities for
our U.S. Attorney's Office are human trafficking, sex crimes, and
financial crimes. For drug cases in Indian country, federal prosecutors
in our area want to see airtight cases with large amounts of drugs.
Those cases represent just a small fraction of the fentanyl cases in
our area, which renders the federal law enforcement response
essentially a non-factor for the Tribe's purposes. Given the realities
of state and federal law enforcement in our area, Chehalis and other
tribes are often in the difficult position of having to fend for
ourselves.
Indian tribes generally lack jurisdiction to prosecute non-Indians
for violations of tribal law, including offenses related to drug
possession and distribution. In 2013, Congress authorized Indian tribes
to prosecute non-Indians for certain domestic violence offenses in
Indian country and expanded that authority for related offenses when it
reauthorized the Violence Against Women Act in 2022. Congress should
consider providing similar authority for Indian tribes to arrest and
prosecute non-Indians for possession and distribution of fentanyl and
other hard drugs. Given the legal and political landscape in the state
of Washington, this type of authority might be the only effective
enforcement mechanism to get fentanyl-related perpetrators off the
streets for tribes in our area.
The Tribe is mindful that law enforcement is only part of the
solution to the fentanyl problem. On December 14, 2023, the Tribe will
host the grand opening of its Hope and Healing Clinic, a facility that
will provide inpatient and outpatient treatment for substance abuse,
including opioids. The Clinic will provide medication-assisted
treatment and behavioral health therapy and will be the only facility
of its kind in the surrounding area. For state and local governments,
siting these types of facilities has proven difficult because of
opposition from residents, neighbors, and citizen groups. Tribes, on
the other hand, can expedite construction on tribal lands using tribal
zoning laws and regulations, which is what the Tribe did.
The Tribe also has a 38-foot mobile clinic that will be used to
provide treatment at remote locations, as well as to transport patients
to and from the Hope and Healing Clinic. The Tribe intends for the Hope
and Healing Clinic to fill a critical void in our area by providing
treatment options not only for the Tribe, but our non-Indian neighbors
as well. Moving forward, the Tribe urges the Committee to ensure that
Indian tribes are included in larger federal initiatives and
legislation that provide resources to governments to arrest and
prosecute fentanyl-related offenders and to provide treatment options.
I thank the Committee for allowing me to provide testimony today
and look forward to answering any questions.

______

Questions Submitted for the Record to the Hon. Dustin Klatush,
Chairman, Confederated Tribes of the Chehalis Reservation

The Honorable Dustin Klatush did not submit responses to the Committee
by the appropriate deadline for inclusion in the printed record.

Questions Submitted by Representative Westerman

Question 1. In your written testimony you mentioned the challenge
to recruit and retain qualified law enforcement officers even with the
Tribe's ability to provide equivalent salaries as neighboring
jurisdictions.

1a) Can you provide the Committee with statistics and/or anecdotes
that illustrate this issue?

1b) Are there law enforcement personnel that have informed you they
would continue to work for the Tribe, but for the difference in
benefits between the law enforcement agencies?

Question 2. You highlighted in your testimony that Washington State
has the lowest number of police officers per capita of any state in the
United States.

2a) How has the overall shortage impacted the Tribe's ability to
recruit and retain tribal officers?

2b) Do you believe that an overall opposition or antagonism towards
law enforcement and police in general has contributed to this shortage?

Question 3. In your testimony you mentioned the common situation of
your Public Safety Department training new officers only to leave for
other law enforcement agencies.

3a) What has the financial cost been for the Tribe of this
revolving door of training officers only to have them leave?

Question 4. Please describe the factors that led the Tribe to open
a treatment facility to provide addiction and behavioral health
services. How will the opening of the treatment facility contribute to
a long-term strategy to address drug use in tribal communities?

Question 5. Can you provide further information on the complex
jurisdiction issues the Tribe faces when working with local and state
officials and agencies in the realm of narcotic related offenses?

Question 6. How has your tribe supplemented resources and funding
that BIA provides for public justice services in your communities? And
are there other funds or resources you have leveraged in your
communities?

Question 7. What actions at a tribal, state, local, or federal
level do you think can increase cooperation between law enforcement
agencies? And what is your tribe doing to increase that capacity for
your own tribal officers?

______

Ms. Hageman. Thank you for your testimony.
The Chair now recognizes the Honorable Lloyd Goggles for 5
minutes.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. LLOYD GOGGLES, CHAIRMAN, ARAPAHO BUSINESS
COUNCIL, NORTH ARAPAHO TRIBE, ETHETE, WYOMING

Mr. Goggles. Chairman Hageman, Ranking Member Leger
Fernandez, members of the Subcommittee, thank you for inviting
me to speak on this important issue of public safety. To inform
you, I do have a speech impediment, so please bear with me.
My name is Lloyd Goggles. I am an enrolled member of the
Northern Arapaho Tribe. I was elected Chairman of the Business
Council in 2022. I have approximately 15 years of experience in
law enforcement. I am a former United States Marine, a Wyoming
National Guardsman, tribal police officer, municipal police
officer, and tribal judge.
Accordingly, I have been exposed to law enforcement and
public safety issues both inside and outside of the Tribe.
Tribal law enforcement grapples with numerous obstacles but I
believe a bright future is emerging. Today, I will talk about
these challenges and opportunities for improvement in critical
areas, including recruitment and retention of key personnel,
jurisdiction, and other community issues.
The Northern Arapaho and Eastern Shoshone Tribes are
separate, sovereign, federally recognized tribes that occupy
the same reservation. With no independent tribal police force,
the tribes rely heavily on the efforts of the Bureau of Indian
Affairs, BIA. BIA officers are helpful in patrolling and
ensuring the public's safety, but they have their limits.
To truly improve the public safety, the Tribe needs a
strong tribal law enforcement agency to work with BIA and other
law enforcement agencies. We do have three tribal fishing and
game wardens, but they are tasked with the patrolling of the
240 lakes, 1,100 miles of stream, and a total 2.2 million acres
of tribal land. Realistically, a minimum of 12 officers are
needed. Creating a tribal law enforcement agency and providing
minimal staffing levels for officers at the Fish and Game
Department requires innovative Federal funding solutions.
Regarding jurisdiction, some of the areas on the
reservation have a checkerboard jurisdiction which creates
logistical inefficiencies and confusion. Sometimes officers are
simply unsure of who to call. Consequently, the law goes
unenforced. The better utilization of special law enforcement
commission cards and cross-deputization can be a solution here.
Confusion and lack of enforcement often results in non-members
on the reservation who believe they do not need to follow
tribal laws.
This results in higher numbers of violations, everything
from simple speeding to far more sinister crimes. For example,
we have caught Federal agents poaching and people sneaking over
to fish without a permit. The fines for such violations outside
of tribal land would be severe but there is a view that you can
get away with this behavior on tribal land.
But this is a direct challenge to our sovereignty. We must
have a system that respects both the rights of the people and
the legitimacy of tribal law. Good public safety requires law
enforcement to engage actively with the communities. Their
increased presence during non-emergency times will build trust
and create strong relationships. As of now, we see BIA officers
only when their presence is required or requested.
Lastly, I would be remiss if I did not mention economic
conditions which can aggravate social pressures, including
crime, and any solution to public safety requires addressing
the harsh economic conditions on the reservation. Public safety
on Native American land is a shared responsibility that
transcends borders, cultures and backgrounds, logistical
issues, and cultural differences. They present challenges for
us.
But the future holds promise. Progress requires community
engagement, cultural awareness, and collaboration. At an early
age, the elders in my community inspired me to serve. Since
then, I have always been a public servant. I am inspired to see
that light in the next generation in my son's eyes and the eyes
of other young people like him.
Thank you and I look forward to your questions.

[The prepared statement of Mr. Goggles follows:]
Prepared Statement of Lloyd Goggles, Chairman of the Northern Arapaho
Business Council

I. Introduction

Chairwoman Hageman, Ranking Member Leger Fernandez, members of the
Subcommittee, thank you for inviting me to speak on behalf of the
Northern Arapaho Tribe about this very important issue.
My name is Lloyd Goggles. I am an enrolled member of the Northern
Arapaho Tribe from the Wind River Reservation. I was elected Chairman
of the Business Council in 2022.
I have approximately 15 years of experience in law enforcement. I
am a former United States Marine, a Wyoming National Guardsman, Tribal
police officer, municipal police officer, and a Tribal judge.
Accordingly, I have been exposed to law enforcement and public safety
issues both inside and outside of the Tribe.
The Wind River Reservation is shared between the Northern Arapaho
and Eastern Shoshone people. We have approximately 10,600 enrolled
Northern Arapaho members, most who live on the reservation.
Additionally, there are also about 3,500 enrolled Shoshone people. In
addition to the members that occupy the land, we also have non-members
who live on the Wind River Reservation.
As Chairman of the Business Council, I view public safety as
paramount to the wellness of our people.
There is no doubt that Tribal law enforcement grapples with
numerous obstacles, from limited resources to jurisdictional issues,
that directly impact public safety. We have issues with funding, with
drugs, with disgruntled residents, and with non-members who do not
respect Tribal laws and the Tribe's jurisdiction. Many of these issues
are exacerbated by a lack of cultural knowledge by non-members.
And yet, even with these hurdles, I believe a bright future is
emerging and that there are several opportunities for improvement.
Moving forward, we should prioritize law enforcement's community
engagement, cultural awareness, and increased collaboration between
agencies at the federal, state, municipal, and tribal levels.
And that is what I will talk about today--both the challenges and
the opportunities for improvement in critical areas relating to public
safety, including (1) recruitment and retention, (2) jurisdiction, and
(3) other community issues.

II. Recruitment and Retention
a. Law Enforcement

Neither the Northern Arapaho Tribe nor the Wind River Reservation
have an independent Tribal police force. Instead, we rely heavily on
the coordinated efforts of the Bureau of Indian Affairs (BIA) Wind
River Agency and their police force. The BIA has approximately 32
officers dedicated to the region and function as our primary law
enforcement agency.
BIA officers are helpful in patrolling and ensuring the public's
safety, but they have their limits. To truly encourage improvements to
public safety, the Tribe needs a strong Tribal law enforcement agency
to work with BIA and other law enforcement departments.
We do have the Tribal Fish and Game Department, which is a Tribal
government entity. However, the Fish and Game force is severely
understaffed. There are only three officers in the department. These
individuals are responsible for patrolling and monitoring roughly 2.2
million acres of reservation land. To patrol adequately, the Fish and
Game force needs at least 12 officers.
This recruitment effort requires increased funding, so that we can
hire and train officers. However, funding has been a major hurdle for
the Tribe in the past. Formerly, we had the Tribal Highway Safety
patrol and a Drug Liaison position, but both have been eliminated due
to a lack of funding. Those positions were important and helped fill
the gaps left by BIA. The loss of these positions means we are unable
cover integral components of regular law enforcement.
b. Tribal Judges and Prosecutors

The judicial and legal systems also play a vital role in public
safety by ensuring the fair and equitable administration of justice.
Every day, our Tribal judges make critical decisions on cases involving
criminal offenses that impact the lives of our residents. So, it is
necessary that we have enough trained judges to carry out these duties.
Likewise, quality prosecutors are needed to ensure public safety--they
play an important role in ensuring fair outcomes, and tribal
prosecutors are also uniquely situated in understanding both the law of
the Tribe as well as the Tribe's tradition and customs.
Right now, we have four tribal judges: a chief judge and three
associate judges. We have one tribal prosecutor. In a recent BIA
report, all of the judges were deemed to be unqualified. Likewise, our
prosecutor is talented and does the best she can, but needs more
structural support to succeed.
Much of the problem here stems from simple economics. Tribal judges
make far less than they would in other markets. They receive no
retirement or health benefits. Their advanced degrees are highly sought
after, and the Tribe is unable to meet their economic needs. The Tribe
needs to be able to compete economically to attract, train, and retain
that talent.

III. Jurisdictional Challenges

Generally, we have a good working relationship with all law
enforcement entities, whether it be federal, state, county, or
municipal government bodies. But there are areas where we can increase
collaboration and simplify jurisdictional processes in a way that
provides for more efficient use of resources.
Some of the areas on the reservation have ``checkerboard''
jurisdiction, which present challenges by way of logistical
inefficiencies and confusion.
Sometimes officers are simply unsure who to call. This can
frustrate officers, who often do not have the time or capacity to
figure out jurisdictional confusions. Consequently, sometimes the law
goes unenforced. To prevent this, BIA officers should continue to work
closely with tribal law enforcement, tribal leaders, and other relevant
agencies to coordinate efforts. Some options to improve this issue
include better utilization of Special Law Enforcement Commission cards
and cross deputization.
The confusion and lack of enforcement results in some non-members
on the reservation having a lack of respect for the rule of law. These
non-members believe they do not need to follow the laws set by our
Tribal government bodies. This results in higher numbers of
violations--everything from simple speeding to far more sinister crimes
within our community.
This is a direct challenge to our sovereignty as a Tribe that we
cannot tolerate. We must have a system that respects both the rights of
the people, whether members or non-members, as well as the legitimacy
of law at all levels of government, including the Tribe.

IV. Community Solutions

In addition to improvements with recruitment and jurisdiction,
there are also opportunities for progress in community policing and
providing more economic opportunities to residents.
Public safety requires law enforcement to interact with and
understand the people being served. BIA officers should engage actively
with tribal communities to build trust and create strong relationships.
Their increased presence in the community during non-emergency times
will improve circumstances for everyone during times of need. As of
now, we see BIA officers only when their presence is requested. This
was not always the case. I remember a time when the presence of BIA
officers was more visible and regular; we should return to that model.
I also suggest that all BIA personnel receive more training on the
specific cultural, historical, and social aspects of the tribes they
serve. Understanding these aspects will help officers work more
effectively and engender greater trust and understanding by both sides.
Lastly, I must also mention economic conditions on the reservation,
something I work on every day to help address. Poor economic conditions
can aggravate social pressures; this includes crime. Sadly, some tribal
members suffer under poor economic conditions, exacerbated by a lack of
opportunity. Distressed people sometimes act in a distressed manner.
The harder we work to address economic conditions on the reservation
and among tribal members generally, the fewer problems we will face,
socially and criminally. To accomplish this, we must make sure that
federal government institutions are fulfilling their responsibilities
and economic opportunities exist to help uplift tribal members.

V. Conclusion

Public safety on Native American land is a shared responsibility
that transcends borders, cultures, and backgrounds. We must work
together to ensure a safer and more just community for everyone.
Throughout my life and career, I have viewed this problem from many
angles. At an early age, the elders from my community inspired me to
serve. Since then, I have always been a public servant and aspired to
have a good rapport with the people I served. I remember a time when
there was a more collaborative working relationships between various
law enforcement agencies, when there was more enthusiasm about serving
the communities, and when law enforcement was viewed in a more positive
light.
Logistical issues and cultural differences do present challenges
for us. But the future still holds promise, and we can make progress
towards a safer and more prosperous future so long as we continue to
focus on community engagement, cultural awareness, and collaboration
between all parties.
Thank you. I look forward to answering your questions and working
with you in the future.

______

Questions Submitted for the Record to the Hon. Lloyd Goggles, Chairman,
Arapaho Business Council, Northern Arapaho Tribe
Questions Submitted by Representative Westerman
Question 1. At the hearing you were able to explain further about
how fentanyl and other illicit narcotics have had a detrimental impact
at Wind River Reservation.

1a) Please provide any further information that you think the
Committee should know about this issue for the reservation.

Answer. The pervasive presence of fentanyl remains a significant
concern within the reservation. The effects are detrimental.
Tragically, lives have been lost and severe disruption within families
has been experienced due to fentanyl and other substances. The
escalating prevalence not only further restricts our already
constrained resources for public safety and public health, but also
demoralizes our people. Thus, it is imperative that we remain committed
to limiting and ultimately eliminating the presence of illegal fentanyl
on the reservation. The Drug Liaison position would help with this
issue.

1b) If the tribe(s) were able to support a Drug Liaison position,
how would that impact the ongoing illicit drug crisis on the Wind River
Reservation?

Answer. Establishing a Drug Liaison position would aid tribal law
enforcement in prioritizing the monitoring and enforcing of drug
control laws within our community. Presently, the absence of dedicated
personnel focused on drug control hinders our visibility into these
critical issues.
For instance, consider the frequent occurrence of non-drug
violations on the reservation, such as trespass. Addressing these
incidents demands significant resources and leads to the diversion of
focus and funding away from drug-related law enforcement efforts. This
designated position would help change the current dynamic and
facilitate the proactive implementation of a systematic approach for
gathering intelligence and investigating both known and potential drug-
related offenses.
Moreover, the appointment of a liaison officer would enhance the
relationship with the Bureau of Indian Affairs (BIA) and other law
enforcement agencies. The Drug Liaison could function as a central
point of contact for drug-related infractions, providing valuable
insights into the cultural and communal aspects intertwined with drug
control issues. This proactive engagement empowers the tribe to assume
a leading role in overseeing and upholding drug laws within the
reservation, an assertion of greater sovereignty.
While reinstating the Drug Liaison position would be a step in the
right direction, it must also be noted that there would still be more
to do. Ultimately, drug enforcement is a communal effort. Tackling
illicit drug issues requires strong and organized law enforcement,
broadly. No one position will be the solution.

Question 2. Your testimony discussed community solutions that
included a return to BIA officers being more regular and visible on the
reservation and establishing further training for BIA personnel on the
culture and history of the tribes they serve.

2a) What impact would an increased, and visible police force have
on the Wind River Reservation and what would that practically look like
in day-to-day actions on the reservation?

Answer. Based on the most recent data available to us, BIA
currently has 22 officers stationed to the Wind River Reservation. We
also understand the agency is looking to fill four more positions, a
total of 26 officers. However, the existing approach concerning the
territorial assignments of BIA officers have led to notable challenges.
First, the deployment of 22 officers falls short in effectively
monitoring our expansive community. Tasked with surveilling a
reservation spanning across 2.2 million acres, or 3,532 square miles,
BIA officers struggle tremendously with triaging their forces to
address the most urgent matters. More personnel are imperative to meet
the needs of our community.
Second, even when fully staffed, the BIA often reassigns officers
to other areas once capacity is met in our region. This is due to the
agency-wide shortage. Consequently, officers frequently spend only
limited time here before being transferred elsewhere. This practice
significantly complicates the rapport between BIA officers and our
community. The transient nature of officer tenure inhibits the
establishment of substantial, enduring relationships and a deep
understanding of the community's needs.
An increase in officers, enough officers to be present in the
community more continuously, would change the current dynamic. This
change means more and improved long-standing relationships with Tribal
law enforcement, more and improved long-standing relationships with the
Tribal governments, increased casual interactions with the Northern
Arapaho people, officer presence in schools, shops, and on street
corners. The change also means community members having day-to-day
interactions with BIA, rather than only interacting with them when
there is an emergency or a problem. This approach encourages harmony
and creates familiarity.

2b) How can the tribe assist the Bureau of Indian Affairs in
providing increased cultural training regimen for officers?

Answer. This is a land of mixed cultures, and it is imperative that
we foster mutual understanding. The Northern Arapaho people, of course,
possess deep expertise in our cultural heritage, and welcome all that
want to learn and understand more. We stand ready to contribute by
offering valuable cultural sensitivity training sessions.
Indeed, our tribe has supported Northern Arapaho participation in
cultural training before. However, while we have previously offered to
conduct training, some former BIA chiefs have declined our offer. This
training ought to be mandatory, rather than optional. Officers and
agencies having adequate familiarity with the communities they serve is
too important to be discretionary.
To that end, I suggest a Tribal component of Wind River Cares.
Previously, Wind River Cares was slated to conduct a cultural
competency training for local police jurisdictions. Regrettably, this
training did not come to fruition.
The Wind River Cares training, and others like it, could help
federal, state, and local law enforcement in the following ways: (1) by
creating shared understanding of the cultural nuances, traditions, and
customs of the community; (2) participating in the training led by
tribal members helps build trust and familiarity from the very
beginning of service; (3) it potentially increases the effectiveness of
communication because of the shared understanding and deliberate
relationship building; and (4) it will help reduce any biases,
stereotypes, and preconceived notions about the tribe.

Question 3. How has your tribe supplemented resources and funding
that BIA provides for public justice services in your communities? And
are there other funds or resources you've leveraged in your
communities?

Answer. BIA plays a pivotal role in delivering direct services
through officer support within our tribal community. Accordingly, any
tribal supplement related to public safety or public justice provided
by the Northern Arapaho is typically in the form of private security
arrangements facilitated by the tribe itself. For instance, the tribe
regularly engages private security services to ensure enhanced safety
and orderliness during significant public gatherings such as Tribal
Council assemblies.
Moreover, the tribe regularly employs private security personnel to
oversee and safeguard large-scale public cultural events, such as the
revered Sun Dance ceremony. The utilization of private security
personnel during these occasions serves multiple purposes, including
crowd management, ensuring the sanctity and security of cultural
practices, and upholding the overall safety and well-being of
attendees.

Question 4. What actions at a tribal, state, local, or federal
level do you think can increase cooperation between law enforcement
agencies? And what is your tribe doing to increase that capacity for
the BIA officers for your reservation?

Answer. There are several actions that can be taken to increase
cooperation between law enforcement agencies. For instance, many of the
above-mentioned suggestions, including more BIA officers deployed to
the Wind River Reservation, a more robust tribal police force presence,
and better cultural understanding between officers and tribes, would
all encourage increased cooperation between agencies. Additionally,
there are two other measures that would be of benefit and encourage
cooperation: (1) seamless cross deputization for tribal law enforcement
officers and (2) well defined exterior boundaries of the reservation.
As the subcommittee is aware, cross deputization for tribal law
enforcement necessitates cooperation between agencies and empowers
tribal law enforcement departments. It can provide for better
communication and collaboration by hosting joint trainings, sharing
resources, and coordinating responses to criminal activities or
emergencies. The state legislature has previously put forward bills to
address cross-deputization, and the Northern Arapaho Tribe supports
these bills. However, we have a shared reservation and need the support
of our tribal counterparts.
Additionally, defining exterior boundaries of the reservation also
helps with coordination and collaboration. Well defined demarcation of
the reservation's boundaries helps law enforcement departments
understand their respective jurisdictions. This reduces confusion, in
turn encouraging better communication and cooperation.

______

Ms. Hageman. Thank you.
The Chair now recognizes Mr. Jonodev Chaudhuri for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF JONODEV CHAUDHURI, AMBASSADOR,
MUSCOGEE CREEK NATION, OKMULGEE, OKLAHOMA

Mr. Chaudhuri. Hello. [Speaking Native language], Madam
Chairman, Ranking Member, and members of the Subcommittee.
[Speaking Native language] for the opportunity to testify.
My name is Jonodev Osceola Chaudhuri, and I am proud to
serve as Ambassador of the Muscogee Creek Nation, the fourth
largest tribe in the United States. As one of the first Tribal
Nations to implement the jurisdiction restored through the
bipartisan 2013 Violence Against Women Act Reauthorization, the
issue of public safety is critical to my Nation. We thank this
Subcommittee for its leadership in the most recent
reauthorization of VAWA in 2022.
Thanks to VAWA 2022, we can prosecute anyone who assaults
tribal law enforcement or abuses a child. No sovereign has a
more significant interest in protecting Muscogee children than
our Muscogee Nation, and the restoration of this inherent
authority through VAWA has already enabled our law enforcement,
our Attorney General, and our entire Nation to better protect
our children.
In 2020, the Supreme Court affirmed the continued existence
of our reservation borders. From 2020 to 2022, the Muscogee
Nation has more than doubled our Lighthorse Police budget. We
hired 20 new police officers, 10 investigators, 2 sexual
offender registration officers, and 6 dispatchers. We also have
been working hard to collaborate with our Federal and state
partners to ensure the safety and protection of all who live
within our borders, Indian and non-Indian alike.
The Nation presently has 64 cross-deputization agreements
in place, including with the city of Tulsa. From July 2020 to
April 2022, the Nation referred approximately 4,162 criminal
matters to non-Indian governments. And, likewise, we have
received 4,136 referrals from non-Indian governments. By all
accounts, the court's decision in McGirt has resulted in
increased safety for those who live, work, or visit the
Muscogee Reservation.
But as the Subcommittee has recognized, our tribal law
officers, who put their lives on the line to secure this
safety, are not afforded the same compensation, benefits, and/
or protections that their Federal colleagues receive. This has
made it all the more challenging to recruit and retain officers
to work for our Lighthorse law enforcement.
The legislation being proposed today, if passed into law,
would take critical steps necessary to ensure better parity
between the Federal officers and tribal officers. For instance,
as others have pointed out, even when tribes use Federal 638
dollars to fund their own tribal law enforcement, tribal law
officers are not eligible for the same retirement benefits as
their Federal counterparts.
Maintaining strong, reliable law enforcement agencies on
tribal lands is critical to ensuring public safety throughout
Indian Country. This is especially true as we attempt to
address the crisis of murdered and missing Indigenous women and
girls. All too often when our women and girls are murdered or
go missing, no one investigates.
The reason our women and children are more likely to be
murdered, assaulted, and victimized than any other population
in the United States is because the inherent right of our own
governments to protect our own citizens living within our
borders has been artificially limited and restrained by the
Supreme Court's 1978 decision, Oliphant v. Suquamish Tribes.
Recently, my Nation along with many other Nations and
national tribal organizations, such as the National Indigenous
Women's Resource Center and others, put forward a legislative
proposal to address the public safety crisis in Indian Country.
This proposal was passed through a resolution by the National
Congress of the American Indians in November 2022. I have
attached NCAI Resolution 22-43 to my written testimony
submitted herein.
Briefly, the proposal focuses on fully restoring the
jurisdiction of Tribal Nations to protect anyone and everyone
within our borders. I should emphasize that restoration is
voluntary, and it is up to any given Tribal Nation the extent
to which they want to adopt it.
We hear time and time again that one of the most
demoralizing aspects of serving as a tribal law enforcement
officer is witnessing horrific, violent crimes committed
against your family and community and knowing that you cannot
arrest, investigate, or prosecute the person harming those who
are you are supposed to protect because the right to do that
has been taken away.
Our law officers have the ability, experience, dedication,
and integrity necessary to keep our communities safe. Today, in
2023, there is no reason to treat them as inferior or less
adequate when compared to state or Federal law enforcement
officers. Today's proposed legislation takes an important step
in the right direction. But truly we will not have public
safety in Indian Country until our right to protect ourselves
is fully restored.
We find ourselves at a historic crossroad. On one hand, the
Supreme Court has recently affirmed Congress' exclusive
authority over Indian affairs, including issues related to
public safety. At the same time, there are members of the court
who have recently signaled they would be happy to subjugate
tribal sovereignty and our Nation's placement in the United
States Constitution to new judicially-crafted doctrines. We
need Congress to remain active and engaged in administering its
authority over Indian affairs.
Thank you again for the opportunity to speak with you
today.
[Speaking Native language.]

[The prepared statement of Mr. Chaudhuri follows:]
Prepared Statement of Jonodev Chaudhuri, Ambassador for the Muscogee
(Creek) Nation

Mr. Chairman and members of the subcommittee, thank you for the
opportunity to testify. My name is Jonodev Osceola Chaudhuri, and I am
proud to serve as Ambassador of the Muscogee (Creek) Nation, the fourth
largest tribe in the United States.
The issue of public safety is critical to my Nation. At Muscogee
Nation, we are aware that Native women and children are more likely to
be victimized by violent crimes than any other population in the United
States, and we are committed to addressing this crisis of violence.
As one of the first tribal nations to implement the jurisdiction
restored through the bi-partisan 2013 Violence Against Women Act re-
authorization, we have dedicated countless resources to prosecuting
crimes committed against our women and children within our reservation
borders. We thank this subcommittee for its leadership in the more
recent re-authorization of VAWA in 2022, when Congress restored tribal
criminal jurisdiction over several categories of non-Indian crimes,
including child abuse and assault on tribal law enforcement. Thanks to
the leadership of this subcommittee, and the bi-partisan efforts in
both the House and the Senate, our Nation can now prosecute anyone,
Indian or non-Indian, who assaults law enforcement personnel when they
respond to a call for help. Thanks to VAWA 2022, we can also prosecute
anyone who abuses a child.
No sovereign has a more significant interest in protecting Muscogee
children than our Muscogee Nation, and the restoration of this inherent
authority through VAWA has already enabled our law enforcement, our
Attorney General, and our entire Nation to better protect our children.
Our children are sacred. They are our future. And it is our inherent
right to protect them.
In 2020, the Supreme Court affirmed the continued existence of our
reservation borders. This ruling not only affirmed our inherent
sovereign authority over our reservation lands, it also confirmed that
Oklahoma had been illegally exercising jurisdiction it never had. One
result of the Court's decision in McGirt was that our Nation had to
increase the amount of resources we dedicate to public safety. And we
have.
From 2020 to 2022, the Muscogee Nation more than doubled our
Lighthorse police budget. We hired twenty new police officers, ten
investigators, two Sexual Offender Registration officers, and six
dispatchers.
We also have been working hard to collaborate with our federal and
state partners to ensure the safety and protection of all who live
within our borders, Indian and non-Indian alike. The Nation presently
has 64 cross-deputization agreements in place, including with the City
of Tulsa. From July 2020 to April 2022, the Nation referred
approximately 4,162 criminal matters to non-Indian governments, and has
received 4,136 referrals from non-Indian governments.
By all accounts, the Court's decision in McGirt has resulted in
increased safety for those who live, work, or visit the Muscogee
Reservation. But, as this Subcommittee has recognized, our tribal law
officers--who put their lives on the line to secure this safety--are
not afforded the same compensation, benefits, and/or protections that
their federal colleagues receive. This has made it all the more
challenging to recruit and retain officers to work for our Lighthorse
law enforcement.
The legislation being proposed today, if passed into law, would
take critical steps necessary to ensure better parity between the
federal officers and tribal officers who have taken on the important
duty of protecting the lives of all who live and work within the
borders of tribal communities and throughout Indian country lands. For
instance, as others have pointed out, even when tribes use federal 638
dollars to fund their own tribal law enforcement, tribal law officers
are not eligible for the same retirement benefits as their federal
counterparts.
Maintaining strong, reliable, law enforcement agencies on tribal
lands is critical to ensuring public safety throughout Indian country.
This is especially true as we attempt to address the crisis of Murdered
and Missing Indigenous Women and Girls. All too often, when our women
and girls are murdered or go missing, no one investigates.
This failure to investigate, however, is the consequence of a
federal failure that extends far beyond failure to recruit, train, or
retain tribal law officers. The reason our women and children are more
likely to be murdered, assaulted, and victimized than any other
population in the United States is because the inherent right of our
own governments to protect our citizens living within our borders has
been artificially limited and restrained by the Supreme Court's 1978
decision in Oliphant v. Suquamish Indian Tribe.
Recently, my Nation, along with many other nations and national
tribal organizations such as the National Indigenous Women's Resource
Center and others have put forward a legislative proposal to address
the public safety crisis in Indian country. This proposal was passed
through a resolution by the National Congress of the American Indians
in November 2022. I have attached Resolution SAC-022-043 to my written
testimony submitted herein. Briefly, the proposal focuses on fully
restoring the jurisdiction of tribal nations to protect anyone and
everyone within our borders.
One of the most demoralizing aspects of serving as a tribal law
officer is witnessing horrific, violent crimes committed against your
family and community and knowing that you cannot arrest, investigate,
or prosecute the person harming those you are supposed to protect
because the right to do that has been taken away. Our law officers have
the ability, experience, dedication and integrity necessary to keep our
communities safe. Today, in 2023, there is no reason to treat them as
inferior or less adequate when compared to state or federal law
officers. Today's proposed legislation takes an important step in the
right direction. But truly, we will not have public safety in Indian
country until our right to protect ourselves is fully restored.
Truly, we find ourselves at a historic crossroads. On one hand, the
Supreme Court has recently affirmed Congress's exclusive authority over
Indian affairs, including issues related to public safety. At the same
time, there are members of the Court who have recently signaled they
would be happy to subjugate tribal sovereignty and our Nations' role in
shaping and placement in the United States Constitution to newfound,
unfounded judicially crafted doctrines. We need Congress to remain
active and engaged in administering its authority over Indian affairs.
Thank you again for the opportunity to be with you today.

______

Ms. Hageman. Thank you.
And the Chair now recognizes Mr. Chris Sutter for 5
minutes.

STATEMENT OF CHRIS SUTTER, POLICE CHIEF, TULALIP
TRIBES, TULALIP, WASHINGTON

Mr. Sutter. Good afternoon, Chairwoman Hageman, Ranking
Member Fernandez, and members of the Committee. My name is
Chris Sutter, Chief of Police for the Tulalip Tribes. On behalf
of Tulalip Chairwoman Teri Gobin, we thank you for this
opportunity to testify on public safety in Indian Country.
The Tulalip Indian Reservation is 22,000 acres located just
35 miles north of Seattle. Three miles of the Interstate 5
corridor was built within the Reservation's eastern border.
This, in addition to 10,000 non-Indian residents who live on
the reservation, due to the history of allotments, has created
the perfect storm for serious felony crimes on our tribal
lands.
The Tulalip police department is a full-service police
agency providing 24/7 service to our tribal community, the non-
Indian community, and the thousands of visitors who enter the
Tulalip Reservation each day. Our officers enforce tribal laws,
state laws, and refer some of our most serious cases to the
U.S. Attorney for Federal prosecution. We have 59 officer
positions that we struggle to fulfill and maintain. Our police
officers hold Washington State peace officer certifications,
giving them the authority to arrest and cite non-Indians under
state law directly into state courts for prosecution.
The Tulalip Tribes has been a leader in many areas relating
to public safety and law enforcement in Indian County. And
while we continue to have many successes, the disparities as a
sovereign is putting more strain than ever on our ability to
protect and serve.
We struggle with officer retention. In recent years, we
have lost approximately 50 percent of our officer workforce due
to recruitment by local law enforcement agencies. We invest
almost a year with our new hires between pre-academy training,
Federal law enforcement training, field training, and finally,
a 2-week Washington State equivalency academy to become state
certified. With this extensive training and certification, our
officers become highly sought after and recruited by outside
agencies with attractive salary and retirement benefits.
H.R. 4524, the Parity for Tribal Law Enforcement Act,
currently pending in Congress, authorizes tribal law
enforcement officers to opt into the Federal officer pension
and retirement benefits plan, extending tribal officers those
same benefits that Federal officers receive. We need this
legislation to recruit and retain tribal officers.
We also continue to face jurisdictional challenges. Tribal
court search warrants are often denied or ignored because
Federal law does not recognize tribal courts as a court of
competent jurisdiction for purposes of requiring disclosure
under the Electronic Stored Communications Act from service
providers, such as Facebook. A Federal fix is needed to help us
apprehend violent offenders.
We also face extreme external pressures from drug
trafficking organizations. The opioid fentanyl epidemic has not
spared Indian Country. Tulalip has had over 60 tribal member
deaths attributed to fentanyl overdoses since 2017. Our
leadership has recently declared an opioid state of emergency.
In search for solutions, Tulalip recently hosted a national
tribal fentanyl summit that was attended by over 1,200
representatives of federally recognized tribes, Federal and
state agencies, and Members of Congress to discuss and share
strategies to help counter the disproportionate impacts of
fentanyl in our tribal communities.
To help combat this, a Federal fix is needed to expand
tribal special jurisdiction over non-Indians who deliver and
distribute controlled substances such as fentanyl on our
reservations. The U.S. Attorney's Office only accepts a small
fraction of our drug trafficking cases due to their own limited
resources. As chief of police, I feel we have been left to
battle against a wave of illegal narcotics without adequate
support from our Federal partners.
To help address these issues, we asked Congress to support
tribal law enforcement parity efforts such as H.R. 4524,
further extending criminal jurisdiction over non-Indians and
extending full recognition of tribal search warrants.
And in closing, I would like to say criminals who prey upon
the vulnerable know no boundaries. They freely enter tribal
lands, commit serious crimes, and flee the reservation often
escaping justice because of the inequalities in Federal law.
Again, thank you for this opportunity to allow us to
testify today, and I will welcome any questions from the
Committee.

[The prepared statement of Mr. Sutter follows:]
Prepared Statement of Chris Sutter, Chief of Police, Tulalip Tribes
Police Department

Opportunities and Challenges for Improving Public Safety in Tribal
Communities

Good afternoon, Chair Hageman, Ranking Member Fernandez, and
members of the Committee. My name is Chris Sutter, Chief of Police for
the Tulalip Tribes Police Department. On behalf of Tulalip Chairwoman
Teri Gobin, we thank you for this opportunity to testify today on
public safety in Indian country.
The Tulalip Tribes is the successor in interest to the Snohomish,
Snoqualmie, and Skykomish people and allied bands signatory to the
Treaty of Point Elliott of 1855. In the treaty, our ancestors reserved
our inherent rights to sovereignty and self-determination as well as
our inherent rights to fish at usual and accustomed grounds and
stations and to hunt and gather upon all open and unclaimed land. The
United States holds a trust responsibility to protect the Tribe's
rights and interests as reserved in the treaty. The Tulalip membership
continues to exercise these rights today. We are a fishing people.
Fishing sustains us culturally and economically as it has since time
immemorial.
The Tulalip community is located on a 22,000-acre Reservation
bordering the Interstate 5 corridor, just 35 miles north of Seattle.
The Tulalip Tribes membership consist of 5246 members. 40 percent of
the Tulalip Indian reservation is in non-Indian fee status due to the
history of allotments and over 10,000 non-Indian residents live on the
reservation. The geographic location of the Tulalip Indian reservation,
the non-Indian resident count, and the tribal economic development
created by Tulalip drawing thousands of daily visitors has created the
perfect storm for serious felony crimes on the reservation.
The Tulalip Tribal Police Department is a full-service police
agency providing 24/7 service to our tribal and non-Indian tribal
community, in addition to the thousands of visitors that enter the
Tulalip reservation each day. Our officers enforce Tribal Laws, State
Laws, and refer some of our most serious cases to the US Attorney's
Office for Federal Prosecution. We have 59 commissioned law officers
with Washington State Peace Officer certifications--giving our officers
the authority to arrest and cite non-Indians under state law directly
into state courts for prosecution. We have our own Drug Task Force, a
Community Response Team, a Sex Offender Registration Unit, a Victims of
Crime Services Coordinator, and a Dedicated Missing and Murdered
Indigenous Women Task Force, in addition to a Fish and Wildlife
division.
The Tulalip Tribes has been a leader in many areas relating to
public safety and law enforcement in Indian County, and we continue to
have many successes. But the ongoing disparities we face as a sovereign
causes extreme strain on our ability to protect the people in our
community.
Despite the robust nature of the Tulalip Police Department
operations, we struggle with officer retention. In recent years, we
have lost 50 percent of our officer workforce due to recruitment by
state and local law enforcement agencies, putting extreme strain on our
agency.
The Tulalip Police Department competes for the same qualified
candidates other law enforcement agencies in our state. We invest a
significant amount of training, time, and energy into new hires. This
includes pre-academy training, Federal Law Enforcement Training at the
BIA Indian Police Academy, post-academy training with our department, a
four-month field training program, and finally, a two-week Washington
State equivalency academy to become state certified. It takes officers
nearly a full year to complete the training and certifications required
for a new hire to operate as a solo police officer. However, with this
extensive training and certification, our officers become highly sought
after and recruited by outside agencies with attractive salaries and
retirement benefits.
Tulalip is not the only tribal community with this challenge. I
serve on the IACP Indian Country Section Committee, and at a recent
meeting with Tribal Chiefs of Police from across the Country, the
Committee identified recruitment, hiring, and retention of officers as
one our biggest challenges, directly impacting tribes' ability to
address law enforcement needs.
H.R. 8387, the Parity for Tribal Law Enforcement Act, currently
pending in Congress authorizes tribal law enforcement officers to opt
into the federal officer pension and retirement benefits plan,
extending tribal officers those same benefits that federal officers
receive. We need this legislation passed to increase our ability to
retain trained and skilled police officers, which will help us provide
public safety for both tribal and non-Indian persons in our community.
We also continue to face jurisdictional challenges. Tribal court
search warrants are often denied or ignored because federal law does
not recognize tribal courts as a ``court of competent jurisdiction''
for purposes of requiring disclosure under the Electronic Stored
Communications Act. This is especially harmful where tribal court
search warrants are not recognized by off-reservation service providers
such as Facebook, preventing tribal law enforcement from obtaining
digital electronic evidence. A federal fix that recognizes tribal
courts as courts of competent jurisdiction under the Act is needed.
Without this, violent offenders escape apprehension and victims do not
receive justice.
The Opioid Fentanyl Epidemic is also placing extreme external
pressure on our police department and the tribal community. Tulalip has
had over 60 tribal member deaths attributed to Fentanyl overdoses since
2018. Tulalip Tribal Leadership has declared an opioid state of
emergency. In a search for solutions, the Tulalip Tribes recently
hosted a national tribal fentanyl summit. This summit was attended by
over 1,200 representatives of tribes, federal and state agencies, and
members of Congress, where we discussed and shared strategies for
helping Indian Country counter the disproportionate impact caused by
the Fentanyl epidemic.
The fentanyl epidemic highlights the need for H.R. 8387. The
recognition of tribal court warrants under the Electronic
Communications Act for drug trafficking offenses would aid law
enforcement in countering drug dealers who take advantage of the
jurisdictional deficiencies on Indian reservations such as Tulalip.
This epidemic also highlights the need to expand special criminal
jurisdiction to Indian tribes over non-Indians who manufacture or
deliver controlled substances such as Fentanyl within reservation
boundaries. The US Attorney's Office only accepts a small fraction of
our drug trafficking cases. The FBI has told us they have limited
staffing resources for assistance on felony drug trafficking activity
on the Tulalip Reservation. As the Chief of Police, I feel that our
Tribal Police Department has been left to battle against a wave of
illegal narcotics and the Fentanyl crisis without adequate support from
our federal partners. We need more support, legal tools, and funding to
investigate, prosecute and incarcerate the perpetrators of these deadly
criminal narcotics organizations.
We need Congress to support tribal law enforcement reform and
parity for our police officers and tribal courts, further extend
criminal jurisdiction over non-Indians, and increase funding. Criminals
who prey upon the vulnerable know no boundaries. They freely enter
tribal lands, commit serious crimes, and flee the reservation escaping
justice because of the inequalities in federal law.

______

Questions Submitted for the Record to Chris Sutter, Chief of Police,
Tulalip Police Department

Questions Submitted by Representative Westerman

Question 1. Your testimony mentioned that tribal search warrants
are routinely denied or ignored under the Electronic Communications
Act.

1a) Can you provide instances in which your office needed to issue
subpoenas to Facebook and other social media companies, and how the
companies have responded?

Answer. The Tulalip Tribal Police Department in the course of
investigating a Missing Murdered Indigenous Woman case submitted Tribal
Court Search Warrants for electronic data from Facebook that would be
crucial information in solving the case, in this situation the data
provider denied the tribal court warrant. Because Tribal Court search
warrants are being denied or ignored due to Tribal Courts not being
considered courts of competent jurisdiction, our ability to investigate
crimes is impeded due to lost time and a less effective investigation
and evidence due to not having timely submission of the requested data.

1b) What are the usual cases where the tribal authorities need to
issue subpoenas?

Answer. Tribal police investigators utilize Tribal Court Search
Warrants for electronic data in many types of felony criminal
investigations including drug trafficking, missing person cases,
controlled substance homicide cases, homicide cases, sexual assault
cases, child abuse cases, and any case that may have electronic
evidence from either the suspect or the victim. The need is heightened
for drug trafficking, as social media platforms are how distributors
connect with users. December 15, 2022, the Congressional Research
Service (CRS) quoted the Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA)
Administrator Ann Milgram who stated that ``Snapchat and other social
media platforms ``the superhighway of drugs.'' Tribal law enforcement
needs access to this information to effectively deal with the opioid
pandemic on our reservations.

1c) When these companies do not respond, how do you obtain that
information?

Answer. When a Tribal Court Search Warrant is denied or ignored,
the only other option is to apply for a warrant from a County Court.
The County Court Warrant with the same facts presented as the Tribal
Court Warrant has been a workaround for tribal investigators to obtain
the needed electronic information. Although utilizing a state court-
issued search warrant may be an alternative, this is not optimum as the
Tribal Court is the court of jurisdiction in most cases, and this takes
additional time putting a criminal investigation at risk. Also, while
our tribal jurisdiction has a decent working relationship with our
county currently to accomplish this effort, this working relationship
is not guaranteed. Moreover, a good working relationship between Indian
tribes and the local jurisdictions is not the norm in other parts of
Washington state and across the nation.

Question 2. Your testimony mentioned that you've heard from other
Tribal Chiefs of Police in the country that recruitment and retention
of officers is one of the biggest challenges and that officers you
train are sought after by other agencies. Have you heard from your
officers that if they were able to have the same salary and benefits as
these other agencies, they would continue to work for your tribal law
enforcement?

Answer. As a member of the International Association of Chiefs of
Police, IACP, I sit on the Indian County Section Committee, in our
October 2023 meeting, the Indian Country Section Committee comprised of
Tribal Chiefs of Police from across the Country affirmed that
recruitment, hiring, and retention was one of the most significant
problems facing Indian Country Law Enforcement. I also communicate with
several Tribal Police Chiefs from Washington state who also share that
they are not able to retain trained certified officers who are
recruited away from tribal policing by outside agencies. At the Tulalip
Tribal Police Department, we have lost approximately 50% of our
commissioned law enforcement staffing due to officers being recruited
away and offered higher salaries, benefits, and pension programs.
Tribal law enforcement officers have directly stated that they love
working for the tribal community because of the community support and
relationships that are developed, among other things, but they cannot
afford to remain in their tribal positions due to a lack of competitive
salaries, lower and more costly benefits such as health insurance, and
the fact that Tribal law enforcement officers cannot participate in
either the state or federal retirement system. These officers were
hired, trained, and certified at the Tribe's expense and then we lose
them to outside agencies who offer increased salaries, benefits, and a
retirement program. This constant hiring, training, and certification
process to end up losing talented officers is significantly weakening
and hindering tribal law enforcement's ability to not only retain
officers but to provide the level of service needed to protect tribal
communities.

Question 3. How has the Tulalip Tribal Police Department been able
to have any immediate impact on the opioid fentanyl epidemic on the
Tulalip reservation and the local surrounding community?

Answer. As stated in our testimony, the Opioid Fentanyl Epidemic is
placing extreme external pressure on Tulalip leadership, the police
department, and the tribal community. At the time of our testimony,
Tulalip had over 63 tribal member deaths attributed to Fentanyl
overdoses since 2017. Unfortunately, we had another death caused by
Fentanyl 10 days ago so the updated number is 64 tribal member deaths.
Our Tribal Community's fentanyl overdose mortality rate is
approximately 10 times greater than the general population. Tulalip
Tribal Leadership has declared an opioid state of emergency due to
community deaths and mass importation of fentanyl from outside drug
trafficking organizations.
Additionally, the Tulalip Tribal Police Department has had some
successes resulting in positive impacts on the opioid fentanyl epidemic
on the Tulalip Reservation. Our proactive narcotics interdiction
efforts include self-funding a Tribal Drug Task Force comprised of five
full-time detectives to conduct narcotics investigations on the Tulalip
Reservation. The Tulalip Drug Task Force is responsible for dozens of
narcotics-related search warrants and seizures of large amounts of
Fentanyl from the Reservation. Our self-funded narcotics K-9 detection
team to focus and assist both Patrol and the Drug Task Force has helped
with these arrests. The problem is, we cannot prosecute these
individuals because they are largely non-Indian, and neither the U.S.
Attorney nor the County is prosecuting these cases. Tulalip needs the
ability to prosecute non-Indians for drug trafficking, and we are
advocating for a legislative fix to do this, along with jurisdiction to
prosecute the same individuals for gun possession ``in furtherance'' of
the crime of drug trafficking. Until we can prosecute these
individuals, our ability to effectively battle this epidemic is
stunted.
The Tulalip Tribal Police Department also has a Community Response
Team to address Chronic Nuisance Properties often directly associated
with narcotics use and sales. We also have a Victims of Crime Program
to assist individuals and families impacted by crime and narcotics
overdoses. We participate in the Tulalip Tribal Wellness Court, we
assist our Probation Department when requested. We also participate
with other Tribal Departments and service providers to identify and
implement strategies to combat the Fentanyl epidemic.

Question 4. Are there specific initiatives that have begun because
of the tribal fentanyl summit, recently hosted by the Tulalip Tribes,
and what impact do you expect them to have on the opioid crisis?

Answer. In addition to the efforts described directly above,
Tulalip leadership hosts regular Opioid Task force meetings with upper
management and those with technical expertise to develop an ongoing
strategic plan. The Tulalip Tribes was integral in the planning of the
Governor's Opioid Summit held in May, 2023. We also hosted the National
Summit in August 2023 which around 1200 tribal leaders, industry
experts, legislators and legislators attended. Tulalip also is piloting
a Prevention Model Pilot program along with five other tribes by
working with the Governor's office, Health Care Authority, Planet
Youth, Northwest Portland Area Indian Health Board. Lastly, Tulalip has
created multi-disciplinary response team to provide increased services
and treatment options for our community specific to the Opioid Fentanyl
Epidemic.
With the issuance of the Public State of Emergency, the Chief of
Police, Prosecutors office, and the Health Administrator meet weekly to
identify key areas that need to be solved. They make recommendations to
the Board of Directors to improve efficiency for our community. Tulalip
also uses the Opioid task force to meet on a regular basis to continue
to work on long term planning. We are also developing strategic plans
to improve response time, public safety & policies.
The Tribal Fentanyl Summit focused on prevention, intervention, and
treatment, along with a law enforcement track. Tulalip Tribal service
providers attended their respective tracks and have begun planning and
implementing strategies derived from the summit. The Summit resulted in
a National Report to the tribes to identify and implement best
practices. The Tulalip Tribes is implementing a prevention model
discussed at the Summit, other initiatives include multi-agency
coordinated response, traditional medicine, Department of Justice
coordinated response, cross-jurisdictional deputization, increased law
enforcement support, and resources, expanding culturally appropriate
drug courts, increased support and funding for housing first
initiatives. The Summit also identified the need for Congress to
support Tribal Law Enforcement Parity Reforms and further extend
criminal jurisdiction over drug-tracking offenses and drug-related
crimes. As the Tribes work through and implement the numerous
recommendations and best practices discussed at the Summit it is
expected that these efforts will result in lives saved.

Question 5. How has the Tulalip Tribes supplemented resources and
funding that BIA provides for public justice services in your
communities? And are there other funds or resources you've leveraged in
your communities?

Answer. The Tulalip Tribes police department is over 90% self-
funded through Tulalip tribal hard dollars from its economic
enterprises. Historically the BIA funding has only contributed
approximately 5% of the overall Police Department's operating budget.
In addition to the BIA self-governance funding, the Tulalip Tribes has
leveraged some Federal grants to help support law enforcement and
justice programs. These Federal grants have provided needed staffing
for community policing programs, victims of crime programs, Tribal
Court programs, and essential equipment and supplies.

Question 6. What actions at a tribal, state, local, or federal
level do you think can increase cooperation between law enforcement
agencies? And what is the Tulalip Tribal Police Department doing to
increase that capacity for your own tribal officers?

Answer. Inter-agency cooperation at all levels between tribal,
local, state, and federal law enforcement is critical for our ability
to successfully accomplish our shared law enforcement mission. It is
more important than ever due to the complicated jurisdictional issues
that Tribal law enforcement be treated as equal partners in law
enforcement. The Tulalip Tribal Police Department has expanded our
internal capacity for our officers through obtaining training and State
Peace Officer Certifications. This provides the authority for our
police officers to arrest non-Indians and charge them directly in state
courts for state offenses. We have also expanded our capacity by
inviting partnerships with other local, state, and federal law
enforcement agencies. We are working to find a federal agency that
would like to partner with us on a Tribal Drug Task Force providing the
advantages of federal task force credentials to our Tribal police drug
task force detectives. Another way we have increased our capacity for
our Tribal Officers is through enhanced training opportunities and
professional development often provided through federal grant funding.
We also use technology as a force multiplier to help our officers work
smarter rather than harder, thereby increasing our efficiency and
effectiveness.
Importantly, one way we can increase cooperation and place tribal
law enforcement in a position of equality is by adopting Federal
legislation giving Parity for Tribal Law Enforcement, expanding Tribal
Court Special Criminal Jurisdiction over drug-related offenses and
illegal gun possession in furtherance of drug trafficking, including
Tribal Courts as `` Courts of Competent Jurisdiction'' under the Stored
Electronic Communications Act, and providing additional technical and
funding support for tribal law enforcement.
Please let me know if I can be of any further assistance to the
Subcommittee, thank you again for the opportunity to appear and testify
on these important public safety issues in Tribal Communities.

______

Ms. Hageman. Thank you and thank you to all of you for your
very thoughtful, organized, and informative testimony. I really
appreciate the different perspectives that each of you bring
while you all also have very similar problems and challenges
that you are facing.
I will now recognize Members for 5 minutes for questioning,
and I am going to begin with myself.
Mr. Newland, I would like to start with you. Would you
please discuss the issues you have seen related to the BIA
recruiting quality law enforcement candidates, and specifically
where does the agency still need to improve its efforts in
recruitment and retention?
Mr. Newland. Thank you, Madam Chair, for that question.
This has been a long-standing struggle for the BIA to not only
hire but to retain officers. A lot of the locations where we
hire direct service officers, as I mentioned in my opening
statement, they are remote locations, and officers often have
to work alone with outdated equipment for less pay than their
Federal counterparts.
So, it is no wonder many chose to leave BIA in the past and
go to other agencies. We have been working to make sure our
officers are at least on par with their colleagues in other
agencies at the department, and that effort has begun to lower
our attrition rate. So, that is one thing. But we are also
working to speed up the time to hire because it takes too long.
Ms. Hageman. It takes too long.
Mr. Newland. And there are other tools that I would be
happy to work with the Committee on, when it comes to location
pay and special incentives and bonuses to get people to sign up
to work in some of these remote locations.
Ms. Hageman. Perhaps we can follow up with some questions
as to what those other tools might be, if you could perhaps
provide that information in writing.
Mr. Newland. Sure.
Ms. Hageman. But over the past few years, Congress has
increased funding going to Indian Country across the board. How
has BIA and OSJ law enforcement been affected by these general
increases and what has gone specifically to public justice and
tribal court programs?
Mr. Newland. Thank you, Madam Chair. Funding has increased
for law enforcement in tribal courts, specifically, as you
noted, and am happy to continue to work with Congress on that.
That money does help pay for new equipment and additional
officers, not only for the BIA, but as I mentioned, we contract
and compact with tribes, and so that funding flows through us
directly to tribal governments for that.
These increases, when they get spread across hundreds of
tribes across the country, often keep up with rates of
inflation, and as we have seen states and local governments
competing for law enforcement officers, that is a good thing
because it raises the pay for officers but it makes it hard for
any one jurisdiction. So, as this funding has increased, it has
allowed tribal governments to buy new equipment and hire new
officers, but as we have seen in the TLOA Report, we are still
behind what the total need is.
Ms. Hageman. And, again, I think that we will have some
follow-up questions for you after the hearing today.
Mr. Goggles, I would like to come to you next and I would
like to thank you for traveling here from Wyoming. It is
wonderful to see you and thank you for engaging on this
incredibly important topic.
In your testimony, you mentioned that cross-deputization
among law enforcement agencies is a possible solution. What are
the current barriers to cross-deputization and has cross-
deputization occurred at all between any of the law enforcement
agencies active on the reservation today?
Mr. Goggles. Thank you, Madam Chair, Members. To answer the
first question, the Wyoming State Legislature in the past has
put forward bills in response to that. The Northern Arapaho
Tribe has always been in support of those bills, but it is our
tribal counterparts, the Eastern Shoshone, who aren't up to
speed with it, for whatever reason.
Ms. Hageman. OK. So, do we have any cross-deputization that
is going on at all right now?
Mr. Goggles. There was an initiative in the past under
Chief Doug NoSeep at the time for Wind River PD. He implemented
it to the surrounding agencies, Fremont County Sheriff's
Office, and I believe some municipalities. But at the time, the
hold-up was them going through the background and more so the
judicial process. That was where a lot of them drew back, so
the cards were never issued, but the names were on board. But I
have also heard mention in the past of some having the cards
but not having the full authorization.
Ms. Hageman. It just seems like this is a terribly
bureaucratized process and I think that that is something that
has to be fixed with BIA as well as perhaps with Congress, but
we have to find a way to streamline this.
With that, I am out of time. But, again, I think we will
follow-up with some written questions for you.
And I would like to now call on the Ranking Member for 5
minutes of questioning.
Ms. Leger Fernandez. Thank you, Madam Chair. And I would
point out that in New Mexico we have some very strong cross-
deputization laws in place, and it is working. We are
constantly running into little things we need to fix, but I
worked on those laws a couple of decades ago. I have been
around for a long time.
Chairman Klatush, I want to really thank you for describing
the Hope and Healing Clinic as well as your call for an
increase of juriable jurisdiction over fentanyl and other drug
possessions. This was also an issue in a recent Senate hearing.
And when we talk about fentanyl, we know that fentanyl is
being smuggled into our country, actually, there is a recent
Cato Institute report that points out that it is being smuggled
by citizens at our ports of entry. I would like to enter that
into the record. Fentanyl is Smuggled for U.S. Citizens by U.S.
Citizens, not Asylum Seekers. Madam Chair, without objection?
Ms. Hageman. Without objection.
[The information follows:]

Fentanyl Is Smuggled for U.S. Citizens by U.S. Citizens, Not Asylum
Seekers

CATO at Liberty Blog, September 14, 2022 by David J. Bier

https://www.cato.org/blog/fentanyl-smuggled-us-citizens-us-citizens-
not-asylum-seekers

*****

Fentanyl overdoses tragically caused tens of thousands of preventable
deaths last year. Many politicians who want to end U.S. asylum law
claim that immigrants crossing the border illegally are responsible. An
NPR-Ipsos poll last week found that 39 percent of Americans and 60
percent of Republicans believe, ``Most of the fentanyl entering the
U.S. is smuggled in by unauthorized migrants crossing the border
illegally.'' A more accurate summary is that fentanyl is overwhelmingly
smuggled by U.S. citizens almost entirely for U.S. citizen consumers.

Here are facts:

Fentanyl smuggling is ultimately funded by U.S. consumers
who pay for illicit opioids: nearly 99 percent of whom are
U.S. citizens.

In 2021, U.S. citizens were 86.3 percent of convicted
fentanyl drug traffickers--ten times greater than
convictions of illegal immigrants for the same offense.

Over 90 percent of fentanyl seizures occur at legal
crossing points or interior vehicle checkpoints, not on
illegal migration routes, so U.S. citizens (who are subject
to less scrutiny) when crossing legally are the best
smugglers.

The location of smuggling makes sense because hard drugs
at ports of entry are about 97 percent less likely to be
stopped than are people crossing illegally between them.

Just 0.02 percent of the people arrested by Border Patrol
for crossing illegally possessed any fentanyl whatsoever.

The government exacerbated the problem by banning most
legal cross border traffic in 2020 and 2021, accelerating a
switch to fentanyl (the easiest-to-conceal drug).

During the travel restrictions, fentanyl seizures at ports
quadrupled from fiscal year 2019 to 2021. Fentanyl went
from a third of combined heroin and fentanyl seizures to
over 90 percent.

Annual deaths from fentanyl nearly doubled from 2019 to
2021 after the government banned most travel (and asylum).

It is monstrous that tens of thousands of people are dying
unnecessarily every year from fentanyl. But banning asylum and limiting
travel backfired. Reducing deaths requires figuring out the cause, not
jumping to blame a group that is not responsible. Instead of attacking
immigrants, policymakers should focus on effective solutions that help
people at risk of a fentanyl overdose.

U.S. Citizen Consumers Fund Fentanyl Smuggling

U.S. consumer payments for illicit opioids ultimately fund fentanyl
smuggling. Consumers pay retail dealers who pay wholesalers, and the
cash is then transferred back in bulk cash form to Mexico. These funds
are then used to pay smugglers to bring drugs back into the United
States again. The best evidence indicates that about 99 percent of U.S.
consumers of fentanyl (or products containing fentanyl) are U.S.
citizens.[i] Noncitizens appear to be about 80 percent less likely to
be fentanyl consumers than their share of the population would predict.
Fentanyl smuggling is almost entirely conducted on behalf of U.S.
citizen consumers. Of course, consumers would prefer much safer and
legal opioids over illicit fentanyl, but the government has
unfortunately forced them into the black market with few safe options.

U.S. Citizens Are Fentanyl Traffickers

Fentanyl is primarily trafficked by U.S. citizens. The U.S. Sentencing
Commission publishes data on all federal convictions, which includes
demographic information on individuals convicted of fentanyl
trafficking. Figure 1 shows the citizenship status of fentanyl
traffickers for 2018 to 2021. Every year, U.S. citizens receive the
most convictions by far. In 2021, U.S. citizens accounted for 86.3
percent of fentanyl trafficking convictions compared to just 8.9
percent for illegal immigrants.

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

.epsNote that since trafficking involves movement from Mexico to the
United States, it is unclear how to measure the likelihood of
conviction for a noncitizen without U.S. lawful immigration status or
citizenship since the denominator would include most Mexicans in Mexico
as well as anyone who crosses through Mexico. But regardless, the
reality is that people with U.S. citizenship or residence traffic the
vast majority of fentanyl, not illegal border crossers specifically or
illegal immigrants generally.

Indeed, this appears to be the case even for the most high-profile
cases. Aaron Reichlin-Melnick of the American Immigration Council
analyzed every Customs and Border Protection press release mentioning
fentanyl over a 6-month period and found just 3 percent involved
illegal immigrants. This means that the agency itself believes the most
important smugglers are U.S. citizens.

U.S. Citizens Bring Fentanyl Through Legal Crossing Points

That U.S. citizens account for most fentanyl trafficking convictions is
not surprising given the location of fentanyl border seizures. Over 90
percent of fentanyl border seizures occur at legal border crossings and
interior vehicle checkpoints (and 91 percent of drug seizures at
checkpoints are from U.S. citizens--only 4 percent by ``potentially
removable'' immigrants).

In 2022, so far, Border Patrol agents who were not at vehicle
checkpoints accounted for just 9 percent of the fentanyl seizures near
the border (Figure 2). Since it is easier for U.S. citizens to cross
legally than noncitizens, it makes sense for fentanyl producers to hire
U.S. citizen smugglers.

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

.epsThe DEA reports that criminal organizations ``exploit major highway
routes for transportation, and the most common method employed involves
smuggling illicit drugs through U.S. [ports of entry] in passenger
vehicles with concealed compartments or commingled with legitimate
goods on tractor-trailers.'' Several agencies including CBP, ICE, and
DHS intelligence told Congress in May 2022 the same thing: hard drugs
come through ports of entry.

Some people posit that less fentanyl is interdicted between ports of
entry because it is more difficult to detect there. But the opposite is
true: fentanyl is smuggled through official crossing points
specifically because it is easier to conceal it on a legal traveler or
in legal goods than it is to conceal a person crossing the border
illegally. Customs and Border Protection estimates that it caught 2
percent of cocaine at southwest land ports of entry in 2020 (the only
drug it analyzed), while it estimated that its interdiction
effectiveness rate for illegal crossers was about 83 percent in 2021
(Figure 3).[ii] This means that drugs coming at a port of entry are
about 97 percent less likely to be interdicted than a person coming
between ports of entry, and this massive incentive to smuggle through
ports would remain even if Border Patrol was far less effective at
stopping people crossing illegally than it now estimates that it is.

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

.epsClosing Ports Increased Fentanyl Smuggling

During the early days of the pandemic, the Trump administration
drastically restricted legal travel to the United States, banning
nonessential travel through land ports of entry from Mexico in
particular in late-March 2020. Because there were fewer opportunities
to traffic drugs at ports of entry, traffickers switched to trafficking
more fentanyl. Because fentanyl is at least 50 times more potent per
pound than heroin and other drugs, smugglers need fewer trips to supply
the same market. The seizure data demonstrate the change in tactics.
From October 2018 to February 2020, about a third of fentanyl and
heroin seizures at southwest ports of entry were fentanyl with no clear
upward trend. By the time the travel restrictions were ended (at least
for vaccinated travelers) in January 2022, over 90 percent of heroin-
fentanyl seizures were fentanyl. Unfortunately, the market shift has
continued. The absolute amount of fentanyl being seized quadrupled
(Figure 4).

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

.epsThe United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime reported that in mid-
2020, as a result of travel restrictions, ``Many countries have
reported drug shortages at the retail level, with reports of heroin
shortages in Europe, South-West Asia and North America in particular''
and that ``heroin users may switch to substances such as fentanyl.''
The DEA predicted in 2020 that ``additional restrictions or limits on
travel across the U.S.-Mexico border due to pandemic concerns will
likely impact heroin DTOs [drug trafficking organizations],
particularly those using couriers or personal vehicles to smuggle
heroin into the United States,'' leading to ``mixing fentanyl into
distributed heroin.''

Unsurprisingly, the increased reliance on fentanyl has increased
fentanyl deaths. Indeed, it appears that the border closures rapidly
accelerated the transition from heroin to fentanyl, leading to tens of
thousands of additional deaths per year (Figure 5). Note that 2021 data
undercount the true number of deaths because not all locations have
reported. Nonetheless, the annual number of fentanyl deaths have nearly
doubled between 2019 and 2021. Banning asylum under Title 42 of the
U.S. code probably had no effect on these trends, but it certainly did
not help reduce fentanyl deaths, as some have claimed.

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

.epsAsylum Seekers Don't Aid Fentanyl Smuggling

Fentanyl smuggling is not a reason to end asylum. The people arrested
by Border Patrol are not smuggling fentanyl. Just 279 of 1.8 million
arrests by Border Patrol of illegal border crossers resulted in a
fentanyl seizure--too small of a percentage (0.02 percent) to appear on
a graph--and many of these seizures occurred at vehicle checkpoints of
legal travelers in the interior of the United States.

Nonetheless, some officials have asserted that asylum seekers distract
Border Patrol from drug interdiction efforts. If asylum seekers were
indirectly aiding drug smuggling, however, we would expect the effect
to show up in the seizure trends by changing the locations, times, or
amounts of the seizures in some way. But drug seizure trends simply do
not deviate measurably with greater arrests of asylum seekers. This is
true on several different metrics: across time, between sectors, along
mile-distance from the border, or the share of seizures at ports of
entry versus between them. If the administration legalized asylum at
ports of entry, even this hypothetical problem would disappear.

Aggressive Drug Interdiction Exacerbates Fentanyl Smuggling

The fentanyl problem is a direct consequence of drug prohibition and
interdiction. As my colleague Dr. Jeff Singer has written:

Fentanyl's appearance in the underground drug trade is an
excellent example of the ``iron law of prohibition:'' when
alcohol or drugs are prohibited they will tend to get produced
in more concentrated forms, because they take up less space and
weight in transporting and reap more money when subdivided for
sale.

Fentanyl is at least 50 times more powerful per pound than heroin,
which means you have to smuggle nearly 50 pounds of heroin to supply
the market that a single pound of fentanyl could. This is a massive
incentive to smuggle fentanyl, and the more efforts are made to
restrict the drug trade, the more fentanyl will be the drug that is
smuggled. The DEA has even admitted, ``The low cost, high potency, and
ease of acquisition of fentanyl may encourage heroin users to switch to
the drug should future heroin supplies be disrupted.'' In other words,
heroin interdiction makes the fentanyl problem worse.

Conclusion

Border enforcement will not stop fentanyl smuggling. Border Patrol's
experience with marijuana smuggling may provide even clearer evidence
for this fact. Marijuana is the bulkiest and easiest-to-detect drug,
which is why it was largely trafficked between ports of entry. Despite
doubling the Border Patrol and building a border fence in the 2000s in
part to combat the trade, the only thing that actually reduced
marijuana smuggling was U.S. states legalizing marijuana. It is absurd
to believe that interdiction will be more effective against a drug that
is orders of magnitude more difficult to detect.

The DEA plainly stated in 2020 that fentanyl ``will likely continue to
contribute to high numbers of drug overdose deaths in the United
States'' even with the ban on asylum and travel restrictions. But
ending asylum or banning travel has been worse than useless. These
policies are both directly and indirectly counterproductive: first
directly by incentivizing more fentanyl smuggling and then indirectly
by distracting from the true causes of the crisis.

My colleagues have been warning for many years that doubling down on
these failed prohibition policies will lead to even worse outcomes, and
unfortunately, time has repeatedly proven them correct. The only
appropriate response to the opioid epidemic is treatment of addiction.
But for this to be possible, the government must adopt policies that
facilitate treatment and reduce the harms from addiction--most
importantly deaths. To develop these policies, policymakers need to
ignore the calls to blame foreigners for our problems.

Notes

[i] This is based on overdose statistics, and last year, fentanyl
caused 88 percent of opioid overdose deaths.

[ii] The cocaine seizure effectiveness rate includes an estimate of all
cocaine that escaped detection, while the interdiction effectiveness
rate for people only includes detected crossings. Including undetected
crossings would lower the effectiveness rate for people, but because
many arrests are the same person crossing after a prior arrest (27
percent in 2021), the interdiction effectiveness rate is a better
estimate of the likelihood of being arrested during a first attempt,
which would be all that is necessary to disrupt a drug smuggling
attempt. Regardless, in 2020, DHS estimated an apprehension rate that
included undetected crossings of 66.2 percent compared to 79.4 percent
using only detected crossings. This would mean that drugs were only
96.8 percent rather than 97.4 percent less likely to be apprehended.

______

Ms. Leger Fernandez. But it is coming into the country. The
question is what do we do about it? We need to stop it at the
border. But what you all are raising is how do we keep our
communities safe on our tribal communities. And this issue
about tribal jurisdiction to protect your own I think is key,
and I am glad that each of you has brought it up in a different
way.
I am going to ask, because we never have enough time to get
full discussion, but I am going to ask each of you, do you
believe that your tribe, if granted the right to have full
criminal jurisdiction over non-Indians, or a limited
jurisdiction over maybe fentanyl and other opioids, would be
able to improve the safety for your citizens and the visitors
to your tribe and what resources would you need? Like can you
do it, what do you need? And I will maybe just start, maybe we
can go from left to right on that.
Mr. Newland, I am going to skip you, because I want to hear
the tribal perspective.
Mr. Klatush. Yes, I believe if we had the full jurisdiction
over non-tribals, I think that is going to be a lot better for
our tribal police. Also training for the tribal police is going
to be another good thing to put them in, but the fentanyl is
just, there is another strain in Washington State now that is
100 times worse than the regular fentanyl, so one little puff
of that little powder and the police officer is going to be
down. So, training is a big thing, too, for that, so I believe
so, yes.
Ms. Leger Fernandez. OK. So, you would need more training
and then perhaps some more resources.
And, Honorable Goggles, what do you think about the issue
and the possibility?
Mr. Goggles. Ms. Fernandez, yes, I do believe if given
that, the tribe would be able to facilitate the safety of the
personnel. One thing that is a hinderance on the BIA side when
it comes to the evidence is the evidence techs. There were two
at one time when I was there last so, say there are only two or
three on the shift, two may be in the evidence locker, one has
to supervise what they brought off the street, the other is
there to manage the evidence locker, so the other officer might
be out there by his or herself.
So, what would happen is that, depending on the amount and
then the quantity, they might have to break free to go assist,
so they would have to make sure everything was in a safe spot,
then leave, and then come back and do it again. So, that is why
it has always been a hard spot to fill.
Ms. Leger Fernandez. You need more people there. And I am
going to move us on. Mr. Ambassador?
Mr. Goggles. Thank you, ma'am.
Ms. Leger Fernandez. I know we want an Oliphant fix. If we
can't get an Oliphant fix, where is the place that we go next,
beyond VAWA, and is it here, and could you handle it? Great job
on what you have been doing so far, by the way.
Mr. Chaudhuri. Thank you, Ranking Member. And I think the
answer is an Oliphant fix. Let me explain why. At Muscogee
Creek Nation, not only would we be fully capable of exerting
authority to protect people of all backgrounds within our
borders, we would welcome that authority.
Brief history, our Nation was removed on the Trail of
Tears. Prior to removal, we had full authority throughout our
entire homelands, and we are talking huge areas of homelands,
Georgia, Alabama, and Northern Florida. Same thing with
Oklahoma and Indian Territory. We had authority over a whole
slew of crimes. That was lost in 1978 with the Oliphant
decision. That is the original sin here. We are handcuffed in
being able to protect folks.
Ms. Leger Fernandez. I completely agree with you on that,
but I don't want to not let our last----
Mr. Chaudhuri. So, let----
Ms. Leger Fernandez. I have run out of time.
Mr. Chaudhuri. If I could say one thing about the fentanyl.
One of the reasons we have been so strong in having broad
authority is being surgical about these crimes misses the fact
that these crimes are often tied to collateral crimes such as
breaking and entering, money laundering, assault, vandalism,
auto theft. If you can't attack the whole umbrella of crimes
associated with something like fentanyl, your hands are tied.
So, thank you so much, Ranking Member.
Ms. Leger Fernandez. Madam Chair, can we give Mr. Sutter a
chance to respond?
Ms. Hageman. Yes, please, Mr. Sutter.
Ms. Leger Fernandez. And sorry to interrupt. I wanted to
make sure all four of you could respond.
Mr. Sutter. Ranking Member Fernandez, we strongly support
expanding the criminal special jurisdiction that tribes have
currently to include crimes such as trafficking fentanyl onto
our reservation because of the extreme disparate impact it is
having on our tribal communities.
Ms. Leger Fernandez. Thank you so very much, and thank you
for yielding to me, Madam Chair.
Ms. Hageman. Thank you. The Chair now recognizes Mr. Carl
from Alabama.
Mr. Carl. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Mr. Newland, I have a copy here of a press release put out
by the Coalition of Large Tribes, COLT, in July of this year.
COLT is an intertribal organization representing the interests
of more than 50 tribes with a reservation of over 100,000 acres
or more. According to this press release, they are concerned
that the FDA's plan to ban legal sales of menthol cigarettes in
the United States will create opportunities for foreign cartels
to profit from the illegal cigarette sales.
They state that the tribes are painfully aware of the
criminal's interest in China, the Mid East, and Mexico already,
and various channels of trafficking the drugs through and on
their reservation. And they are concerned that the same will be
true for the new illicit supply chain of menthol cigarettes.
My question, sir, to you, have you consulted with the FDA
about this rule and how it impacts on already overburdensome
tribal law enforcement?
Mr. Newland. Thank you, Congressman. I am not aware of that
rule and I have not myself spoken with the FDA about it.
Mr. Carl. OK. According to this same article, the tribes
were not consulted at all on this issue, and I think that is
one thing I really want to point out here, that we have these
mandates that get pushed down through, whether it is an
Executive Order or whether it is just on a whim of what
somebody wants onto these law enforcements. There is no money
to back it up, there is no help to enforce them, but yet we
expect them to do this.
How would you do that? How would you expect these people to
start following up on something as simple as menthol
cigarettes?
Mr. Newland. Again, Congressman, I am not familiar with
that rule. I am happy to follow-up and look into it. And I did
want to emphasize that Federal agencies generally are subject
to Executive Order 13175 on tribal consultation, but I can't
speak to their process.
Mr. Carl. Normally before those Executive Orders are
passed, is there communication with the tribes, do they
actually ask?
Mr. Newland. Oftentimes, in my experience, Executive Orders
and other agency policies that affect tribes directly are the
product of many conversations and engagements between agencies
and tribes. But I can't speak to the FDA's process, sir. I am
sorry.
Mr. Carl. OK. Well, my point here is simply trying to put
out we tie their hands on what they can or can't do, but yet we
try to push more down the line of what they should do. And then
when we ask them to do it, we don't provide any leadership, we
don't get any input from them, and there is no monetary reason
to do it also. So, my frustration is pretty simple. And I know
this is a very simple thing, menthol cigarettes. That is
exactly why I wanted to talk about it.
Madam Chair, that is all I have. Thank you.
Ms. Hageman. Thank you, Mr. Carl. I actually think it is an
important issue because what so many of our law enforcement
personnel have been turned into is regulators and regulator
enforcement, so I think it would be great if the BIA would
reach out to the sister agency and provide the information
about the challenges associated with enforcement of those kinds
of things on our reservations and burdening already burdened
law enforcement in our tribal communities.
I think it is very important to address those kinds of
things, because it is one of the reasons why we don't have the
resources that we need. So, I appreciate you raising that
particular issue.
The Chair now recognizes Mr. LaMalfa from California for 5
minutes.
Mr. LaMalfa. Thank you, Madam Chair, and apologies to
everybody in the room for my late arrival. There was another
big deal going on. I am glad I could be here for this portion.
With the flow of illegal drugs or illegal handling of drugs
in this country, and especially rural America, the rural part
of California where I reside, of course, this affects Indian
Country as well, so we see the giant problem with the drugs
from China, of course, fentanyl ad nauseam, and the flow from
our southern border. It is a direct attack on public safety,
the actual usage or finding these things laced in other
products, and then the negative effect on neighborhoods, et
cetera.
Chairman Goggles, we have talked a lot of times on this
Committee about public private lands are constantly being
trespassed upon for illegal cannabis grows up in my
neighborhood. Across Northern California they see, again, a
surge of illicit fentanyl and other hard drugs. Our local law
enforcement has to a lot of times do the job, whether it is
counties, cities, or tribal law enforcement. And we are talking
international drug cartels infesting these areas as well as the
whole country.
So, Chairman, would you talk a little bit about how the
impact, we kind of have a broad percentage of how it affects
the country, but is this especially acute on your lands, on
your reservation for your members maybe beyond the national
average?
Mr. Goggles. Thank you, Congressman. I don't have the
percentage with me currently, but there has been enrolled
members' deaths at all ages from the surrounding communities.
It is just one of those evils that doesn't have any care about
who or what. Presently, we have been saved from any children's
death or exposure to that drug in particular.
Mr. LaMalfa. So, these cartels, they are not only bringing
this product in and infecting our communities with it, but we
are seeing that illegal weapons are being brought in and those
get into the marketplace. And then maybe most important is the
human trafficking side of it. What experiences can you relate
with those sides?
Mr. Goggles. With the cartels, sir?
Mr. LaMalfa. On human trafficking or handling of illegal
weapons and such, have you seen a lot of that?
Mr. Goggles. With the cartels, it is usually a nonvisible
component. They facilitate their acts through small fish
people, counterparts, enrolled members. The human trafficking,
it has been through the reservation in different aspects, not
at a high volume, just small instances here and there. One
example was a child that was recovered in the California area,
I believe it was Los Angeles, or San Francisco, I believe. And
there was a child that was recovered on our reservation in Wind
River from the Crow Reservation in Montana.
Mr. LaMalfa. Are you finding the cooperation with law
enforcement at your tribe level is well-coordinated with the
Federal?
Mr. Goggles. I would say the best example of that would be
in the Tribal Fish and Game and the U.S. Fish and Wildlife.
They are, from what I see, the seamless, effortless tandem. The
rest has always resided with the characters or officers that
were in the department. It has just always depended on how they
were with other people.
Mr. LaMalfa. Do you see as much of a help with the cartel
side of it with Federal law enforcement?
Mr. Goggles. From our standpoint, I would not be able to
identify any cartel involvement, only the counterparts.
Mr. LaMalfa. I appreciate it. I will yield back, Madam
Chair.
Mr. Goggles. Thank you, sir.
Ms. Hageman. Thank you. We do have a briefing that we need
to get to, but I would like to ask a quick question to each of
you that I think is very important because I would like your
input. And that is, if there was one thing that you could
change that you think would dramatically improve the law
enforcement situation within your respective jurisdictions,
what would that be? And, again, I will go to the tribal
members. I am going to start with you, Mr. Klatush.
Mr. Klatush. Law enforcement pension.
Ms. Hageman. Pensions, OK.
And Mr. Goggles?
Mr. Goggles. More cohesion and cooperativeness.
Ms. Hageman. Sir?
Mr. Chaudhuri. Well, there are a variety of things that
need to be done and funding is always at the top of the list.
At the very top, you have to have restoring tribal
jurisdiction, and everything flows from that. If we were
allowed to do that, we would be better positioned to work with
state counterparts, county counterparts, and Federal
counterparts. So, it has to start there, restoring inherent
tribal jurisdiction.
Ms. Hageman. OK. And Mr. Sutter?
Mr. Sutter. All the issues we discussed today are very
important. The tribal jurisdiction, the fentanyl epidemic. We
still have a MMIW issue, and for us to effectively provide the
law enforcement, to protect and serve, and really protect the
most vulnerable from harm, we have to have the officers in our
tribal police agencies to affect these very detailed, lengthy
investigations.
So, working on officer retention with the pension program
would make a significant difference for us and Tulalip in our
ability to retain officers, and I think that would help us
address the other very, very significant issues causing harm
and very disproportionately on our tribal community.
Ms. Hageman. I very much appreciate that. And I don't know
if the Ranking Member has any follow-up, but if not, I will go
ahead and close out the hearing.
Ms. Leger Fernandez. Thank you very much for your insight
that you provided us today. And, Assistant Secretary, it is not
that we don't want to hear your views on all of this, but----
[Laughter.]
Ms. Leger Fernandez. So, once again, to the tribal members
as well as Mr. Newland, thank you very much.
Ms. Hageman. And I want to thank the witnesses for your
valuable testimony and the Members for your questioning.
The members of the Committee may have some additional
questions for the witnesses and we will ask you to respond to
those in writing. Under Committee Rule 3, members of the
Committee must submit questions to the Committee Clerk by 5
p.m. on Friday, November 17, 2023, and the hearing record will
be held open for 10 business days for these responses.
If there is no further business, and without objection, the
Committee stands adjourned.

[Whereupon, at 3:20 p.m., the Subcommittee was adjourned.]

[ADDITIONAL MATERIALS SUBMITTED FOR THE RECORD]

Submission for the Record by Rep. Carl

COLT Chairman Echoes Senate Alarm on Foreign Illicit Tobacco Threats
Amid FDA Prohibitory Rulemakings on Menthol and Nicotine in Cigarettes

*****

July 24, 2023

Browning, MT--The Coalition of Large Tribes, an intertribal
organization representing the interests of the more than 50 tribes with
reservations of 100,000 acres or more, echoes the U.S. Senate concerns
raised by Senators Cassidy, Rubio, Budd and Hagerty in their letter
today Commissioner Califf of the Food and Drug Administration, sounding
the alarm over the Biden administration's plans to restrict tobacco
products for Americans, potentially creating opportunities for foreign
cartels to profit from illegal tobacco on the black market.

COLT is also concerned about FDA's proposed rules because they will no
doubt create illicit markets for menthol and nicotine-containing
products, gaps that will be filled by foreign criminal interests and
directly and negatively impact public safety on remote rural Indian
reservations like those of COLT member tribes.

As with other forms of prohibition, unregulated supply chains will take
over once legal pathways to adult consumers are closed off. Banning the
legal sale of menthol and nicotine-containing cigarettes will cede
control of the market to illicit producers. ``Tribes are painfully
aware from our experience with the fentanyl crisis that criminal
interests in China, the Middle East and Mexico already use various
channels to traffic drugs through and concentrate drugs on our
reservations, where the jurisdictional maze and chronic underfunding of
tribal law enforcement leaves a persistent gaps for public safety. The
Rules will strain already overburdened tribal law enforcement,'' said
COLT Chairman Marvin Weatherwax, a member of the Blackfeet Tribal
Business Committee, quoting COLT's June 2, 2023 Resolution #03-2022
(WR-Las Vegas), Calling for Pause in FDA Rulemaking on Tobacco to Allow
for Tribal Consultation and Protection of Tribal Ceremonial Uses and
Public Safety.

``Many of COLT member tribes' citizens are cigarette smokers,
including myself and my wife. We are very concerned that
illicit markets borne from the FDA's forthcoming Rules--Native
American smokers who obtained such products will have no idea
what foreign illicit cigarettes might be laced with--just like
certain foreign drugs today are routinely laced with
fentanyl,'' said OJ Semans, COLT Executive Director. ``As a
career tribal police officer, I can tell you that the risks of
FDA's prohibitions on menthol and nicotine are huge for Indian
Country.''

OJ Semans, COLT Executive Director

In addition to intensive public safety concerns, COLT is also dismayed
that the FDA has not consulted with tribes at all on the Rules, despite
the strong policies of the Biden Administration and numerous Executive
Orders. COLT is also concerned that tribal tobacco manufacturers could
be severely impacted by both Rules, and that tribal ceremonial use of
tobacco could be severely restricted, infringing on tribal cultural and
religious practices.

Consequently, COLT has called upon FDA to pause its rulemakings, engage
in appropriate, required tribal consultation, and fully assess the
Rules' impacts to tribal economies and tribal public safety. COLT urges
Congress to continue to shine light on the risks of the FDA's
rulemakings.

[all]
