- OVERSIGHT HEARING ON DESTROYING AMERICA'S BEST IDEA: EXAMINING THE BIDEN ADMINISTRATION'S USE OF NATIONAL PARK SERVICE LANDS FOR MIGRANT CAMPS

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

DESTROYING AMERICA'S BEST IDEA:
EXAMINING THE BIDEN ADMINIS-
TRATION'S USE OF NATIONAL PARK
SERVICE LANDS FOR MIGRANT CAMPS

=======================================================================

OVERSIGHT HEARING

BEFORE THE

COMMITTEE ON NATURAL RESOURCES
U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

Wednesday, September 27, 2023

__________

Serial No. 118-63

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Natural Resources

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.govinfo.gov
or
Committee address: http://naturalresources.house.gov

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
53-626 PDF                  WASHINGTON : 2024

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

COMMITTEE ON NATURAL RESOURCES

BRUCE WESTERMAN, AR, Chairman
DOUG LAMBORN, CO, Vice Chairman
RAUL M. GRIJALVA, AZ, Ranking Member

Doug Lamborn, CO Grace F. Napolitano, CA
Robert J. Wittman, VA Gregorio Kilili Camacho Sablan,
Tom McClintock, CA     CNMI
Paul Gosar, AZ Jared Huffman, CA
Garret Graves, LA Ruben Gallego, AZ
Aumua Amata C. Radewagen, AS Joe Neguse, CO
Doug LaMalfa, CA Mike Levin, CA
Daniel Webster, FL Katie Porter, CA
Jenniffer Gonzalez-Colon, PR Teresa Leger Fernandez, NM
Russ Fulcher, ID Melanie A. Stansbury, NM
Pete Stauber, MN Mary Sattler Peltola, AK
John R. Curtis, UT Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez, NY
Tom Tiffany, WI Kevin Mullin, CA
Jerry Carl, AL Val T. Hoyle, OR
Matt Rosendale, MT Sydney Kamlager-Dove, CA
Lauren Boebert, CO Seth Magaziner, RI
Cliff Bentz, OR Nydia M. Velazquez, NY
Jen Kiggans, VA Ed Case, HI
Jim Moylan, GU Debbie Dingell, MI
Wesley P. Hunt, TX Susie Lee, NV
Mike Collins, GA
Anna Paulina Luna, FL
John Duarte, CA
Harriet M. Hageman, WY

Vivian Moeglein, Staff Director
Tom Connally, Chief Counsel
Lora Snyder, Democratic Staff Director
http://naturalresources.house.gov
------

CONTENTS

----------
Page

Hearing held on Wednesday, September 27, 2023....................     1

Statement of Members:

Westerman, Hon. Bruce, a Representative in Congress from the
State of Arkansas..........................................     2
Grijalva, Hon. Raul M., a Representative in Congress from the
State of Arizona...........................................     4

Statement of Witnesses:

Ariola, Hon. Joann, New York City Council Member, Ozone Park,
New York...................................................     7
Prepared statement of....................................     8
Williams, Jaime, Assemblymember, New York State Assembly,
Brooklyn, New York.........................................     9
Prepared statement of....................................    11
Acer, Eleanor, Senior Director, Refugee Protection, Human
Rights First, New York, New York...........................    12
Prepared statement of....................................    13
Spencer, Kenneth, Chairman, United States Park Police
Fraternal Order of Police, Washington, DC..................    18
Prepared statement of....................................    20

Additional Materials Submitted for the Record:

Submissions for the Record by Representative Westerman

Department of the Interior National Park Service,
Decision Memorandum and Environmental Review to Support
Emergency Activities for Temporary Housing of Migrants.    90

Department of the Interior National Park Service, Budget
Justifications and Performance for Fiscal Year 2024....   108

Submissions for the Record by Representative Grijalva

CEQ, Memo on Emergencies and NEPA Guidance, dated
September 14, 2020.....................................    71

National Park Service, ``Work and Life on Barren
Island,'' dated September 25, 2023.....................    75

Cato, ``Fentanyl Is Smuggled for U.S. Citizens by U.S.
Citizens, Not Asylum Seekers,'' dated September 14,
2022...................................................    78

DEA Report, ``Fentanyl Flow in the United States,'' dated
January 2020...........................................    84

GAO Report GAO-23-105443 on Southwest Border, September
2023...................................................    87

CRS In Focus: NPS FY2024 Appropriations, dated August 11,
2023...................................................    88

OVERSIGHT HEARING ON DESTROYING AMERICA'S BEST IDEA: EXAMINING
THE BIDEN ADMINISTRATION'S USE OF NATIONAL PARK SERVICE LANDS
FOR MIGRANT CAMPS

----------

Wednesday, September 27, 2023

U.S. House of Representatives

Committee on Natural Resources

Washington, DC

----------

The Committee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:24 a.m., in
Room 1324, Longworth House Office Building, Hon. Bruce
Westerman [Chairman of the Committee] presiding.

Present: Representatives Westerman, Lamborn, McClintock,
Gosar, Radewagen, LaMalfa, Fulcher, Stauber, Tiffany, Carl,
Bentz, Kiggans, Hunt, Collins, Duarte, Hageman; Grijalva,
Sablan, Huffman, Neguse, Leger Fernandez, Stansbury, Ocasio-
Cortez, Hoyle, Kamlager-Dove, Magaziner, and Velazquez.

Also present: Representatives Lawler, Malliotakis, Pfluger,
D'Esposito; and Espaillat.

Mr. Westerman. The Committee will come to order.

Without objection that Chair is authorized to declare
recess of the Committee at any time.

The Committee is meeting today to hear testimony on
Destroying America's Best Idea: Examining the Biden
Administration's use of National Park Service Lands for Migrant
Camps.

I ask unanimous consent that all Members testifying today
be allowed to sit with the Committee, give their testimony, and
participate in the hearing from the dais. The gentlewoman from
New York, Ms. Malliotakis, and the gentleman from New York, Mr.
D'Esposito. Additionally, we have the gentleman from New York,
Mr. Garbarino, Mr. Pfluger from Texas, and Mr. Espaillat from
New York.

Without objection, so ordered.

Under Committee Rule 4(f), any oral opening statements at
hearings are limited to the Chairman and the Ranking Minority
Member. I therefore ask unanimous consent that all other
Members' opening statements be made part of the hearing record
if they are admitted in accordance with Committee Rule 3(o).

Without objection, so ordered.

Before we get into the testimony, I now recognize myself
for an opening statement.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. BRUCE WESTERMAN, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF ARKANSAS

Mr. Westerman. Good morning. Thank you for joining us here
today. New York City's Democrat Mayor, Eric Adams, recently
said that the endless flow of illegal migrants to his hometown
will ``destroy the city.''
He is right. Last week, I saw that firsthand, and the
numbers don't lie. In August of this year, 232,000 illegal
immigrants flowed across our southern border. That adds to the
6 million that has flowed across the border since President
Biden was inaugurated.
In the last 11 months of this fiscal year, this is an
unbelievable fact, 25,000 pounds of fentanyl has been
intradicted and 151 people on the Terrorist Watch List have
been apprehended at our southern border.
And there is one more number. Eight. Eight Democrat mayors
or governors have declared a state of emergency because illegal
immigrants have flooded their cities and states.
The endless flow of illegal immigrants over our southern
border is not only is destroying individual cities and states
it is destroying our country.
Now, the Biden administration is looking to spread this
chaos to one of America's greatest ideas, our national parks.
Let me set the stage. Gateway National Recreational Area, a
unit of the National Park System, is the lifeline to the
outdoors in the middle of New York City. It provides space for
the city's largest community guard, campgrounds, fishing and
boating access, and even a unit of U.S. Sea Cadets Core.
Last year, Gateway had more than 9,000,000 visitors. Facing
political pressure, the Biden administration rubber stamped a
lease proposal to allow the construction of shelters for
migrants inside the park boundaries.
The Committee first heard rumors of Biden's plan in late
August. When I visited the area last week, the lease was signed
and I would not be surprised if they are constructing migrant
shelters as we speak.
National Park Service officials told me, verbatim, that
they are shortcutting NEPA to build these camps. And then CEQ
backed it up with a public statement, and I quote, ``there is
not time to complete an environmental assessment before action
must be taken to address imminent threats.''
Now, this is interesting in contrast of what CEQ Chair
Brenda Mallory stated in May 2023 at a Senate DPW hearing, and
I quote, ``One of NEPA's key functions is to prevent the damage
and costs that arise from rushed, biased, and incomplete
environmental decision making.''
In case you didn't catch that, I am going to say it again.
Four months ago, the CEQ Chair said that, ``One of NEPA's key
functions is to prevent the damage and costs that arise from
rushed, biased, and incomplete environmental decision making.''
And then CEQ, last week, stated to the press, ``There is
not time to complete an environmental assessment before action
must be taken to address imminent threats.''
Our founders talked about our job as we the people. They
said, in order to form a more perfect union, not a perfect
union but a more perfect union, and to establish justice and
ensure domestic tranquility, and the preamble goes on.
If you look at those first two things, establishing justice
and ensuring domestic tranquility. How does two sets of
standards establish justice?
How can one interpretation of the law 4 months before
another interpretation, give anybody assurance that we are
working toward a more perfect union by establishing justice?
How does the actions that we are seeing across the country and
at the southern border give us confidence that we are
accomplishing domestic tranquility?
And furthermore, this action is on a piece of National Park
Service land that in its enabling legislation specifically
prohibits housing. It wouldn't matter if it were on a mountain
top, but this land happens to be in a floodplain that flooded
just this past weekend.
Isn't NEPA supposed to protect human life? How is building
a migrant camp in a floodplain humane? I can't tell you how
many times I sit right here in this room and listen to my
colleague's pontificate on the sanctity of a bedrock
environmental law, even as some of those conversations
contribute to energy poverty for everyday Americans.
Yet, now that the President is facing public backlash from
a border crisis unlike any this nation has ever seen, the
Administration is suddenly reversing course, ignoring every
environmental protection in the book.
Time and again, we have seen President Biden and his folks
embrace these rules for thee and not for me. It is absolutely a
shameful way to govern. And once again, there is no justice in
a double standard.
Last week, I wrote a letter to DOI Secretary Deb Haaland
and the National Park Service Director Charles Sams, demanding
to know more about how their plan to house migrants in national
parks came to be, including the role of CEQ on signing off on
the so-called emergency action.
The Secretary has yet to respond, and her silence is
deafening. We need answers.
Last week in New York City, I got kicked out of a
processing facility and was refused a tour. I heard Park
officials say they are bypassing our environmental laws to
build migrant camps in a small park used by a million people a
year who live nearby.
It is a rare green space in the midst of a city. Our
national parks are some of America's most treasured places. And
as I said earlier, they have been called our best idea. I won't
sit back while President Biden takes them away to atone for a
crisis of his own making.
Building camps on Park Service land in the middle of New
York City is not addressing the real problem. It is putting
another band aid on the bigger problem. Having 18,000 or 20,000
migrants in New York City is but a small amount of what is
affecting the rest of our country. This Administration needs to
own their mistakes and take the corrective actions to stop the
flow of migrants.
And it is not just me saying that, it is not just
Republicans saying that. President Biden and his disaster at
the southern border is now affecting our national parks. Enough
is enough, and I look forward to hearing the testimony.
I yield back and recognize the Ranking Member for an
opening statement.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. RAUL M. GRIJALVA, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF ARIZONA

Mr. Grijalva. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Chairman, when you assumed the leadership of this
Committee, I was cautiously optimistic.
It is no secret that the gap between our policy views is
wide. But I have come to think of you as a reasonable and
principled colleague. I hoped that these qualities will be
reflected in the Committee's work, but today's hearing is
neither reasonable nor principled. It is a dehumanizing
political stunt.
The current influx of migrants is a humanitarian crisis, no
doubt, that deserves meaningful, comprehensive solutions.
Solutions that are rooted in upholding our basic values and
human rights and solutions that would provide resources to
respond to the crisis and to the humanitarian needs that we are
confronting.
Solutions that are based on facts, not rhetoric from MAGA
talking heads. Solutions that accept the reality that we are
dealing with. Solutions that deal, yes, with security, nobody
is denying that. No one, on our side, is saying let's open up
the borders and see what happens.
That is the deal with security, but we also have to
understand that we are dealing a global crisis. A crisis of
major proportions affecting the Third World primarily across
this globe.
A crisis built on poverty, repression, and oppression,
political, and otherwise, undemocratic governments in all parts
of the world, the violence, the collapse of civil society,
organized criminal groups that infect and affect every decision
for these countries and these communities.
The climate that is impacting our world in a very direct
way. So, this impact of a global crisis and creating the
challenges that we confront, not only in the southern border
but across this nation, are driven by root causes and we are
not dealing with those. That is part of the solution as well.
But we won't hear about any of that today, because it is
not about solutions, this hearing. Today's hearing is not meant
for solutions. Today's hearing is an excuse for Republicans to
double down on the failed policies from the Trump
administration.
It is an excuse to distract American people from the fact
that Republicans are pushing us into a government shutdown that
doesn't need to happen. A government shutdown that will
actually slow down the processing of asylum applications, I
might add.
And finally, this hearing is an excuse to use national
parks and public lands as a political foil to fuel anti-
immigrant rhetoric that creates division in our country and
that the Republican party sees as the only political advantage
heading into the 2024 elections.
So, of course, we are going to hear about it, and we are
going to continue to hear about it. No solutions, we are just
going to hear about it.
And for anyone that believes that this hearing is a sincere
attempt to protect public lands, let me quickly relieve you of
any misguidance you might have on that.
If my GOP colleagues actually cared about the parks, they
would increase funding for the Park Service. Instead, they have
done the opposite and passed an appropriations bill that cuts
Park Services already underfunded budget by half a billion.
If my GOP colleagues actually cared about our public lands,
they would make a real effort to hold oil, gas, and mining
companies accountable for the messes that they leave on our
public lands.
Instead, they do the opposite and continue pushing bill
after bill to gut environmental laws like NEPA and give
industry a cheap or even free pass to wreck our landscapes and
stick taxpayers with the cleanup bill.
And if my colleagues actually cared about the American
people, they wouldn't be pulling this stunt and would instead
get to work to keep our government funded and open, our more
basic responsibility in Congress.
But if my Republican colleagues are about migrant
scapegoating, ginning up the political rhetoric on this issue,
MAGA drum beats, Fox News shoutouts, Speaker McCarthy retweets,
and dramatic distractions, then I would say they are right on
track and on target in this hearing.
This is a serious issue and it is of crisis proportion,
nobody denies that. What we had hoped, from the initiation of
this Congress, this House of Representatives, was that there
would be some response to the initiative by President Biden on
comprehensive immigration reform and funding adequately what
needed to be done to deal with the humanitarian crisis.
I suspect and no, I don't suspect, I believe that this is a
self-fulfilling prophecy. You will not hear solutions from my
colleagues, you will hear the rhetoric that we have been
hearing over and over again. Hateful, sometimes, not fact
based, all the time. And without a clear solution.
If there is a middle ground and a consensus to be reached,
we want to work on that, but to say that this hearing is about
protection? An epiphany has occurred to save our public lands
is a mistake. It is an excuse.
And the self-fulfilling prophecy that Americans need to be
aware of is that the worst that it gets, the better in the
political calculations of the Republican party.
Has the Biden administration done everything? Has it
responded the way it should every time? No. I have complaints
about capacity, resource allocation, and being able to respond
to this in an effective and efficient way. I have complaints
about that.
But Congress has not done its job. This is a broken
immigration law that we have been dealing with for decades and
if the Republicans are serious, we are serious, to find
solutions and common ground.
But if this is just about maintaining a political advantage
or creating more division, or using this going into 2024 is the
only issue that Republicans have, then we can't work with that.
So, as we go forward with this hearing, I can only say that
this is not an opportunity to discuss, in some serious manner,
solutions. This is a meeting to try to create the division and
the rhetoric that is being pumped into this issue over and over
again.
With that, I yield back, Mr. Chairman.

Mr. Westerman. The gentleman yields back and I remind the
Committee that it is fully under our authority and jurisdiction
to have oversight over the National Park Service.
This is an issue that is imminently important to our
Committee and, I believe, to the American public on the broader
issue of immigration.
I will say that Republicans have acted. We passed H.R. 2,
the Secure our Border Act, a comprehensive immigration reform
bill. The first time that has been done definitely since I have
been in Congress and any kind of memory that I have of laws
being passed.
The Senate, unfortunately, has not taken that bill up. I
hope we give them another opportunity to do that. Before I
introduce the witnesses today, I will note that we planned on
having two panels today.
The first panel would have included National Park Service
Director Chuck Sams, DOI Solicitor Anderson, and DOI Principal
Deputy Assistant Secretary Mooney, but they chose not to appear
before us today.
All of these, we understand, played an intimate role, at
the bequest of the White House, to rubber stamp the lease on
Floyd Bennett Field.
While I realize that we provided a little over a weeks'
notice, I expect that the DOI and National Park Service
officials who signed off on a state of emergency would want to
urgently discuss that matter with Congress and the American
public.
We noticed this hearing on the first business day after the
lease was signed. With that being said, we will use all
available tools at the discretion of the Committee to compel
them to discuss this matter with us and the American people in
the near future.
I do want to thank the witnesses who agreed to testify
before us today and I look forward to hearing your testimony.
Our witnesses are the Honorable Joann Ariola, New York City
Council Member for the 32nd District, the Honorable Jaime
Williams, New York State Assemblymember for the 59th District,
Ms. Eleanor Acer, Senior Director of Refuge Protection at Human
Rights First, and Mr. Kenneth Spencer, Chairman of the United
States Park Police Fraternal Order of Police.
Let me remind the witnesses that under Committee Rules, you
must limit your oral statements to 5 minutes, but your entire
statement will appear in the hearing record.
To begin your testimony, please press the ``on'' button on
the microphone. We use timing lights. When you begin, the light
will turn green. At the end of 5 minutes, the light will turn
red, and I will ask you to please complete your statement.
The Chair now recognizes Councilwoman Ariola for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. JOANN ARIOLA, NEW YORK CITY COUNCIL
MEMBER, OZONE PARK, NEW YORK

Ms. Ariola. Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank you Mr. Ranking
Member, as well as the members of the Committee.
The primary duty of the National Park Service is to protect
the national parks and the national monuments under its
jurisdiction and keep them as nearly in their natural state as
this can be done in view of the fact that access to them must
be provided in order that they may be used and enjoyed.
These words were written by Stephen Mather, the first
director of the National Park Service, back in 1925. For much
of the last century they have held true, until now.
With the offering and signing of the lease at Floyd Bennett
Field, the Federal Government is going directly against what
Mather and countless other officials through the decades have
repeatedly said should be the primary duty of the National Park
Service.
Rather than providing access to this national park space,
the Federal Government is restricting the ability of the public
to fully enjoy the 1,300 acres of park land on the shores of
Jamaica Bay.
Instead of enabling public access, the National Park
Service is instead agreeing to house 2,000 people on the former
runway of this aviation landmark. Not only is this decision to
house thousands of people a violation of the founding ideals of
the National Park Service, but is also a violation of the
agreement made to establish the Gateway National Recreation
Area as well.
On September 26, 1972, then-Congressman Frank Brasco made
it clear why this site is incompatible with any plans for
housing at this location. There are no sewers, no sidewalks, no
curbs, no streets. There are no schools, no medical facilities,
or houses of worship.
Floyd Bennett Field is totally filled land with water 8
feet below the surface. Transportation facilities are virtually
nonexistent and the nearest subway is 4 miles from the site.
A single bus route now serves the area. The Congressman
also explained that New York City faces a serious lack of open
recreation space and Floyd Bennett Field would provide that
access to open green spaces for countless residents of
Brooklyn, Queens, and beyond.
Thanks to Congressman Brasco's argument, a state proposal
constructing housing at Floyd Bennett Field was removed and by
a vote of 76 to 13, Floyd Bennett Field was made a part of the
Gateway National Recreation Area.
Today, the situation is not much different than it was back
in 1972. The closest subway station is still 4 miles away. The
area still has no schools, medical facilities, houses of
worship, and is still only served by one bus line.
What has changed, however, is that the park now welcomes as
many as 1 million people per year to enjoy its open spaces and
programmed events.
It also is home to specialized NYPD units, a training
facility for the Department of Sanitation, and even a Marine
Reserve Unit among other assets. All of these stand to be
disrupted by the placement of 2,000 people or if the mayor's
office is to be believed, as many as 7,500 people in the area.
The decision to house thousands of people at this site has
also been done without following the proper protocols necessary
for such an endeavor, namely the decision is being pursued
without following the federally mandated NEPA process.
Pursuant to NEPA, the National Environmental Policy Act,
Federal law requires agency decision makers to make informed
decisions via a codified system of studies, assessments, and
input sessions, and the NEPA handbook itself states clearly,
``Actions taken in response to an emergency are not exempt to
NEPA review.''
Therefore, the NEPA process must be complete before any
agency makes a final decision on the proposed action. This was
not done. Additionally, there was no process of public notice,
effectively shutting out the ability of local community to
voice their concerns about this sudden and radical change to
their local park land.
This has effectively turned our national parks, something
Wallace Stegner once said was the best idea we ever had and
absolutely American, absolutely Democratic, into something that
is entirely undemocratic indeed.
Already, we have seen programming that should have taken
place at Floyd Bennett Field be canceled to accommodate this
base camp. Already an art festival from Jamaica Bay Rockaway
Park Conservancy has been scraped and we can be sure that
additional planned events will follow.
The placement of the migrant base camp at Floyd Bennett
Field flies in the face of the founding ideals of the National
Park Service and erodes the democratic underpinnings that have
been the hallmark of our park since their inception.
For these reasons, it is vital that the Federal Government
revoke the lease for Floyd Bennett Field and enable the public
to fully use this space, just as they have continually done
since 1972. Thank you for the time.

[The prepared statement of Ms. Ariola follows:]
Prepared Statement of Council Member Joann Ariola, 32nd Council
District, NYC City Council

``The primary duty of the National Park Service is to protect the
national parks and national monuments under its jurisdiction, and keep
them as nearly in their natural state as this can be done in view of
the fact that access to them must be provided in order that they may be
used and enjoyed.''
These words were written by Stephen Mather, the first director of
the National Parks Service, back in 1925. For much of the last century,
they have held true. Until now.
With the offering and signing of the lease at Floyd Bennett Field,
the federal government is going directly against what Mather and
countless other officials through the decades have repeatedly said
should be the primary duty of the National Parks Service. Rather than
providing access to this national park space, the federal government is
restricting the ability of the public to fully enjoy the 1,300 acres of
parkland on the shores of Jamaica Bay. Instead of enabling public
access, the National Parks Service is instead agreeing to house 2,000
people on the former runway of this aviation landmark.
Not only is this decision to house thousands of people a violation
of the founding ideals of the National Parks Service, but it is also a
violation of the agreements made to establish the Gateway National
Recreation Area as well. On September 26, 1972, then-Congressman Frank
Brasco made clear why this site is incompatible with any plans for
housing at the location: ``there are no sewers, no sidewalks, no curbs,
and no streets. There are no schools, medical facilities, or houses of
worship. Floyd Bennett Field is totally filled land with water 8 feet
below the surface . . . transportation facilities are virtually non-
existent . . . the nearest subway station is 4 miles from the site. A
single bus route now serves the area.''
The Congressman also explained that New York City faces a serious
lack of open recreation area, and Floyd Bennett Field would provide
access to open green spaces for countless residents of Brooklyn,
Queens, and beyond.
Thanks to Congressman Brasco's argument, a state proposal to
construct housing at Floyd Bennett Field was removed, and, by a vote of
76 to 13, Floyd Bennett Field was made a part of the Gateway National
Recreation area.
Today, the situation is not much different than it was back in
1972. The closest subway station is still 4 miles away. The area still
has no schools, medical facilities, or houses of worship, and it is
still only served by one bus line. What has changed, however, is that
the park now welcomes as many as one million people a year to enjoy its
open spaces and programmed events. It is also home to specialized NYPD
units, the training facilities for the Department of Sanitation, and
even a Marine Reserve unit, among other assets. All of these stand to
be disrupted by the placement of 2,000 people--or if the Mayor's office
is to be believed, as many as 7,500 people--in the area.
The decision to house thousands of people at this site has also
been done without following the proper protocols necessary for such an
endeavor. Namely, the decision is being pursued without following the
federally mandated NEPA processes. Pursuant to NEPA, the National
Environmental Policy Act, federal law requires agency decision makers
to make informed decisions via a codified system of studies,
assessments, and input sessions, and the NEPA handbook itself states
clearly ``actions taken in response to an emergency are not exempt from
NEPA review.''
Therefore, the NEPA process must be completed before an agency
makes a final decision on a proposed action. This was not done.
Additionally, there was no process of public notice, effectively
shutting out the ability of local communities to voice their concerns
about this sudden and radical change to their local park land. This has
effectively turned our national parks--something Wallace Stegner once
called ``the best idea we ever had. Absolutely American, absolutely
democratic'' into something entirely undemocratic indeed.
Already, we have seen programming that should have taken place on
Floyd Bennett Field be canceled to accommodate this base camp. Already,
an art festival from the Jamaica Bay Rockaway Parks Conservancy has
been scrapped, and we can be sure that additional planned events will
follow.
The placement of a migrant base camp at Floyd Bennett Field flies
in the face of the founding ideals of the National Parks Service, and
erodes the democratic underpinnings that have been the hallmark of our
parks since their inception. For these reasons, it is vital that the
federal government revoke the lease at Floyd Bennett Field, and enable
the public to fully use this space, just as they have continually since
1972.

*****

The following document was submitted as an attachment to Ms. Ariola's
testimony.

The document is available for viewing at:

https://docs.house.gov/meetings/II/II00/20230927/116399/HHRG-118-II00-
Wstate-AriolaJ-20230927-SD001.pdf

______

Mr. Westerman. The gentlelady yields back.
The Chair now recognizes Assemblywoman Williams for 5
minutes.

STATEMENT OF JAIME WILLIAMS, ASSEMBLYMEMBER, NEW YORK STATE
ASSEMBLY, BROOKLYN, NEW YORK

Ms. Williams. Good morning, Chair and Ranking Member.
In recent weeks, the Governor of New York State and the
Mayor of New York City proposed a plan to use our national
park, Floyd Bennett Field, via the Biden administration, to
temporarily house migrants have become a great concern for our
community.
Please let me share some of these concerns. This past
weekend, there were almost 5 inches of water covering Runway
19, the exact location proposed for housing the migrants. This
is not an isolated event, but rather a frequent occurrence.
This serves as a stark reminder to the potential dangers of
Floyd Bennett Field. In addition, it is a transit desert and
has no infrastructure, no plumbing, no electricity, no sewage
system.
As you may know, SEQR mandates a rigorous review of
environmental, social, and economic impacts for any project.
However, in this particular case, it is evident that due
diligence was not executed in compliance with SEQR's multi-step
decision process.
This noncompliance not only negates the law, but also risks
unforeseen detrimental consequences on multiple fronts,
including the socio-economic well-being of the local residents
and the environmental sanctity of the area.
The failure to adhere to NEPA regulations further
illuminates the glaring shortcomings in evaluating the proposed
plan. NEPA's binding regulations are designed to safeguard
against environmentally detrimental proposals, ensuring the
preparation of environmental impact statements. The absence of
these critical assessments raises grave concerns about the
underlying environmental sustainability and safety of
relocating migrants to this area.
Floyd Bennett Field, a national park, is a treasure of
natural beauty and biodiversity. Housing individuals here is
equivalent to tarnishing the sanctity of Yellowstone National
Park.
The irreversible damage of flora and fauna and the
destruction of our natural beauty are contrary to the ethos of
conservation and preservation that national parks symbolize.
The 1972 decision by Congress against the housing plan in
Floyd Bennett Field based on its inadequacy for residents must
not be overlooked. This historical precedence serves as a
legislative evidence of the sustainability of the area.
Revisiting and overturning such well-founded decisions
without adequate reassessment suggests a lack of prudence and
disregard for established legislation.
Migrants, many of whom have already faced immense
suffering, are entitled to a safe and secure living
environment. Placing them in a flood prone area during an
active hurricane season, as well as colder months ahead, is
neither humane or ethical.
The proposal not only risks the safety of the migrants but
also impacts the welfare and quality of life of the local
residents around Floyd Bennett Field. It is crucial to consider
the cumulative implications to the community, which will have
to bear the brunt of the socio-economic and environmental
disruptions.
In conclusion, on behalf of every resident of the 59th
Assembly District, I ask the dedicated members of this
Committee of Natural Resources to take these points into
consideration and reject this proposal.
Please reflect on our commitment to uphold the principals
of our environmental stewardship, legislative compliance,
ethical responsibility, and humanitarian compassion.
Together with your support, we will continue to ensure that
our national park and its historic sites will be preserved for
future generations to come. Thank you.

[The prepared statement of Ms. Williams follows:]

Prepared Statement of Jaime Williams, NYS Assemblywoman,
59th Assembly District

Good morning, Chairman Westerman, Chair of Natural Resources and to all
House Committee Members of Congress. Thank you for inviting me to
appear before you today.

In recent weeks, the Governor of NYS and the Mayor of NYC proposed
a plan to use our National Park Floyd Bennett Field via the Biden
Administration to temporary house migrants have become a great concern
for our community.

Please let me share some of our concerns:

1.  Concrete Evidence of Danger and Unsuitability: This past weekend,
there was almost 5 inches of water covering Runway 19--the
exact location proposed for housing the migrants. This is
not an isolated event but rather a frequent occurrence.
This serves as a stark reminder to the potential dangers of
Floyd Bennett Field. In addition it's a transit dessert and
has no infrastructure! No plumbing, no electricity, no
sewage system.

2.  State and Federal Environmental Guidelines were not followed: As
you may know SEQR (State Environmental Quality Review Act)
mandates a rigorous review of environmental, social, and
economic impacts for any project. However, in this
particular case it is evident that due diligence was not
executed in compliance with SEQR's multi-step decision
process. This non-compliance not only negates the law but
also risks unforeseen detrimental consequences on multiple
fronts, including the socio-economic well-being of the
local residents and the environmental sanctity of the area.

3.  Federal Oversight and Responsibilities: The failure to adhere to
NEPA (National Environmental Policy Act) regulations
further illuminates the glaring shortcomings in evaluating
the proposed plan. NEPA's binding regulations are designed
to safeguard against environmentally detrimental proposals,
ensuring the preparation of environmental impact
statements. The absence of these critical assessments
raises grave concerns about the underlying environmental
sustainability and safety of relocating migrants to this
area.

4.  Devastating Impact on National Park's Ecosystem: Floyd Bennett
Field, a National Park, is a treasure of natural beauty and
biodiversity. Housing individuals here is equivalent to
tarnishing the sanctity of Yellowstone National Park. The
irreversible damage to flora and fauna and the destruction
of natural beauty are contrary to the very ethos of
conservation and preservation that National Parks
symbolize.

5.  Historical Precedence and Legislative Prudence: The 1972 decision
by Congress against the housing plan on Floyd Bennett Field
based on its inadequacy for residences must not be
overlooked. This historical precedence serves as a
legislative evidence of the unsuitability of the area for
residential purposes. Revisiting and overturning such well-
founded decisions, without adequate reassessments, suggests
a lack of prudence and disregard for established
legislation.

6.  Ethical and Humanitarian Considerations: Migrants, many of whom
have already faced immense suffering, are entitled to a
safe and secure living environment. Placing them in a
flood-prone area during an active hurricane season, as well
as the colder months ahead, is neither humane nor ethical.

7.  Local Residents Welfare and Community Impact: The proposal not
only risks the safety of the migrants but also impacts the
welfare and quality of life of the local residents
surrounding Floyd Bennett Field. It is crucial to consider
the cumulative implications to the community, which will
have to bear the brunt of the socio-economic and
environmental disruptions.
Conclusion:
In conclusion on behalf of every resident of the 59th Assembly
district I ask the dedicated committee members of the Natural Resources
Committee to take these points into consideration and reject this
proposal. Please reflect on our commitment to uphold the principles of
environmental stewardship, legislative compliance, ethical
responsibility, and humanitarian compassion. Together, and with your
support, we will continue to ensure that our National Parks and its
historic sites are well preserved for future generations to come.

______

Mr. Westerman. Assemblywoman Williams, thank you for your
testimony as well as Councilwoman Ariola, thank you for your
testimony.
The Chair now recognizes Ms. Acer for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF ELEANOR ACER, SENIOR DIRECTOR, REFUGEE PROTECTION,
HUMAN RIGHTS FIRST, NEW YORK, NEW YORK

Ms. Acer. Thank you. Chairman Westerman, Ranking Member
Grijalva, and distinguished members of the Committee, thank you
for the opportunity to testify before you today.
My name is Eleanor Acer, and I am Senior Director for
Refugee Protection at Human Rights First. My testimony today is
going to focus on some of the key steps that the Biden
administration and Congress should take to ensure and sustain
humane, legal, and orderly processes as U.S. communities, both
at the border and across the country, receive migrants and
people seeking asylum.
Key steps include: to significantly improve access to work
permits; to increase critical funding to support reception in
border and destination communities; to properly resource
humanitarian aid for settlements, safe shelter, asylum and
immigration, court adjudications in the United States; and to
reject and counter dangerous rhetoric painting migrants and
asylum seekers as threats or invaders.
In recent years, the human rights situation in many
countries in the Americas have deteriorated pushing people to
flee in search of protection, safety, and stability.
In reality, though, the vast majority of the world's
refugees are hosted by countries other than the United States.
Six million of the 7.3 million, now, I think, 7.7 million, that
have fled from Venezuela are in other countries, in Colombia,
Brazil, Peru, Costa Rica, and other places in Latin America and
the Caribbean.
The United States is more than capable of humanely
receiving and fairly processing the claims of people seeking
asylum. The steps outlined in my testimony today are crucial to
doing so.
First, the prompt provision of work permits is critical to
supporting U.S. communities, as well as for migrants and asylum
seekers to support themselves and their families.
The reality is that immigrants have always been and always
will be a boom to New York City and the nation. In a letter to
President Biden and congressional leaders, over 100 executives
of major corporations explain that there are labor shortages in
many U.S. industries and there is a compelling need for
expedited processing of asylum applications and work permits.
Last week, the Biden administration announced important
steps to improve work authorization processing, as well as to
designate and extend TPS for Venezuelans, moves that will help
more people to work, house, and support themselves more
quickly, but more action is needed, as outlined in my written
testimony.
Second, Congress should increase shelter and support
program funding, and increase funding to all cities receiving
migrants and asylum seekers through the Aspire Act, which we
will urge you all to support.
Third, the Biden administration should also double down on
some of the effective humane and legal policies that it has
already initiated or announced, and reject those that punish,
ban, and block people seeking asylum.
I have laid out some key steps along these lines in my
testimony and I am happy to talk about this later further.
Congressional support is essential to assure the
appropriations needed to implement effective solutions. By
contrast, the failure of Congress to appropriate necessary
resources, including via a government shutdown, is sure to
thwart orderly migration management and adjudications.
It is deeply concerning to see many of the most harmful and
ineffective policies from recent years included in legislation
passed by the House, called the Secure Border Act of 2023.
It is a patchwork of extreme anti-immigrant proposals that
would shut down the U.S. asylum system and target families and
children. Policies that ban, block, and turn away people
seeking asylum are not a solution. They are actually part of
the problem.
The crisis we are facing is a global humanitarian crisis.
Other nations, including those with far less resource, are
welcoming and hosting the overwhelming majority of the world's
refugees.
We can and must do better, and I look forward to discussing
this with you further.

[The prepared statement of Ms. Acer follows:]
Prepared Statement of Eleanor Acer, Senior Director for Refugee
Protection, Human Rights First

Chairman Westerman, Ranking Member Grijalva, and distinguished
Members of the Committee, thank you for the opportunity to testify
before you today. My name is Eleanor Acer, and I serve as Human Rights
First's Senior Director for Refugee Protection. I have over twenty-five
years of experience monitoring and advocating for adherence to human
rights and refugee law. Human Rights First is an independent, non-
profit organization that, for more than four decades, has pressed the
United States to take a lead role in promoting, defending and upholding
human rights. It has partnered with human rights defenders in Cuba, El
Salvador, Hong Kong, Russia, Saudi Arabia, Ukraine and elsewhere around
the world and, here at home, with attorneys, veterans and many others.
Human Rights First also works with volunteer lawyers at many of the
nation's leading law firms through our offices in New York City, Los
Angeles and Washington DC to provide pro bono legal representation to
refugees seeking asylum, helping thousands to receive protection in
this country. These have included pro-democracy advocates and victims
of religious persecution from China, journalists forced to flee
Guatemala, Ethiopia, Honduras, Iran, and Nigeria, LGBTQ+ people seeking
protection from persecution, victims of political repression from
Venezuela, Syria, Egypt and Nicaragua, and Indigenous and other
families targeted due to their opposition to brutal armed groups with
transnational reach in Honduras, El Salvador, and Guatemala.
My testimony will focus on some of the key steps that the Biden
administration and Congress should take to ensure and sustain humane,
legal and orderly processes as U.S. communities--both at the border and
across the country--receive migrants and people seeking asylum. These
include steps to significantly improve access to work permits, increase
critical funding to support reception in border and destination
communities, properly resource humanitarian aid, resettlement, safe
shelter in Mexico and adjudications, and to reject and counter
dangerous rhetoric painting migrants and asylum seekers as threats or
``invaders.''
Upholding Asylum is Morally Right and Politically Popular Across Party
Lines

The right to seek asylum is a fundamental human right enshrined in
the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. In the wake of World War II,
the United States helped lead efforts to draft the Refugee Convention,
which along with its Protocol, prohibits the return of people to
persecution. United States law specifically provides for people in
search of refuge to seek asylum at ports of entry and after entering
the United States.
The majority of American voters, across party lines, believe that
the United States should provide asylum to people fleeing persecution
or violence in their home countries.
1
Many Americans are the
children, grandchildren, and great-grandchildren of people who fled
political, religious and other persecution. Moreover, lawmakers of both
parties also believe the right to asylum should be protected.
Over recent years, the human rights situations in many countries in
the Americas have deteriorated, pushing people--including people from
Cuba, Haiti, Nicaragua and Venezuela--to flee in search of protection,
safety and stability.
Contrary to anti-immigrant rhetoric, the reality is that the vast
majority of the world's refugees are hosted by countries other than the
United States. In fact, of the 7.3 million people who have fled
Venezuela in search of safety and stability, about 6 million are hosted
in Colombia, Ecuador, Peru and other countries in Latin America and the
Caribbean. Costa Rica is hosting over 200,000 or more Nicaraguans, and
experienced a five-fold increase in total asylum claims in the first
six months of 2022, as compared to the year before. Mexico hosts about
500,000 refugees and asylum seekers, though many face grave threats to
their safety there. The United States is more than capable of humanely
receiving and fairly processing the asylum claims of the portion of
people seeking refuge here from repression, violence and persecution.
But the steps identified in my testimony today are crucial to doing so.
Migrants and Asylum Seekers Should be Provided Prompt Work
Authorization

The prompt provision of work permits is critical to supporting U.S.
communities receiving asylum seekers and migrants, as well as for
migrants and asylum seeker to be able to work to support themselves and
their families. Swift access to work permits is a top concern to both
asylum seekers themselves and the communities hosting new arrivals.
The reality is that immigrants have always been, and will continue
to be, a great benefit to New York City. In a letter to President Biden
and Congressional leaders, New York City business community leaders
stressed that ``there is a compelling need for expedited processing of
asylum applications and work permits for those who meet federal
eligibility standards'' and explained that ``[t]here are labor
shortages in many U.S. industries, where employers are prepared to
offer training and jobs to individuals who are authorized to work in
the United States.'' One hundred executives of major corporations
signed the letter. The Speaker of the New York City Council and the
Executive Director of the New York Immigration Coalition also explained
that providing work permits and TPS would ``help alleviate our
overburdened shelter and social service systems, delivering necessary
relief to our social infrastructure.'' Mayor Eric Adams of New York
repeatedly urged the Biden administration to issue work permits to
asylum seekers more quickly.
Last week, the Biden administration announced important steps to
improve work authorization processing, as well as to redesignate and
extend TPS for Venezuelans. These moves will help enable more people to
work, house and support themselves more quickly--and were welcomed by
New Yorkers, including the Mayor and non-profit organizations. The
steps include important action to address work permit processing delays
and to lengthen the validity period of certain work permits to five
years.
But more action is urgently needed to address work permit delays.
The Biden administration should take additional steps, and work with
Congress to ensure, prompt provision of work authorization for asylum
seekers.
For example, the Biden administration should advance additional key
reforms including to immediately act to permanently expand the
automatic extension of work authorization for immigrants with pending
work permit renewal applications by issuing an interim final rule. In
addition, the administration should support, and Congress should enact,
statutory reforms to reduce the 180 day waiting period for work
authorization and eliminate the two-year renewal schedule which
prevents many people seeking asylum from working to support themselves
and their families, and deprives host communities of much needed
workers.
The Biden administration should also move ahead with other
necessary and warranted redesignations, extensions, and designations of
TPS which will enable migrants and people seeking asylum from these
countries to apply for work authorization and will benefit U.S.
communities. The administration should redesignate and extend TPS for
Cameroon, Sudan, South Sudan, El Salvador, Honduras, Nicaragua and
Nepal, and provide new designations for countries, that meet the
program's statutory requirements, including the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, Guatemala, Mali, Mauritania and Nigeria. The Biden
administration should also provide quick access to work authorization
for parolees by providing it on arrival as was done for Ukrainian
nationals who were paroled into the United States.
Leverage Faith-Based and Refugee Aid Organizations, and Increase SSP
Funding

To enhance arrival and reception efforts, the Biden administration
should redouble efforts to leverage and coordinate with the network of
humanitarian organizations, including faith-based groups, legal
nonprofits, and refugee assistance agencies with offices across the
country. Many have substantial experience assisting new arrivals and
long track records of working with CBP and other U.S. agencies. Some
provide refugee assistance and management around the world. Congress
should strongly support these initiatives which are critical to U.S.
communities, CBP operations, and the migrants and asylum seekers they
assist.
The Biden administration should develop and continue to pursue
increased funding for the Shelter and Support program to disburse funds
as needed (rather than on a reimbursement model), remove limitations on
the use of funds for transportation and shelter costs and safeguard the
program's humanitarian funding structure. Congress in turn should
increase SSP funding. It should also continue to express concern that
the funds are routed through CBP given its track record of misusing
humanitarian funds, and provide rigorous oversight to ensure problems
with the distribution and coordination of funds are immediately
addressed. We urge that transmission of actual funds that have been
awarded through this program are transferred to the receiving
organizations without delay so as to ensure this vital work is not
impacted by any potential government shutdown.
In addition, the Biden administration should work with Congress to
increase funding to all cities receiving migrants and asylum seekers,
including by supporting the ASPIRE Act. That bill would provide an
additional $10 billion for EFSP and SSP funding, helping to lay the
foundation for the robust coordination that border and interior
communities urgently need.
Real, humane, legal and effective asylum policies and border strategies

The Biden administration should double down on some of the
effective, humane and legal policies that it has already initiated or
announced, and reject those that punish, ban and block people seeking
asylum. Key steps include to redouble efforts to expand regional
refugee resettlement, strengthen the administration's pivotal parole
initiatives, increase critical humanitarian aid to help remedy the
regional protection gaps that have been pushing many to flee north,
urgently increase support for safe shelter and other dire needs of
people waiting in northern Mexico, maximize access to asylum at ports
of entry, properly staff asylum and immigration court adjudications,
and improve and restart use of the Biden administration's new asylum
processing rule to help adjudicate more asylum cases more efficiently.
Congressional support is essential to assure the appropriations
needed to implement effective solutions, including to properly ramp up
resettlement, regional humanitarian aid, and U.S. reception and
adjudication capacities. By contrast, the failure of Congress to
appropriate necessary resources--including a government shutdown--is
sure to thwart orderly migration management and adjudications.
The Biden administration should bring its harmful asylum ban
policy, which it pledged would only be temporary, to its end now and
honor his campaign promise to end such restrictions. A federal district
court ruled in July that the asylum ban is unlawful, but it remains in
place on appeal. Not only does the policy violate both U.S. and
international law, but it has generated strong and diverse opposition
from faith-groups, Holocaust survivors, major unions, civil rights
organizations, members of the president's political party and other key
Biden administration allies. Every day that it is left in place, it
continues to endanger refugees and subvert refugee law.
Congress must also reject attempts to codify into law policies that
ban, block or turn away people seeking refuge without providing asylum
hearings or interviews that comply with U.S. and international refugee
law. Like the Biden and Trump asylum bans, the Trump administration's
Title 42 and Remain in Mexico policies were also failed policies that
violated and evaded immigration law, inflicted disorder and dysfunction
at the border, and led to massive human rights abuses. These
dysfunctional policies also spurred repeat entries, led to family
separations, pushed people seeking asylum to cross outside ports of
entry, and inflated border statistics. Human Rights First tracked at
least 1,544 publicly reported cases of kidnappings, murder, torture,
rape and other violent attacks against people returned to Mexico under
MPP during the Trump administration, and over 13,480 kidnappings,
torture, and other attacks against asylum seekers and migrants impacted
by the Title 42 policy during the first two years of President Biden's
administration.
It is deeply concerning to see many of the most harmful and
ineffective policies from recent years included in legislation passed
by the House. The ``Secure the Border Act of 2023'' is a patchwork of
extreme anti-immigrant proposals that would shut down the U.S. asylum
system and target families and children for the cruelest forms of
mistreatment.
Counterproductive policies such as Title 42 and Remain in Mexico
have also benefited the criminal cartels that control extensive
territories. As Human Right First detailed in a February 2022 report,
cartels adapted to turnback policies by targeting the very asylum
seekers turned away by CBP--kidnapping them, purporting to charge them
for the right to remain in Mexico, torturing them and demanding ransom
payments from their U.S. family members. Some of these organizations
worked to actively prevent asylum seekers from approaching ports of
entry, as the restoration of port of entry processing for asylum
seekers threatens the cartels' control and extortion efforts. Now they
are actively targeting people who wait to seek asylum in northern
Mexico, driving some to cross in urgent search for safety.
Ending the failed Title 42 policy does not mean that the U.S.
border is ``open.'' It means that U.S. immigration and refugee law can
no longer be evaded by the specious invocation of ``public health''
authority. Policies that ban, block and turn away people seeking asylum
are not a solution, they are part of the problem.
The last thing that Congress or the Biden administration should do
is to attempt to force, prolong, codify, or resurrect policies that
violate U.S. law and obligations under international refugee law and
inflict disorder, family separation and massive human rights abuses on
people seeking refuge.
Anti-Immigrant Narratives Endanger Communities and Drive Harmful
Policies

Anti-immigrant fear-mongering that paints migrants and people
seeking asylum as threats and ``invaders'' fuels white supremist
conspiracy theories and violence targeting Black, brown, immigrant,
Jewish and other people, as Human Rights First's experts on extremism
and antisemitism have detailed in a recent fact sheet. By portraying
immigrants as an existential threat to native-born Americans, this type
of rhetoric makes violence more likely, as we have seen in recent
years. Eleven people in Pittsburgh and 23 people in El Paso were
murdered by white supremacists animated by fears of supposed immigrant
``invaders.'' As these horrifying attacks demonstrate, we cannot
divorce this ``invasion'' rhetoric from its violent and racist origins.
These narratives often rely on a vitriolic combination of
disinformation and bigoted stereotypes. For example, immigrants are
often portrayed as criminal or violent, even when extensive research
shows native-born Americans are much more likely to commit crimes than
are immigrants. In recent years, immigrants have been increasingly
blamed for the devastating growth of fentanyl usage across the country,
despite the reality that fentanyl is most likely to enter the United
States through legal points of entry by U.S. citizens.
Lawmakers must refuse to provide a platform for this rhetoric and
must swiftly call out racist fearmongering and counter disinformation
with reliable and accurate data. To prevent Congressional hearings from
serving as vehicles to further popularize extremist rhetoric, lawmakers
must effectively challenge the disinformation, bigoted stereotypes, and
conspiracy theories on which these narratives rely. For example, 115
Members of Congress co-sponsored H. Res. 413, which condemns the white
supremacist ``great replacement'' conspiracy theory and the terrorist
attack targeting the Black community it inspired in Buffalo, New York.
Representative Raskin, Ranking Member of the Committee on Oversight and
Accountability, publicly called on his fellow Committee members to
denounce white supremacism. Lawmakers, especially those in positions of
leadership, can and must proactively and repeatedly counter such
statements on the public record, ensure the voices of targeted
communities have representation, and support efforts to protect the
rights of migrants and asylum seekers.
Recommendations for Upholding Refugee Law

Instead of seeking to prolong, use or resurrect inhumane and
counterproductive policies that were part of the Trump administration's
agenda, the Biden administration and Congress should work together to:

Increase support for human rights and refugee hosting
capacity in other countries in the Americas, addressing
gaps in regional protection, including through efforts to
support development of strong asylum systems, reception
capacities, access to employment, and protection of rights
and safety of refugees and migrants in Mexico and other
countries in the Americas. Urgently enhance aid for safe
shelter, humane reception and dire needs of people waiting
in northern Mexico to seek asylum.

Ramp up, speed up, support and strengthen regional and
global refugee resettlement, improve parole and other safe
migration pathways in the Americas, but never use the
existence of such pathways to deny access to asylum.

Uphold refugee law at U.S. borders without discrimination,
including to maximize (rather than restrict or ``meter'')
asylum at ports of entry, and ensure people seeking asylum
have prompt access to ports of entry--not limited to CBP
One, but also assured to people approaching ports of entry
to seek asylum. Maximizing asylum at ports of entry after
years of blockage is essential not only to uphold refugee
law, but also to end the counterproductive consequences of
Trump policies that, by restricting and blocking access to
asylum at ports of entry, have long pushed populations that
previously sought asylum at ports of entry to instead
attempt to cross the border.

Immediately rescind the Biden administration's asylum ban,
which punishes refugees and bars them from asylum. Stop
subjecting asylum seekers to expedited removal which
diverts adjudication resources and is being used to alter
the credible fear standard, including through dangerously
fast-tracked screenings in CBP custody where asylum seekers
do not have meaningful access to counsel.

Implement a humanitarian, rather than a punitive and
attempted deterrence-based, approach to refugee protection
through effective, sustainable, humane refugee reception
agency structures, coordination, funding mechanisms, and
case support to address the lack of dedicated humanitarian
and refugee protection structures that has long hampered
the U.S. response to people seeking refuge at its own
borders.

Upgrade asylum adjudication processes so they are
accurate, fair, properly staffed, and prompt, including:
improve the new asylum rule process so it leads to
efficiency rather than rushed and counterproductive
inaccurate adjudications, fund sufficient asylum
adjudication capacities to address asylum backlogs and
ensure timely adjudication of new cases, and support and
champion funding for legal representation.

Stand firm against anti-immigrant rhetoric and efforts,
and unequivocally reject attempts to exploit Congressional
hearings as opportunities to platform dangerous anti-
immigrant conspiracy theories. Reject and oppose anti-
asylum Congressional proposals, including efforts to force
continuation or enactment into law of the Trump
administration's cruel, racist, and counterproductive
policies. Draconian policies will not appease perpetrators
of xenophobic, racist rhetoric, but will inflict massive
human suffering, create more dysfunction, and subvert
refugee law globally.

Human Rights First has detailed these steps in its comprehensive
recommendations paper issued in January 2023. These strategies lay out
a more humane and effective approach.

Let's be clear: we are not, by any stretch of the imagination, an
``open borders'' nation. Any such assertion is patently false. For
example, CBP conducts security checks of people seeking entry at ports
of entry or otherwise encountered, and puts people into removal
proceedings, expedited removal, and/or refers them to ICE for check-
ins. Too often they send people seeking refugee protection to
immigration jails. Human Rights First has issued countless reports
documenting past and present asylum bans and the horrifying impact of
Title 42. Unfortunately, our government has repeatedly focused on
harsh, rights-violating policies that attempt to deter and punish
people seeking to migrate or request asylum at the border, only
exacerbating bottlenecks and dangerous conditions along the Southwest
border and in detention.
Instead of prolonging, codifying, using, or resurrecting unjust,
inhumane, and dysfunctional policies aimed at decimating asylum that
were initiated under the Trump administration, the Biden administration
and Members of Congress should uphold U.S. refugee law, the human right
to seek asylum, and U.S. commitments under international refugee law.
This includes abandoning efforts to ban or deny asylum to refugees who
are otherwise eligible for asylum under U.S. law.
The crisis we are facing is a global humanitarian crisis; people
are fleeing their home countries due to a rise in political
instability, authoritarianism, human rights abuses, climate change, and
more. The United States is not meeting the moment, nor is it leading by
example; other nations, including those with far less capacity than
ours, are welcoming and hosting the overwhelming majority of the
world's refugees. We can and must do better to uphold refugee law at
home.

______

Mr. Westerman. Ms. Acer, thank you for your testimony.
The Chair now recognizes Mr. Spencer for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF KENNETH SPENCER, CHAIRMAN, UNITED STATES PARK
POLICE FRATERNAL ORDER OF POLICE, WASHINGTON, DC

Mr. Spencer. Thank you. Good morning, Chairman Westerman,
Ranking Member Grijalva, and members of the Natural Resources
Committee.
My name is Kenneth Spencer and my testimony this morning is
delivered in my capacity as Chairman of the United States Park
Police Fraternal Order of Police.
Simply put, our organization represents the interests of
approximately 350 sworn law enforcement officers of the United
States Park Police. I am honored to be here today and very
thankful for this opportunity to share officer safety concerns
regarding the proposed migrant shelter facilities on Floyd
Bennett Field.
On average, U.S. Park Police officers protect 160,000 daily
visitors to our national parks in Washington, DC, San
Francisco, and New York City. Patrolling a geographic area of
over 30,000 acres and more than 75 miles of highway.
Notably, we are the world's leading law enforcement agency
when it comes to supporting large-scale special events and
other First Amendment activities.
Despite our sweeping law enforcement jurisdiction across
Floyd Bennett Field and the surrounding communities, the
September 15, 2023 lease agreement between the Interior
Department and the City of New York, 61 pages in all, includes
only one reference to the United States Park Police, which
restates our role as the primary entity responsible for law
enforcement issues outside of the camp perimeter within the
boundaries of the park area.
Tellingly, the National Park Service never consulted with
our agency or our officers to collaborate on law enforcement
concerns or operational implementation. Let me be perfectly
clear, even without the migrant shelter on Floyd Bennett Field,
we are at least 300 officers short of our required minimum
level.
Our capacity to serve and protect the public today is
literally bursting at the seams. The idea that the U.S. Park
Police is prepared to address 2,000 new migrants left under
tents with nothing to do and no ability to communicate is not
only imprudent, but it is also perilous.
The proposed migrant's shelter on Floyd Bennett Field falls
under the jurisdiction of our Jamaica Bay Station Unit. As of
today, there are 25 sworn officers assigned to this unit.
Typically, there are only two officers on duty per shift. I
think that is worth restating. Under the officer staffing
levels that exist today, just two police officers will be
responsible for all the law enforcement matters outside of the
tent.
The impact of this staffing reality undeniable, the
surrounding public, our officers, and the migrants themselves
will face significant safety risks 24/7.
In addition to the extreme shortages of our officers, the
Jamaica Bay Unit does not have any of the modern facilities
that would be needed to provide law enforcement services
surrounding the migrant camp.
For example, we have one holding cell for prisoner
processing. Our station phones and computers are at best
unreliable, and the station is left unstaffed most of the day.
Windows to the station are unsecured and accessible on the
ground level from the outside of the station. To my knowledge,
the National Park Service has no plans to address or fix any of
this in advance of the migrants moving in.
In fact, the NPS superintendent of Gateway National
Recreation Area refused to request any funds for the United
States Park Police under the terms of this lease agreement.
Even if one were to ignore the officer staffing shortages,
and the dilapidated station facilities, as New York City and
the Park Service have done, I have many grave concerns about
our agency readiness to protect the public and the migrants
themselves.
For example, will the Park Service provide us full time
translators to facilitate communications? What will be the
processing protocols for arrests? How can we protect migrants
from the dangerous currents of Jamaica Bay, the toxic areas
containing discarded radioactive materials, and abandoned
buildings where homeless are known to congregate?
What protections are in place for the adjacent youth sports
center, bird watching sanctuaries, fishing areas, and
children's petting zoo. I am not a lawyer, but under these
knowingly dangerous conditions, I can only imagine the number
of lawsuits the Park Service might face.
Our officers are truly passionate about serving the public
throughout the communities under our three jurisdictions.
Unfortunately, the National Park Service appears all too
willing to erect these migrant camps in a region that is
entirely unprepared to mitigate against the safety risks.
My testimony this morning is not one of politics or public
policy regarding migrants. Indeed, the law enforcement concerns
I speak of today are all too real, dangerous, and
irresponsible.
Regrettably, I fear for the safety of our officers, the
public, and the migrants themselves. Thank you again for the
opportunity to present this testimony today on behalf of United
States Park Police Officers, and I welcome any questions the
Committee may have.

[The prepared statement of Mr. Spencer follows:]
Prepared Statement of Kenneth Spencer, Chairman, United States Park
Police Fraternal Order of Police

Good morning Chairman Westerman, Ranking Member Grijalva, and
Members of the Natural Resources Committee, my name is Kenneth Spencer
and my testimony this morning is delivered in my capacity as the
Chairman of the United States Park Police Fraternal Order of Police
(``USPPFOP''). Simply put, our organization represents the interests of
the approximately 350 sworn law enforcement officers of the United
States Park Police (``USPP''). I am honored to be here today and very
thankful for this opportunity to share the USPPFOP's serious safety
concerns regarding the proposed migrant shelter facilities on Floyd
Bennett Field in southeast Brooklyn.
By way of background, in addition to my capacity as the Chairman of
the USPPFOP, I serve as a Master Patrol Officer for the USPP. In my 13
years with the USPP, with the help from my brothers and sisters at the
USPP and in other law enforcement departments, I have survived first-
hand experiences with several serious and large-scale matters where
crowd control was difficult and public safety was in jeopardy. My
experience with these matters enables me to predict, with a high degree
of certainty, that law enforcement related to the Floyd Bennett migrant
camps will be extremely hazardous.
Before my time with the USPP, I proudly served in the United States
Air Force as a Law Enforcement Area Supervisor and Nuclear Weapons
Security Escort Team Leader with the United States Air Force Security
Forces. During these years, I was deployed in support of Operation
Enduring Freedom and Iraqi Freedom, completing tours in multiple
locations throughout Iraq and Kuwait. I firmly believe my background
and experience with such ``powder keg'' environments involving large
populations with almost no ability to communicate between one another
is directly relevant to the discussion here today.
United States Park Police

The United States Park Police was created by President George
Washington in 1791. The Force functions as a unit of the National Park
Service (``NPS'') with jurisdiction in urban federal parks, including
all federal lands throughout the District of Columbia, San Francisco,
and New York City. Our mission is to provide quality law enforcement to
safeguard lives, protect our national treasures and symbols of
democracy, and preserve the natural and cultural resources entrusted to
us.
On average, USPP officers protect 160,000 daily visitors to our
parks, patrols a geographic area of over 30,000 acres across 3 urban
metropolitan regions, and more than 75 miles of highway. Notably, we
are the world's leading law enforcement agency when it comes to
supporting large scale special events and other First Amendment
activities.
Despite our sweeping law enforcement jurisdiction across Floyd
Bennett Field and the surrounding community, the September 15, 2023
lease agreement between the Interior Department and the City of New
York, 61 pages in all, includes only one reference to the USPP which
restates our role as the ``primary entity responsible for law
enforcement issues [outside of the camp perimeter] within the
boundaries of the Park Area.'' Tellingly, the National Park Service
never consulted with our agency or our officers to collaborate on law
enforcement concerns or operational implementation.
Moreover, despite the tens of millions of dollars being allocated
to the NPS for rent and park maintenance improvements, not a single
penny, according to the signed lease, is assigned to offset the new
demands the migrant shelter will put upon the USPP's New York Field
Office. Adding insult to injury, just last week our new Chief
circulated an email to all officers, sharing with us that she has been
directed by NPS to formulate a budget that anticipates law enforcement
cuts in FY24. I struggle to understand NPS thinking when they accept
the role of law enforcement oversight of 2,000 migrants one minute, and
force budget cuts the next.
United States Park Police Fraternal Order of Police

The United States Park Police Fraternal Order of Police, for the
last 30 years, serves as the exclusive representative for bargaining
unit employees of the USPP. We negotiate collective bargaining
agreements as necessary and administer the labor-management agreement
between the officers and the National Park Service. On a day-to-day
basis, the USPPFOP communicates the challenges facing USPP officers to
the public and their elected representatives with the goal of improving
the operational readiness of the Force. Membership in the USPPFOP is
voluntary and we represent all members of the bargaining unit
regardless of membership status. We do not have a political action
committee, we do not make political donations, and we do not endorse
candidates for public office.
Most recently, the USPPFOP has focused on issues related to officer
retention and recruitment as the consequences from decades of NPS
neglect (across administrations from both political parties) has come
to roost. Law enforcement experts who have studied our agency have
suggested that the minimum number of officers needed to accomplish our
essential missions (without new migrant shelters) is at least 639 and
some estimates are as high as 1,400. As of today, we have 528 sworn
officers across all three jurisdictions. It is not an overstatement to
suggest that, at current staffing levels, our agency is unsustainable.
Let me be perfectly clear, even without the migrant shelter on
Floyd Bennett Field, we are at least 300 officers short of our required
minimum levels. Our capacity to serve and protect the public today is
literally bursting at the seams. The idea that the USPP is prepared to
address ``law enforcement issues within the boundary of the park area''
with 2,000 new migrants left under tents with nothing to do and no
ability to communicate is not only imprudent but it is also perilous.
Some in Congress have stepped forward to address the USPP's
recruitment and retention crisis, leading to the introduction of the
United States Park Police Modernization Act (H.R. 3924) in the 117th
Congress. The bill withered in committee. The officers are hoping that
my testimony today might stimulate a bipartisan congressional coalition
to revisit that legislation and push for swift enactment before the end
of this year.
USPP New York Field Office/Jamaica Bay Unit

The New York Field Office (``NYFO'') is responsible for the law
enforcement functions in the Jamaica Bay and Staten Island Units of the
Gateway National Recreation Area (``GNRA''), as well as at the Statue
of Liberty/Ellis Island National Historic Site. Headquartered on Fort
Wadsworth in Staten Island, the USPP has served at the GNRA since its
inception in 1974. Additionally, the USPP has full concurrent
jurisdiction in New York State and Hudson, Monmouth, Ocean, Essex and
Middlesex Counties in New Jersey.
Annually, more than 9.4 million people visit the GNRA, with an
additional 4.2 million people visiting the Statue of Liberty National
Monument.
As stated above, officer staffing levels is a major concern across
the agency, and the NYFO's Jamaica Bay Unit Station (``JBU'') is
certainly no exception. As of today, there are 25 sworn officers
assigned to the JBU (which will be tasked with the work surrounding the
migrant shelter). Typically, there are only 2 officers on duty per
shift.
It's worth restating . . . under the officer staffing levels as it
exists today, just two police officers will be responsible for all law
enforcement matters ``outside the tent.'' The impact of that staffing
reality is undeniable . . . the surrounding public, the officers, and
the migrants themselves will face significant safety risks 24/7/365.

Beyond the staffing crisis, I would urge Members of this Committee
to also consider the JBU facilities and infrastructure environment
(none of which, according to our conversations with NPS, will be
addressed before--or after--the migrant shelter is opened). The JBU
unit, tellingly, was opened in 1974 and has not been significantly
refurbished since. More specifically:

The JBU has one holding cell for prisoner processing. If
there are multiple arrests or if a male and female or
juvenile are in custody, there is no holding cell to safely
process multiple prisoners. Prisoners are handcuffed to a
bench or chairs in the hallway;

The walls adjacent to the JBU holding cell door have shown
structural integrity issues;

The JBU computer and phone systems are unreliable, forcing
officers to use personal cell phones for sensitive
communications and transporting prisoners to Staten Island
or Jersey City to be processed; and,

Despite the presence of dozens of agency-issued rifles and
shotguns, there is no station security at JBU, meaning that
the station is frequently left unstaffed because both
officers on shift are responding to calls or on patrol.
Moreover, the windows to the station are unsecured and
accessible on ground level from the outside of the station.
Because the station is not HVAC equipped, many of the
windows have air conditioners which could be easily
discarded from the outside. Once inside the station,
intruders would quickly find the lockers that house our
issued rifles and shotguns.

None of these infrastructure problems, to our knowledge, are being
addressed in anticipation of the migrant shelters on Floyd Bennett
Field. In fact, NPS officials have indicated that no funds will be made
available to improve or modernize the dilapidated JBU station
conditions.
Floyd Bennett Field Migrant Camp: A Law Enforcement Nightmare & Public
Safety Disaster in the Making

To begin, I want to acknowledge and thank our brothers and sisters
in the New York Police Department (NYPD) who have been forced into the
role of providing law enforcement services inside the camp itself. We
wish them the best, knowing that they are also facing retention and
recruitment issues that will only be exacerbated by their new, and
dangerous, responsibilities on Floyd Bennett Field.
But the law enforcement challenges do not end at the tent's edge .
. . and, in fact, they only become more taxing on the officers and
threatening to the surrounding neighborhoods. Under the terms of the
lease agreement, the NPS committed the USPP to be responsible ``for the
safety and security of [the migrants], including safety, security, and
maintenance of their personal property.''
It is important to keep in mind that the thousands of male migrants
from Africa, the Middle East, Haiti, Venezuela, and other countries are
not prisoners. They are free to come and go as they please. It is only
to be expected that the migrants will cross the foot bridges and enter
Riis Park, Fort Tilden or any other surrounding community where it
become more difficult to anticipate policing needs.

Thinking through the surrounding area, we can easily anticipate a
number of law enforcement concerns that were ignored or never
considered by the parties to the lease agreement:

As stated above, a typical JBU shift assigns 2 officers to
patrol the entire jurisdiction. Two officers cannot
possibly protect the safety of the public on the nearby
trails, beaches, and residential communities with this
added responsibility.

Given the diversity of countries that the migrants are
from, there are no onsite translators to help with violence
that erupts or when migrants experience life-threatening
medical situations. The lack of official translation
services could be life threatening.

Relatedly, what will be the processing protocol for
arrests? Will migrants be processed through the state and
central booking if they refuse to identify themselves? Are
USPP officers to report criminal charges to immigration
authorities?

Floyd Bennett Field is surrounded by the waters of Jamaica
Bay. The migrants will be a 5-minute walk to deep, fast-
moving currents. There are no lifeguards on the Jamaica Bay
beaches and drowning accidents are not uncommon.

The Brooklyn community has long cared for Floyd Bennett
Field and, in particular, the area immediately adjacent to
the proposed migrant camp is home to dozens of community
activities events, including:

+  A sports center for youth and high school athletics,
summer camps, children's parties, playgrounds, rinks, rock
climbing walls and other activities focused on families and
children.

+  A migration area for birds, which attracts thousands of
bird-watching visitors.

+  Summer bicycle races sponsored by local nonprofit groups.

+  A children's petting zoo with hay rides.

+  An archery range and multiple fishing areas.

Areas of Floyd Bennett Field and Dead Horse Bay contain
toxic residue from aviation fuel and radioactive materials.
There is no effective way to protect the migrants from
unknowingly wandering into these areas with just two
officers on patrol.

There are approximately 10 abandoned buildings on Floyd
Bennett Field, none of which are fenced off from intruders.
These buildings have structural concerns and USPP officers
routinely witness homeless people enter and exit these
properties.

Given the lack of USPP officers, the NPS will undoubtedly
face numerous lawsuits regarding any number of incidents
that are predictable given the obvious inability for 2 USPP
officers to supervise 2,000 migrants.

There is already significant community opposition to the
migrant shelter on Floyd Bennett Field. In the event
activists enter the park, how can the USPP manage a large-
scale protest, protecting the entire community including
the migrants, with little or no notice?

Conclusion

Officers of the United States Park Police are truly passionate
about serving the public within the communities under our three
jurisdictions. We are humbled by our responsibility to protect the
millions of park visitors, as well as the surrounding residents and
businesses. But we are equally proud of the legacy we leave behind--
protecting our parks and national monuments so that future generations
can enjoy them safely and without impairment.
Unfortunately, the National Park Service does not share our view,
or the view of the surrounding neighborhoods, of the urban parks and
appears all-too-willing to erect migrant camps in a region that is
entirely unable to mitigate the risks. Make no mistake, NPS along with
the City of New York, sold out the safety of visitors to Floyd Bennett
Field and the surrounding residents and neighborhoods, in order to
erect the migrant shelters. They know full well that the US Park
Police, thanks to decades of NPS neglect, is in no position to provide
adequate law enforcement services to guard against the significant
safety issues that are undeniably forthcoming.
My position on this matter is not one of politics or public policy
regarding migrants. Indeed, this testimony is based solely on law
enforcement concerns that are all-too-real, dangerous, and
irresponsible. Regrettably, I fear for the safety of our officers, the
public, and the migrants themselves.
Thank you again for the opportunity to present this testimony on
behalf of the members of US Park Police Fraternal Order of Police. I
welcome any questions you have.

______

Mr. Westerman. Mr. Spencer, thank you for your testimony
and for your service.
The Chair will now recognize Members for 5 minutes each for
questions. We will begin with the gentleman from Colorado. Mr.
Lamborn, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Lamborn. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you for having
this hearing. Thank you for talking about the positive
solutions the Republican Conference has put forward, like H.R.
2, addressing this serious problem.
Gateway National Recreation Area was created by Congress in
1972 with ``the dream of bringing a national park experience to
the New York Metropolitan area.'' Think about that. Bringing a
national park experience to the New York Metropolitan Area.
But what we have under the Biden administration is exactly
the opposite. It is bringing a New York Metropolitan experience
to the national parks. And I shouldn't be surprised about the
hypocrisy of the Biden administration.
The purpose of the Bureau of Land Management, for instance,
is to maintain working land, but a few weeks ago, we found out
that the Biden administration wants to lock up working land
under conservation easements.
The purpose of a resource management plan is to manage
public resources, but the BLM in Colorado, my state, has
proposed a withdrawal of 1.6 million acres of land that was
adequately planned and prepared under a resource management
plan.
So, now to the topic at hand, the National Park Service in
New York City wants to house thousands of migrants on park
land.
Ms. Ariola, I have a question for you. Does the general
management plan for Gateway National Recreation Area include
provisions for migrant housing?
Ms. Ariola. At a recent hearing last Thursday, discussing
the migrant crisis and different parks and shelters, I directly
asked the Administration if there was a plan in place if the
national park at Floyd Bennett Field should become a migrant
base camp.
The first answer was, it is evolving. When I pushed
further----
Mr. Lamborn. So, no, they don't have an existing----
Ms. Ariola. Correct. When I pushed further, the answer was,
no.
Mr. Lamborn. Thank you. So, where do they get the authority
to house migrants on Park Service land, not to mention the
arbitrary waiving of an environmental regulation?
Ms. Ariola. Without a proper plan in place, this would
never work. It is an ill-conceived plan and there are no
measures that are taking place. This is an area that does not
have any sewer system. Therefore, sewer and provisions have to
be brought in. And it doesn't have any type of water source.
So, you would have to bring water in, but you can't have
propane tanks, so it would be cold water.
Mr. Lamborn. OK. Thank you. I am going to move on to my
next question. Section 8623 of the 2018 Farm Bill allows the
Forest Service to lease Federal land for administrative
functions.
We are wondering, in Colorado, if that includes temporary
housing for agency employees.
Ms. Acer, I have a question for you, do you believe that
administrative site leasing or employee housing should be
construed to be open to housing migrants?
Ms. Acer. Thank you very much, Congressmember. I am
actually not an expert on parks or the law that governs them. I
am here today to talk about solutions for leading to protecting
people seeking asylum in the United States.
Mr. Lamborn. OK. So, you can't speak as to whether this
could become a template for other parks, all over the United
States, and the other 49 states?
Ms. Acer. No. I really would like to stick to the areas
that I know best because I am testifying in front of Congress
and really do want to be completely accurate. Thank you, sir.
Mr. Lamborn. OK. Well, thank you, but that is a big concern
to us. I was hoping you might be able to shed some light on it.
My next question. In October 2021, Eric Adams, the Mayor of
New York City stated, ``We should protect our immigrants. Yes,
New York City will remain a sanctuary city under an Adams
Administration.''
However, you see the quote behind me here, he said, ``This
issue will destroy New York City.'' So, a lot can change in 2
years.
Ms. Williams, I have a question for you. What do you think
changed the Mayor's mind over the last 2 years?
Ms. Williams. I guess you are going to have to ask the
Mayor himself. That is the problem at hand. As we come before
you, it is about Floyd Bennett Field, our national park. The
Mayor, he would have to answer that question. He said what he
said, but on this day, we are here to talk about the misuse or
the intent to house 2,000 plus single men at Floyd Bennett
Field, our national park.
Mr. Lamborn. My concern is that New York City, a wealthy
part of our country, if it is having trouble with this housing
crisis, what about all the other communities around the
country? Either our border states or other states, how are they
going to be able to cope?
Ms. Williams. Absolutely. I don't have the answer for that.
Mr. Lamborn. Thank you so much. Thank you for being here.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Westerman. The gentleman's time has expired.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from California, Mr.
Huffman for 5 minutes.
Mr. Huffman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I think a lot of folks at home, especially if they followed
the work of this Committee for the last 9 months, are probably
pretty confused.
Why are we here in the Natural Resources Committee talking
about the migrant challenges we face? The asylum system being
overwhelmed because of a complex set of issues that Ms. Acer
talked about. Why is that happening here in the Natural
Resources Committee?
Why do we have Republicans, who have spent the last 9
months and, in some cases, their entire careers slashing the
budgets of the National Park System and the Interior Department
suddenly today gravely concerned about the integrity of our
National Park System?
Why do we have Republicans who have spent the last 9 months
attacking our bedrock environmental laws trying to undermine
them in every way possible, suddenly urging more aggressive
enforcement of our environmental laws?
Why is all of this happening? Well, team extreme and the
MAGA chaos agents that control this narrow dysfunctional
Republican Majority are 3 days away from shutting down the
government.
Welcome to the distraction. They don't want to talk about
what that is going to do to the National Park System. They
don't want to talk about what that is going to do to the border
patrol agents, and asylum workers, and everyone else who is
trying to deal with a really difficult challenge. They want to
change the subject.
So, you see all of this stagecraft, and theater, and
vitriol because it induces hyperventilation and internet clicks
and distraction, like their favorite narrative.
Now, one week ago this hearing was supposed to be a markup.
So, why are Interior Department officials not here? Because one
week ago, they were busy filling up their calendars with real
work.
But something changed. As we got closer to that MAGA
government shutdown, a distraction was needed. So, this hearing
was quickly repurposed to an oversight hearing about something
that you have to stretch and strain the jurisdiction of this
Committee to even be talking about.
That is why we are here. And it is oh so popular. We have
Republican Members waving on to this Committee to be part of
it. Isn't that interesting?
Now why New York City? I don't really think of most of my
Republican colleagues as caring much about New York City most
of the time, but the fact is this narrow dysfunctional
Republican Majority runs through the state of New York.
And right now, because of a series of unfortunate events,
some Republicans managed to get themselves elected to Congress
and they are about to be held accountable for the chaos and
dysfunction of this crazy Republican Majority and the
government shutdown that we are 3 days away from bringing, and
they need some air cover.
They need to distract. So, that is why we are here. That is
why we are talking about this unlikely issue, and that is why
it is centered in, of all places, New York City. It is about
distraction and air cover.
So, Ms. Acer, I want to thank you for providing the broader
context for this conversation. I want to thank you for the
incredible work that you do for human rights. And I want to
shed a little light on the issue that our Republican colleagues
don't want to talk about, and that is all the stuff that is
going to happen 3 days from now when they shut down the
government.
Could you speak a little bit to the inevitable impacts of a
government shutdown when it comes to the folks who are
straining to deal with this overwhelming situation of providing
humanitarian treatment of asylees? Processing asylum claims?
I mean, for goodness sake, all these folks, including the
border patrol agents, that have the tough job of dealing with
both legal and illegal border crossings, they are about to
start going without pay because of this MAGA government
shutdown.
Could you speak a little bit to what that means for the
issues that you are working on?
Ms. Acer. Certainly. Thank you, Congressmember.
A government shutdown would be disastrous, and would
undermine the United States' ability to manage migration and
refugee protection at home and regionally.
A shutdown will, in particular, wreak havoc on the
immigration courts. Back when there was a government shutdown
in 2019, some of you may know, 80,000 to 94,000 cases had to be
canceled and put off for years.
And those cancellations and adjournments added to the
backlog that have already been existing.
Mr. Huffman. How about the national park unit we are
talking about here today?
Ms. Acer. I think I would defer to Mr. Spencer on the
details of how something like this would impact the national
parks, but I did hear him talk about resource issues.
In addition to the immigration courts, we also have real
concerns about the impact that a shutdown could have on many of
the critical services that are conducted day in and day out by
humanitarian organizations that are helping to welcome people
seeking asylum.
We really urge that steps be taken to ensure that that does
not happen, because that would really be a disaster for U.S.
communities.
Mr. Huffman. Thank you, Ms. Acer. I am out of time. I yield
back.
Mr. Westerman. The gentleman's time has expired and I was
reminded, during that round of questioning, about how it was
Republican-led initiative on the Great American Outdoors Act
that put $6.5 billion into the National Park Service, signed by
President Trump.
So, thank you for that reminder.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from California, Mr.
McClintock.
Mr. McClintock. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
First of all, for the record, the Constitution was
America's best idea. The national parks were one of our better
ideas, and the Democrats' open border policy is clearly
unquestionably America's worst idea.
Since Biden took office, that policy has produced the
deliberate release into our country, in direct violation of
Federal law, 2.6 million illegal immigrants.
Our law requires that every asylum seeker be detained until
their asylum claim has been adjudicated. That law is being
ignored.
Now, by the way, that is the population of the state of
West Virginia, and while the border patrol has been overwhelmed
dealing with that, another 1.7 million known Gotaways have
illegally entered our country as well.
That is an additional illegal population the size of New
Mexico. So, in the last 34 months the Democrats have admitted
two new states into the country, the size of West Virginia and
New Mexico. Virtually all of them destitute, desperate, and
dependent.
They have migrated to sanctuary cities like New York and
the hypocrisy of declaring yourself a sanctuary city where
illegal immigration is welcomed and encouraged and then
protesting the result of that, is the ultimate comic tragedy.
Now, Mayor Adams has complained that the 110,000 migrants
in his city will destroy it, and he blames Texas. Well, Texas
is responsible for sending about 15,000 illegal immigrants,
with their consent, to New York, but as Governor Abbott just
pointed out, all the rest were sent by Joe Biden, once Biden
allowed all of them into the country in the first place.
And, of course, we have the same problem in California. New
York and California voters overwhelming voted for Biden and the
Democrats. So, folks, sorry, but you get the government you
vote for.
And when you voted for the Democrats, this is exactly what
you voted for, and if you are surprised by this, you weren't
paying any attention.
As Abraham Lincoln said, the voters are everything. If they
get their backsides too close to the fire, they will just have
to sit on the blisters a while. That might be painful, but
hopefully it is a learning experience, or as Cicero put it, I
don't blame Caesar, I blame those who cheered for Caesar.
So, the issue is not where this unprecedented illegal mass
migration is being settled. The issue is that this
Administration, the people that have been elected to it, and
have not only allowed it but have actively encouraged it, not
as a matter of incompetence, or as the Chairman called it, a
mistake, they have done it methodically and deliberately and
this is going to continue until the people responsible for
these policies have been turned out of office, and you have
already heard from a few of them today.
The issue goes far beyond the decision to turn our national
parks into migrant camps. Explain to me how we make our
communities safer by making it all but impossible to deport
criminal illegal aliens and instead release them back into our
communities?
This is the central function of sanctuary cities, which New
Yorkers have happily voted themselves to be. How do we protect
our citizens by inviting the criminal cartels to set up shop in
our communities and then flood them with fentanyl and other
lethal drugs?
How do we make our schools better by packing our classrooms
with non-English speaking students? How do we strengthen the
social safety net for Americans by admitting millions of
impoverished, homeless, and destitute people into our country?
How do we make our hospitals more accessible by cramming
them with illegals demanding uncompensated care? How do we
improve the wages for working Americans by flooding the labor
market with cheap illegal labor?
History is screaming this warning at us that countries that
either cannot or will not secure their borders simply aren't
around very long.
Without borders, we have no country. We have simply become
a vast, lawless, plundered international territory between
Canada and Mexico.
We had finally secured our borders during the Trump
administration. Trump's Remain in Mexico Policy all but brought
phony asylum claims to a standstill. The border wall was
nearing completion and court ordered deportations were being
enforced.
On his first day in office, Biden reversed those policies
and has produced the worst illegal mass migration in history.
The bill passed by the House of Representatives, H.R. 2 would
restore our borders, but the Democrats are blocking it in the
Senate and Biden has vowed to veto it.
And that is the real issue and that is the issue at the
center of this hearing. Mr. Huffman made it clear that the
Democrats consider this crisis a mere distraction. I wonder if
the people might have a different opinion.
I yield back.
Mr. Westerman. The gentleman yields back.
The Chair now recognizes the gentlelady from New York, Ms.
Velazquez, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
Ms. Velazquez. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Today, the Committee is holding a disingenuous hearing
under the guise of protecting National Park Service land.
This is ironic considering that the Republican party is
currently fighting to cut the NPS budget by approximately half
a billion dollars in the Interior Appropriations Bill and is
pushing our country toward a disastrous government shutdown
that will furlough many NPS employees and disrupt the
maintenance of parks across the country.
This politically charged stunt to distract from the fact
that Republicans have no solution to avoid a shutdown just as
they have no real solutions to the situation in New York City.
Please don't come here and kid ourselves. This is not about
national parks. This is about their inability to govern.
Politicians from states like Texas and Florida have fueled this
emergency and manufactured a crisis that local state and
Federal officials will be forced to solve.
Instead of bickering about what the demand of the day is,
to fund the government and avoid a shutdown, we need
Republicans in Congress to come to the table and work with us
to fix this through real substantive immigration reform.
And to not do so is basically looking for a political
talking point to attack cities like New York. Not simply
yelling and screaming over a lack of border security.
As one of the two New Yorkers on this Committee, I am
deeply disturbed by this hearing, because I know firsthand that
the situation in New York City is a humanitarian crisis and not
a partisan issue.
Let me just make sure that people fleeing violence and
persecution, regardless of nationality or other demographics,
can access functioning asylum and Refugee Resettlement System
in this country.
New York City is doing all it can to accomplish this, but
they cannot do it alone. Asylum seekers deserve to be treated
with respect and dignity, not treated as political pawns to
taut anti-immigration rhetoric, which is deeply rooted in
racism and xenophobia.
At every step, Republicans have made this crisis worse. It
is time for us to put politics aside and address this issue
head on.
Ms. Acer, in a podcast conversation with reporter Errol
Louis, a New York City Republican candidate for mayor suggested
housing migrants at Rikers Island, the city's central jail.
Can you explain the dangers of ostracizing asylum seekers
in a facility normally used to contain individuals who have
broken the law?
Ms. Acer. Thank you very much, Congressmember for that
question.
Over many, many years of doing this work, both as an
individual lawyer representing asylum seekers and since then, I
visited many of the immigration jails in this country where we
send people seeking asylum.
I have been to the detention centers where families are
held and heard about how difficult it was for them to be held
in these facilities.
I have spoken to people who came to this country because
they believed in freedom, because they believed in what this
country stood for and they were shocked again and again to find
themselves handcuffed and shackled when they asked for
protection, sent to immigration jails and left in prison
uniforms, often for long periods of time, denied release, even
if they have family members or friends in this country
sometimes.
Sending people seeking refuge to immigration jails or
Rikers Island is definitely not an answer. I outlined in my
paper many solutions that really are effective.
Ms. Velazquez. Thank you for that answer. I yield back the
balance of my time.
Mr. Westerman. The gentlelady yields back.
The Chair now recognizes the gentlelady from American
Samoa, Ms. Radewagen, for 5 minutes.
Ms. Radewagen. Thank you to the Chairman and Ranking Member
for holding this hearing today.
I want to start by saying that, by no means should we turn
a blind eye to refugees in need. Despite some of the rhetoric
that gets thrown around when discussing this sensitive issue, I
am sure none of my colleagues are suggesting anything so cold
hearted.
However, I say this as someone from a culture of
hospitality, charity, and service. If your own house isn't in
order, you are no help to anyone.
In addition to the very real and very practical concerns
over the camp site in question, I want to point out that our
colleagues over in the Judiciary Committee have been struggling
with DHS over their ability, or perhaps it is better to say
inability, to process migrant paperwork.
The people who come to this country deserve dignity and a
fair chance at the American dream, but some of the
Administration's policies are proving to be counterproductive
to that goal.
A mismanaged house quickly becomes rundown and provides no
shelter to anyone. President Biden's reckless border policies
are turning every city in America into a border city and the
impacts are undeniable in New York City.
Today, we gave the Administration an opportunity to come
before the Committee and answer to the American people
regarding their failed immigration policies and fortunately, as
you can see, President Biden is not interested in transparency
and accountability when it comes to the southern border and the
migrant crisis in New York City.
Council Member Ariola and Assemblywoman Williams, if we had
an administration official here today, what would be your
message to them?
Ms. Williams. I would say that the use of our national park
is not up for grabs and I am saying this to you right now, that
this Floyd Bennett Field is located in the southeast side of
Brooklyn.
It is a bipartisan fight that you are seeing here. I am
sorry that we are in the crossfire between what the Republicans
are doing and the Democrats, but that is not the purpose of why
we are here.
We are here to protect our national park that has become a
place of interest to house 2,000 plus migrants into our
backyard that is used by our constituents and throughout the
state.
It has become a very local issue. So, I would say, there
was no public hearing and I would ask, on behalf of every one
of my constituents, and every American citizen that believe and
visit our national park, to please withdraw this lease. Thank
you.
Ms. Radewagen. Ms. Ariola?
Ms. Ariola. Thank you.
What I would say is New York is in trouble. When you have a
Democratic mayor who was welcoming migrants only a year ago
saying that it is going to destroy New York City and a
Democratic governor saying, if you are leaving your country, go
somewhere else, they are not Republicans. Those are Democrats.
This is a bipartisan issue that is happening in New York
City. We have 206 shelters. It costs us $383 per day, per
migrant to house them. We are now looking at national parks,
which means we are at our borders here.
We cannot sustain it anymore. All of our hotels, any
available housing are full. They are full to capacity. It is
120,000 plus migrants that have come into New York without the
Walkaways.
We are seeing more and more people living on the streets.
This is not humanitarian. We need to do something. So, what is
happening now?
Our governor has asked for the use of our natural
resources, our parks, the things that we all, in this
Committee, stand to protect. That is why this Committee is
here.
We talk about protected lands. We talk about endangered
species. We talk about climate change. But none of that matters
at Floyd Bennett Field, or Fort Wadsworth, or Fort Tilden, or
at any of the Gateway Recreational Areas.
This is not about crossfire, as my colleague said, this is
about putting 2,000 to 7,500 human beings on a property that
floods regularly and is covered when we do have a climate
incident like Sandy.
It is not a place that can house long-term residents and it
cannot house short-term residents. It doesn't have any type of
police force. We talked about NPS and their inability to
provide services.
So, does the NYPD have a less headcount as the FDNY. The
Mayor's management report stated that both those agencies have
had higher response times. What will happen if we do get hit
with a hurricane?
We have to evacuate the entire Rockaway Peninsula, all of
the Brooklyn portion of the burrow, and we have to pass by
Floyd Bennett Field. Floyd Bennett Field isn't even an option
for the residents to go to for safety when there is a climate
emergency.
So, it is not about politics today. It is about our
national resources; it is about opening a door to our national
parks that can then set a precedent to happen in each and every
one of the national parks in each and every one of your states.
And it is also placing migrants in a place where they would
not be safe. And we are in agreeance on that. and that is a
bipartisan agreement. Thank you.
Ms. Radewagen. Thank you.
Mr. Westerman. The gentlelady's time has expired.
The Chair now recognizes the gentlelady from New York, Ms.
Ocasio-Cortez, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
Ms. Ocasio-Cortez. Thank you so much, Mr. Chairman.
And I would like to emphasize some of the remarks that
Ranking Member Grijalva made in the opening of this hearing,
which is really lining out the differences between the folks
who are identifying solutions and those who are not.
I would like to submit to the record two statements from
what is known as the Commonsense Caucus in the New York City
Council, I believe of which Council Member Ariola is a member.
The first is a statement on the migrant crisis and the
second is a statement on Secretary Mayorkas as well.
Mr. Westerman. Without objection.
Ms. Ocasio-Cortez. Councilmember Ariola, it says here that
this statement is in opposition to work permits and work
authorizations for newly arrived asylees, is that correct?
Ms. Ariola. That is correct.
Ms. Ocasio-Cortez. So, you are in opposition and in this
letter, it says, ``the migrants who have recently arrived in
New York should follow the lawful immigration process,'' does
that sound familiar to you?
Ms. Ariola. Yes, it does.
Ms. Ocasio-Cortez. Are you aware that seeking asylum is a
lawful immigration process?
Ms. Ariola. When it is deemed to be asylum.
Ms. Ocasio-Cortez. Yes.
Ms. Ariola. It has not yet been deemed to be asylum
seekers.
Ms. Ocasio-Cortez. And are you aware that for application,
you have to arrive in the United States in order to apply for
asylum, correct?
Ms. Ariola. That is correct.
Ms. Ocasio-Cortez. So, arrival is also part of that lawful
process. I would like to highlight that.
So, when we opposed work authorization, we have folks who
are opposing the ability for people who are seeking a lawful
process to support themselves who don't want to be a strain on
public systems, and we have folks who want to block people from
being able to follow the same American dream that almost every
person here, their family comes from.
Folks coming here with nothing but the shirt on their back
and getting a job and supporting a family. We have folks who
want to deny that. On a Federal level, we have folks who oppose
comprehensive immigration reform.
We are cutting funding, not just to our National Park
Service, but to our overall supportive services. We are on a
brink of shutdown right now so that none of these things can
get processed in the first place.
And then, while we are in this process of opposing work
authorizations, I think it is important to note that these
systems are being overwhelmed in the first place because of
large parts of contributions to solve this problem.
If we are serious about addressing this issue, we need to
also make sure that we are opening and allowing people to be
documented. And I can't, for the life of me, understand why
there is such partisan opposition to doing this.
I mean, truly and in addition to that, we also need to be
assessing the foreign policy decisions that we are making that
are driving people to our southern border in the first place.
There is so much rhetoric out there blaming other countries
and their dysfunctions for why people are coming to the United
States, when we are engaging in interventionist policy abroad
and when our sanctions in Latin America are part of the picture
here.
So, we are either going to agree to those things and take
on the responsibility of the consequences or we are going to
reassess our policy. It is outrageous to be using the City of
New York, where by the way these asylum seekers, their kids are
enrolling in school, those who can seek work are doing it right
away, that by the way they are trying to fill labor needs that
we have long had as a city and state.
We should be paving the pathways to make this as easy as
possible and perhaps we wouldn't need and perhaps there
wouldn't be a Floyd Bennett Field situation if people were
actually supporting a smooth system here.
Assemblymember Williams, I didn't hear, in your testimony,
I understand the concerns you are raising about the field. I
didn't hear in your testimony the alternative sites you have
advocated for. Could you remind me of which those are?
Ms. Williams. The alternative sites to house migrants?
Ms. Ocasio-Cortez. The alternative site to Floyd Bennett
Field?
Ms. Williams. Well, in the conversation, as we----
Ms. Ocasio-Cortez. I am sorry. I only have 18 seconds.
Which are the sites that you propose as an alternative?
Ms. Williams. I don't have a proposal of another site.
Ms. Ocasio-Cortez. So, you don't have a proposed
alternative? No proposed alternative. No solutions here. No
ideas here, but Democrats, we are authorizing 500,000 work
permits so people can get on their feet and support themselves.
Democrats, we are proposing comprehensive immigration
reform. Democrats, we are talking about saying, let's reassess
our foreign policies so that people aren't fleeing and making
sure that we aren't participating in the destabilization of
what is happening abroad.
And all I am hearing right now is that we are not being met
in the middle. No support, no path to citizenship, no
identified alternatives, just grievances. We need to get it
together and make sure that we are getting on the right page.
And if the ideas being presented here in this Committee are
being disagreed with, I would like to see some actual
functional alternatives that center and preserve the dignity of
both people who are coming here to fulfill the American dream
and the American citizens here who want to support them.
And with that, I yield back to the Chair. Thank you.
Mr. Westerman. The gentlelady's time has expired. The Chair
now recognizes----
Ms. Ariola. Chair, may I just respond with permission,
please?
Mr. Westerman. Maybe the next person asking a question will
yield you time.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from Idaho. Mr.
Fulcher, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Fulcher. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And I will just right
out of the chute agree with my colleague from New York. We need
to get it together on the border where it starts.
Mr. Chairman, I want to thank you for doing this today. For
your leadership on this. Just for the public record, point out
that it is a Republican Chair of Natural Resources that is the
one bringing this forward.
I am going to guess that the Mayor of New York, Mr. Adams
wasn't thinking that Chairman Westerman was going to be his
ally within the last year, but here we are. So, thank you for
your leadership, Mr. Chairman.
Whether we like it or not we are in a war, and we are in a
war on the southern border with the cartels. I am from Idaho.
Not exactly a border state, southern border anyway. We have a
northern border. But in the state of Idaho, for the first time
in our state's history, fentanyl convictions have surpassed
convictions related to methamphetamine.
I don't have the numbers in front of me for fentanyl
related deaths, but it is off the charts, comparatively
speaking. Last year, local police in Idaho, in the central part
of state, small town recovered 30,000 fentanyl pills from one
person, and that is in central Idaho.
That is a long way from the southern border, but that is
where they came from. Not only is the fentanyl epidemic
impacting cities across the country, but it is killing our next
generation.
But this is not a priority for this Administration. And,
Ms. Williams, I was looking at your testimony and listening to
you and welcome to our world. The Administration is from your
party.
This is what we are struggling with. For the month of
September, we are about to break an all-time record of
apprehensions on the southern border, and we wonder why this is
a problem.
Ms. Ariola, in your testimony you spoke out against using
Floyd Bennett Field as a shelter for migrants. Not only does it
violate your sovereignty, but it, certainly in my opinion,
placates the problem we have on the southern border.
How many constituents do you represent in New York? About?
Ms. Ariola. Just shy of 170,000 constituents in my
district.
Mr. Fulcher. 170,000. This month alone we are looking at
approximately 210,000 apprehensions on the southern border.
Just this month. And that is just apprehensions.
Compared to the population of your constituency, that is a
huge number of people. So, as a New York City Council Member,
and I apologize for not being here on the front end of your
testimony, but have you heard significant pushback using Floyd
Bennett Field from your constituency?
Ms. Ariola. Oh, yes. We are. And just to speak to the work
authorization and the giving any other type of alternatives. We
have done that.
All City Council Members were asked to give alternatives
and alternatives were given, and I do have shelters, within my
district, that we work well with.
We are hearing from our constituents that we only have one
police force on the Brooklyn side, the other is the 63rd
Precinct, on the Queens side is the 100th Precinct. Each are
down in numbers. We have no more than four cars in patrol of
the entire command at any given time on the Queen's side. They
can never get over to Floyd Bennett Field and patrol that area
as well.
Fire Department. If you look, the Mayor put out his
management report and response times for both the NYPD and the
FDNY are significantly higher. So, now you are thinking about
having FDNY then cover Floyd Bennett Field, which has fire
hydrants that are not all operational, but are currently being
checked today.
Mr. Fulcher. Ms. Ariola, because I am just about out of
time, I am going to, from your comments, make the assumption
that your constituents agree that we have a problem on our
southern border.
Ms. Ariola. Yes.
Mr. Fulcher. And they probably lost their sense of humor on
accommodating more migrants until we deal with that problem. Is
that correct?
Ms. Ariola. That is absolutely correct.
Mr. Fulcher. Thank you.
Mr. Chairman, once again, it was you that took the
initiative on this. And I just can't emphasize strongly enough
that I appreciate you being willing to do it. All of us need to
eventually come together to solve this thing, but I appreciate
your leadership in taking the right step in Natural Resources.
I yield back.
Mr. Westerman. The gentleman's time has expired.
I know there has been a lot of talk about funding of the
Park Service. Since Fiscal Year 2013, the National Park Service
budget had increased about 26 percent, the largest percentage
of which was in 2018, under the Trump administration.
And I will also note and enter into the record the Biden
administration requested a decrease, a decrease in Fiscal Year
2024 in their budget request, a 19.9 percent cut, which is
$1.23 billion and as my colleagues have mentioned, the Interior
markup only cuts it half a billion.
So, without objection, I will enter that into the record.
The Chair now recognizes the gentlelady from New Mexico.
Ms. Stansbury, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
Ms. Stansbury. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And I want to welcome all of our witnesses who are here
today and especially those of you who traveled to be here.
And I really do genuinely welcome the opportunity to hear
from our communities, to hear from our local officials, but I
do have to note that it is very odd to be having what appears
to be a New York City County and City Council meeting in the
chambers of the House Natural Resources Committee.
I think it is notable as well that all of the Members who
sit on this Committee from New York did not ask for this
hearing and actually support the city and the state's request
to use this space.
And I do want to clarify, because there has been some
misinformation propagated on the other side of the aisle this
morning that it was, in fact, the city of New York that
requested this lease.
It was not the Federal Government. So, I understand we have
a Federal oversight role her, but it was the city of New York
and the state of New York that have asked to use this emergency
space, which, by the way, has been used previously as emergency
shelter and for other emergency purposes, including during
Superstorm Sandy.
So, I think it is very disingenuous for folks this morning
to be representing this as somehow something other than it is.
There has also been a lot of misrepresentation of the Mayor of
New York statements and a sense put forward, including this
ridiculous sign back here that the Mayor made these comments
with respect to the use of this emergency site, and that is
just factually untrue.
But I think we all know here that this is not what this
hearing is about. It is being held the week that our
colleagues, unfortunately, across the aisle have been unable to
pass a Federal budget and in 4 days will shut our government
down.
And this really is a publicity stunt. I mean, look at the
posters in the room. When I walked in here this morning, the
staff were putting up these posters. This is not about the
people of New York.
I have great respect for the people of Brooklyn and the
people of New York. This is a humanitarian crisis. This is a
serious immigration issue. We do have a humanitarian crisis
happening right now.
There are thousands of people coming to the United States
right now. I represent a border state. I represent the people
of New Mexico. And we know that we have to search for real
solutions, but if this was an actual Federal oversight hearing
on immigration solutions, we would be in a different committee
for one, and two, we would be talking about actual policies
that would solve the problem.
But that is not what we are talking about here. In fact,
the budget that is going to be brought to the Floor in the
coming days would slash the very programs that help address
asylum.
I mean, it is ridiculous. It truly is ridiculous. And it is
not even a real budget. It is not even going to pass. They are
bringing a budget to the Floor that is not going to pass and
then they are going to shut the government down.
I mean, it is truly outrageous. It really boggles the mind.
So, I do want to say to my colleagues, if you want to work on
immigration reform, let's work on immigration reform. We need
bipartisan immigration reform.
We need a pathway to citizenship. We need an asylum system
that works. We need border security that is humane and
appropriate. We need to address this crisis. We need you to
act, but you have to keep the government open first.
And we need you to come to the table and actually work on
bipartisan immigration reform. Stop blocking it. Stop bringing
false solutions forward and stop using the people of New York
for a publicity stunt.
And stop demonizing the people who are coming to this
country to seek asylum. New York has always been a place of
immigrants. Every single country in the world has a community
in the city of New York. It is the most international city.
My own family came through New York City in the 1850s to
escape famine in Ireland, like many of your families did. So,
if you want to be serious about immigration reform, you want to
be serious about the people of New York, you want to be serious
about helping people across the world who are struggling with
violence, with famine, and economic desperation, then come to
the table and be serious, but don't use this Committee as a
political stunt. Don't use this Committee to dehumanize people
coming to this country, and don't use this Committee as a farce
to try to make the people of New York think that you actually
care about them, because that is not what this is about.
I thank you for the opportunity to speak this morning and
with that, I yield back.
Mr. Westerman. The gentlelady yields back.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from Wisconsin. Mr.
Tiffany, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Tiffany. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Spencer, did I hear correctly that you are going to
have two officers for that entire encampment if you are not
authorized to have more people?
Mr. Spencer. Thank you for the question, Congressman. We
actually only have two officers currently on duty at any given
time there. So, it is not for the encampment, that is for our
day-to-day operations.
Mr. Tiffany. So, if there is an encampment and if you are
not provided more security, you are going to have two officers?
Mr. Spencer. Correct.
Mr. Tiffany. Ms. Williams, I think I heard you say that
what is going on is not humane and not ethical. Did I hear you
correct in your testimony?
Ms. Williams. Yes, you did.
Mr. Tiffany. Ms. Ariola, did I hear you say you want the
lease revoked?
Ms. Ariola. I think that the lease should never have been
signed. Never should have been offered. Never should have been
asked for. It is a National Federal Park. Yes.
Mr. Tiffany. So, should this Committee, which has
jurisdiction, if we can do this, should we revoke that lease?
Ms. Ariola. I believe you should.
Mr. Tiffany. Mr. Chairman, I think this Committee should
take a look at the possibility of doing this because it is
clearly not in the interest of New Yorkers.
Ms. Acer, do you support the Floyd Bennett lease?
Ms. Acer. Yes, Congressmember. Actually, I explained
earlier that I am not an expert on national parks or the legal
system overseeing it, so I am going to restrict my comments to
the areas of my expertise.
Mr. Tiffany. Did the Minority tell you about what you were
going to be testifying in regards to here today, because it is
about the Floyd Bennett lease.
Ms. Acer. Yes. I was asked to come to speak about real
solutions to addressing the challenges that we face at the
border and in our major cities, as we have received people
seeking asylum and migrants.
Mr. Tiffany. Mr. Chairman, real interesting. They do not
send anyone; the Administration doesn't send anyone to testify
at this hearing and then it is almost like there is a bait and
switch that went on here with Ms. Acer. She knows what she
wants to testify on, but it is not on the subject that is
before us in regards to the Floyd Bennett lease.
Before I comment on that, Ms. Acer, you said in your
written testimony that we need to do what is humane and morally
right. Do you think what is going on with fentanyl across our
country is humane and morally right?
Ms. Acer. Thank you very much, Congressmember. I think that
it is probably at this point pretty well-known, from all the
fact checking that fentanyl, which is absolutely disastrous,
comes primarily in through ports of entry.
Mr. Tiffany. Yes. I would just correct you on that. That is
incorrect and I would urge you to go meet with someone who
testified under oath before the Judiciary Committee, Sheriff
Mark Dannels from Cochise County who is south of Tucson on the
Mexico border, who has testified under oath that it is a direct
result of January 20, 2021, when President Biden adopted open
borders policies that the fentanyl that was coming into
American skyrocketed.
And I don't think it is humane or morally right to see the
No. 1 killer of young people in America, at this point, being
fentanyl poisonings, not overdoses, poisonings. I don't think
that is right.
Ms. Acer, do you think there are other national parks that,
if need be, if we continue on the pace that we are at with
millions of people coming into America, that we should turn any
other national parks into encampments?
Ms. Acer. Thank you very much, Congressmember. Again, I am
not an expert on national parks, but I do think that there are
key steps----
Mr. Tiffany. I have a real brief amount of time. I have the
Apostle Island National Lakeshore in my district, if we
continue to burst at the seams, should we turn that into an
illegal immigration encampment?
Ms. Acer. I love to use national parks too and fully
support national parks, but I am going----
Mr. Tiffany. I am going to close. You are not answering my
question, and it would be a really easy yes or no, should we
use the national parks for this.
I am going to close, Mr. Chairman, by just saying, America,
if you don't know yet, there is a party that refuses to
acknowledge what happened on January 20, 2021, open borders
were declared in America, and this is what we got.
And we hear from the other side, you are not talking about
solutions. We gave you a solution. We vetted it. We marked it
up in the Judiciary Committee. It is H.R. 2. It secures the
border.
You can vote for it anytime. We gave you a solution. First,
we secure the borders, and we could do that in a minute if we
want to. Republicans are defending your national parks at this
point, ladies and gentlemen.
The other side wants to turn them into homeless
encampments. And the Ranking Member here admitted today that
the Biden administration has failed. I think that is all we
need to know. I yield back.
Mr. Westerman. The gentleman yields back.
The Chair recognizes the gentlelady from California, Ms.
Kamlager-Dove for 5 minutes.
Ms. Kamlager-Dove. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
It has been a while for me since I have been held hostage
in this circus, but here I am again and I want to welcome you
to the circus.
I did not know in the Natural Resources Committee that we
would be talking about New York instead of the Republican
government shutdown that is upon us in just a matter of days.
Instead of talking about the fact that the House
Republicans Interior Appropriations Bill cuts National Park
Service funding by nearly half a billion dollars, in addition
to the fact that the recent CR includes more than $2 billion
for Trump's border wall, which has destroyed public lands and
tribal cultural resources irreparably.
With no money for you. We are talking about New York City.
This is an all-over-the-place hearing. It crosses all kinds of
jurisdictional lines. We have been talking about addiction and
substance abuse, asylum seekers, migrants, refugees, foreign
policy, New York, laments from the local law enforcement,
housing, and yes, a whiplash stance on NEPA.
And not anything that we would normally be talking about in
this Committee. Last month, we heard from Republican witnesses
who were here to talk about mining extraction, saying to us
that the NEPA rules are just too long. It is too hard to read.
Too many words on the pages. Why should we follow them?
And now here we are hearing manufactured umbrage about
cities not following NEPA. NEPA that the Republicans gutted.
Disingenuous is the kindest word I can use right now about what
I am feeling and hearing in this Committee.
And Mr. Spencer, you are incorrect. It is all about
politics today. In your testimony, you talked about wanting a
bipartisan coalition to revisit H.R. 3924. This Congress can't
even get it together to keep the government open.
You only have two staff people. You want more? Don't look
to the Republicans, they are trying to shut it all down. You
won't get a dime.
So, let's not kid ourselves. I am on the Foreign Affairs
Committee; I wish we would be talking about some of these
issues. Instead, we are talking about China and Russia,
countries that the last president was kissing folks' behinds
like nobody's business.
Is the issue an immigration policy that we don't have?
Absolutely. Republicans don't have one, oh except hiding barbed
wire in the river to maim and kill pregnant women migrants.
Give me a break. Migrants aren't voluntarily flooding into
cities; Republican governors are flooding our cities with
migrants, using people as pawns. Propaganda. This is a game,
and we are talking about people's lives.
And by the way, it is not President Biden's fault. He is
trying to fix manure dropped by the former president who had a
reckless, feckless, racist, xenophobic non-foreign policy
foreign policy.
So, please don't give me that. And Mr. Spencer, I am so
sorry that you don't have the staffing that you need. You
should talk to your Mayor and your City Council, but not to us.
You probably don't have it because of challenges with
COVID, early retirement, injuries, a strong economy, and
lawsuit settlements that your city is facing. Not what happens
under the normal jurisdiction of this Committee.
Talk to the Mayor, talk to the City Council, talk to the
Governor, talk to the State Assembly, talk to the State Senate.
I am here to talk about what happens in this Committee and the
fact that the Republicans can't even get it together to pass
rules to talk about their own bills so that we can prevent a
government shutdown.
And I just heard a colleague from the other side of the
aisle bring me into a white-people only brigade. Non-English-
speaking people don't deserve to get any support? I will end
with this, in these late nights getting on an elevator to go
down to the House, there was a worker who comes here at night
to clean our offices, to clean our offices and he doesn't speak
very good English and do you know what he said, as the doors
were closing? Because he is here at night cleaning all of our
offices, Republicans and Democrats alike, he said, will there
be any money? Because he needs his paycheck.
And my colleagues on the other side of the aisle don't seem
to care about that.
Mr. Westerman. The gentlelady's time is expired.
Ms. Kamlager-Dove. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Mr. Westerman. The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from
New York. Mr. Lawler, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Lawler. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I would just note, I think Mr. Spencer----
Mr. Westerman. Mr. Lawler, I thought we waived you in
early. I ask unanimous consent that we allow Mr. Lawler to join
the dais?
Without objection, you are now recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Lawler. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I just noted it looks
like Mr. Spencer works for the U.S. Park Police, so I don't
know what Mayor or City Council he should be talking to. I
think he should be speaking to Congress.
But look, we have a crisis in New York, and it is a crisis
of the making of the elected officials in New York City and New
York State. Our southern border has been wide open for years.
Since Joe Biden took office nearly 6 million migrants have
crossed the border, many illegally.
The asylum cases are taking 2 to 3 years to be heard. At
minimum, when these cases are finally heard, nearly two-thirds
are being rejected, and yet New York City's response is to
enact sanctuary city policies, refuse to cooperate with ICE,
right to shelter policies, and using taxpayer funds to provide
free housing, free healthcare, free education, free food, free
clothing, and then be shocked, shocked that people would want
to come to New York.
My family came through Ellis Island over 100 years ago. New
York is a beacon, and I believe in immigration. My wife is an
immigrant. She came to this country in search of a better life,
economic opportunity, and education.
I am proud of the fact that she became a U.S. citizen 2\1/
2\ years ago. We have a 17-month-old daughter who will have a
better life because her mother chose to come to the United
States of America.
There is a reason people want to come here and we accept
that. We embrace that. We are a nation of immigrants, but there
must be a process. You cannot continue to have tens of
thousands of migrants cross the southern border every week and
be shocked that municipalities can't handle it.
Having sanctuary city policies has been one of the dumbest
things I have ever seen for years and only now are Democrats in
New York finally waking up and going, oh, this is a problem.
You think?
Eric Adams and Kathy Hochul don't have the first clue how
to handle this, because to handle it would be to acknowledge
that these policies have failed. Would be to acknowledge that
these policies don't work.
Yes, we need to reform our immigration system. Yes, we need
to deal with the at minimum 11\1/2\ million who are here
undocumented. Yes, we need to have a more merit-based system
that deals with our employment shortages, doctors, nurses,
engineers, home health aides.
We need immigrants in this country. They contribute to our
economy. They contribute to our communities. They are good
people. But there needs to be a process. And to allow this to
continue in perpetuity, as my Democrat colleagues have for
years, and immediately, the moment you raise a question? Oh, it
is racist, it is xenophobic. Total nonsense. Total nonsense.
We are not only dealing with a humanitarian crisis at the
border, we are dealing with human trafficking, women and
children being raped, assaulted, sold, fentanyl pouring into
our country killing 70,000 Americans a year.
And Joe Biden has done absolutely nothing. This is totally
unsustainable. Eric Adams said that if this continues it will
destroy New York City, they are talking about $12 billion over
3 years, $12 billion in taxpayer money to deal with this
crisis.
The time for action is now. Hakeem Jeffries, the Democratic
Leader, Chuck Schumer, the Senate Majority Leader, both from
New York, both from Brooklyn. Silent. Pathetic. Grow a
backbone, show some leadership, stand up and say we are not
going to have a system like this anymore.
Secure the border. We need more border personnel. We need
more court personnel to hear these asylum cases immediately.
Remain in Mexico should be the policy of the United States,
period.
Then deal with the undocumented. Deal with DACA and fix the
legal immigration systems so that those people who want to come
to the United States to participate in our economy, to have a
better life for themselves and their children can do so, but do
so legally.
That is all that needs to be done. This is not rocket
science and all of my colleagues in New York City and New York
State need to wake u, and speak out, and speak very clearly.
With that, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Westerman. The gentleman's time has expired.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from Rhode Island,
Mr. Magaziner, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Magaziner. Well, thank you, Chairman.
I was excited to come over here because this hearing is
supposed to be about national parks and I could not wait to
have a conversation with my colleagues who are apparently so
concerned about the state of our national parks.
Perhaps because they are so concerned, they will reconsider
the budget bill that they are trying to move that would cut
$436 million from the National Park Service, a 13 percent cut
from last year.
Because they care so deeply about national parks, perhaps
they will rethink their stance on H.R. 21, a bill that would
enable more than $400 million of public land to be given to the
oil and gas companies for drilling.
When we were debating that, the Ranking Member, Mr.
Grijalva, put in an amendment that would prevent any new
drilling in national parks. My Republican colleagues voted that
amendment down.
Perhaps now they will reconsider. Perhaps they will
reconsider their support of President Trump's failed plan to
remove 35 million acres from Federal protection, the only
president in history to have removed more Federal land from
protection than he added.
And maybe they will rethink the language that they put into
the House Rules this year to value all Federal land at zero
dollars. The sole purpose of which is to make it easier to
discharge protected land from Federal protection.
So, slashing funding from public parks and the National
Park Service, opening up protected land to oil and gas
drilling, privatization. This is not how you protect national
parks, which I am glad to hear my colleagues care so deeply
about.
I hope that they will work with us, in a bipartisan way, on
real policies to strengthen and support our National Parks
Program. And I hope that they will show even a little bit of
concern for the people who are unhoused in New York City.
To be clear, these are human beings, many of whom came to
this country through a legal process, something that my
colleagues often fail to acknowledge. In many cases, these are
migrants fleeing cartel violence, human trafficking,
persecution from their governments, and in many cases, came to
legal points of entry at the border to apply for legal asylum
through a legal process under our laws and are now waiting for
their cases to be heard, unhoused in New York and other places.
So, let's be clear about what we are talking about here. We
are talking about, in New York City, one former airport, it
still has runways, being used for temporary housing for people
who, in many cases, are using a legal process to attempt to
immigrate to our country.
We are not talking about Yellowstone. We are not talking
about the Rocky Mountains National. We are even not talking
about iconic national parks. Although, unfortunately, if
members of the public are interested in visiting those parks,
they are not going to be able to do so next week because of the
Republican government shutdown that is looming.
All we are talking about, though, when it comes to
temporarily housing migrants, is an airport in Brooklyn. Come
on. Let's get serious here about real immigration reform that
improves security, that provides legal avenues for an orderly
system, and let's talk about real policies to protect our
national parks from budget cuts, from drilling.
Let's protect our national parks. That is what the work of
this Committee is supposed to be about. With that, I will yield
back. Thank you.
Mr. Westerman. The gentleman yields back.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from Minnesota. Mr.
Stauber, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Stauber. Thank you, Mr. Chair for convening this very
important hearing today.
Under this Administration, every community has now become a
border community. The failed policies of this Administration
have forced Americans to suffer the disastrous consequences, no
matter how far they live from our borders.
It is shameful to see this has extended as far as our
national parks and other lands. I proudly served my community
as a member of the Duluth Minnesota Police Department for over
two decades, 23 years.
I am very concerned that the Biden administration's migrant
crisis has an impact to the safety of our law enforcement and
our communities. Since the spring of 2022, over 100,000
migrants have arrived in New York City. And over the same time,
the city manager describes the average response time for crimes
in progress when people call the police, they are delayed, and
sometimes it is violent crimes that are delayed.
Councilwoman Ariola, with the New York PD clearly over-
burdened with the increase in crime across your city, are you
concerned that the growing migrant crisis will further
overextend resources for the NYPD?
Ms. Ariola. Absolutely.
Mr. Stauber. Are you concerned about response times for
people that are calling for help?
Ms. Ariola. Yes.
Mr. Stauber. So, what effect will this have on the safety
of your constituents?
Ms. Ariola. It will absolutely adversely affect the safety
of our constituents and any migrants that would be placed on
Floyd Bennett Field.
Mr. Stauber. As a victim of a violent shooting myself, I
remember getting on the radio and calling for help and help
arrived within 30 seconds, because I was in the downtown area.
In my mind, when I was interviewed, I thought it was
several minutes. When you need help by law enforcement in
critical times, you need it now, not 3 or 4 minutes. And I am
sad that your constituents have to go through this because of
this disastrous border policy.
What are you hearing from your constituents, regarding the
increase in response time for those crimes in progress? For
those small businesses, for those people that are walking and
being assaulted and robbed on the street?
Ms. Ariola. Absent the migrant crisis, we are hearing great
concern from our constituents for those very reasons. We are
always asking for more police to be placed at our precincts,
more patrols on our streets, more beat cops on our residential
and our commercial strips, and that is just not able to be done
because of manpower.
Mr. Stauber. How is morale?
Ms. Ariola. Morale is extremely low.
Mr. Stauber. Mr. Spencer, I imagine that hosting a camp for
2,000 migrants at Floyd Bennett Field in temporary housing will
make it much more difficult for the Park Police and NYPD to do
their job.
Can you explain the additional law enforcement challenges
that will come with the migrant camp at Floyd Bennett Field?
Mr. Spencer. Thank you, Congressman.
Well, basically right now, we are already struggling day-
to-day to meet our mission requirements with what we do.
Mr. Stauber. Speaking of that, tell us your day-to-day
duties as a U.S. Park Police officer and does migrant and
refugee population management fall into the regular duties of
U.S. Park Police officers?
Mr. Spencer. Not directly, sir, but anything that falls on
our jurisdiction and the national parks and public lands that
we patrol, will definitely be our responsibility, but our
concern is our staffing level right now, for instance, over the
last year we had 511 officers sworn total since last June.
Over that time, today, we have hired 68 officers. We have
only yielded 15 total because of our attrition and our
retention problem. So, to answer your question we have, like I
said before, two officers usually patrolling that area.
To add 2,000 migrants in a camp is going to definitely
strain our operations.
Mr. Stauber. Do you think non-migrants, who wish to visit
Floyd Bennett Field, do you think that number will be
diminished once the migrant population enters?
Mr. Spencer. I really don't know if that will happen or
not, sir. I do know that there is a youth sports complex
nearby. I do know that there is a children's petting zoo and a
playground. I know they do hay rides for children in that area.
We are concerned about that.
Mr. Stauber. Finally, if the Biden administration secures
our open southern border to reduce the number of migrants
flooding communities across the country, including New York
City, at a record pace, will it help alleviate some of the law
enforcement issues facing the NYPD and Park Police?
Mr. Spencer. I would agree the homeless problem, in
general, if it was reduced in our parks would, definitely help
out the law enforcement situation.
Mr. Stauber. Real quick, Mr. Chair, we also have a northern
border. Last year, we had an incident up north where five
migrants came over. We don't know where they are. They came
across a northern lake. And the reason we weren't able to
apprehend them because our customs and border patrol agents
were ordered to in process, in their offices, in process the
illegal immigrants coming across our southern border. I yield
back.
Mr. Westerman. The gentleman's time has expired.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from New York, Mr.
Espaillat, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Espaillat. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you, Ranking
Member.
Mr. Chairman, words matter. Words can be used to bring
about solutions to complicated problems or words can be used to
throw gasoline on fire, to promote hate, violence, and habit.
So, it is always important that we distinguish rhetoric
that is used for that purpose from facts. Let me give you some
of the facts.
Fact, according to the conservative leading Cato Institute,
99 percent of fentanyl in the United States is smuggled into
the United States by some of our own citizens. That is the Cato
Institute saying that, not me, not you. An entity that you
often rely on for facts.
Fact, although there has been a very low unemployment rate,
perhaps the lowest in 60 years, 90,000 New Yorkers have left
the labor force since the pandemic began.
Fact, 60,000 migrants have stayed in New York City. Out of
those 60,000, 20,000 are children. And out of the remaining
40,000, 15,000 are Venezuelans that have already benefited from
extended TPS and are now able to work.
So, what we have is 25,000 people, and by the way the
children, they bring in Federal dollars through schools,
through Title 1, which you must understand what it is, and
Title 3, although, as we speak right now, the other side of the
aisle is trying to gut Title 1 by 80 percent.
Fact, a total of the 25,000 migrants left are the ones that
we are dealing with.
Fact, in 1907, over 1.25 million people came through New
York City through Ellis Island, exactly when the city had a
smaller infrastructure and a much smaller safety net.
Almost 1.3 million immigrants came to Ellis Island in 1907,
right through New York City, and yet we were able to handle
that. These are the facts.
The last fact that I want to point out is that back in
1986, that a very prominent leader from your party passed
amnesty. His name was Ronald Reagan, not President Carter, not
President Kennedy, not President Obama, Ronald Reagan.
Those are the facts. So, let's not engage in rhetoric that
is volatile, that will lead to violence, that will pin us
against each other.
I want to ask a question to the two representatives from
New York at the state and local level, because this is personal
to me.
I came to the United States back in 1964 with my family on
a visitor's visa, overstayed my visa, had to get my green card
later on, but I was here with no papers. What would you have
done with me, as a 9-year-old? Would you have sent me to Rikers
Island? Would you have sent me under a bridge? Where would you
have placed me and my family, back in the 1960s if that was the
case today?
I am a Member of Congress right now. Obviously, I haven't
seen any bloody incident from the migrants; 100,000 of them and
you can't point to one really reprehensible act of violence and
you are saying that they are taxing the police department?
You grab out 100,000 people anywhere and you are going to
have dozens of felonies perhaps, anywhere, on Park Avenue,
anywhere in the city of New York, so my question, what would
you have done with me and my family back in 1964 when I came in
without any papers, and now I am a Member of Congress? Right
here, walking the halls of Congress with all of these folks
here, having the same vote that they have and having an impact
on the future of this nation?
You are a city councilwoman, you are an assemblywoman, I
served 14 years in the New York State Assembly, what would you
have done with me back in 1964?
Ms. Ariola. I would have protected you just like I want to
protect all the immigrants that came in as families prior to
this influx of migrants----
Mr. Espaillat. Thank you.
Ms. Ariola [continuing]. Who are now skipping the line
while people like you were still waiting. People like your
family who went through the proper process, got the green card
and you applied for citizenship and you got citizenship.
And it may have taken you years, however, now they are
skipping the line.
Mr. Espaillat. The way to protect them is to give them a
safe environment where they can be safe with their families.
Women that have walked thousands of miles to get to the border.
Believe me, they will never be late to work. They won't miss a
day's work because they have the sniffles.
You walk 2,000 miles with three of your kids, you are going
to be a force for our economy. We should give you the
opportunity to bring us back.
Assemblywoman?
Ms. Williams. Thank you, Congressman, for the chance----
Mr. Westerman. The gentleman's time has expired. If you can
just briefly answer, Assemblywoman.
Mr. Espaillat. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Ms. Williams. Thank you for sharing. I too am an immigrant.
I must state this here, but going back to what you just stated,
I certainly would not put any family in an area that is
isolated, no transit whatsoever, and have them in a flood zone
for further implications down the road.
Mr. Espaillat. But where you put them?
Ms. Williams. Where will I put them? This will be a
conversation that we have to have with all parts of government.
Mr. Espaillat. Where will you put them right now? Today?
Ms. Williams. Well, if they are----
Mr. Espaillat. You don't have an answer.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Ms. Williams. That is your opinion.
Mr. Westerman. The gentleman's time has expired.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from Oregon.
Mr. Bentz, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Bentz. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
And I thank the witnesses for being here.
The politically sensitive nature of this issue has been
well discussed, and I want to make it clear, but I am curious,
from the folks from New York, the two counselors.
Are you are happy that we are having this hearing today?
Here at the congressional level, are you happy to be here today
sharing with your constituents, of course, but the rest of
America the need to discuss this issue?
Ms. Ariola. I am absolutely happy to be here today to
discuss this issue because it really is a Federal issue.
This migrant crisis that we are facing in New York City
should never be taken care of by the locality. Department of
Homeland Services is not prepared to give services to over
120,000 migrants, and when you take----
Mr. Bentz. We have a lot to cover. I am going to come back
to you.
Ms. Ariola. OK.
Mr. Bentz. Councilwoman Williams? Your thoughts? You are
happy to be here today?
Ms. Williams. Absolutely happy, but I must say, for the
record, I am very highly insulted that they would look at Floyd
Bennett Field, our national park, that we treasure in the
southeast side of Brooklyn, and deem it not as good as
Yellowstone.
This is an insult on our community and using this platform
on our natural resources to counteract with each other is
insulting.
Mr. Bentz. You are happy to be here today to be able to
share your thoughts?
Ms. Williams. Yes, I am. Thank you for having me.
Mr. Bentz. If New York, which is one of the most wealthy
communities, cities, metropolises in our country, is this
challenged to find places to put these folks, what does that
mean about the rest of the cities across the United States?
What are they doing with the thousands upon thousands of
people that are coming in each day? I don't want to ask you to
hazard a guess, but this is not just New York's problem that we
are facing, but it most assuredly is one that belongs before
this Committee, and I must say I resent my colleagues from
across the aisle suggesting that we manufactured this hearing
today. That it is somehow fabricated and phony. Some sort of an
opportunity to talk about one of the greatest problems that our
nation now faces.
And one of things that we say back home is, if you are in a
hole, stop digging. And that means, you have to address the
flow of thousands, millions of people across the border first.
We heard today, not one person, I don't think, on the other
side of the aisle, talked about the need to address border
security first. Not one. A lot of talk about how we need a
comprehensive system. A lot of talk about how unfeeling we
Republicans are, but the truth of the matter is we have to
address the border first, because otherwise what do we have to
build upon when it comes to creating a comprehensive system?
And you folks in New York City are one of the best bully
pulpits to talk about the challenge that your communities face.
So, at this point, someone in the community has decided
that the national park is the place to go and thus it brings
us, in this Committee, to talk about it. And you have been
asked repeatedly, is there some other thing to do, if the
answer is no, I agree that is what all of the communities are
saying, the answer is no. We are out of space to put these
thousands, these millions of people.
Yet, we did not hear that from the folks from the other
side of the aisle. It amazes me because what we need to do is
get control of the border.
Now, please, Ms. Ariola, do we need to control the border
first so we can talk about comprehensive solutions second?
Ms. Ariola. Absolutely.
Mr. Bentz. And would you be supportive of us focusing on
ways of addressing asylum? Because as we all know about 1 out
of 10 persons granted asylum are entitled to it, 1 out of 10,
and the other 9 disappear.
The point of the matter is we are allowing in 90 percent
more people than we should under the guise of asylum. We need
to address it, yet, we did not hear a peep about that, instead
there are attacks upon Republicans for having the audacity to
suggest that we should stop people at the border, but there is
no other solution when there is no place for them to go, even
in a place as wealthy as New York City.
That is why I am happy for this hearing today.
Ms. Williams, you were cut off a number of times. You have
28 seconds, add what you want to say?
Ms. Williams. Well, I just want to say. That is the whole
thing. Asking all of these questions and wanting to get just a
yes or no answer. I don't have a solution as to where to put
them, but I am very sure if we had the conversation from the
bottom up or the top down, including the state, the city, and
the Federal, we may get to some other solution.
So, when you don't give me an opportunity to answer
correctly and you then walk off, it really tells me that we are
not really here based on the issue, again, of using our
national park, which deemed as it is just an old airport
runway. That is insulting to me and to the people that I
represent in the southeast side of Brooklyn.
Mr. Bentz. Thank you for your testimony. I yield back.
Mr. Westerman. The gentleman's time has expired.
The Chair now recognizes the gentlelady from New Mexico.
Ms. Leger Fernandez, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
Ms. Leger Fernandez. Thank you so much, Mr. Chair, and
thank you witnesses.
I have been following this from my office. We are just 4
days away from a government shutdown. The question on America's
minds is will Congress pass legislation so that we can continue
paying our Federal employees and all those who rely on them
from the Head Start classes in my district to the Head Start
classes in New York. But that is not why we are called here
today.
Instead, we are having a hearing, with lots of posters, to
talk about an issue that once again is on Congress' plate,
because we have refused to address and pass immigration reform
to fix a broken system.
Ms. Acer, thank you. Thank you for your recommendations to
better serve the migrants seeking asylum, which is presently
the law of the land. Is that correct?
Ms. Acer. Yes. U.S. law allows people, at ports of entry,
or within the United States, to seek asylum.
Ms. Leger Fernandez. So, we have a law that needs to be
addressed, and we have a migrant issue that needs to be
addressed.
But let's talk about what is really happening. How would a
government shutdown impact the ability of Federal, state, local
agencies, and non-profits to provide shelter and humanitarian
aid to these migrants?
Take us out a bit, and say what would a shutdown do to the
ability of these wonderful humanitarians, people who want to
serve those who need shelter, because they remember that
proverb?
Ms. Acer. A shutdown could affect humanitarian
organizations in quite a few ways, and the Biden administration
really should take steps to minimize that.
The last thing we want to see are humanitarian
organizations, faith-based groups, and others who are working
on the front lines, not be reimbursed or reimbursed promptly
for the very important critical assistance they are providing,
which is essential to U.S. communities, and it is also
essential by the way to the customs and border protection.
Ms. Leger Fernandez. Thank you so very much. Because if we
do not actually provide the Biden administration with the
funds, because we shut the Federal Government down, and that is
going to be across our country, not just in New York, it is
across our country where we are going to see this harm, this
hurt.
Ms. Acer. This is across the country, and in addition, I
just want to emphasize again the devastating impact this will
have on the ability to actually resolve asylum claims by adding
immeasurably to the immigration court backlog and delaying
those cases for years.
People we represent, refuges seeking asylum in this country
are waiting years to get their cases resolved. There is so much
Congress can do to really make sure that the immigration courts
are funded properly so that the cases move much more quickly
and fairly. Thank you.
Ms. Leger Fernandez. So, when we have a budget that is
proposed that would cut significantly from these cases, what we
are actually doing is making this problem worse, rather than
solving it, so that we could then have some political theater
around it.
I want to move a bit to Mr. Spencer. In a recent letter,
Secretary Haaland, a letter written by my Republican
colleagues, they noted, and this is beautiful language, and I
completely agree with the Republicans on that, that national
parks are important for Americans, I quote, ``To experience
wonder, to recreate, and find joy or to simply learn more about
the great history of our nation.''
I am very concerned because, with the impending shutdown,
but not just the impending shutdown, but with the proposed cuts
in appropriations, Republicans are stealing Americans joy.
Republicans are going to be stealing Americans joy in our
parks.
But Mr. Spencer, there is a proposed cut in the
appropriations of $500 million to the National Park Service.
That is going to absolutely cut park officers and rangers. With
a $500 million cut, that would impact the number of rangers and
police officers.
What would that do to morale and your ability to actually
protect those places of awe?
Mr. Spencer. Thank you for the question, Congresswoman.
As far as we see it, from my level, from the members of the
boots on the ground with the U.S. Park Police, we have been
dealing with this for decades. So, our funding has been cut
across both sides of the aisle.
I don't know where the money is going, but it certainly
doesn't make it down to the U.S. Park Police through the
National Park Service. So, that is the best I can answer for
that.
I mean, we have had cuts across the board, we don't have
the money to hire any more officers this next fiscal year and
that was a direct conversation I had with our Chief of Police.
Ms. Leger Fernandez. So, we actually need more funding to
make sure we can adequately protect the parks and the people
who attend them.
And with at, Mr. Chairman, my time is up, and I yield back.
Thank you so very much.
Mr. Westerman. The gentlelady's time has expired.
The Chair recognizes the gentlelady from New York, Ms.
Malliotakis. You are recognized for 5 minutes.
Ms. Malliotakis. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I want to thank you for coming to see Floyd Bennett Field,
unlike our colleague from Rhode Island that wants to disparage
our park in New York City, which is, as you said, Ms. Williams,
very insulting.
That you would say it is OK to have a migrant encampment in
the middle of Brooklyn because he feels the park is not as nice
as some of the other national parks in the country. We invite
him to come visit as well so he can learn something.
I would like to first start by saying, it is disappointing
that the Department of the Interior and the National Park
Service refused to come here to answer questions.
I wonder why they refused to come here? Maybe it is because
they did something wrong, and I think we were going to get to
the bottom of that. And I thank the Chairman for doing this.
I want to start by saying, in response to my colleague from
New York, who said that everything is great in New York, there
are no problems and, unlike the mayor, is saying that it is
destroying New York and he said, well, has anyone gotten
injured?
Well, you know what? They were on a tour at Roosevelt
Hotel, that shelter, right? Remember that we have a lot of
media coverage. Right after they left that tour, someone got
stabbed in that hotel.
It was a migrant that stabbed another migrant. And there
are dozens of arrests that have taken place at that hotel
already for assault. In Staten Island, we saw unlicensed
drivers without plates slamming into vehicles, totaling
people's cars in the community.
In Brooklyn, there was a DUI bust of a migrant that led to
an NYPD sergeant's finger being bitten off.
We have seen multiple crimes. One Venezuelan migrant
actually, 14 crimes in 2 months. That is pretty much a record
for New York. And in two upstate New York shelters, there were
individuals arrested for rape, forcing that county, by the way,
to say they are not going to accept any migrants and forcing
our governor to say that they should go somewhere else.
So, Mr. Spencer, my question on public safety is to you
first, being that you present the U.S. Park Police. Is your
agency concerned about public safety?
Mr. Spencer. Thank you for the question, Congresswoman.
Before I answer, thank you for your continued support with
the U.S. Park Police FOP.
Is our agency concerned with the migrant situation that is
proposed for Floyd Bennett Field? Yes, they are. And again,
that is because of our staffing levels right now and our
resources. We don't have the staffing or the resources to
handle 2,000 migrants put into a tent on our property right
now.
Ms. Malliotakis. So, you feel it is a bad idea for this
encampment to be placed at Floyd Bennett?
Mr. Spencer. It is certainly going to make our law
enforcement duties much more difficult.
Ms. Malliotakis. OK.
Councilwoman Ariola, in your testimony and also
Assemblywoman Williams, which I am happy you are both here
because it is a bipartisan effort here that you want to stop
this from happening in your community.
So, I applaud this. It is not Republican versus Democrat;
it is two people coming together for the betterment of their
community. So, what I want to say is, SEQR is a State
Environmental Quality Review Act, we also have the NEPA,
National Environmental Policy Act, those were violated, right?
They did not do anything to address any of environmental
impact? It is so interesting because some of my colleagues from
New York City want to shut everything down, because we don't
follow NEPA, now all of a sudden want to see NEPA being
completely bypassed. They have no regard for the environment
all of a sudden.
Can you comment on that?
Ms. Williams. I think it is very insulting to not follow
NEPA regulations, to not even have a public hearing for
community input and this is why our citizens are forced to
voice their concerns for their safety and our environment, and
for everyone that utilizes Floyd Bennett Field.
I will remind you, it is a national park, whether you want
to compare it to Yellowstone or a plain old airport field, I
ask you, come out, take you around and you will see the
phenomenal things that happen at Floyd Bennett Field, our
national park.
Ms. Malliotakis. Thank you.
And Councilwoman Ariola, would you like to add to not
following any of the laws?
Ms. Ariola. We recently asked for NPS to extend a soccer
field at Fort Tilden, which is on my side of the Queens
district, and we were flatly denied access and I believe that
you do have an email from the NPS stating why, because it would
not conform with what is regularly at that location.
And that it could impede other activities, it could impede
protected property, protected species and all of that. All of
this has been negated at Floyd Bennett Field. No NEPA, no SEQR,
no EIS and an expedited EA without any community outreach.
Ms. Malliotakis. Thank you. And because I have run out of
time, I just want to make a point to say, Chairman, I
appreciate you looking into the fact that no environmental
impact statement, no environmental assessment. They claim it is
an emergency, but yet, the President says nothing is going on
at the border. There is no emergency to see here, so how do
they get away with this and that is what the Committee has to
be tasked with looking into.
Thank you. With that, I yield back.
Mr. Westerman. The gentlelady's time has expired.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from California, Mr.
LaMalfa. You are recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. LaMalfa. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
What Committee are we in, Mr. Chairman?
Mr. Westerman. The House Natural Resources Committee, Mr.
LaMalfa.
Mr. LaMalfa. OK. And does it have jurisdiction over the
National Park System?
Mr. Westerman. It has jurisdiction over all of the
Department of the Interior and national parks.
Mr. LaMalfa. So, today's hearing about the national parks,
in this case in New York, is an appropriate venue for the
conversation, yes?
Mr. Westerman. We have a duty to have oversight over the
National Park Service.
Mr. LaMalfa. OK. And there are 435 members of the House
with many, many committees meeting. Some of them working on
fiscal issues, such as funding the government today?
Mr. Westerman. That is correct.
Mr. LaMalfa. Probably. Likely. So, it is possible to walk
and chew gum at the same time on many issues in the U.S.
Congress.
All right. Good. Well, then we are in an appropriate place
to talk about these issues of the parks in New York and the
overwhelming effect this is going to have upon them, and we
sympathize and we thank those folks here today for traveling
and being with us on this.
Well, I will just dive into a couple questions here for
Assemblywoman Williams and Council Member Ariola. You may be
aware of the New York Restoration Project, as it is called, I
have been made aware of it, so I am certain you are.
Of course, it maintains community gardens and parks in the
City. In 2019, the Project published a study which observed
that the increase in park and general green space in the east
Harlem neighborhood of New York resulted in over 200 fewer
felonies committed per year, reduction of over 50 percent.
So, with the lease signed by the Department of the
Interior, a substantial amount of recreational space will be
taken away. Can you speak to what effect housing these illegal
immigrants on Floyd Bennett Field will have on the local area
and the loss of recreation, and increased crime possibilities,
not only from the neighborhood having less park when we are
seeing the crime of the neighborhood itself go down, but the
crime that will be generated from these camps?
Ms. Ariola. Yes, thank you. We have a number of groups that
go to Floyd Bennett Field regularly. We have the Jamaica Bay
Rockaway Park Conservancy, which was made to postpone their
public arts festival.
They also have a new project that we have all been working
with, within EIS, with the community, and for outreach for the
betterment of Floyd Bennett Field.
There are bird clubs, there are people who fish there,
there are people who kayak there, there are people who have
archery there, there is an aviator sports center. There are----
Mr. LaMalfa. I am sorry, but please focus on the crime
aspect of what you would expect?
Ms. Ariola. Sure. So, if you have two police officers from
NPS on any given tour and a depleted police force from the 63rd
and the 100th Precinct who would have oversight there, then
absolutely it would be a crime issue.
Mr. LaMalfa. Because of the camp itself as well as now less
park space that has been instrumental in lowering crime in the
neighborhood, as statistically shown, right?
Ms. Ariola. Right. And because there would be upwards of
2,000 to 7,500 people living on that park space.
Mr. LaMalfa. Yes.
Ms. Ariola. And that really is a community. That is a
community that deserves its own precinct, school board, and
fire department and they wouldn't have that.
Mr. LaMalfa. Assemblywoman?
Ms. Williams. Thank you very much. As we have stated, Floyd
Bennett Field is unsafe and unsuitable for anyone to live
there. You talk about the crime. I think Mr. Spencer shared the
burden that this will have on his force, having just two
officers there, we are looking at 2,000 plus single migrant
men.
I can't tell the future. I don't have a crystal ball in
front of me to say what crime is going to be committed from
what is not going to be committed, but we have to be prepared.
Mr. LaMalfa. Sure, thank you.
Mr. Spencer, would you weigh in on that, please? Because
what I am wondering too is, the Department of the Interior,
Department of Justice, Homeland Security, have they offered any
kind of help to pay for the employees that it is going to take
to do this job, if indeed you can get more than two?
Mr. Spencer. Thank you for the question, Congressman. No.
From everything I know, we have not been given any funding to
supplement outside of normal operations on Floyd Bennett Field.
Mr. LaMalfa. As the Park Police, what is the interface
between them and New York Police Departments for dealing with
the crime that is expected?
Mr. Spencer. I do know the NYPD is also severely
understaffed, just as we are. They do work hand in hand with us
on law enforcement functions, but primarily we are the
servicing law enforcement agency for Floyd Bennett Field.
Mr. LaMalfa. So, it is a real recipe for disaster, isn't
it?
Mr. Spencer. It is going to overwhelm us.
Mr. LaMalfa. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Mr. Westerman. The gentleman's time has expired.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from Montana. Mr.
Rosendale, you are now recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Rosendale. Thank you very much, Mr. Chair and Ranking
Member Grijalva for holding the hearing today.
President Biden's harmful border agenda has been felt by
states far from the border nearly since the day he took office.
Democrat leaders in sanctuary cities enacted President
Biden's leftist immigration policies and the crisis quickly
spilled into rural states hundreds of miles away. If President
Biden, Secretary Mayorkas and other administration officials
were serious about controlling immigration and securing our
border, we would not have this hearing today about New York
State and the National Park Service.
Our country's national parks are some of the greatest
treasures. To allow illegal immigrants to set up camp in these
parks and hamper everyday American's rights to visit and enjoy
these parks is just another example of Biden and his Cabinet
putting their leftist agenda above the need of Americans.
Just the other week, it was announced that over 100
migrants are going to be settled in Billings, Montana. What
concerns me the most about this is that they are likely just
the beginning of a process that will see many different states
forced to accept these illegal immigrants and refugees.
Where will the rest of the 100,000 Afghan refugees go? I
can assure you they will not be sent to sanctuary cities.
Montana has many great and historic national parks. The last
thing we need is the Federal Government coming in and telling
us that the bedrock of our tourism and a significant factor in
our economy will now be used against its intended purpose and
instead for housing illegal immigrants.
I hope that this Committee can help shine some light on
this issue and we can prevent the Administration from trying
similar tactics in states such as mine.
Ms. Ariola, how long is the Department of the Interior
proposing to house these illegal immigrants in or on Floyd
Bennett Field?
Ms. Ariola. The current lease is for 1 year and then it has
an option to extend for 2 years.
Mr. Rosendale. Two additional years, so a total of three or
a total of two?
Ms. Ariola. No, for another year, an additional year.
Mr. Rosendale. One and one?
Ms. Ariola. Right.
Mr. Rosendale. OK, so the general public and the American
taxpayers are only authorized to stay in Floyd Bennett Field
for a maximum of 14 consecutive days, yet Interior wants to
violate their very own rules and basically grant an unlimited
duration of stay to these illegal immigrants?
Ms. Ariola. That would be correct.
Mr. Rosendale. You mentioned in your testimony that a
million people a year enjoy Floyd Bennett Field. What kind of
impact will housing these illegal immigrants have on the local
economy, community safety, and the areas surrounding the
national park?
Ms. Ariola. What we have seen in the areas where there have
been asylum seekers and illegal immigrants, we have seen crime
tick up. We have seen what Representative Malliotakis said.
There have been violent crimes. Shoplifting has up ticked. We
have seen a lot of different crimes: rape, muggings, assaults,
robberies, burglaries. These are all up ticked since we have
had this vast migration of illegal immigrants coming into our
city.
Mr. Rosendale. Do you think that that type of activity is
conducive to promoting tourism and economic development in your
area?
Ms. Ariola. You can't have tourism when all your hotels are
full of migrants.
Mr. Rosendale. Mr. Spencer, I would like to ask you a
question. I don't have a law enforcement background, if you
have 2,000 military age men that are contained in an area like
that without tasks that will be performed each day, so they
basically have a lot of idle hands, as my father used to call
it, what is the likelihood for more criminal element to take
place? Crimes to take place?
Mr. Spencer. I appreciate the question, Congressman.
We are definitely concerned. The fact that those premises
are going to be put directly close to where there are going to
be a lot of children is one of my primary concerns for the
officers I represent.
Like I said, we are already so short staffed that it is
going to be difficult to police 2,000 extra people. That takes
away from more day-to-day operations and it is not even just
the concerns of putting 2,000 men on Floyd Bennett Field, it is
also the concerns that we have for their safety as well because
if something happens to one of them, EMS typically in that area
of New York City, they know how to get to Floyd Bennett Field,
but if there is a specific area where one of these migrants are
injured, they may not speak English, they could get hurt, one
of our officers has to break away and escort them to that
location just to make sure that they can be found. So, that
leaves one officer available during that time.
Mr. Rosendale. It would be very, very susceptible to having
something tragic happen?
Mr. Spencer. Correct.
Mr. Rosendale. Very good. Thank you so much.
Mr. Chair, I do see my time has expired, I would yield
back. Thank you.
Mr. Westerman. The gentleman yields back.
The Chair now recognizes the gentlelady from Virginia, Ms.
Kiggans. You are recognized for 5 minutes.
Ms. Kiggans. Thank you, Mr. Chair. And I just wanted to
start by thanking our witnesses who took time to be with us
today when we had other witnesses not show up. I think this
says a lot about how much you care about this issue.
So, thank you very much for being here. It also says a lot
about the people who did not show up to speak to this issue.
The numbers are staggering and I don't think I need to
repeat some of the headlines and words of my colleagues about
human trafficking, drug trafficking, crime, the number of
illegal immigrants crossing our border, 6 million. It is the
size of the population of Denmark or Singapore.
It is really since Biden took office. I am a person that
likes to think of the problem and take 10 steps back. How can
we prevent this problem, and you all have presented so
eloquently and been great advocates for your national park, but
this is a problem in the park.
So, what can we do to prevent the problem? Well, I think
step one it would be great if we could just acknowledge that
there is a problem at the border. There is a crisis at the
border.
But there is something that needs to be done at the border.
I went to the border twice. I represent Virginia's 2nd
Congressional District, so I am not a border state, but we all
are becoming border states.
But just to see, in real life, and talk to those ranchers,
and talk to those homeowners, and talk to the small businesses,
talk to the border patrol, talk to law enforcement.
The stories were shocking, and to listen how few of them
there were, the amount of problems they deal with on a daily
basis. I cannot understand why our current Administration
doesn't even acknowledge that there is a problem at the border.
So, now we are talking about how it has bled into places on
the East Coast, like Virginia, like New York, like Floyd
Bennett Field, costing $12 billion over the next 3 years,
100,000 migrants coming to New York City since Spring of 2022.
You talked about the 2,000 migrants and some of the
security concerns and I just want to know what the
infrastructure and kind of quality of life looks like. I can't
imagine it is real good there. It is like a tent city, I am
imagining. I haven't seen it, but what are these children
doing? What are the adults doing during the day? What is the
plan of action? Is there one? What are we doing with these
people?
Mr. Spencer. Thank you, Congresswoman.
I am sorry, I don't follow your question. Are you asking
about what the local community does there on a day-to-day
basis?
Ms. Kiggans. What do the people there do?
Mr. Spencer. Right. It is a recreational area, so there are
nature trails, there are bird watching areas, there are beaches
and----
Ms. Kiggans. The immigrants specifically. I am sorry.
Mr. Spencer. The immigrants specifically? I mean, they are
going to be part of that. They are going to be able to come and
go as they please. I don't know exactly what the facility is
going to look like, from what I hear it is going to be a tent
and that is the way it is described in the lease.
But they are going to be able to come and go as they
please, so they are going to be intermingling with the local
community and being able to engage the park just like anyone
else would.
Ms. Kiggans. I can't imagine that everything is going to go
super smoothly. And you talked about some of the crime issues.
And again, security issues.
What will happen if there is an arrest or multiple arrests?
Is there a place that we are going to house them? Is there a
place that we are going to hold arrested migrants over other
arrested people in your city? What are the plans for that?
Mr. Spencer. That is part of what kind of baffled me with
this lease agreement. As I stated before, we really weren't
consulted on the operational plan, as far as the law
enforcement aspect of it goes.
Every time we have a special event or some type of incident
outside of normal day-to-day operations, our agency comes up
with an operational plan, an ops plan to make sure that that
special event or First Amendment activity, or whatever it may
be, is handled appropriately.
Usually that makes canceling days off for the officers that
are on their day off, to bring in extra officers to handle that
kind of event. There has been no plan in place on what we are
going to do with this.
Ms. Kiggans. It is frustrating to hear you speak about your
recruitment, your retention, and the quality of work that your
officers do, so please thank them for us. I know they are doing
heavy lifts right now.
Is the National Park Service or anyone else addressing any
of the infrastructure problems to prepare for the migrant
shelters at Floyd Bennett Field that we know of?
Mr. Spencer. I am unaware of any.
Ms. Kiggans. And will the migrant camp hurt or help the
quality of the park and the services that are currently offered
to visitors and, likewise, we talked a little bit about the
migrant camp impact on the national park's ecosystem. I can't
imagine that there is not going to be a big impact on that as
well?
Ms. Ariola. There would absolutely be a major impact on the
park's ecosystem.
Ms. Kiggans. Thank you very much. I yield back.
Mr. Westerman. The gentlelady yields back.
I realize our witnesses have been sitting at the table for
a long time and speaking of facilities at Floyd Bennett Field,
I am going to declare a 5-minute recess so that you can take a
break and we will plan to start back promptly in 5 minutes.
[Recess.]
Mr. Westerman. The Committee will come to order.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from California. Mr.
Duarte, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Duarte. Thank you, Mr. Chairman and thank you to all of
our guests here today testifying.
I wanted to talk to Ms. Ariola and Ms. Williams. Is this
the first time that you ladies have had a chance to come to
Capitol Hill and have our attention and explain what is
happening in your districts?
Ms. Ariola. For me it has, yes.
Mr. Duarte. And Ms. Williams, have you been able to find an
opportunity to let us, in Congress, know how this influx of
migration is impacting your district?
Ms. Williams. I am very thankful for the opportunity to be
before you, to bring to the attention the misuse or the intent
of our national park.
Mr. Duarte. Thank you.
You represent districts there in New York. Please elucidate
for us a little bit, beyond just the national park issue. I am
reading reports about one of the reasons of these hearings is
to get first-hand accounts from folks on the ground throughout
the country.
What is happening to small businesses around the hotels
where migrants are being housed and tourism is being displaced?
Ms. Ariola. Small businesses, both around and inside the
hotels are closing.
Mr. Duarte. On what scale? What are you seeing?
Ms. Ariola. I would say on a large scale. They have been
reporting it on the local news that they just cannot function
because of the lack of tourism and the fact that there are so
many migrants on the street and in the hotels.
Mr. Duarte. Thank you. And Ms. Williams, what are you
seeing along those lines? What other social and community
impacts are the large influxes of migrants having? I assume the
national park wasn't our first option, in terms of where to put
hordes of migrants. Where else have they been put and what have
the community impacts been so far in your district?
Ms. Williams. Well, I heard this on the news and there was
no prior communication from the powers that be and it was very
concerning for our community.
I have to say that the 59th District is a very peculiar
district. It is a residential area. It is a transit desert. We
do not have a train going through our community. Period. Our
community has some of the most green spaces in New York City,
hence Floyd Bennett Field.
So, housing the migrants there? It is almost 2 to 3 miles
from anything possible. And we have a mall there. And those
people that run that mall, they are concerned because as the
colder months come, darkness comes earlier.
So, people are very concerned. Small businesses are
concerned, but again, the district that I represent is a very
residential one, with many safety concerns at hand.
Mr. Duarte. How about food outlets, services, jobs? Can you
elucidate a few of those issues?
Ms. Williams. Well, as I said, it is a 2-mile radius from
where they will be placed, or almost 3 miles. There are no jobs
there. There is no food there. There is nothing there but
institutions like Aviator and Fresh Meadow Farm for
recreational purposes.
So, all these things will have to be brought in for them.
For them to travel, they would have to travel out of Floyd
Bennett Field to go into the bigger population where they can
seek those amenities.
Mr. Duarte. So, we have a food desert. We have a job's
desert. SNAP cards and work visas won't remedy these factors
easily.
We have a transportation problem. We don't have public
transportation set up to move these folks to where they can be
productive or participate in the economy. So, what is the end
game? What do we do with, and I think this last month we had
230,000 new crossings documented on the southern border, plus
Gotaways, so we assume it is a higher number than that.
What is the end game? How does this end? Because in my
district, in Modesto, we have neighborhoods that were formed
as, you can call them refugee camps or displaced camps around
Modesto, California where the Model A's just came and parked
and people started living there and now, we have neighborhoods
that sprawled up that not quite 100 years later, 90 years later
that still have no sidewalks. They have never been
incorporated. There never was a solution and now we have these
ongoing problems of these communities that were never planned.
How do you see this ending?
Ms. Williams. I just want to add, as you said, end game? I
don't know if there is an end in sight, however, what I do know
that needs to happen that every part of government, Federal,
state, and city have to be in communication.
You cannot ignore the local government, the local
representatives that represent their constituency. These
decisions cannot be made at such a level where the local
electeds read about or hear about it over the news.
Mr. Duarte. So, has anyone asked you, from the Federal
Government, as they displace onto the Federal park here and
other places throughout your community, how they are going to
supplement the tax base that further demands have been put on?
Are they going to give you, as a city or state government,
additional revenues to handle the public safety or the lack of
tax base that is coming with these new demands?
Mr. Westerman. The gentleman's time has expired. I will
give you a brief moment to answer.
Ms. Ariola. There has been no commitment for financial
support.
Mr. Duarte. Well, thank you for coming here today. I yield
back to the Chairman.
Mr. Westerman. The gentleman's time has expired. The Chair
now recognizes the gentlelady from Wyoming, Ms. Hageman. You
are recognized for 5 minutes.
Ms. Hageman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman and thank you for
having this incredibly important hearing and for you being
willing to come in today to talk about these serious issues.
Council Member Ariola, we are very interested in learning
more about the public consultation process for migrant camp at
Floyd Bennett Field.
Just 2 weeks ago, the Oversight and Investigations
Subcommittee heard testimony from the Democratic witness about
how important it was to ``facilitate meaningful, public
engagement in decision making,'' and especially in
``communities of color'' and ``low-income communities'' during
the NEPA process because it will lead to ``better decisions for
the entire community.''
Council Member Ariola, please briefly describe the public
consultation process to host thousands of migrants at Floyd
Bennett Field?
Ms. Ariola. There was no public consultation. There was a
letter written to the President by our Governor asking for
Floyd Bennett. We then asked for a meeting with the Governor's
office. The Governor's office did comply. A meeting was held.
The Governor was not present.
We sent questions beforehand, none of the questions were
answered. We followed up 2 weeks later for another meeting,
that was on a Thursday. They told us no changes have happened,
we don't need another meeting and on Friday the lease was
signed.
Ms. Hageman. That does not sound to be very meaningful in
terms of public engagement or decision making. Then, are there
communities of color or low-income communities in the area
around Floyd Bennett Field and Gateway National Recreation Area
that were consulted?
Ms. Ariola. No. There were no areas at all, whether areas
of color, low income, middle income, no areas, no communities,
no elected officials. We found out like everyone else did.
Ms. Hageman. So, across the board the Biden administration
has totally failed at communicating and working with the
community to address the crisis that the Biden administration
has created. Is that fair?
Ms. Ariola. It is fair to say. He actually visited our city
and flew in and out without meeting with the Mayor or visiting
a shelter.
Ms. Hageman. So, I would say that he is not engaged in a
meaningful public engagement process. In the process, it seems
to me that the Biden administration has also failed to engage
with local communities of color, as we have already discussed,
and other groups that are impacted by this throughout the area.
Is that also fair?
Ms. Ariola. That is correct.
Ms. Hageman. As a result of the Biden administration not
engaging in a meaningful consultation process, they reached a
decision that harms your community and has caused great
suffering for not only your community, but the people that they
are bringing in. Isn't that true as well?
Ms. Ariola. Yes, it is.
Ms. Hageman. Councilmember Ariola and Ms. Williams, you
quoted the NEPA handbook where it says that ``actions taken in
response to an emergency are not exempt from NEPA review.''
As a NEPA attorney, I don't agree that this is the way that
it should be. I think that there are many situations in my home
state of Wyoming where we could have prevented a catastrophic
wildfire, if we had not been held up by the NEPA process. But I
think it is worth highlighting the double standard that we are
seeing here, in relation to the invasion on the southern border
and the invasion of our cities, such as in New York.
If we want to respond to emergencies related to immediate
risks of severe forest fires that devastate communities and
people throughout my state, we can't expedite the process, yet
when the politics of this situation is magnified enough for the
world to see the disaster that has been created by the Biden
administration, then what happens? Exactly what is happening
with the National Park Service and what you are suffering
through in New York.
How do you see the politics of this situation creating a
double standard for the National Park Service, particularly as
it relates to NEPA?
Ms. Ariola. I think that they have given it no thought, no
cause, and they are talking about protecting people, but they
are not protecting the people that they want to place on Floyd
Bennett Field without having these safeguards in place.
Ms. Hageman. One of things that I think has been so
shocking to the American public is in watching the invasion on
the southern border and the southern states, Arizona, Texas,
California, and even in my area have been dealing with this
crisis for quite some time.
It is now visiting upon other areas and it is exploding
across our country. It isn't just affecting one national park,
it is affecting every community, it is affecting every state,
and it is affecting the nation as a whole.
It is tearing apart the fabric of our society because of
these failed policies. I am sorry for what the Biden
administration has done to you and I am sorry for what the
Biden administration has done to our country.
They should be ashamed of themselves. I very much
appreciate your willingness to come here and tell us about the
crisis they have created. Thank you.
Mr. Westerman. The gentlelady's time has expired. The Chair
recognizes the gentleman from New York. Mr. D'Esposito, you are
recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. D'Esposito. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you for
allowing this proud New Yorker to waive on to your Committee
this afternoon, and thank you as well for your leadership and
commitment to this issue that is so important.
There is no question, from everything we have heard today
and hearings that we have had across Capitol Hill over the last
months, that President Biden's failed immigration policies, his
dereliction of duty, alongside Secretary Mayorkas, has led to
an unprecedented crisis at our border.
And now that unprecedented crisis at our border is no
longer at just our border, but is at states throughout this
country, like the great state of New York.
And what baffles me the most is that during the campaigns
of Mayor Adams and Governor Hochul, they praised the fact that
certain areas were sanctuary cities. They were going to welcome
everyone with open arms.
And now, we realized that there was actually no plan in
place to be that sanctuary. It was just complete pandering for
their base. There was no plan in place to have migrants
sheltered correctly.
There is no chance that migrants leaving their homes,
risking their lives, leaving their families, coming to this
country for a better way of life, coming to this country to
achieve the American dream that so many of our parents, and
grandparents, and great grandparents have achieved.
They never thought they were going to come into this
country and that American dream was going to be living in a
vacant hangar at JFK Airport. That is not the American dream.
What we have seen is that there were no plans in plan and
now panic has set in. Just a few weeks ago, and it is probably
the first and last thing that Mayor Adams and I will ever agree
on. He said that this issue, the migrants coming into New York
City could ``destroy New York.''
In essence, the light is dimming on Broadway. And now what
we see is you have a letter, that many of you have referenced,
a letter from Governor Kathy Hochul to President Biden asking
for the use of places, national parks.
There has also been talk of using military bases to house
these migrants. Prior to becoming a Member of Congress, I was
proud to serve as a member of the greatest police department in
the world, the NYPD.
And I look back now on my brothers and sisters in blue who
call Floyd Bennett Field essentially their office: aviation,
some of Scuba, members of special operations, different
specialized units within the NYPD who took an oath to protect
and serve the Constitution, who took an oath to stand that line
between good and evil.
Not only did New York State and the democratic policies in
this country legitimately take the handcuffs off of criminals
and put it on police, but now they want to cut the budget. And
now they have to share an office with migrants at Floyd Bennett
Field.
Councilwoman I ask you, New York City is going to face
unprecedented budget cuts. Mayor Adams has said 15 percent over
the next 9 months in agencies that are dealing with these
migrants the most.
And if this was asked already, I apologize. But what do you
see and, Ms. Williams, what do you see as the results that are
going to face New York City as a result of these budget cuts
and the changes being made in New York City because of the
unprecedented levels of migrants because of the failed policies
of Joe Biden and Secretary Mayorkas?
Ms. Ariola. The 15 percent cuts that are being spoken about
between now and April will reduce our essential services, fire
department, NYPD, the DSNY, education, all the different things
that we need to keep our city going, and if we don't have NYPD
and we don't have overtime, we don't have extra patrols because
we have a diminished police force.
If we don't have overtime for our firefighters, we don't
have firefighters on every shift. And we have a very big
problem with the migrants and their motor scooters with their
lithium-ion batteries.
Mr. D'Esposito. We sure do. I don't want to cut you off,
but just one last thing because my time is running out.
It is estimated that in 2024, and I believe this number is
going to be higher, that it is going to cost the city close to
$5 billion, with a b, for migrants.
And in 2025, that number is going to be higher. It is going
to be close to $8 billion. We had a Homeland Security hearing,
and I am sure there are some members of this Committee that sat
here earlier, those numbers are higher than their entire
state's budget. It is baffling.
And Mayor Adams is right. This issue, this problem that has
been created by President Biden and Secretary Mayorkas, is
going to destroy New York City and many other cities throughout
this country.
Mr. Chairman, thank you again for allowing me to waive on.
I yield back.
Mr. Westerman. The gentleman's time has expired. The Chair
recognizes the gentleman from Texas. Mr. Hunt, you are
recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Hunt. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want to thank all the
witnesses for being here today. I really, really appreciate you
all being here. Thank you for your time. I mean that from the
bottom of my heart.
Behind me, you see a picture that speaks for itself. This
is what I call sheer chaos. And by the way, this photo was
captured in 2021. A little background on me. I am a combat
veteran deployed to Baghdad in 2006.
That is about what it looked like when I was there in a
combat zone. This is what happens when you refuse to control
our border and our sovereign nation. We are over-run by cartels
trafficking in migrants, drugs, and crime.
These are all realities in Joe Biden's America, except now,
they are being felt well beyond our border states, like mine in
Texas. It is not just Republicans sounding the alarm now. This
is happening with Democrats as well.
Next picture. Mayor Adams, as we have heard a few of the
Congressmen say on August 22 about New York, ``I am proud that
this is the right to shelter state, and we are going to
continue that,'' that is the leader of the largest city in
America.
If you remember in 2022, he even met migrants as they
entered New York. Let's fast forward to May 2023, and Mayor
Adams, through Executive Order, has suspended the law he was so
proud of.
And it seems that even Democrats are starting to see the
light. It only gets real when it is in your backyard. This is
something that we have been experiencing in Texas for the past
few years.
We have had 6\1/2\ million people enter our country
illegally at our southern border. This is the most we have seen
in my lifetime. It is absolute chaos and it is a crisis.
I get text messages every single week from people finding
dead bodies on their ranches and yet, we sit by here and do
nothing with this current Administration. ``Never in my life
have I had a problem that I did not see an ending to. And I
don't see an ending to this. This issue will destroy New
York.'' Those are his words.
Next up, Kathy Hochul, the governor from the great state of
New York. In December 2021, Governor Hochul said and I quote,
``as you know, the Statue of Liberty is inscribed and it says,
`Give me your tired, your poor, your huddled masses'. You are
welcome with open arms, and we will work to keep you safe.''
``Give me your tired, your poor, your huddled masses,
yearning to breathe free, the wretched refuse of your teeming
shore, send these the homeless, tempest tossed to me. I lift my
lamp beyond the golden door.'' That is actually what it says.
And I know it by heart because I learned it when I was a
child. That is what this country is about. This is actually
what I fought for.
So, please know I am not xenophobic. I love my country. I
am willing to die for it. My parents took me to the Statue of
Liberty and made me memorize that. This is not that.
This is a disgrace. Do not try to pawn this off as if this
is Ellis Island and people that are trying to come to this
country to find a better way for themselves. Because right now,
we ain't got it. Don't do that to me. Don't insult my
intelligence and don't insult the intelligence of the American
people.
Now that we have these people coming here en masse, it is
``go somewhere else, can't sit here, seats taken.'' All of a
sudden the governor turns into Forrest Gump and in Biden's
America, what it seems like to me, for him, life is like a box
of chocolates, you never know what you are going to get, and
that is the way he is governing our country right now.
We don't even know what we are going to get. But now the
governor is saying, if you are thinking of coming to New York,
we are truly out of space and you are going to leave your
country, so go somewhere else.
This is what happens when we don't abide by the law that we
have already set in our country. Are we a sovereign nation or
not? Are we a nation of laws or not? This has now become the
United States of lawlessness.
Ms. Williams, I saw your testimony earlier on TV. Ma'am,
you said you don't want this to be political. I hate to break
it to you, unfortunately, it is.
And if you can't that the dichotomy between what we are
saying on this side, the dais, and our colleagues on the left,
pay attention, ma'am. I wish this wasn't a political issue, to
be honest with you.
I wish we could all agree that having 6\1/2\ million people
enter our country illegally is not a sustainable model. We
cannot afford it. We bring in $5 trillion a year from the
American taxpayer, the hardworking American taxpayer, and we
are spending $7 trillion and then bringing in 6 million people
that we can't afford.
Enough is enough. And that is why we have hearings like
this, to elucidate the American public. To let them know we are
fighting tirelessly just for our country. We are not
xenophobic, trust me, I am not racist, I just want my country
back.
Thank you all so much for being here. I yield back the rest
of my time. Thank you.
Mr. Westerman. The gentleman yields back. The Chair
recognizes the gentleman from Arizona, Mr. Gosar who, he and I
were able to be in New York City last week. You are recognized
for 5 minutes.
Dr. Gosar. I thank the Chair. Councilwoman Ariola and
Assemblywoman Williams, thanks for your hospitality. I
certainly appreciate it.
You are both politicians, so are you familiar with good
process, builds good policy, builds good politics. Are you
familiar with that?
Ms. Ariola. Sure.
Dr. Gosar. Why I bring that up is that when you go through
a process properly you get people to come together and come up
with some ideas. So, the other side just harassed you about
what is your idea.
Wouldn't that have been done at a meeting where you got all
the interested stakeholders together? You have no idea what can
be proposed. Would you agree with that, Councilwoman?
Ms. Ariola. I would agree that if more people were included
in the conversation, there could have been a better solution.
Dr. Gosar. Do you agree with that, Assemblywoman?
Ms. Williams. 100 percent.
Dr. Gosar. So, the power is really at that local level,
right?
Ms. Ariola. Yes.
Dr. Gosar. It doesn't come from the Federal Government. It
doesn't come from the state. It comes from the local people. I
think that makes a big, big difference.
I think that there are so many opportunities that we never
get a chance to see because we don't go through that
consultation process.
The other side talks about a process about NEPA and EA and
EISs and yet, we don't want to do that here when the Federal
Government wants to throw a bunch of people on a tarmac, so to
speak, in a national park. It is really, really sad.
One of the things I wanted to ask you is, you saw a lot of
this rigmarole going on and then you were attacked. If I asked
you what was the one question that you wish you had been asked
and what is its answer, would you please give me that, and we
will start with Ms. Ariola and then Assemblywoman Williams, all
the way down the line? Go ahead, Ms. Ariola.
Ms. Ariola. I wish I would have been asked why. In the
letter to Mr. Mayorkas, I said that I did not approve of
temporary work authorization because I would have said, it is
because there are tens of thousands of immigrants who are here
now who have been waiting for years to get their work
authorization so that they can work and pay taxes and become
part of our economic engine and tax engine who have been pushed
back that others have now jumped the line.
Dr. Gosar. You said there is a right way and a wrong way,
right? Thank you.
Ms. Williams?
Ms. Williams. I agree with what my colleague said. That
poses a very big thing because then you are putting one against
another and this is not what we stand for.
And then also to not have public hearing. Not to have local
government, like myself, the Council Member at the table when
it is in our backyard and our constituency is very, very
concerned. This is an issue when there is no communication.
Dr. Gosar. Ms. Acer?
Ms. Acer. Thank you. I would have liked to have had a
chance to talk more about how getting work authorization to
asylum seekers and migrants can make a key difference and will.
I think in the coming weeks we will see as more and more
people actually have access to these work permits. It will be a
boom to New York City. New York City is not going to be
destroyed. I live there. My grandparents were immigrants that
lived in New York City.
I have faith in New York City. It is going to be totally
fine.
Dr. Gosar. Mr. Spencer?
Mr. Spencer. Thank you, sir. My question would just be for
the National Park Service and the Department of the Interior
why we really weren't invited to the table with planning any of
the law enforcement aspects that went into this.
This lease, all 61 pages of it, mentions the U.S. Park
Police one time, yet, they also say that we are going to be
holding the sole responsibility for law enforcement actions
that occur outside of the premises on our park, on our
jurisdiction.
So, my question would be why weren't the U.S. Park Police
consulted during the planning of this lease.
Dr. Gosar. By the way, have you ever seen a 2,200-person,
adult male, military age man camp that actually works very
well? I have never seen that. Even in the oil patch.
We have never seen anything like that and then intersperse
that with the playgrounds and the soccer fields, there is no
way in hell this is actually going to work.
And that is why I came back to my first statement. Good
process builds good policy, builds good politics, and none of
it was followed here.
The Federal Government doesn't do any of that. The one last
thing that I want to make a point to is on these work permits.
Remember these people are going to the front of the line.
So, what ends up happening, you have people coming here
legally, they should have the first say in that aspect. And all
of these people have been waiting for months, years to try to
get these work permits.
So, when you see people going to the front of the line,
wrong answer. I don't think it helps anybody. I think it causes
mischief and it causes disparaging comments about each other.
Mr. Chairman, I will yield back, and I want to say thank
you.
Mr. Westerman. The gentleman's time has expired. The Chair
recognizes the Ranking Member. Mr. Grijalva, you are recognized
for 5 minutes.
Mr. Grijalva. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Ms. Acer, let me begin by quoting a comment. ``Every city
in America has become a border city. Drugs and criminals,
including hundreds of terrorists are pouring into our
backyards. Our schools and hospitals are over-run with
illegals. Police forces are overwhelmed as progressive mayors
slash their budgets. Our streets are not safe. Fentanyl is
rampant. Police officers are being assaulted. Cartels are
thriving.''
This is representative in a report of tweets, quotes, and
public comments that have been made on the subject of asylum-
seeking refugees and the border and immigration in general.
You mentioned in your testimony that how rhetoric,
describing migrants as threats or invaders fuels violence
against certain groups, especially racial and ethnic
minorities. And instead of having a hearing that fuels
violence, what real solutions should Congress be focusing on?
And let me add to that, the alternative being proposed by
the Republican Majority is H.R. 2, and I think it is a
messaging bill. The probability of it becoming a law is zero.
So, there is a consensus moment that we could look at what
are common-sense solutions on this issue. So, reference that
and also the issue of rhetoric? If you don't mind?
Ms. Acer. Yes, thank you very much, Ranking Member. Greatly
appreciate it.
H.R. 2 is not a solution. It is just the opposite. If
people are fleeing a burning building, it is not a solution to
lock the door and prevent them from fleeing. All it does is
endanger lives and force people to start jumping out of
windows.
Efforts to prevent people from seeking refuge will just
force them to more dangerous routes. The H.R. 2 bill that the
House has passed codifies some of the most horrific policies of
recent years, including, in effect, codifying a version of the
Title 42 policy, as well as the Remain in Mexico Policy.
Teams of researchers in my organization, me, myself
repeatedly visited with asylum seekers subjected to those
policies. We have had teams at the border in recent weeks and
months.
People who are forced to wait in Mexico, under these
policies, people who are denied sufficient access to ports of
entry face life-threatening conditions.
They are being targeted specifically. These policies have
actually put them at risk by forcing them to wait in areas
where cartels target them for kidnappings, torture. My staff is
just overwhelmed by what happens.
Humanitarian workers now are in danger increasingly. These
policies are not a solution. They are a problem. And they are
not effective, from a migration management perspective either.
They encourage repeat entries. They force populations that
generally went to ports of entry to cross instead.
If you want to really look at good solutions, look at the
shift that has happened with Haitian asylum seekers who now are
coming to ports of entry because of the steps that have been
taken by the Biden administration. That is an example of an
effective policy.
Mr. Grijalva. My situation is not unique. I am a first-
generation American, I have the privilege of serving in this
Congress from southern Arizona, along the border. That is where
I grew up. That is the area I represent and live the issue day
in, day out.
I don't need to go to the border and take a photo op and
then say, look, I care about the border. But the fact remains
that this complex difficult issue that requires political
courage on all sides, has to be resolved.
And the issue that we are seeing in New York City is a
response to an emergency. A response to not having the system
in place and the resources to do this correctly.
A schizophrenic policy back and forth from hardline to more
humanitarian, back to hardline, back and forth, back and forth.
There has been no consistency as well. And I blame all the
administrations for that.
But this issue is a precursor, I believe, it is very
transparent, that everything, all the hearings that we have
seen from all the committees, including this one now, on this
issue, is to tee up the ball so that when we finish the hostage
negotiations after the government closes down, that some of the
most dire elements in H.R. 2 will suddenly appear as part of
the compromise and part of the law.
That is the strategy. That is the agenda. It is
transparent. It is a mistake. We, once again, will avoid a
comprehensive complex solution that is needed very desperately.
I am proud of the area that I represent. It is a wonderful
land, wonderful people, and we owe it to them and to every
citizen and to every person in this country to solve this
critical domestic issue that we are not solving.
With that, I yield back and I guess I will leave now. I am
done.
Mr. Westerman. The gentleman yields back. I now recognize
myself for questioning.
Again, I want to thank the witnesses for your time and your
patience today. I also want to personally thank the
Councilwoman and Assemblywoman for the visit in New York with
the group that came last week, for your passion about this
issue, and for your willingness to come here to DC to testify.
Mr. Spencer, I wish I had had a chance to talk to you when
I was at Floyd Bennett Field last week. I think you could have
shed some additional light on the issue.
You can tell there is a lot of passion around this issue.
This hearing is about building migrant camps on Floyd Bennett
Field, but it obviously has far-reaching effects, all the way
to the southern border, throughout many parts of our
government.
We can't solve those issues here today. As much as I would
like to solve those issues, but we do know there is a reason
why there is a flood of migrants into New York City.
But Mr. Spencer, had you been there last week, I think you
could have added to the questions that we asked when we were
meeting with New York City officials and Park Service
officials, the question was raised about security and safety if
these migrant camps were built.
We were assured at one point, by New York City officials,
that they would take care of security around the migrant camp.
And I am going to move over to Ms. Ariola for just a
moment. How is the funding for supplying that additional
security? Where are those officers going to come from?
Ms. Ariola. It is about to be cut by 15 percent.
Mr. Westerman. Mr. Spencer, they assured us that this
campsite would be secure, but in the course of conversation
they mentioned something about the migrants are free to come
and go. They can't be held there.
We were up in the control tower and you could see the place
they were saying they were going to build the camp and then you
could look over and see the playground.
I asked the question, so a migrant can walk out, and these
are, as has been mentioned, single, adult males, they could
freely walk out of the migrant camp, walk down the street, and
walk in the playground, and I was told that was a hypothetical
question.
Had you been involved in the planning process, had NEPA not
been shortcut, is this the kind of issue you would have looked
at? And is that a hypothetical question?
Mr. Spencer. Thank you, sir. That question is definitely
something I would have brought up if I was able to attend last
week. That is one of our concerns.
The fact that that camp is going to be put, like I said
before, right next to a youth complex where there are going to
be lots of children is definitely concerning as a law
enforcement aspect.
And the fact that we also have to get, from our union
anyway, we haven't been given the opportunity to bring up our
safety concerns with the officers either.
Two officers on a day-to-day basis is already unsafe as it
is, in my opinion, to monitor that area, and now you are going
to add 2,000 more people in a tent in probably some pretty
detrimental living conditions where they are able to come and
go as they please. That is going to be our responsibility, the
U.S. Park Police.
NYPD were gracious enough to give some officers to take
care of the inside of the tent, the facility itself, but we are
going to be the ones that are going to be responsible for
everything that happens outside of that tent area.
Mr. Westerman. And just to be clear, that has caused you
concern?
Mr. Spencer. It is very concerning to us.
Mr. Westerman. And also, I know as the leader of the Park
Fraternal Order of Police, that you are able to come here and
testify. Do you believe there are other Park Service employees
that might fear retribution if they were to speak out?
Do you sense that there are others in the Park Service that
are not comfortable with this decision?
Mr. Spencer. I would imagine there are probably more
employees in the Park Service. I can definitely tell you that
there are employees in my agency that would love to speak out
about this, but they would be in fear of what would happen with
their career.
Mr. Westerman. Thank you, sir.
As we visited the park and I was learning more about it, I
was fascinated that a facility like this existed in such a
populated area and that a million people a year visit this
park.
And looking at the park map, it shows the area actually
where the migrant shelters are going to be built is labeled as
a grassland's restoration project and in parenthesis,
underneath that on the map, it said, ``Public access denied.''
I know the Autobahn Society has done work there. There is
an ecology village. There are all the other recreational
opportunities, and it bothered me to hear that referred to as
just an airport in Brooklyn.
I live in a national park and that would be very offensive
to me if somebody said it was just a bathhouse in Arkansas.
There is a lot of pride in the local communities where these
parks exist, but to me that is just an indication of how this
whole situation is being viewed.
That it is just an airport in Brooklyn. Who cares if we
build a few migrant shelters on it. I am going to give the two
local authorities in Brooklyn an opportunity to talk about that
and to make any final closing comments you would like to.
We will start you with you first, Ms. Ariola.
Ms. Ariola. The comments were very, very insulting because
we all love our park land, we all love our greenspace, and it
may not look like Yellowstone or anything else in any other
state, but it is ours.
And it is not just a rundown runway. It is a place where
people go and enjoy, up to a million people per year. And it is
where schools go and schools have their after-school
recreational athletic fields and they play there.
It is where people have a community garden. It is a place
of community for the surrounding communities. And there has
been a lot of talk, Ms. Acer said about organizations doing
their job and getting people asylum status, but if that were
the case, why is Kathy Hochul employing the National Guard to
work as social workers to make sure that their paperwork goes
through?
And what happened to our homeless population that were New
Yorkers prior to the migrants coming into this? Have they
evaporated? Have our homeless veterans, have they evaporated?
Such focus is being given to this that all the other issues
that New Yorkers are facing have just gone to the wayside. But
we are stretched so thin that we are now looking at national
parks, national parks that are not safe. If anyone saw the
video that played earlier, Assemblymember Williams was there.
She was in 10 inches of water. That is not in a hurricane, that
is in a light rainfall.
It is unsafe to put the migrants there. It is unsafe for
anyone to be there. We have said it front the start; this is
not any type of nimby type of ask. This is bipartisan. This is
what it should be.
A Republican and a Democrat who are working together to
make sure that the integrity of their park remains what it
should be, as a national park, the surrounding communities
remain as they should be, to be able to enjoy that park, and
that the migrants, the homeless, and those that are seeking
asylum are tended to, but we can't continue to do it because
there is no more room at the inn and our borders are not
closing and unless they do, we are going to continue to be
over-run and it won't just be New York. It will be every city
in every state across America.
Thank you for the time. Thank you for coming to see our
national park. And thank you for hosting this session for us,
this hearing.
Mr. Westerman. Assemblywoman Williams, thank you for your
passion to speak out on this. I didn't introduce you as a
Democrat member of the New York General Assembly, but it has
been established here in the discussions. Any closing remarks
about just an airport in Brooklyn?
Ms. Williams. Thank you so very much and we had to travel
all the way from the southern side of Brooklyn to hear that our
national park is just a regular runway.
Well, that might be your opinion and we have heard many
opinions float around this room today, however, our visit here
to Congress is to talk about using what we call our national
park, the misuse and the intent to house 2,000 plus men.
We talk about protected fields there. In every area of
Floyd Bennett Field, there is signage and the signage says,
``Area closed. Do not enter.'' It is a natural resource
protection area.
Violators are subject to be fined. Grassland habitat,
management area. The following activities are prohibited,
entry, kite flying, pets, fires. We have heard from Mr.
Spencer, two officers.
How are you going to man 2,000 individuals there and to
keep them off the grass? Not to mention there are other things
floating around. Right across the street we have a very big
area, Bottle Beach, that is contaminated with radiation that is
closed off. What is to say that they won't end up on that side
of the beach?
So, we have to be very vigilant of what it is we are
seeing. Myself and my colleague here, we come together in a
bipartisan effort because our community has a voice. And the
one thing that I did not say when they spoke earlier about low
income and communities of color. In the 59th District, 70
percent of our population is black. Another 25 to almost 30
percent is white. So, we really need to do our homework and
probably, if they came into our communities to do a public
assessment or to hear from individuals, you would see the
diversity of our community.
And as taxpayers, we should be concerned about what is
happening in our backyard. As parents, we should be concerned
about the safety of our children.
I applaud you, Chairman, for having us here on this
platform to talk about our natural resources and how our
natural resources, our national park is being used as a pawn
and is not being said for what it is.
We are supposed to be Ambassadors of our national parks.
And that is it. Thank you.
Mr. Westerman. Thank you.
Mr. Spencer, you never got asked the question, but have you
worked at other national parks, other than Gateway?
Mr. Spencer. No, Mr. Chairman. I am actually based out of
here in DC. We only have three field offices, DC, New York, and
San Francisco.
Mr. Westerman. How do you think it makes the law
enforcement officers feel at Gateway to hear their park called
just an airport in Brooklyn?
Mr. Spencer. I don't believe that my members who are proud
New Yorkers up there would appreciate that comment, but that is
OK.
Mr. Westerman. Thank you.
The Ranking Member, I believe, has an announcement?
Mr. Grijalva. Yes, thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Before we wrap up, I would like to ask unanimous consent to
enter some documents into the record having to do with the NEPA
emergency process; the historic uses of Floyd Bennett Field to
dispel some of the environmental review and the myths about the
park and environmental review; reports from Cato and the Drug
Enforcement Administration that lays out the facts about
fentanyl and drug trafficking--Newsflash--asylum seekers are
not responsible, it is organized crime on both sides of the
border; a GAO report on the border wall; and finally the budget
recommendations, the continuing resolution, and the
appropriations that deal with issues of the Park Service,
including enforcement.
Mr. Westerman. Without objection.

[The information follows:]
EXECUTIVE OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT
COUNCIL ON ENVIRONMENTAL QUALITY
WASHINGTON, D.C. 20503
September 14, 2020
CEQ-NEPA-2020-01

MEMORANDUM FOR HEADS OF FEDERAL DEPARTMENTS
AND AGENCIES

FROM:  Mary B. Neumayr, Chairman

SUBJECT:  Emergencies and the National Environmental Policy Act
Guidance

This guidance\1\ updates and replaces previous guidance from the
Council on Environmental Quality (CEQ) on the environmental review of
proposed emergency response actions under the National Environmental
Policy Act, 42 U.S.C. 4321-4347 (NEPA).\2\ Federal departments and
agencies (agencies) should distribute this guidance as part of their
general guidance on emergency actions to agency offices that are or may
become involved in developing and taking actions in response to
emergencies.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ The contents of this guidance do not have the force and effect
of law and are not meant to bind the public in any way. This memorandum
is intended only to provide clarity to the public regarding existing
requirements under the law or agency policies.
\2\ This guidance replaces guidance issued by CEQ on September 29,
2016, May 12, 2010, and September 8, 2005. CEQ rescinds the prior
guidance.

As agencies respond to situations involving immediate threats to
human health or safety, or immediate threats to valuable natural
resources, they must consider whether there is sufficient time to
follow the procedures for environmental review established in the CEQ
National Environmental Policy Act Implementing Regulations, 40 CFR
parts 1500-1508 (CEQ NEPA regulations),\3\ and their agency NEPA
procedures.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ https://ceq.doe.gov/laws-regulations/regulations.html.

This guidance does not establish new requirements. CEQ established
the regulation addressing alternative arrangements in emergency
circumstances in 1978,\4\ and amended it in 2020 to clarify that it
provides for alternative arrangements for compliance with NEPA section
102(2)(C) (42 U.S.C. 4332(C)).\5\ 40 CFR 1506.12. CEQ has approved, and
agencies have applied successfully, numerous alternative arrangements
to allow a wide range of proposed actions in emergency circumstances
including natural disasters, catastrophic wildfires, threats to species
and their habitat, economic crisis, infectious disease outbreaks,
potential dam failures, and insect infestations.\6\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\ 43 FR 55977, Nov. 29, 1978.
\5\ 85 FR 43304, July 16, 2020.
\6\ A synopsis of previous alternative arrangements is available at
https://ceq.doe.gov/nepa-practice/altemative_arrangements.html.

Attachment 1 provides agencies with a step-by-step process for
determining the appropriate path forward for the NEPA environmental
review of all actions proposed in response to an emergency situation.
Environmental Impact Statements:

The CEQ regulations, at 40 CFR 1506.12, provide for alternative
arrangements for NEPA compliance in emergency situations when the
agency proposal has the potential for significant environmental impacts
and would require an environmental impact statement (EIS) if the
situation were not an emergency:

Where emergency circumstances make it necessary to take an
action with significant environmental impact without observing
the provisions of the regulations in [parts 1500-1508], the
Federal agency taking the action should consult with the
Council about alternative arrangements for compliance with
section 102(2)(C) of NEPA. Agencies and the Council will limit
such arrangements to actions necessary to control the immediate
impacts of the emergency. Other actions remain subject to NEPA
review.

Agencies develop these alternative arrangements, based on
emergency-specific facts and circumstances, during consultation with
CEQ. The alternative arrangements developed by an agency address the
actions necessary to respond immediately to the impacts of an
emergency. The long-term response to the emergency, including recovery
actions, remains subject to the regular NEPA process set forth in the
CEQ NEPA regulations.

Alternative arrangements do not waive the requirement to comply
with the statute, but establish an alternative means for NEPA
compliance. Alternative arrangements also do not complete or alter
other environmental requirements (except as provided by other
environmental statutes or regulations); however, engaging other
resource and regulatory agencies about other environmental requirements
during development and implementation of alternative arrangements can
facilitate meeting other compliance requirements. Final agency action
taken pursuant to alternative arrangements for compliance with NEPA
under 40 CFR 1506.12 may be subject to judicial review if a statute,
such as the Administrative Procedure Act, provides for such review.

Attachment 1 describes the factors for an agency to address when
requesting and designing alternative arrangements. Once the agency
develops the alternative arrangements, CEQ will provide documentation
detailing the alternative arrangements and the considerations on which
they are based.
Environmental Assessments:

When agencies are considering proposals with less than significant
impacts or are uncertain about the significance of impacts, the agency
can prepare a concise, focused environmental assessment (EA).
Attachment 2 of this memorandum provides guidance for preparing an EA.
Some agency NEPA procedures provide processes for preparing EAs for
emergency actions.\7\ Agencies must continue their efforts to notify
and inform the affected public and relevant Federal, State, Tribal, and
local agency representatives of the Federal agency activities and
proposed actions. Agencies must comply with the CEQ NEPA regulatory
requirements for content, interagency coordination, and public
involvement to the extent practicable.\8\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\7\ See Agency NEPA procedures, for example: Department of Homeland
Security Instruction Manual 023-01-001-01, Revision 01 at VI-1, https:/
/www.dhs.gov/sites/default/files/publications/
DHS_Instruction%20Manual%20023-01-001-
01%20Rev%2001_508%20Admin%20Rev.pdf; U.S. Forest Service, 36 CFR
220.4(b), http://www.fs.fed.us/emc/nepa/nepa_procedures/includes/fr_
nepa_procedures_2008_07_24.pdf; and Department of the Interior, 43 CFR
46.150, https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/
retrieveECFR?gp=&SID=2a2ce144c79da6f3e773bfa9cdf17bcf&mc=true&n=
sp43.1.46.b&r=SUBPART&ty=HTML#se43.1.46_1150.
\8\ 40 CFR 1501.5, 1501.6, and 1506.6 (these regulations address
required content and public involvement for preparing EAs and Findings
of No Significant Impact).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

*****

ATTACHMENT 1

Emergency Actions Under the National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA)

In the case of an emergency:

1.  Do not delay immediate actions necessary to secure lives and
safety of citizens or to protect valuable resources.
Consult with CEQ as soon as feasible. Please coordinate any
communications with your Federal agency NEPA contacts. See
https://ceq.doe.gov/nepa-practice/agency-nepa-
contacts.html.

2.  Determine if NEPA applies and the appropriate level of NEPA
analysis:

Determine if a Federal agency is taking the
proposed action (e.g., city or State action does not trigger
NEPA; Federal decisions to fund city or State action may
trigger NEPA, depending on the nature of the funding
arrangements) or is exempt from NEPA (e.g., certain Federal
Emergency Management Agency response actions under the Stafford
Act are statutorily exempt from NEPA; additional information is
available at https://www.fema.gov/media-library-data/20130726-
1748-25045-1063/stafford_act_nepa_fact_sheet_072409.pdf.).

If the Federal agency's proposed emergency
response activity is not statutorily exempt from NEPA, and the
agency has a categorical exclusion (CE) that includes that type
of activity, then apply the CE unless there are extraordinary
circumstances that indicate using the CE in this particular
case is not appropriate. Agency NEPA personnel can assist in
identifying agency-specific actions that are categorically
excluded.

If the proposed Federal agency emergency response
activity is not statutorily exempt from NEPA, a CE is not
available, and the agency does not expect the potential
environmental impacts of the proposed response activity to be
significant, then an environmental assessment (EA) is
appropriate. Prepare a focused, concise EA as described in
Attachment 2. Alternative arrangements, as outlined at 40 CFR
1506.12, do not apply because the environmental impacts are not
expected to be significant. Agency NEPA personnel can assist in
identifying agency-specific actions that typically require an
EA.

If the proposed Federal emergency response
activity is not statutorily exempt from NEPA, and the agency
expects it would have significant environmental impacts, the
agency should determine whether an existing NEPA analysis
covers the activity (e.g., implementing pre-existing spill
response plans). If so, the agency may rely upon its existing
analysis or adopt the analysis of another agency consistent
with 40 CFR 1506.3.

If the proposed Federal emergency response
activity is not statutorily exempt from NEPA, the agency
expects it to have significant environmental impacts, and an
existing NEPA analysis does not cover the activity, then the
agency should consult with CEQ to determine whether alternative
arrangements can take the place of an EIS. Contact CEQ to
develop alternative arrangements under 40 CFR 1506.12. CEQ's
main phone number is (202) 395-5750.

3.  Factors to address when requesting and designing alternative
arrangements include the:

Nature and scope of the emergency;

Actions necessary to control the immediate impacts
of the emergency;

Potential adverse effects of the proposed action;

Components of the NEPA process that the agency
can follow and provide value to decision making (e.g.,
coordination with affected agencies and the public);

Duration of the emergency; and

Potential mitigation measures.

*****

ATTACHMENT 2

Preparing Focused, Concise and Timely Environmental Assessments

An agency can prepare a concise and focused EA in a short time in those
situations where:

There is no statutory exemption from NEPA requirements;

There is no CE available, either because the agency has
none that cover the activity or there are extraordinary
circumstances;

An existing NEPA analysis (EA or EIS) does not cover the
proposed recovery or response actions; and

The environmental impacts of the proposed recovery or
response actions are not likely to be significant.

The following outline with notations addresses the core elements of an
EA as required by 40 CFR 1501.5:

The purpose and need for the proposed action;

Alternatives as required by NEPA section 102(2)(E);

The description of environmental impacts of the proposed
action and the alternatives; and

The list of agencies and persons consulted.

Purpose and Need for the Proposed Action

The agency should briefly describe information that substantiates
the purpose and need for the action and incorporate by reference
information that is reasonably available to the public. For example,
``This agency is preparing to erect a temporary emergency response
facility to replace facilities disrupted or destroyed by the
[hurricane/flooding/contamination/etc.] to facilitate rescue or relief
efforts in an effort to [minimize further adverse health conditions/
restore communications/restore power].''

The agency should briefly describe the existing conditions and the
projected future conditions of the area impacted by the action. For
example, ``The area(s) in which the temporary facility will be located
or relocated is identified in the attached map. This area consists of
[add brief description of the environmental state of the area that will
be affected by the location and operation of the facility, focusing on
those areas that are potentially sensitive. The goal is to show that
environmental effects have been considered and the facts found indicate
no significant impact (for example, refueling sites are not on top of
aquifers, nesting areas, graves, sacred sites, etc.). These are
examples to show the utility of and need to identify actual place-based
environmental issues rather than compiling lists of environmental
resources not at issue].''

Proposed Action and Alternatives

The agency should list and briefly describe its proposed action and
reasonable alternatives that meet the purpose and need. The agency must
use its discretion to ensure the number and range of reasonable
alternatives is reasoned and not arbitrary or capricious. The purpose
and need for the proposed action and its environmental impacts should
focus the alternatives. For example, the need to use existing
infrastructure necessary to support the facility is a reasoned basis
for focusing on a discrete number of alternatives.

When there is no conflict over the resource effects of the proposed
action based on input from interested parties, the agency can consider
the proposed action and proceed without consideration of additional
alternatives. Otherwise, the agency must identify reasonable
alternatives that meet the action's purpose and need, consistent with
section 102(2)(E) of NEPA.

Environmental Impacts of the Proposed Action and Alternatives

The agency should describe the environmental impacts of its
proposed action and each alternative. The description should provide
enough information to support a determination to either prepare an EIS
or a finding of no significant impact.

The agency should focus on whether the action would significantly
affect the quality of the human environment. The agency should follow
CEQ's NEPA regulations in considering whether the effects of a proposed
action are significant. 40 CFR 1501.3. Agency NEPA contacts and
contacts at resource agencies can assist in this effort.

Tailor the length of the discussion to the complexity of each
issue. Focus on those human and natural environment issues where
impacts are a concern. Telephone or email discussions with State,
Tribal, and local governments and agencies, and other Federal agencies
that operate in the area, will help focus those issues.

The agency must discuss the impacts of each alternative and may
discuss those impacts together in a comparative description, or discuss
each alternative separately. The agency should use the approach that
will be most effective in the time available. The agency may contrast
the impacts of the proposed action and alternatives with the current
condition and expected future condition in the absence of the action.
This constitutes consideration of a no action alternative as well as
demonstrating the need for the action.

The agency should incorporate by reference data, inventories, other
information, and analyses relied on in the EA. CEQ encourages the use
of hyperlinks in web-based documents. This information must be
reasonably available to the public. For example, include relevant
existing programmatic agreements and generally accepted best management
practices.

The agency should be clear and concise about its conclusions and
their bases.

List of Agencies and Persons Consulted

The agency must involve the public, relevant agencies, and any
applicants, to the extent practicable in preparing EAs, and list the
agencies and persons consulted. For example, include the people,
offices, and agencies that the agency coordinated with to ensure that
the location of the action did not cause unintentionally an adverse
impact. Also include information about individuals consulted to comply
with substantive environmental requirements and regulations, for
example: the Clean Water Act, the National Historic Preservation Act,
and the Endangered Species Act (ESA). [Note that the ESA emergency
provisions at 50 CFR 402.05 may be applicable to the proposed action.]

______

Work and Life on Barren Island

National Park Service

https://www.nps.gov/gate/learn/historyculture/work-and-life-on-barren-
island.htm

Last updated January 20, 2023

*****

There is a history buried in South Brooklyn. As a matter of fact, that
history pours into the bay. Today, it takes the form of trash, but to
many of those who settled here in the second half of the 19th century
it was a way of life. On the surface we see a decommissioned airfield.
Floyd Bennett Field, New York City's first municipal airport and later
a Naval Air Station built atop landfill. Dig a little deeper and you
will discover a thriving community.

The following text and accompanying images were part of the pop-up
exhibition, A Most Self-Contained Community: Barren Island curated by
Gateway National Recreation Area, the Jamaica Bay-Rockaway Parks
Conservancy, the Sanitation Foundation, and Miriam Sicherman--Author of
Brooklyn's Barren Island: A Forgotten History. It was installed outside
of the Ryan Visitor Center at Floyd Bennett Field from June to
September in 2022.

A Most Self-Contained Community: Work and Life on Barren Island 1850s-
1930s

Imagine, for a moment, that you are aboard a rickety ferry. As you
sailed from Canarsie Pier and closer to your destination, the smells
became more pungent--a mixture of burning garbage, drying fish, rotting
animals, and in contrast, a brisk salt-water breeze.

Now stepping off the boat, you see men heading off to factories,
chatting in German, Polish, Italian, and southern-accented English.
Children are carrying driftwood home before heading off to the school.
Women are gathering eggs from the chickens outside their tiny houses,
while hogs are snuffling around in nearby piles of garbage. A horse and
wagon carefully traverse a bridge over a creek, carrying supplies to
the grocery store in someone's front room. A whistle blows as the last
few workers arrive at the factories for their 10-hour shifts. You are
on Barren Island. You're in New York City, yet you're also in a remote,
windswept, marshy seaside village. Though most of your fellow New
Yorkers have never heard of this place, essential tasks take place
here. Here workers extract industrial grease from the city's garbage,
preventing it from being dumped in the ocean and washing up on the
beaches. Here skinners, bone-cutters, and other laborers transform the
thousands of horses who die on city streets each year into everything
from gloves to buttons to products needed for Brooklyn's booming sugar
refineries.

The people who live and work here are strivers: new European immigrants
and Black migrants from Virginia and Delaware, creating a community on
land that is so isolated that islanders are left to collect their own
water, grow or catch much of their own food, fight their own fires, and
lay planks on the ground to build their own roads.

As the decades pass, this cohesive, self-sustaining community will be
attached to Brooklyn with landfill, host the city's first airport, and
eventually disappear, leaving almost no trace. The following images
reveal a nearly forgotten history and how the legacy of this community
informs the landscape of New York City.

New York City Department of Sanitation at Floyd Bennett Field

Over the course of the 1920s Barren Island and its surrounding
saltmarsh were filled in and attached to mainland Brooklyn. Floyd
Bennett Field, the City's first municipal airport was built atop the
new land. In 1931, the Navy began operating an air base on the grounds.
In 1941, the Navy fully absorbed Floyd Bennett Field and operated a
Naval Air Base there until 1971. Following the property's transfer to
the National Park Service in 1972, the Navy's Aviation Patrol Base
hangar was demolished. The site remained vacant until the 1990s, when
the National Park Service granted New York City Department of
Sanitation (DSNY) exclusive use of the hangar area as a training
facility. Since then, DSNY has conducted its Safety and Training
operations at Floyd Bennett Field and made Tylunas Hall, constructed by
the Navy in 1970, its training headquarters. Prior to that, Sanitation
Workers were trained at facilities at the East 23rd Street Pier in
Manhattan and on Randall's Island.

Each year, between 250 to 500 new recruits enter the Training Academy
at Floyd Bennett Field on their way to becoming Sanitation Workers. At
the Sanitation Training Academy, these new employees receive
instruction on how to perform every aspect of the job, including safely
collecting refuse and recycling, cleaning streets, and clearing snow.
Expert trainers also teach sanitation workers how to safely and
effectively operate DSNY's heavy fleet and specialty equipment, from
collection trucks to mechanical brooms, front-end loaders, and heavy-
duty wreckers, using obstacle courses to simulate real-world
situations. The Training Academy also trains promotional classes for
Supervisors and Superintendents and provides specialized training for
new operations and programs.To learn more about DSNY's historic and
contemporary fleet of vehicles, click here (https://
www.sanitationfoundation.org/fleet).

Hurricane Sandy

In 2012, the expertise of the DSNY was on display as the department
played an essential role in the recovery efforts after Hurricane Sandy,
which caused an estimated $19 billion in damage to New York City. DSNY
fully mobilized the morning after the storm, working around the clock
for over a month to remove over 420,000 tons of storm debris. Much of
this was staged in the Jacob Riis Park parking lot, working in
partnership with the National Park Service/Gateway National Recreation
Area. DSNY also operated additional collection services for impacted
communities like the Rockaways, where food and supplies were being
distributed and residents were gutting their flooded homes. Then-
Commissioner John Doherty stated: ``It was important for the Department
to ensure that the residents of these areas, reeling from the
devastating impact of the storm, felt some comfort in knowing that the
seemingly endless debris placed out at the curb would be removed
quickly to create a safe and clean environment, which would aid them in
the process of moving on and rebuilding their lives.''

Landfills: Disposal and Reuse

In addition to championing the recovery of New York City after extreme
events, the DSNY also plays a key role in the establishment of park
land. Sanitary landfills are engineered facilities where people dispose
waste. Once full, it is possible to reclaim landfills for other uses,
such as parkland. This process usually involves capping the landfill
with impermeable materials, soil, and vegetation. It may sound easy but
creating parks from landfills is an elaborate undertaking that can take
decades to complete.

Restoration in the Works: Dead Horse Bay

One challenging legacy of landfill is Dead Horse Bay (named for the
animal carcasses once used to manufacture glue and fertilizer on nearby
Barren Island), located to the east of Floyd Bennett Field. In the
1940s and 50s, the City of New York filled the area with great mounds
of garbage and sand. Much of this historic waste is eroding along the
shoreline, earning it the nickname ``Glass Bottle Beach.''
Environmental investigations have found locations at Dead Horse Bay
with radiation above ambient levels, often due to the disposal of deck
markers--glowing disk-shaped objects once used by the military to
provide light at night. Under the authority of CERCLA Act (commonly
known as the Superfund program), Dead Horse Bay is now the site of a
cleanup that may take many years to complete. While it is important
that park visitors avoid this area, NPS is evaluating options to allow
for continued use of Dead Horse Bay. Community involvement is an
important aspect of this process. You can find out more about Dead
Horse Bay here (https://www.nps.gov/gate/learn/management/dead-horse-
bay-environmental-cleanup-project.htm).

A Landfill Restored: Shirley Chisholm State Park

However, nearby Shirley Chisholm State Park is an excellent example of
landfill restoration. This 400-acre park sits above the former
Pennsylvania and Fountain Avenue landfills. After the landfills were
closed in the 1980s, decades of work began. The City of New York
installed a massive plastic cap and four feet of clean soil to cover
the landfills, as well as pipes to channel methane generated by the
site to two ever-burning flares. Where there once was decaying trash,
visitors can now enjoy spectacular views of New York City and Jamaica
Bay; 10 miles of trails; and 35,000 native trees, shrubs, and grasses.
As you consider the history of landfills in Jamaica Bay, ask yourself:
How did we get here? What is the future for polluted sites like Dead
Horse Bay? Given that the average American produces four pounds of
waste every day, what can you do to help? Get started today--consider
taking the zero-waste pledge (https://dsny.force.com/zerowastepledge/s/
?language=en_US) to commit to reducing what you send to landfill.

______

Fentanyl Is Smuggled for U.S. Citizens by U.S. Citizens, Not Asylum
Seekers

CATO at Liberty Blog, September 14, 2022 by David J. Bier

https://www.cato.org/blog/fentanyl-smuggled-us-citizens-us-citizens-
not-asylum-seekers

*****

Fentanyl overdoses tragically caused tens of thousands of preventable
deaths last year. Many politicians who want to end U.S. asylum law
claim that immigrants crossing the border illegally are responsible. An
NPR-Ipsos poll last week found that 39 percent of Americans and 60
percent of Republicans believe, ``Most of the fentanyl entering the
U.S. is smuggled in by unauthorized migrants crossing the border
illegally.'' A more accurate summary is that fentanyl is overwhelmingly
smuggled by U.S. citizens almost entirely for U.S. citizen consumers.

Here are facts:

Fentanyl smuggling is ultimately funded by U.S. consumers
who pay for illicit opioids: nearly 99 percent of whom are
U.S. citizens.

In 2021, U.S. citizens were 86.3 percent of convicted
fentanyl drug traffickers--ten times greater than
convictions of illegal immigrants for the same offense.

Over 90 percent of fentanyl seizures occur at legal
crossing points or interior vehicle checkpoints, not on
illegal migration routes, so U.S. citizens (who are subject
to less scrutiny) when crossing legally are the best
smugglers.

The location of smuggling makes sense because hard drugs
at ports of entry are about 97 percent less likely to be
stopped than are people crossing illegally between them.

Just 0.02 percent of the people arrested by Border Patrol
for crossing illegally possessed any fentanyl whatsoever.

The government exacerbated the problem by banning most
legal cross border traffic in 2020 and 2021, accelerating a
switch to fentanyl (the easiest-to-conceal drug).

During the travel restrictions, fentanyl seizures at ports
quadrupled from fiscal year 2019 to 2021. Fentanyl went
from a third of combined heroin and fentanyl seizures to
over 90 percent.

Annual deaths from fentanyl nearly doubled from 2019 to
2021 after the government banned most travel (and asylum).

It is monstrous that tens of thousands of people are dying
unnecessarily every year from fentanyl. But banning asylum and limiting
travel backfired. Reducing deaths requires figuring out the cause, not
jumping to blame a group that is not responsible. Instead of attacking
immigrants, policymakers should focus on effective solutions that help
people at risk of a fentanyl overdose.

U.S. Citizen Consumers Fund Fentanyl Smuggling

U.S. consumer payments for illicit opioids ultimately fund fentanyl
smuggling. Consumers pay retail dealers who pay wholesalers, and the
cash is then transferred back in bulk cash form to Mexico. These funds
are then used to pay smugglers to bring drugs back into the United
States again. The best evidence indicates that about 99 percent of U.S.
consumers of fentanyl (or products containing fentanyl) are U.S.
citizens.[i] Noncitizens appear to be about 80 percent less likely to
be fentanyl consumers than their share of the population would predict.
Fentanyl smuggling is almost entirely conducted on behalf of U.S.
citizen consumers. Of course, consumers would prefer much safer and
legal opioids over illicit fentanyl, but the government has
unfortunately forced them into the black market with few safe options.
U.S. Citizens Are Fentanyl Traffickers

Fentanyl is primarily trafficked by U.S. citizens. The U.S. Sentencing
Commission publishes data on all federal convictions, which includes
demographic information on individuals convicted of fentanyl
trafficking. Figure 1 shows the citizenship status of fentanyl
traffickers for 2018 to 2021. Every year, U.S. citizens receive the
most convictions by far. In 2021, U.S. citizens accounted for 86.3
percent of fentanyl trafficking convictions compared to just 8.9
percent for illegal immigrants.

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Note that since trafficking involves movement from Mexico to the
United States, it is unclear how to measure the likelihood of
conviction for a noncitizen without U.S. lawful immigration status or
citizenship since the denominator would include most Mexicans in Mexico
as well as anyone who crosses through Mexico. But regardless, the
reality is that people with U.S. citizenship or residence traffic the
vast majority of fentanyl, not illegal border crossers specifically or
illegal immigrants generally.

Indeed, this appears to be the case even for the most high-profile
cases. Aaron Reichlin-Melnick of the American Immigration Council
analyzed every Customs and Border Protection press release mentioning
fentanyl over a 6-month period and found just 3 percent involved
illegal immigrants. This means that the agency itself believes the most
important smugglers are U.S. citizens.

U.S. Citizens Bring Fentanyl Through Legal Crossing Points

That U.S. citizens account for most fentanyl trafficking convictions is
not surprising given the location of fentanyl border seizures. Over 90
percent of fentanyl border seizures occur at legal border crossings and
interior vehicle checkpoints (and 91 percent of drug seizures at
checkpoints are from U.S. citizens--only 4 percent by ``potentially
removable'' immigrants).

In 2022, so far, Border Patrol agents who were not at vehicle
checkpoints accounted for just 9 percent of the fentanyl seizures near
the border (Figure 2). Since it is easier for U.S. citizens to cross
legally than noncitizens, it makes sense for fentanyl producers to hire
U.S. citizen smugglers.

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

The DEA reports that criminal organizations ``exploit major highway
routes for transportation, and the most common method employed involves
smuggling illicit drugs through U.S. [ports of entry] in passenger
vehicles with concealed compartments or commingled with legitimate
goods on tractor-trailers.'' Several agencies including CBP, ICE, and
DHS intelligence told Congress in May 2022 the same thing: hard drugs
come through ports of entry.

Some people posit that less fentanyl is interdicted between ports of
entry because it is more difficult to detect there. But the opposite is
true: fentanyl is smuggled through official crossing points
specifically because it is easier to conceal it on a legal traveler or
in legal goods than it is to conceal a person crossing the border
illegally. Customs and Border Protection estimates that it caught 2
percent of cocaine at southwest land ports of entry in 2020 (the only
drug it analyzed), while it estimated that its interdiction
effectiveness rate for illegal crossers was about 83 percent in 2021
(Figure 3).[ii] This means that drugs coming at a port of entry are
about 97 percent less likely to be interdicted than a person coming
between ports of entry, and this massive incentive to smuggle through
ports would remain even if Border Patrol was far less effective at
stopping people crossing illegally than it now estimates that it is.

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Closing Ports Increased Fentanyl Smuggling

During the early days of the pandemic, the Trump administration
drastically restricted legal travel to the United States, banning
nonessential travel through land ports of entry from Mexico in
particular in late-March 2020. Because there were fewer opportunities
to traffic drugs at ports of entry, traffickers switched to trafficking
more fentanyl. Because fentanyl is at least 50 times more potent per
pound than heroin and other drugs, smugglers need fewer trips to supply
the same market. The seizure data demonstrate the change in tactics.
From October 2018 to February 2020, about a third of fentanyl and
heroin seizures at southwest ports of entry were fentanyl with no clear
upward trend. By the time the travel restrictions were ended (at least
for vaccinated travelers) in January 2022, over 90 percent of heroin-
fentanyl seizures were fentanyl. Unfortunately, the market shift has
continued. The absolute amount of fentanyl being seized quadrupled
(Figure 4).

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

The United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime reported that in mid-
2020, as a result of travel restrictions, ``Many countries have
reported drug shortages at the retail level, with reports of heroin
shortages in Europe, South-West Asia and North America in particular''
and that ``heroin users may switch to substances such as fentanyl.''
The DEA predicted in 2020 that ``additional restrictions or limits on
travel across the U.S.-Mexico border due to pandemic concerns will
likely impact heroin DTOs [drug trafficking organizations],
particularly those using couriers or personal vehicles to smuggle
heroin into the United States,'' leading to ``mixing fentanyl into
distributed heroin.''

Unsurprisingly, the increased reliance on fentanyl has increased
fentanyl deaths. Indeed, it appears that the border closures rapidly
accelerated the transition from heroin to fentanyl, leading to tens of
thousands of additional deaths per year (Figure 5). Note that 2021 data
undercount the true number of deaths because not all locations have
reported. Nonetheless, the annual number of fentanyl deaths have nearly
doubled between 2019 and 2021. Banning asylum under Title 42 of the
U.S. code probably had no effect on these trends, but it certainly did
not help reduce fentanyl deaths, as some have claimed.

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Asylum Seekers Don't Aid Fentanyl Smuggling

Fentanyl smuggling is not a reason to end asylum. The people arrested
by Border Patrol are not smuggling fentanyl. Just 279 of 1.8 million
arrests by Border Patrol of illegal border crossers resulted in a
fentanyl seizure--too small of a percentage (0.02 percent) to appear on
a graph--and many of these seizures occurred at vehicle checkpoints of
legal travelers in the interior of the United States.

Nonetheless, some officials have asserted that asylum seekers distract
Border Patrol from drug interdiction efforts. If asylum seekers were
indirectly aiding drug smuggling, however, we would expect the effect
to show up in the seizure trends by changing the locations, times, or
amounts of the seizures in some way. But drug seizure trends simply do
not deviate measurably with greater arrests of asylum seekers. This is
true on several different metrics: across time, between sectors, along
mile-distance from the border, or the share of seizures at ports of
entry versus between them. If the administration legalized asylum at
ports of entry, even this hypothetical problem would disappear.

Aggressive Drug Interdiction Exacerbates Fentanyl Smuggling

The fentanyl problem is a direct consequence of drug prohibition and
interdiction. As my colleague Dr. Jeff Singer has written:

Fentanyl's appearance in the underground drug trade is an
excellent example of the ``iron law of prohibition:'' when
alcohol or drugs are prohibited they will tend to get produced
in more concentrated forms, because they take up less space and
weight in transporting and reap more money when subdivided for
sale.

Fentanyl is at least 50 times more powerful per pound than heroin,
which means you have to smuggle nearly 50 pounds of heroin to supply
the market that a single pound of fentanyl could. This is a massive
incentive to smuggle fentanyl, and the more efforts are made to
restrict the drug trade, the more fentanyl will be the drug that is
smuggled. The DEA has even admitted, ``The low cost, high potency, and
ease of acquisition of fentanyl may encourage heroin users to switch to
the drug should future heroin supplies be disrupted.'' In other words,
heroin interdiction makes the fentanyl problem worse.

Conclusion

Border enforcement will not stop fentanyl smuggling. Border Patrol's
experience with marijuana smuggling may provide even clearer evidence
for this fact. Marijuana is the bulkiest and easiest-to-detect drug,
which is why it was largely trafficked between ports of entry. Despite
doubling the Border Patrol and building a border fence in the 2000s in
part to combat the trade, the only thing that actually reduced
marijuana smuggling was U.S. states legalizing marijuana. It is absurd
to believe that interdiction will be more effective against a drug that
is orders of magnitude more difficult to detect.

The DEA plainly stated in 2020 that fentanyl ``will likely continue to
contribute to high numbers of drug overdose deaths in the United
States'' even with the ban on asylum and travel restrictions. But
ending asylum or banning travel has been worse than useless. These
policies are both directly and indirectly counterproductive: first
directly by incentivizing more fentanyl smuggling and then indirectly
by distracting from the true causes of the crisis.

My colleagues have been warning for many years that doubling down on
these failed prohibition policies will lead to even worse outcomes, and
unfortunately, time has repeatedly proven them correct. The only
appropriate response to the opioid epidemic is treatment of addiction.
But for this to be possible, the government must adopt policies that
facilitate treatment and reduce the harms from addiction--most
importantly deaths. To develop these policies, policymakers need to
ignore the calls to blame foreigners for our problems.

Notes

[i] This is based on overdose statistics, and last year, fentanyl
caused 88 percent of opioid overdose deaths.

[ii] The cocaine seizure effectiveness rate includes an estimate of all
cocaine that escaped detection, while the interdiction effectiveness
rate for people only includes detected crossings. Including undetected
crossings would lower the effectiveness rate for people, but because
many arrests are the same person crossing after a prior arrest (27
percent in 2021), the interdiction effectiveness rate is a better
estimate of the likelihood of being arrested during a first attempt,
which would be all that is necessary to disrupt a drug smuggling
attempt. Regardless, in 2020, DHS estimated an apprehension rate that
included undetected crossings of 66.2 percent compared to 79.4 percent
using only detected crossings. This would mean that drugs were only
96.8 percent rather than 97.4 percent less likely to be apprehended.

______

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Executive Summary

The flow of fentanyl into the United States in 2019 is more diverse
compared to the start of the fentanyl crisis in 2014, with new source
countries and new transit countries emerging as significant trafficking
nodes. This is exacerbating the already multi-faceted fentanyl crisis
by introducing additional source countries into the global supply chain
of fentanyl, fentanyl-related substances, and fentanyl precursors.
Further, this complicates law enforcement operations and policy efforts
to stem the flow of fentanyl into the United States. While Mexico and
China are the primary source countries for fentanyl and fentanyl-
related substances trafficked directly into the United States, India is
emerging as a source for finished fentanyl powder and fentanyl
precursor chemicals.

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

CHINA

Currently, China remains the primary source of fentanyl and fentanyl-
related substances trafficked through international mail and express
consignment operations environment, as well as the main source for all
fentanyl-related substances trafficked into the United States. Seizures
of fentanyl sourced from China average less than one kilogram in
weight, and often test above 90 percent concentration of pure fentanyl.

As Beijing and the Hong Kong Special Autonomous Region (SAR) place
restrictions on more precursor chemicals, Mexican transnational
criminal organizations (TCOs) are diversifying their sources of supply.
This is evidenced by fentanyl shipments from India allegedly destined
for Mexico. On May 4, 2018, the Hong Kong SAR updated their drug law to
control the fentanyl precursors 4-anilino-N-phenethyl-4-piperidine
(ANPP) and N-phenethyl-4-piperidone (NPP) as well as the synthetic
opioid U-47700. This matches China's scheduling of ANPP and NPP on July
1, 2017. The move by the Hong Kong SAR is considerable, since synthetic
opioids produced and shipped from China may transit the Hong Kong SAR
en route to the United States.

Effective May 1, 2019, China officially controlled all forms of
fentanyl as a class of drugs. This fulfilled the commitment that
President Xi made during the G-20 Summit. The implementation of the new
measure includes investigations of known fentanyl manufacturing areas,
stricter control of internet sites advertising fentanyl, stricter
enforcement of shipping regulations, and the creation of special teams
to investigate leads on fentanyl trafficking. These new restrictions
have the potential to severely limit fentanyl production and
trafficking from China. This could alter China's position as a supplier
to both the United States and Mexico.

MEXICO

Mexican TCOs are producing increased quantities of fentanyl and illicit
fentanyl-containing tablets, with some TCOs using increasingly
sophisticated clandestine laboratories and processing methods (i.e.,
laboratory grade glassware, unregulated chemicals, and industrial size
tablet presses). DEA, working in conjunction with Mexican officials,
has seized and dismantled numerous fentanyl pill pressing operations
and fentanyl synthesis laboratories in 2018 and 2019, highlighting the
role TCOs play in supplying the US fentanyl market. Fentanyl is
smuggled across the U.S.-Mexico border in low concentration, high-
volume loads, kilogram seizures often contain less than a 10 percent
concentration of fentanyl.

TCOs are also increasingly producing wholesale quantities of illicit
fentanyl pills and smuggling them into the United States. In December
2018, Mexican officials in combination with DEA authorities seized an
illicit pill mill in Azcapotzalco, Mexico City. Law enforcement
officials seized illicit fentanyl-laced oxycodone M-30 pills, suspected
fentanyl powder, precursor chemicals and multiple other items related
to the production of fentanyl-laced illicit pills. As with the
Mexicali, Mexico fentanyl pill mill seized in September 2018, DEA
reporting indicated the organization operating the pill mill in Mexico
City is linked to the Sinaloa Cartel.

DEA reporting continues to indicate the Sinaloa and the New Generation
Jalisco (Cartel de Jalisco Nueva Generacion or CJNG) cartels are likely
the primary trafficking groups responsible for smuggling fentanyl into
the United States from Mexico. To date, the fentanyl synthesis and
fentanyl pill production operations dismantled in Mexico have either
occurred in territories controlled by these cartels or have had
involvement by members/associates of these cartels. In addition, these
TCOs are known to control the trafficking corridors in Mexico that
connect to California and Arizona, indicating drugs passing through
these associated areas would need to be approved by these
organizations.

INDIA

In 2017, the DEA provided information to India's Directorate of Revenue
Intelligence, resulting in the takedown of an illicit fentanyl
laboratory in Indore, India in 2018. DEA reporting indicates an Indian
national associated with the Sinaloa Cartel initially supplied the
organization with fentanyl precursor chemicals, NPP and ANPP, after
which a Chinese national also affiliated with the Sinaloa Cartel would
synthesize the fentanyl and traffic it from India to Mexico.

Between February and March 2018, the India- and China-based suspects
shifted their production from China to India, likely due in part to
China's regulation of ANPP and NPP. The organization likely transferred
their production to India due to difficulties obtaining precursor
chemicals in China and the increasing pressure from Chinese authorities
on fentanyl manufacturing operations. This may serve as an important
precedent, given China's newly imposed restrictions on fentanyl and
fentanyl precursors as a class. Fentanyl and fentanyl precursor
trafficking from India to TCOs in Mexico or direct to the United States
may be poised to increase if China-based traffickers work with Indian
nationals to circumvent China's new controls on fentanyl. In addition,
in February 2018, India announced controls on the exportation of ANPP
and NPP, similar to previous regulations enacted by China, which will
likely result in stricter controls on these precursors.

In December 2018, the Mumbai Anti-Narcotics Cell (ANC) seized
approximately 100 kilograms of the fentanyl precursor NPP and arrested
four Indian nationals in Mumbai, India. India's Narcotics Control
Bureau (NCB) reported to DEA in April 2019 that the seizure was
identified as NPP through forensic analysis at a state-run laboratory
in India. According to the ANC, the NPP was destined for Mexico and
deliberately mislabeled. This was the third seizure of a fentanyl-
related substance or fentanyl precursor linked to Mexico in 2018,
demonstrating growing links between Mexican TCOs and India-based
fentanyl precursor chemical suppliers. Given the behavior of Mexican
TCOs who obtain fentanyl precursors and finished fentanyl from China,
it is highly likely the precursor chemicals purchased from India were
to be used in the synthesis of finished fentanyl destined for sale in
the United States.

OUTLOOK

The flow of fentanyl to the United States in the near future will
probably continue to be diversified. The emergence of India as a
precursor chemical and fentanyl supplier as well as China's newly
implemented regulations have significant ramifications for how TCOs'
fentanyl and fentanyl precursor chemical supply chains will operate.
Mexican TCOs are likely poised to take a larger role in both the
production and the supply of fentanyl and fentanyl-containing illicit
pills to the United States, especially if China's proposed regulations
and enforcement protocols are implemented effectively. Fentanyl
production and precursor chemical sourcing may also expand beyond the
currently identified countries as fentanyl lacks the geographic source
boundaries of heroin and cocaine as these must be produced from plant-
based materials.

______

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

*****

The full report is available at:

https://www.gao.gov/assets/830/828858.pdf

______

[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Laura B. Comay, Specialist in Natural Resources
Policy

______

Mr. Grijalva. Thank you very much for the indulgence. I
can't do anything to take away the damage nativists and racist
rhetoric that permeates and infects this issue and keeps it
from being really discussed and dealt with, but at least my
effort to make sure that the record has some information that
is rooted in reality and fact.
With that, thank you very much.

Mr. Westerman. Thank you, Ranking Member, and I will also
be submitting to the record an accounting of the National
Disaster Emergency that was declared for Floyd Bennett Field
when it was used in an emergency situation for other purposes
and how there were denial of FEMA trailers to be located there
for housing after that national emergency declaration.
Also, I will be submitting additional information to the
record on the funding of the National Park Service and the fact
that those numbers have gone up, and this Administration asked
for budget cuts far beyond what have been included in the
rescissions in the Interior Appropriations Bill that hasn't
been debated on the Floor yet.

[The information follows:]
Decision Memorandum and Environmental Review to Support Emergency
Activities for Temporary Housing of Migrants
U. S. Department of the Interior National Park Service
Gateway National Recreation Area

Introduction

The National Park Service (NPS) is requesting alternative
arrangements for National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA) compliance
pursuant to 43 CFR 46.150(c) (emergency responses).\1\ As described
below, there is an urgent need to respond to a humanitarian crisis
caused by tens of thousands of migrants entering New York City (City)
and exceeding the City's capacity for temporary shelter. The Council on
Environmental Quality (CEQ) has concurred that there is an emergency
situation that can appropriately be addressed through the DOI NEPA
emergency procedures at 43 CFR 46.150.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ ``If the Responsible Official finds that the nature and scope
of the subsequent actions related to the emergency require taking such
proposed actions prior to completing an environmental assessment and a
finding of no significant impact, the Responsible Official shall
consult with the Office of Environmental Policy and Compliance about
alternative arrangements for NEPA compliance. The Assistant Secretary,
Policy Management and Budget or his/her designee may grant an
alternative arrangement. Any alternative arrangement must be
documented. Consultation with the Department must be coordinated
through the appropriate bureau headquarters.''
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The NPS is proposing to enter into one or more agreements, leases,
and other administrative arrangements in accordance with its
authorities to allow the City to use NPS lands for the purposes of
temporarily operating a migrant camp on Floyd Bennett Field (FBF)
within Gateway National Recreation Area (GATE or park). The impacts of
allowing such use are not expected to be significant, and therefore an
environmental assessment would be the appropriate NEPA compliance
pathway for this action. However, there is not time to complete an EA
before action must be taken to address imminent threats to human health
and safety. Consistent with guidance from the Council on Environmental
Quality (Emergencies and the National Environmental Policy Act Guidance
2020), the information contained herein, and the efforts to be taken
regarding the emergency action, the NPS proposes to comply with the
regulatory requirements for EA content, interagency coordination, and
public involvement to the extent practicable.
Background
New York City has seen an influx of approximately 100,000 migrants
in the past year and is currently housing more than 58,000 migrants in
City shelters. The City has utilized areas such as soccer fields,
recreation centers, and parking lots to house migrants, but lacks
additional space and resources to meet current needs. The influx of
migrants has led to overcrowding in existing facilities, instances of
migrants being forced to sleep on sidewalks and other public areas, and
in some cases unsanitary conditions. Taken together, the situation has
resulted in threats to health and safety of migrants and others. The
State of New York has declared a Disaster Emergency as a result of the
large number of migrants, stating, ``federal support is critical to
support the City of New York and other local governments within the
State that lack the infrastructure, facilities, and resources necessary
to meet the immediate humanitarian demand to house and meet other basic
needs of the large numbers of migrant arrivals related to the large
influx of migrants'' (see New York State Executive Order 28).
Purpose and Need

The purposes of taking action are: 1) to allow New York City to
operate a temporary shelter to provide housing and other services for a
limited number of migrants; and 2) to make certain improvements to
Floyd Bennett Field that ensure its preservation, repair and
rehabilitation and will contribute to its long-term visitor use and
enjoyment.
Action is needed to alleviate risks related to health and safety of
migrants and others and to assist the City in meeting migrant needs.
GATE has historic resources available for lease that can assist the
City in meeting those needs, as well as its own need to make certain
improvements to the historic property at Floyd Bennett Field.
Proposed Action

The 1,450-acre Floyd Bennett Field Historic District is the largest
single publicly owned, managed, and accessible under-developed parcel
of land in New York City (National Register Form 2010). Floyd Bennett
Field opened in 1931 as the site of New York City's first municipal
airport. In 1942, it was transferred to the Navy and became Naval Air
Station--Brooklyn. The Navy decommissioned the airfield in 1971, and in
1972, most of the land was transferred to the National Park Service as
a unit in Gateway National Recreation Area. The site was originally one
of many marsh islands in Jamaica Bay. Extensive fill was placed on the
site from the 1920s through 1940s to create the largely anthropogenic
landform that is exists today. The site was most densely developed
during the World War II era. Many of the buildings and structures at
the site today are unoccupied and in varying degrees of disrepair or
ruin. It is an expansive landscape characterized by open fields,
extensive areas of concrete and asphalt pavement, young second-growth
thickets and woods, engineered and natural shorelines, and a variety of
buildings clustered into what were historically flight-path clear
zones.
The NPS will enter into a lease agreement with the City for a
period of one year with an initial period of ninety days. The lease
agreement will allow the City to take actions necessary to provide
occupation and use of the areas specified in Figure 1 for the purpose
of housing up to 2,000 migrants.

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Figure 1. Floyd Bennett Field, Gateway National Recreation
Area, Brooklyn, NY identifying runaway 19, a portion of the Hanger B /
Sea-Plane Parking Lot, and two (2) Campground areas.

The lease agreement will also include requirements for site
improvements of certain areas within FBF as public benefits (see Figure
2). Some of the site improvements will be completed at the end of, or
after, the up to 12-month emergency action period. For the purposes of
this document, ``emergency action'' refers to actions related to
controlling the immediate impacts of the emergency, which are fully
covered by these NEPA emergency alternative arrangements. This
generally includes construction, improvements to existing
infrastructure, and placing new temporary infrastructure to allow
occupancy of the site; operation and administration of the site; and
associated actions related to health and safety of individuals within
the project area. Planned future improvements (follow-on actions) are
actions that will provide public benefits and that will not be
immediately implemented. Although follow-on actions are included in
this document, related impacts are assessed at a ``programmatic''
level. The NPS has time to complete site-specific NEPA compliance for
follow-on actions and will do so as necessary before implementing any
follow-on actions.

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Figure 2. Location of emergency actions required to provide
safe access for and administration of the migrant housing (projects 1,
4, 5 and some elements of project 2) and follow-on actions (projects 2
and 3) at Floyd Bennett Field, Gateway National Recreation Area,
Brooklyn, NY.

Throughout the duration of the proposed action, the NPS will
provide oversight of operations on FBF concerning the temporary housing
of migrants. The NPS Director (or designee) will retain command
oversight of the park's facilities and operations, balancing the City's
requirements against impacts to the park's mission. All modifications
to real property will require pre-approval from the NPS and will be
submitted to the GATE superintendent for approval. The City and its
agents will be held accountable for the protection of park resources to
include natural and cultural resources identified in various NPS
management plans.
Temporary facilities will be constructed to support a maximum
initial occupancy of 2,000 residents plus additional support personnel
to provide shelter, food services, restrooms, showers, clothing,
medical, security, laundry, and associated needs. Migrants will be
housed in tent-based structures. All facilities will be constructed in
a temporary and removable fashion. Facilities will be designed in a
resilient manner or will be able to be quickly demobilized in
anticipation of major weather events. Based upon facilities constructed
at other locations, NPS anticipates that 4-8 winterized tents similar
in size to the airplane hangars at FBF will be installed to support the
2,000 residents. Facilities will be arranged and anchored in a manner
that minimizes impacts to natural and cultural resources. To the
greatest extent possible, tents will be secured using sandbags, water
ballast or similar materials. Staking will be minimized and will avoid
areas with sensitive resources. Throughout the duration of the proposed
action, the City will be responsible for providing and managing
utilities (including water, wastewater, and power), security, food,
clothing, medical, security, custodial services, solid and hazardous
waste, and grounds maintenance, as necessary. Medical staff will be
under the direction of the designated Lessee's Chief Medical Officer or
medical coordinator. The City may station an emergency medical service
unit at the site as required. The disposal of all medical waste will be
coordinated with appropriate NPS representatives and will meet all
applicable regulatory requirements.
The City will provide 24-hour law enforcement (security services)
scaled appropriately to accommodate the number of migrants and the size
and complexity of the camp. The New York Police Department will be the
primary entity responsible for law enforcement issues involving
migrants. The City will provide enhanced 24-hour law enforcement and
security at locations identified by the NPS Director sufficient to
protect park visitors and park resources. During park closure hours
this will include staffing the security gate at the entrance to FBF.
The NPS will identify sites within the proximity of the project area
that pose an elevated safety risk with a high density of people
residing in the park 24-7, including unoccupied and deteriorating
buildings as well as contaminated sites. The City will be required to
mitigate those risks through fencing, security cameras, and other
security measures. To the greatest extent possible, fencing will be
secured using sandbags, water ballast or similar materials. Any ground
disturbance related to fencing will be temporary in nature and will
avoid areas with sensitive resources. Temporary lighting will be
installed in locations throughout the area in order to ensure safety
and deter crime. To the greatest extent possible, new lighting will be
Night Sky compliant. In some locations, such as near the visitor center
and other structures, lighting will remain on at all times after
sundown.
The City will make arrangements for all required utilities,
including gas, electricity, other power, water, cable, telephone,
sewage, waste removal, and other communication services. The City will
manage all water and wastewater facilities in a containerized manner as
the City will not be permitted to connect to NPS utilities, which are
not sized to accommodate additional capacity. The City will provide
electrical services which may include on-site generators or other
temporary installations. The City will manage all fuel in a
containerized manner as the City will not be permitted to utilize NPS
fuel services, which also are not sized to accommodate additional
capacity. All fuel facilities will have secondary containment. In the
event the City generates, processes, disposes of, or handles any
hazardous substances and hazardous materials, the City will ensure
removal, remediation, or other corrective action mandated by either the
State or Federal regulatory authority and adhere to all relevant
regulatory requirements related to hazardous substances and hazardous
materials. The City is not authorized to operate the site for storage
of hazardous materials.
The City will improve traffic circulation, parking, and access to
the site by reestablishing the historic entrance to the FBF at the Ryan
Visitor Center, improving the Hangar B/Sea-Plane Ramp Parking Lot, and
performing repairs on approximately 12,000 linear feet of main access
routes throughout the project area. As identified in the 2006 Jamaica
Bay Transportation Studies and 2014 General Management Plan (GMP), the
original entrance to the municipal airport from Flatbush Avenue will be
re-opened at the Ryan Visitor Center. Re-opening the diagonal entrance
drives requires a circulation plan, striping, security mechanisms for
the gates, gate repair, hardscape repair or repaving of the surface,
minor curb modifications, and landscaping. The park coordinated with
The New York City Department of Transportation (NYCDOT) on their design
and reconfiguration of Flatbush Avenue to accommodate this use. NYCDOT
has already altered the pavement markings and signage on Flatbush
Avenue to allow for reopening of the Ryan Visitor Center entrance
drives. Re-opening of the diagonal entrance drives is identified in the
Cultural Landscape Report for Floyd Bennett Field (Cody and Auwaerter
2009) as the most historically appropriate location for new entrances
from Flatbush Avenue into the Historic District.
At the Hangar B/Sea-Plane Ramp Parking Lot, work will include
removing a large debris pile adjacent to the site, removing invasive
trees and vegetation, planting native species, replacing fencing, jack
mudding sunken slab sections, and concrete patching. Consistent with
the 2014 GMP, the 12 adjacent RV camping sites will be upgraded to
include electrical hookups and striping. The parking lot area is a non-
contributing structure within the Historic District.
Throughout FBF, approximately 12,000 linear feet of main access
routes will be improved to facilitate traffic for equipment delivery,
administration, and migrant housing. Immediate improvements will be
needed to correct drainage issues where water is ponding on Runway Road
15-33, parallel to Flatbush Avenue. Existing asphalt roadway will be
milled and top coated. Existing concrete areas will be mud jacked and
patched as necessary. The City will be responsible for not only
addressing any impacts that result from their use but for general
improvements to these access routes for the benefit of the public.
The NPS and the City will develop a full site plan for how the
project area relates to other public areas and operations of FBF. The
NPS may limit migrant, City personnel, and/or contractor access to some
park areas and/or amenities as necessary to provide visitor safety and/
or to protect park resources. Movement of City personnel, contractors,
and visitors to the mission site will be restricted to direct movement
between the main entrance to FBF (from Flatbush Avenue just north of
the Marine Parkway Bridge) to the project area and return when exiting
GATE. Any movement outside this direct travel route must be coordinated
with the NPS. During hours the park is open, migrants will be permitted
to use the park following the same rules as other visitors. During
closure hours, migrants will not be permitted in areas of the park that
are not part of the project area.
When use of the project area ends, the City will remove all
temporary facilities, alterations and additions related to the
operation and administration of temporary migrant housing and restore
the area at a minimum, to as good of a condition that existed prior to
the commencement of the emergency action. Alterations, betterments,
additions and improvements that are made to reestablish the historic
entrance to the FBF at the Ryan Visitor Center, to improve safety and
use of the Hangar B/Sea-Plane Ramp Parking Lot, and to improve
approximately 12,000 linear feet of main access routes will remain
after the use of the project area ends. Additional compliance may be
required for other improvements or requirements specified in the
proposed by the City throughout the period of the lease. Any changes to
the proposed action will be subject to NEPA compliance, as appropriate.
Compliance for planned future improvements is addressed in the
``Follow-on Actions'' section of this memorandum.
Mitigation Measures

Pursuant to the terms of the lease, the City will be responsible
for developing a number of plans to address and incorporate the
specific issues and mitigation measures listed below, as applicable.
The lease agreement contains additional mitigation measures and plan
requirements that, although not specifically listed below, are
incorporated by reference into this memorandum.

1.   All City personnel and contractor employees must utilize routes
specifically designated by NPS. The City, in coordination
with NPS Director, will develop a transportation plan to
include ingress and egress to the project area, parking,
pick-up and drop-off locations, and operational schedules.

2.   Visitor access to the project area will be limited. A formal
request for visitation to the project area will be made to
and approved by NPS based on a City-provided ``need to
access assessment'' after coordination with all appropriate
NPS entities. All visitors to the project area will be
escorted by a City representative. This includes, but is
not limited to, Congressional staff, media, and non-
governmental organizations.

3.   NPS will limit migrant, City personnel, and/or contractor
access to some park areas and/or amenities as necessary to
provide visitor safety and/or to protect park resources.

4.   The City will comply with all requirements derived from
completion of federally required consultations and
compliance, including National Historic Preservation Act
Section 106, Endangered Species Act Section 7, Coastal Zone
Management Act, and Floodplain Statement of Findings.

5.   All vertical structures/facilities built or installed on NPS
property will comply with applicable building code
requirements to include wind loads.

6.   The City will develop a trash and recycling plan. This will
include actions to minimize single use plastics to protect
park resources. Best management practices will be employed
to manage and secure trash at all times.

7.   The City will develop a food services plan to include food
distribution, food storage, food security, cooking
facilities, cold storage, etc. The City will be responsible
for ensuring food is managed in a centralized facility and
will be responsible for ensuring all food handling meets
federal standards.

8.   The City will develop a pest management plan for review and
approval of the NPS Director prior to occupancy. The plan
will conform to NPS laws, regulations, and policies for
integrated pest management, and any chemicals used must be
approved by NPS.

9.   The City will develop a detailed storm management plan for
review and approval of the NPS Director. This plan will
identify how the City will address how temporary facilities
and other property will be removed from the project area
within 48 hours of an evacuation notice.

10.   The City will develop a detailed emergency evacuation plan for
review and approval of the NPS Director. The plan will
describe how the site will be evacuated in the event an
emergency evacuation order is issued.

11.   The City will develop a stormwater pollution protection plan to
include erosion control associated with all construction
and any potential overflow into Jamaica Bay related to the
proposed action. Best management practices will be employed
to prevent migration of construction materials, debris, and
sediment from entering the waterways. Seed-free straw bales
must be deployed for sediment/erosion control.

12.   The City will develop an air quality management plan for review
and approval of the NPS Director. The City will submit to
the NPS all air quality monitoring reports that may be
required by regulatory agencies in conjunction with
activities associated with the Premises, such as the use of
generators. Any generators utilized on the Premises must be
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) Tier IV (Tier 4)
compliant and must be permitted by the appropriate
regulatory agencies.

13.   The City will monitor noise levels associated with generator
operations to ensure that the noise levels identified in
the GATE Superintendent's Compendium of 60 decibels, at 50
feet from the source, are not exceeded.

14.   The City will develop a lighting management plan. The City will
ensure sufficient lighting to deter crime both on the
Premises and at secondary locations the NPS deems to be
appropriate to protect resources. While safety will remain
the first priority for the lighting plan, the City will
make every effort to comply with NPS Management Policies
2006 (Section 4.10) best practices on lightscape management
in national parks.

15.   The City will develop a Spill Prevention, Control and
Countermeasures Plan. The City will immediately notify the
NPS and other applicable regulatory entities of any
unauthorized releases or the deployment of any
countermeasures.

16.   All machinery containing fuels and oils shall have a spill kit
available immediately in the event of a spill. In the event
of a fuel or oil leak/spill, the work shall cease
immediately, spill containment deployed, and NPS Dispatch
(phone: 718-354-4700) and other jurisdictional authorities
called immediately, as designated.

17.   Excess drilling fluids, slurry, and spoils must be contained
until disposed of in compliance with local ordinances,
regulations, and environmentally sound practices in an
approved disposal site.

18.   Unless otherwise specified by the NPS, all removed material is
to be disposed of outside the park at an approved landfill,
recycled, or disposed of at other locations in accordance
with federal, state, and local regulations.

19.   All areas of soil disturbance resulting from the permitted
activity must be stabilized immediately following project
completion.

20.   Intact native topsoil from the project area shall be retained
whenever feasible. Should additional fill be needed, all
fill must be of quality suitable for use in a National Park
Unit. The City will submit material certificates for
imported backfill and fill materials before delivery to
document park approval of source and quality in accordance
with applicable standards.

21.   Any new soils/sediment brought on site must be tested and meet
New York State Department of Environmental Conservation
standards for general fill (6 CRR-NY 360.13). Any fill
materials required for the project must be obtained from a
park-approved source. Soils should not be amended.

22.   The City will provide documentation that all imported soils and
materials (such as straw bales, mulch, seed mixes,
plantings) are clean of contaminants and free of exotic
seeds and spores.

23.   The City will submit certificate(s) of inspection for species
and areas subject to quarantine rules (such as but not
limited to 1 CRR-NY III C 142) to demonstrate compliance
with applicable Federal, state, and local laws,
requirements, and NPS policies.

24.   Except for the project work described in this document and the
lease agreement, the City may not cut any timber or remove
any other landscape features such as shrubs or bushes
without prior written approval from the NPS.

25.   Site use controls (e.g., temporary fencing) and improved
signage will be used to direct visitor use to authorized
areas and authorized trails to limit impacts on vegetation
and wildlife.

26.   Any wheel ruts, holes or divots in lawn areas caused by the
work will be repaired. Any bare soil areas created by the
work will be seeded with annual ryegrass and a native grass
seed mix designed for the Northeast US region, where needed
to restore the area to pre-construction condition. Seed
will be applied at a rate of \1/2\ pound per 1,000 square
feet unless otherwise required for compliance with
applicable standards. The park's Resource Stewardship
Division must approve all plant selections before they are
purchased.

27.   The City will use native plant species that are as closely
related genetically and ecologically as possible to park
populations. For GATE, the operational definition for
closely related native species is plant material from seeds
or cuttings that were collected from native plant species
within 10 miles of the ocean anywhere along the coasts of
New Jersey, Staten Island, and western Long Island.
Substitution of plant material will be made only based on
proof of unavailability. The NPS must approve all plant
selections before they are purchased.

28.   Care will be taken not to disturb any wildlife species
(reptiles, migratory birds, raptors, or bats) found
nesting, hibernating, estivating, or otherwise living in,
or immediately nearby, worksites.

29.   If exterior project work will be implemented during period of
April 1 to September 1, NPS must be notified in advance and
the City may be required to have a qualified biologist
conduct an inspection of the work area prior to initiating
work to determine if there is any nesting activity that
could be impacted by the project. If nest building begins,
birds must not be harassed in any manner to deter nesting
activity. Park approval is required prior to placement of
any structures to deter nesting.

30.   Any park infrastructure impacted during construction, including
but not limited to paved and unpaved roadways, walkways,
turf, will be restored to pre-construction conditions upon
completion of the project.

31.   Best management practices for communication tower design,
sighting, construction, operation, maintenance, and
decommissioning will comply with United States Fish and
Wildlife Service 2016 guidelines (see https://us-
fcc.app.box.com/s/sc1742pnyc7w14vzzhcz3hrkoft1qn31).

Existing Condition of Resources and Potential Environmental Impacts

In addition to the resources discussed below, the NPS used CEQ's
Climate and Economic Justice Screening Tool to determine whether there
are any disadvantaged communities that would be disproportionately
affected by the proposed action. While some disadvantaged communities
exist outside of the project area and outside of GATE, no disadvantaged
communities would be disproportionately affected by the proposed action
due to their distance from the project area.

The following discussion of impacts presumes application of the
mitigation measures included above, as applicable.
Air Quality

Floyd Bennett Field is in Kings County, New York, which is part of
the New-Jersey-New York-Connecticut Interstate Air Quality Control
Region (40 CFR Sec. 81.13). The air basin is a shared resource and
impacts on it come from regional sources. Current air quality
conditions at FBF are poor for several indicators, including all three
indicators evaluated by the NPS: ozone, wet deposition, and visibility.
Kings County is designated by USEPA as serious nonattainment for the
2008 8-hour ozone (O3) National Ambient Air Quality Standard (NAAQS)
and as moderate nonattainment for the 2015 8-hour O3 NAAQS. Kings
County is also designated as maintenance for carbon monoxide (CO) and
particulate matter less than or equal to 2.5 microns in diameter
(PM2.5) and unclassified/attainment for all other criteria pollutants
(USEPA 2020).
Temporary operation of heavy equipment; workers commuting to and
from the project area in personal vehicles; heavy duty diesel vehicles
hauling materials, water, wastewater, and debris to and from the
project area; operation of generators to power the temporary
facilities; and the potential for bus services for migrants to travel
to and from the project area would contribute to air quality impacts.
Particulate matter air emission would be produced by the combustion of
fuels. Particulate matter emissions from fugitive dust would be
minimized through minimal ground disturbance and use of hardscapes.
Portable facilities and other sustainable design techniques would
minimize the need for permanent construction and its related air
quality impacts.
In its GMP, the park evaluated the impacts of creating a wetlands
center at FBF. This included the use of heavy equipment for excavating,
grading, and construction. The GMP concluded that the very intense
construction related to the wetlands center, requiring 30 to 50 trips
by heavy-duty trucks each day for a 6-month period would contribute
between 0.25 and 0.5 ton of hydrocarbons, 1.3 and 2.3 tons of carbon
monoxide, and 6 and 10 tons of nitrogen oxides. The GMP concluded that
those levels of emissions would be small in the context of overall air
quality at FBF. The air quality impacts expected from construction
related to the wetlands center are far greater than the impacts that
would occur from the temporary construction and operation activities
under the proposed action.
Generators used under the proposed action would be permitted by
appropriate regulatory agencies and would meet EPA Tier 4 emissions
standards in order to minimize impacts to air quality. The City will be
required to develop an Air Quality Management Plan and submit air
quality monitoring reports, as appropriate, to the NPS.
The park would potentially diminish its contribution to greenhouse
gases by restoring native vegetation as part of emergency and follow-on
actions, including removal of non-native vegetation and planting of
appropriate native vegetation (Figure 2 projects 2, 3 and 4), thereby
offsetting the cumulative degradation of air quality from regional
sources. Overall, air quality impacts would be minimal, temporary, and
localized.
Cultural Resources

Floyd Bennett Field Historic District was listed on the National
Register of Historic Places in 1980 with 15 contributing resources and
a period of significance from 1928 to 1931. In 2010, the district was
expanded to include 94 contributing resources and a period of
significance from 1928 to 1945. It is significant under Criterion A at
the national level in the area of Transportation for its role in early
aviation history. It is also significant at the national level under
Criterion C in the areas of Architecture and Engineering for its
collection of buildings and structures embodying the characteristics of
both early-twentieth-century civil aviation facility design and World
War II-era military construction. Today the site consists of Art Deco
hangars, paved runways and taxiways, and the Ryan Center, a 42,000-
square foot Georgian Revival administration building with an attached
control tower. FBF also contains numerous structures from the WWII era
such as barracks, utility buildings, warehouses, and maintenance
facilities. The civil and military aviation history resources at FBF as
well as pre-contact and historic archeological sites are identified as
important park resources and values in the 2014 GMP.
The Historic District is a largely anthropogenic landform that was
transformed during the 1920s and 1930s through extensive grading and
landfilling to develop New York's first municipal airport. In 1941, FBF
was transferred to the Navy and became the Naval Air Station--Brooklyn.
In the early 1940s, the Navy expanded the airfield from 387 acres to
more than 1,200 acres. Over 100 new buildings and structures were
constructed including runways, taxiways, new hangars, offices,
workshops, storage and maintenance facilities, barracks, mess halls,
and other support structures. It was the busiest Naval Air Station in
America during World War II and was in use until 1967. The Navy
decommissioned the airfield in 1971, and in 1972, most of the land was
transferred to the NPS as a unit in GATE.
Runway 6-24 (New) (built 1942, LCS #041264, NYSHPO #04701.014793,
contributing structure) is located along the northern edge of the
airfield. It was built by the Navy in asphalt in 1942 and initially
measured 5,000 feet long and 300 feet wide. In 1960 it was lengthened
to 5,800 feet with a concrete extension at its east end that required a
small area of fill into Jamaica Bay. Runway 6 is the only runway that
presently retains most of its historic circulation pattern. Runway 6 is
identified as the location for the migrant housing (Figure 2).
Access routes required for equipment delivery and administration of
the migrant housing include the Main Entrance Road, Barracks Road
Complex, Runway 15-33 (Taxiway 10), Taxiways 1 and 2 (the original
Runway 6-24), and Taxiway 6 (Figure 2). The Main Entrance Road (built
ca. 1951, non-contributing structure) consists of the main public
entrance to FBF from Flatbush Avenue to the Main Entrance Gate House
and Entrance Guard Booth. The Barracks Road Complex (built ca. 1942,
contributing structure) is a system of paved roads through the barracks
area. The central road of the Barracks Road Complex, Floyd Bennett
Boulevard, runs east-west through the center of the barracks area from
the main entrance and continues north to connect with the Naval
Aviation Patrol Base Access Road. Runway 15-33 (Taxiway 10) (built
1930-1945, LCS #041264, NYSHPO #04701.014793, contributing structure)
defines the western boundary of the airfield, extending north to south
parallel to Flatbush Avenue and the Hangar Row Apron. One of the two
runways original to the municipal airport, it presently serves as the
main public entrance road to Hangar Row. The present asphalt road was
built on top of the original runway, running roughly along the
centerline, and taking up approximately one-quarter of the runway
surface. The historic runway surface remains intact beneath and to
either side of the road. Taxiways 1 and 2 (original Runway 6-24, built
1930-1935, contributing structure) extend perpendicularly from Runway
15-33 (Taxiway 10) just south of the Administration Building/Passenger
Terminal (Ryan Visitor Center) to Taxiway 6. Taxiway 1 forms the
eastern half and Taxiway 2 the western half of the original Runway 6-
24. Taxiway 6 (built 1942, contributing structure) is part of the
taxiway system developed during War II for circulation around the
periphery of the airfield. Taxiway 6 is surfaced in asphalt and is now
used as a road.

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Figure 3. Floyd Bennett Field National Historic District
National Register Base Map (from National Registration Form 2010).

Runway 1-19 (built 1935-1942, LCS #041265, NYSHPO #04701.014792,
contributing structure) crosses the airfield diagonally from the
southwest to the northeast corners (Figure 1 area B and Figure 3).
Runway 19 was originally 3,500 feet long and 150 feet wide with a
concrete surface. In 1942 it was widened to 300 feet with concrete
extensions and lengthened to 5,000 feet, using asphalt at the north end
where it intersects Runway 6.
The Airport Entrance Site (built 1932-2006) is a contributing site.
The Airport Entrance Drives (built ca. 1932, LCS #041260, associated
feature) consist of two diagonal drives from Flatbush Avenue that frame
a central lawn area and converge in front of the Administration
Building/Passenger Terminal (currently the Ryan Visitor Center) at the
Airport Entrance Central Parking Lot (Figure 4). The drives are
surfaced in asphalt and edged by concrete curb. The upper ends of the
drives are currently closed off with black metal picket fencing.

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Figure 4. Floyd Bennett Field Airport Entrance Detail Map (from
National Registration Form 2010).

The Naval Aviation Patrol Base Apron Extension (built ca. 1952,
non-contributing structure) and Naval Aviation Patrol Base Apron
Taxiways (built ca. 1952, non-contributing structure) (Figure 1 area C)
are adjacent to the Naval Aviation Patrol Base Apron (built 1940-1942,
contributing structure), Naval Aviation Patrol Base Seaplane Ramp
(built ca. 1942, LCS #174, contributing structure), and Naval Aviation
Patrol Base Hangar B (built ca. 1942, LCS #100, contributing building)
(Figure 3). The Naval Aviation Patrol Base Apron Extension is currently
used as a parking lot with the Naval Aviation Patrol Base Apron
Taxiways used as access routes to the parking lot.
While there are no documented precontact or historic archeological
sites in the area of potential effect, there is the potential for these
resources to be encountered in marshy areas buried below the average 9
feet of fill that comprises the airfield. The southern portion of the
current airfield boundaries, however, incorporates what were formerly
the upland boundaries of Barren Island, a highly desirable settlement
location during both the pre- and post-contact periods. Comprising well
drained soils, an abundance of subsistence resources, proximity to
fresh water, and high ground overlooking the Atlantic to the south and
prime marshland hunting locations to the north, the island would have
been a locus of settlement beginning with the stabilization of sea
level during the latter half of the Early Archaic Period through the
19th and 20th century residential and industrial development.
The proposed action would not authorize any penetration or
alteration of Runway 6 or 19 for construction and administration of the
migrant housing. All structures would be free-standing or secured with
water filled ballast or like materials. No penetration of the historic
runway or any hardscape is authorized. Repair to approximately 12,000
linear feet of main access routes would correct drainage issues on
historic runways and taxiways through mud jacking and patching of
existing concrete areas and milling and top coating of existing
asphalt. Rehabilitation of the historic entrance to the municipal
airport, removal of invasive vegetation, and planting of appropriate
native species will enhance the cultural landscape. Ground disturbance
will be limited to staking to a depth of less than thirty inches and
will be authorized only in NPS-approved areas. The lease does not
authorize any digging or trenching. The lease requires that all
existing cultural resources and landscape features must be protected
from damage or injury and that no actions can be taken that are
detrimental to the historical resources. The NPS-collected August 2023
photo points are included as an Appendix to the lease to document pre-
project conditions. An August 2023 evaluation of List of Classified
Structures (LCS) within or adjacent to the proposed project area was
also completed to document baseline conditions of park cultural
resources. While the NPS does not anticipate that the proposed
emergency action would have any adverse effects on cultural resources,
in accordance with 36 CFR Part 800.12(b)(2), the NPS will notify the
New York State Historic Preservation and Tribal Historic Preservation
Offices of the Delaware Nation, Delaware Tribe, Stockbridge-Munsee
Community, Shinnecock Nation and Shawnee Tribe, and the Advisory
Council on Historic Preservation of the emergency situation and will
initiate consultations as appropriate.
The NPS finds that the proposed action would not have adverse
impacts on cultural resources. Temporary impacts on the viewshed would
be expected. Reopening the Airport Entrance Site, repairs to the
runways, removal of invasive species, and planting of appropriate
native species would benefit the cultural landscape and improve the
conditions of the historic district and could help to offset any of the
project's temporary impacts. The effects of the project on cultural
resources will be fully evaluated under emergency procedures of Section
106 and any as yet unidentified adverse effects would be mitigated.
Wetlands, Floodplains, and Flooding

FBF is a mostly man-made conglomerate of dredged fills, fly ash,
garbage, and other urban fill. Some of the North Forty (the western
portion) is also underlain with rubble or other urban materials. The
western portion of the North Forty includes one 0.70-acre of a
freshwater pond and two freshwater forested/shrub wetlands (9.02 acres
total), with the nearest located 185 feet from northern edge of Runway
6. Tidal wetlands are located along the shoreline of Jamaica Bay,
including low salt marsh type located north of Hangar B parking lot
that is critically imperiled statewide. No impacts to any site wetlands
are anticipated from the proposed action, including proposed
rehabilitation work for public benefit.
Site elevation is highest in the western portion of Floyd Bennett
Field, near Flatbush Avenue at +14 feet NAVD88, and generally decreases
to +9.5 feet NAVD in the eastern portion of the site near Taxiway 6.
Portions of the project area are located within the 500-year
floodplain, as determined by the Federal Emergency Management Agency
(FEMA). The eastern portion of Hangar B parking lot and portions of the
North Forty are located within the 500-year floodplain, where the
elevation is below +9.5 feet NAVD88 and there is a 0.2% annual chance
of flooding.
Overall, the potential flood risks associated with the proposed
action include risks to human health and life, as well as minor
flooding damage risk to temporary housing and associated facilities.
Within the project area, flood potential is highest at Hangar B/Sea-
Plane Ramp Parking Lot because it is located within approximately 500
feet of Jamaica Bay and along the segment of Flatbush Avenue located
within 100 feet of Dead Horse Bay. It should be noted that the proposed
temporary migrant housing will primarily be constructed on-top of
already built out (hardened) lands formerly constructed as airfield
runways. These park lands are situated outside of the 1% annual
exceedance probability (AEP) flood within Zone X that constitutes a
``moderate'' floodplain hazard in FEMA terms (floods that fall between
the 0.2 to 1% Annual Exceedance Probability). As such, the flooding
risk to government investment is considered acceptable. The risk of
inundation, erosion, wave attack, and overtopping potential at the
project area is low.
FBF has previously been used by the US Government for emergency
relief services stemming from Superstorm Sandy relief, which included
housing for 2,000 troops (US Army 2012). The existing infrastructure
and facilities needed to support emergency services can be found
nowhere else within NPS lands at this location.
NPS has prepared a Floodplain Statement of Findings (FSOF) to
document compliance with Executive Order 11998 (Floodplain Management),
as amended by Executive Order 13690. Through the FSOF process, the NPS
has determined that there are no practicable, non-floodplain locations
for the proposed action. Potential impacts to human life and health
would be mitigated through a combination of non-structural risk
mitigation measures. Emergency preparedness planning, storm and flood
warning, and coordinated evacuation plans and protocols would be
protective of human life. The risk to federal capital investment is
acceptable, and there is no risk to natural and beneficial floodplain
values because the cumulative amount of new permanent infrastructure
would be small, above ground, and in previously disturbed and developed
areas. All improvements, including storm or flood damage, would be
undertaken at the City's sole expense and only with the NPS's prior
written approval. Therefore, the NPS finds that the proposed action
would not have any additional adverse impacts on floodplains and their
associated values.
Native Vegetation

Natural areas at FBF are named as fundamental resources in the
park's 2014 GMP. Most of the areas between the runways and taxiways are
managed as natural areas and wildlife habitat.
FBF is a mostly man-made conglomerate of dredged fills, fly ash,
garbage, and other urban fill. Some of the North Forty (the western
portion) is also underlain with rubble or other urban materials.
Nonetheless, a wide diversity of vegetation grows here, including
successional maritime forest, northern beach heather dune shrubland,
northern bayberry dune shrubland, and a host of human-modified
associations such as early successional woodland, northeastern modified
successional forest, and northeastern old field. Both successional
maritime forest and northern bayberry dune shrubland are vulnerable or
imperiled statewide. Within GATE, maritime forest is considered
important at FBF because of its rarity at other park sites where it
occurs. Hardened areas of the FBF coastline associated with development
alternate with eroding mudflats or sandy beaches. Although the
grassland growing in the center of FBF is human-modified little
bluestem old field, it is important because it is one of the largest
remaining grasslands in the New York City area and provides nesting for
migratory birds as well as pollinator habitat.
The City selected FBF as suitable for temporary migrant housing in
part because of existing hardscaped acreage to accommodate the proposed
use. The proposed action would minimize new built facilities and would
concentrate them on existing hardscaped areas to avoid any rare
vegetation associations. The proposed action could increase park
visitation. During hours that the park is open, site contractors, staff
and migrants will have use of the park following the same rules as
other visitors. Bringing more visitors to FBF would increase the
potential for loss of vegetation from trampling, a localized adverse
impact. Mitigation measures include site use controls (e.g., temporary
fencing, as necessary) and improved signage that would encourage
visitor use in authorized areas and authorized trails to limit new
adverse impacts on native vegetation in natural areas such as the North
Forty and grasslands. The NPS would also limit migrant, City personnel,
and/or contractor access to some park areas as necessary to protect
native vegetation. Overall impacts to native vegetation would be
minimal, and impacted vegetation is expected to return to existing
conditions once use of the site for the emergency action ends.

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Figure 5. 2008 Floyd Bennett Field National Historic District
existing conditions showing the location of woods, managed grasslands
and marsh (from Cultural Landscape Report for Floyd Bennett Field (Cody
and Auwaerter 2009)

Nonnative Plants
Large areas of FBF are dominated by nonnative, invasive species
such as porcelain berry (Ampelopsis glandulosa), Japanese honeysuckle
(Lonicera japonica), tree of heaven (Ailanthus altissima), oriental
bittersweet (Celastrus orbiculatus), mugwort (Artemisia vulgaris) and
Phragmites australis (the nonnative genotype). Park management of
invasive species is conducted as time and resources allow. This
localized beneficial impact on native vegetation would continue during
the time frame of the proposed action. In addition, the proposed action
would provide for some removal of invasive species and planting of
appropriate native species (Figure 2 projects 2, 3 and 4). Efforts
associated with the proposed action to control invasive species and
revegetate with native species would have localized beneficial impacts.
Wildlife

Maintenance of the grassland at FBF through mechanical means
(primarily mowing) would continue during the time frame of the proposed
action, with localized benefits for grassland nesting birds, including
horned lark, eastern meadowlark, upland sandpiper, savannah sparrow,
northern harrier, American kestrel, and common barn owl. Many of these
species also depend on FBF grasslands for overwintering, as do short-
eared owls and rough-legged hawks. Historically, the Jamaica Bay and
Long Island region was thought to contain some of the largest
contiguous grassland habitats east of the Mississippi River (Drennan
1981, as cited in NYCDEP 2007). Although the 140-acre grassland at FBF
is artificially maintained by mowing, it is extremely rare as a
remaining large grassland habitat in the New York City area. Its unique
character and ability to support wildlife that would otherwise not be
present in the park in more than an incidental way provides substantial
benefits for grassland species.
The proposed action would construct temporary migrant housing on
existing hardscaped areas to avoid wildlife impacts. Increased
occupancy and 24-hour use of Leased areas adjacent to grassland and
forested habitat, in addition to increased visitator use of trails
within these habitats, has the potential for adverse localized impacts
on wildlife in the form of disturbance, which may cause wildlife to
temporarily avoid certain areas. Mitigation measures including site use
controls (e.g., temporary fencing) and improved signage would encourage
visitor use in authorized areas and authorized trails to limit new
adverse impacts on wildlife. NPS would also limit migrant, City
personnel, and/or contractor access to some areas of FBF as necessary
to protect wildlife. Impacts to wildlife would be temporary and limited
to the duration of the proposed action. A qualified biologist would be
onsite to conduct an inspection of the work area for any exterior
construction occurring between April 1 and September 1. The biologist
would determine if there were nesting activity that could be impacted
by the project. If there is, construction activities would be modified
or relocated to the greatest extent possible to avoid or minimize
impacts. Overall, the proposed action would result in minimal,
temporary impacts to wildlife. Impacts would cease and conditions would
return to a state similar to existing conditions once use of the site
for the emergency action ends.
Special Status Species
The proposed action does not include in-water work or potential to
impact aquatic federal or state listed species that may occur within
Jamaica Bay. NPS is conducting informal consultation with US Fish and
Wildlife Service (USFWS) under Section 7 of the Endangered Species Act
(ESA) on four terrestrial ESA listed species that may occur within the
proposed emergency action area.
Piping plover (Charadrius melodus--threatened) are not expected to
occur within the project area except as occasional transients. Plovers
may forage along the FBF shoreline of Jamaica Bay. There is no
designated critical habitat for piping plover. The only report in eBird
of a piping plover sighting at FBF was one bird in March 2016. The
nearest location for annual piping plover nesting is on the oceanside
beach on the Rockaway Peninsula at Fort Tilden near Beach 169th Street
[located over 1.4 mile (2.3 km) south of the project site]. For these
reasons, NPS concludes that the proposed action would have no effect on
piping plover.
Roseate tern (Sterna dougallii dougallii--endangered) are not
expected to occur within the project area except as occasional
transients. The species may nest and forage on the Atlantic shoreline
of the Rockaway Peninsula and may forage on along the shorelines of FBF
and bay beaches within Jamaica Bay. No roseate tern sightings at FBF
were identified in eBird. Nesting or loafing roseate terns have been
observed occasionally during the past decade on the beach at Breezy
Point, which is over 3 miles (4.8 km) from the project area. There is
no critical habitat designated for this species. For these reasons, NPS
concludes that the proposed action would have no effect on roseate
tern.
Red knots are not expected to occur within the project area except
as occasional transients, in part because suitable breeding habitat
does not occur within New York. This species breeds in the Canadian
arctic region. From mid-March through late November, foraging red knots
(Calidris canutus rufa--threatened) may occur along the FBF shoreline
of Jamaica Bay. The first eBird reported sighting of two red knots at
FBF occurred in August 2007. Since then, the greatest number of
individuals reported at one time was 71 individuals at an unnamed FBF
location in May 2017. The most recent eBird report was of a single
individual in late October 2022. The proposed emergency action is
located approximately 1 mile (1.6 km) from proposed critical habitat
unit NY-4 in Jamaica Bay (88 FR 22530). The proposed action has no
potential to temporarily or permanently alter the quality of critical
habitat in the project vicinity or the proposed critical habitat unit
NY-4. Most of the proposed project area is more than 984 feet (300 m)
from the Jamaica Bay shoreline. For these reasons, NPS concludes that
the proposed action would have no effect on red knot and that there
would be no effect on designated critical habitat for this species.
Northern long-eared bat (Myotis septentrionalis--endangered)
historically occurred in Kings County. No site-specific survey for bats
has been conducted at FBF. The proposed action does not include forest
conversion via trimming or removal of vegetation during the active
season (April 1 through October 30). The project area is not located
within 0.5-mile radius of any known northern long-eared bat
hibernacula. For these reasons, NPS concludes that the proposed action
would have no effect on the northern long-eared bat.
Monarch butterfly (Danaus plexippus--candidate) are known to feed
on the nectar of flowering plants such as those in the approximately
140-acre grasslands at FBF in the immediate vicinity of the proposed
action. There is no designated critical habitat for this species at
FBF. Management of the grasslands will continue as usual and no use or
alteration of the grassland area will be authorized as part of the
proposed action. Increased activity on and use of runways adjacent to
the FBF grasslands as well as increased park visitation related to the
proposed action would result in minimal, temporary impacts to monarch
butterfly. Impacts would cease and conditions would return to a state
similar to existing conditions once use of the site for the emergency
action ends. As a candidate species, ESA consultation is not
applicable.
State listed and other special status species that may occur in the
project action area include barn owl, red-banded hairstreak (butterfly;
historic), white-m hairstreak (butterfly; historic), forest blue grass,
red pigweed, reflexed flat sedge, and Schweinitz's flat sedge.
Increased activity on and use of runways adjacent to forested and
grassland habitats as well as increased park visitation related to the
proposed action would result in minimal, temporary impacts to these
species. Impacts would cease and conditions would return to a state
similar to existing conditions once use of the site for the emergency
action ends.
Soundscapes

A 2015 resource brief for GATE provides the best available summary
of the park's acoustic environment, using predictions from a geospatial
sound model (see Wood 2015). The mean existing sound level at GATE is
estimated to be 47.3 dBA (decibels), and the average existing sound
level (with the influence of human-caused sounds) is predicted to be
9.9 dBA above natural conditions. The soundscape at FBF has a sound
level typical of quiet rural residential areas with little to light
automobile traffic (45-50 dBA) and some helicopter overflights
associated with New York Police Department (87 dB at 500 ft and 79 dB
at 1000 ft) (see How Loud is a Helicopter? (Comparing Helicopter Noise
Levels)/Executive Flyers).
Noise from temporary construction activities would originate from
mechanical equipment. To the extent practicable, construction work
would occur during park operating hours. However, some construction
related activities could occur outside of those hours. Generators used
would be Tier 4 in order to minimize impacts to soundscapes. Generators
would be located as far as possible from visitors, migrants, and
wildlife. The City will monitor noise levels associated with generator
operations to ensure that the noise levels identified in the GATE
Superintendent's Compendium of 60 decibels, at 50 feet from the source,
are not exceeded. Overall, construction noise impacts would be minimal
and temporary.
Visitor Use and Experience

The human need for recreation and renewal has resulted in an
evolving history of traditional and innovative uses of the park's lands
and waters to improve the quality of urban life. Intrinsically
connected to the diverse population of the New York metropolitan area,
GATE's resources provide unique opportunities for outdoor recreation
and rejuvenation in a densely populated and largely impacted
metropolitan area. The park's open spaces and wide horizons offer
opportunities for resource-based recreation as well as contemplation
and reflection. The feelings associated with open space in the high-
density metropolitan area and opportunities to recreate through nature
observation, water-based activities, walking, hiking, biking, and
visiting historic sites are fundamental resources and values.
The GATE 2014 GMP identifies FBF as a year-round destination for
daily use and multiple day experiences that include outdoor recreation,
community activities, environmental education, preservation and
interpretation of the aviation and military history of this historic
site, and the protection of grassland, forested and coastal ecosystems.
FBF is managed to provide camping opportunities, a community garden,
environmental education, access to shorelines and waters of Jamaica Bay
for fishing, canoeing, and kayaking, an extensive system of trails for
hiking, access to runways and roadways for biking, and the concession
operated Aviator Sports Complex. Park management relies heavily upon
partnerships to provide and develop recreational opportunities and for
the management and reactivation of the structures and spaces at this
site.
With annual visitation around 9 million, GATE typically ranks
within the top five most visited National Park units. FBF, like many of
the sites in GATE, is in the ``backyard'' of New York City. Going to
FBF is routine for many park visitors. A 2015 visitor use survey
identified that 22% of visitors surveyed had visited FBF 21 or more
times in the prior 12 months, 50% had visited 2-20 times and 28% had
visited only once. Visitor use levels peak in the summer months,
decrease in the fall, and are lowest in the winter and spring. In the
Jamaica Bay Unit of GATE, 73% of visitors were white, 12% black or
African American, and 10% were Asian.
The closure of any areas within FBF would be minimized to only
those areas necessary for the proposed action and for the safety and
security of park visitors. Certain portions of FBF will be closed to
the public by the City for operation and administrative purposes in
connection with the proposed action. Access to those areas of the park
will be limited to the City, its contractors, migrant residents and
others that have been approved by the NPS. Visitors will continue to
have access to locations within FBF that provide opportunities for
fishing, launching and landing kayaks, biking, walking, running, or
parking a car to enjoy views of Jamaica Bay. At FBF, there are five
primary hubs of visitor activity. The Hangar B parking lot is one of
those hubs. The Hangar B parking lot is the only area of FBF that
provides vehicle access to the shoreline and views of Jamaica Bay.
Temporary impacts on visitor use of the Hangar B parking lot would
occur due to a partial closure of the lot as a result of the proposed
action. The NPS does not anticipate that any impacts related to the
proposed action will disproportionately affect any particular user
groups.
FBF has over 3 miles (5 km) of shoreline. Much of the shoreline is
hardened or currently unavailable for visitor use due to access
limitations related to adjacent upland forested habitat, land
assignments to park partners (New York City Sanitation, New York City
Police Department) or the shoreline is part of the US Marine Corps
Reserve Center, an inholding within FBF. Public access is focused at
approximately 2962 feet (903 m) of shoreline across 5 locations within
FBF. The proposed action would restrict access to less than 900 feet
(250 m) of shoreline (Figure 1 area C). The primary effect of this
limited access would be on visitors that rely upon vehicle access to
the shoreline. The impacted area is the only area in FBF in which park
visitors can drive up to the shoreline. This is a popular area for
fishing, landing and launching of kayaks, and for enjoyment of the
Jamaica Bay viewshed.
FBF provides approximately 5.8 miles (9.3 km) of runways, taxiways
and roads for biking or running. Vehicle traffic is authorized on 4.3
miles (6.8 km) of that 5.8 miles (9.3 km). There are no protected bike
or pedestrian use lanes on any roadways. The proposed action would
restrict pedestrian and bicycle access of up to 1.5 mile (2.5 km) on
Runways 6 and 19 (Figure 1 areas A and B). There would be no impact to
vehicle access since both areas are closed to vehicles.
There is system of trails within the North Forty area of FBF,
northwest of Runway 6. Depending upon the season, the Belt Parkway is
visible from some parts of the trail system. It is not anticipated that
trails will be closed. Increased noise and activity associated with
construction and operation of the temporary migrant camp as well as
increased use of trails would impact visitor experience on some parts
of the trail system.
Three varieties of camping experiences are offered at Floyd Bennett
Field and include programmatic camping at Ecology Village, walk-in tent
camping at Goldenrod and Tamarack Campground (30 sites), and
recreational vehicle (RV) camping at an RV park (12 sites). The
Goldenrod and Tamarack Campground and RV camp sites have not been open
since 2019. These sites were closed in 2020 and 2021 due to COVID. The
sites were not opened in 2022 and 2023 due to staff capacity. No bids
were received in response to a 2022 Request for Proposal for use and
occupancy to facilitate opening the campground to the public. The
Ecology Village camping program is managed by the Appalachian Mountain
Club for school and youth groups. The proposed emergency action is not
expected to impact programmatic camping at Ecology Village.
The proposed action would increase park visitation. During hours
that the park is open, the City's contractors, staff and residents will
have use of the park following the same rules as other visitors. NPS
would limit migrant, City personnel, and/or contractor access to some
park areas and/or amenities as necessary to provide visitor safety.
Overall, the proposed action would have minimal and temporary impacts
on visitor use and experience, primarily in the form of increased use
of specific sites within FBF during operating hours.
Traffic and Site Circulation

Floyd Bennett Field is located south of Exit 11 on the Belt Parkway
(Shore Parkway), a six-lane highway that runs west to northeast across
the southern portion of Brooklyn, NY. Commercial traffic is not
authorized on NY Parkways. As a major route of transportation in the
metropolitan area, traffic is heavy on the Belt Parkway. The 2016 two-
way annual average daily traffic (AADT) for Shore Parkway, starting at
Rockaway Parkway (Exit 13) traveling southwest toward Flatbush Avenue
(Exit 11), was 165,379 vehicles. Flatbush Avenue travels in a northwest
to southeast along the western boundary of FBF. The AADT count for
Flatbush Avenue, from Shore Parkway to the Marine Parkway Bridge, was
24,420 vehicles. Although less common, access is also available from
the south via Beach Channel Drive, Rockaway Point Boulevard, and the
Marine Parkway Bridge, which had 2016 AADT counts of 22,616, 6,753, and
21,100, respectively. The average travel time for people commuting in
New York City is 36.2 minutes while the average commuter in Kings
County drives approximately 42.6 minutes (NYSDOT 2016, USCB 2019).
Impacts to area traffic will be mitigated through the City's
transportation management plan and mobilization and demobilization
plans. Impact to area traffic will be minor and temporary.
Flatbush Avenue is part of the Jamaica Bay Greenway, a 19-mile
pedestrian and bicycle loop around Jamaica Bay in Brooklyn and Queens.
A protected bicycle lane with access points is located along the
eastern side of Flatbush Avenue. NPS allows pedestrians and cyclists to
hike and bike the historic runways at FBF (NYCDOT 2019).
According to traffic data, approximately 1,600 vehicles on weekdays
and 1,000 vehicles on weekend days access FBF via Aviation Road during
non-summer months and up to 3,000 vehicles per day during the summer
months, which is a rate of approximately 300 vehicles per hour during
typical daytime recreation hours. Peak hour traffic using Aviation
Drive is 150 vehicles (morning) to 200 vehicles per hour (evening).
Saturday midday peak hour traffic is slightly more than 200 vehicles
per day (NPS 2014).
Impacts on traffic and site circulation are expected to be minimal
and temporary. Runways 6 and 19 are currently closed to vehicles;
therefore, use of those areas under the proposed action would not
impact vehicle circulation. While there is no prohibition on pedestrian
or cyclist use of runways, taxiways, and roadways within FBF, there are
very limited sidewalks and no bike lanes or designated multi-use paths
within FBF. As a result, movement throughout FBF is primarily by
vehicle. Site circulation would be improved through the rehabilitation
and reopening of the historic airport entrance to FBF and repairs to
approximately 12,000 linear feet of main access routes within FBF
(Figure 2 projects 1 and 5).
Coordination with Affected Agencies and Public Outreach

The NPS has coordinated with the State of New York and New York
City officials regarding this emergency action. Throughout the duration
of the proposed action, in coordination and collaboration with the NPS,
the City will be primarily responsible for all external communications
to include questions from media, local residents, businesses, other
land users, and local, state, and federal elected officials. The NPS
will make this memorandum available to the public.
In accordance with 36 CFR 800.12(b)(2), the NPS has notified the
New York State Historic Preservation and Tribal Historic Preservation
Offices of the Delaware Nation, Delaware Tribe, Stockbridge-Munsee
Community, Shinnecock Nation and Shawnee Tribe, and the Advisory
Council on Historic Preservation of the emergency situation and will
initiate consultations as appropriate.
The NPS has prepared a FSOF to document compliance with NPS
floodplain management procedures for the proposed action. Through the
FSOF process the NPS has determined that there are no practicable, non-
floodplain locations for the proposed action. Potential impacts to
human life, health, and safety would be mitigated through a combination
of non-structural risk mitigation measures. Emergency preparedness
planning, storm and flood warning, and coordinated evacuation plans and
protocols would protect human life, health, and safety. There is no
risk to federal capital investment or natural and beneficial floodplain
values. All improvements shall be undertaken at the City's sole expense
and only with the NPS's prior written approval. Therefore, the NPS
finds that the proposed action would not have any additional adverse
impacts on floodplains and their associated values.
The NPS has determined the proposed action would have no effect on
listed species and is conducting informal consultation with the USFWS
under Section 7 of the ESA on four terrestrial ESA listed species that
may occur within the proposed emergency action area.
The NPS has determined that the proposed emergency action
constitutes an exigent circumstance under the Coastal Zone Management
Act as provided in 15 CFR 930.32(b). Once the exigent circumstances
have passed, the NPS shall comply with all applicable provisions of 15
CFR part 930, subpart C, to ensure that the activity is consistent to
the maximum extent practicable with the enforceable policies of the New
York State Department of State Coastal Management Program. The NPS will
submit a Consistency Determination to provide a description of actions
and supporting policy analysis.
Follow-on Actions

The NPS will conduct some follow-on actions related to site
improvements that may not occur until the end of, or after the up to
12-month emergency action period. The follow-on actions will include:

Public Campground Improvements--The FBF public campground sites
(Goldenrod and Tamarack Campgrounds; Figure 2 project 2), which are
across the street from Historic Hangar B, would be used for
administrative purposes such as providing a location for office
trailers and equipment staging. Minor improvements, such as vegetation
maintenance (mowing and trimming) necessary for use to support the
emergency action are included in the above analysis. Additional
improvements would be required as follow-on actions under the Lease.
Consistent with the park's 2014 GMP, camping opportunities would be
improved at FBF. The City would be responsible for campground
improvements so that the facilities follow current NPS Campground
Design Guidelines. The existing 30 public camping sites would be
upgraded and an additional 30 sites will be added. Improvements include
adding signage, removing hazardous and invasive trees and vegetation,
installing fire rings and picnic tables at each site, re-grading the
access trail, and building a new permanent restroom facility. Temporary
trailers would be required to house additional restroom and shower
facilities as well as a camp store.

Outdoor Education Campus--The City would be required to develop
portions of an outdoor education campus according to existing
conceptual designs. This includes garden plots, an outdoor skills
course, a gathering pavilion, and parking lot. Actions to accomplish
this would include site clearance of invasive plant material,
construction of permeable walking trails, rehabilitation of the
existing greenhouse, installation of new parking, and visitor
amenities. This would need to proceed in coordination with the two park
partners involved in this project, Launch and the Jamaica Bay-Rockaway
Parks Conservancy.
In general, these actions will be consistent with the park's
holistic management approach for coastal resources to improve
resiliency and will incorporate principles of energy conservation and
sustainability, resulting in long-term beneficial impacts to park
resources and values, and to visitor use and experience. Adverse
impacts related to the follow-on projects may include short-term,
localized, and low intensity impacts to air quality, soundscapes,
vegetation, wildlife, and visitor use and experience related to
construction activities and temporary closures. The NPS will complete
site-specific NEPA compliance, as appropriate, before taking the
following actions. Therefore, these actions are not fully covered by
these NEPA alternative arrangements.
Other Alternatives Considered but Dismissed

Hangars 3 and 4--Hangars 3 and 4 (49,020 square feet) at Floyd
Bennett Field are existing vacant historic structures that were
constructed in 1931. Hangars 3 and 4 are contributing resources in the
Floyd Bennett Field Historic District which was listed on the National
Register of Historic Places. They have not been restored or
rehabilitated and are currently vacant and deteriorated. The building
shell is showing signs of failure that left uncorrected will result in
damage that is beyond reasonable repair. The interior is aged, and the
utilities and systems are either inoperable, inadequate, or non-
compliant with current codes and standards. The building is only
suitable as semi-protected storage space in its current condition, and
even that use is put at risk by continued neglect. Although the NPS is
currently preparing plans to rehabilitate the structures, no work has
yet begun.
Within the Jamaica Bay Unit, there are no other sites where
emergency activities of a similar nature have previously been sited;
have a lower potential for impact on park resources, operations, or
public uses; or have available hardscaped areas of sufficient acreage
with a low risk of flood potential to accommodate the emergency
activities.

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

__

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

*****

The full report is available at:

https://docs.house.gov/meetings/II/II00/20230927/116399/HHRG-
118-II00-20230927-SD012.pdf

------

Mr. Westerman. Again, I want to thank the witnesses for
your valuable testimony and the Members who were here for their
questions. The members of the Committee may have some
additional questions for the witnesses and we will ask you to
respond to these in writing.
Under Committee Rule 3, members of the Committee must
submit questions to the Subcommittee Clerk by 5 p.m. on October
2. The hearing record will be open for 10 business days for
these responses.
If there is no further business, without objection the
Committee is adjourned.

[Whereupon, at 1:53 p.m., the Committee was adjourned.]

[all]
